Rock brittleness is the key parameter in the evaluation of “sweet spot” in the shale reservoir which is characterized with low porosity and low permeability, and numerous methods are presented to qualitatively reveal the essence of rock brittleness. However, the quantitative evaluation of this property is still a tough question with continued attention. This paper proposes a new quantitative evaluation method based on the energy dissipation principle in fracture mechanics, which interprets the degree of rock brittle fracturing as energy efficiency contributing to the new generated surface energy of fractures. The fractal geometry and fractal dimension are introduced to describe fracture surface with intricate geometry. The experimentally constructed correlation between volume density of rock fracture and fractal dimension is incorporated into energy dissipation and fractal geometry of fracture. Finally, the energy-balance equation, which corresponds to the rock brittleness index with volume density of rock fracture, is established. The brittleness indexes of different rock are calculated and compared, and the influence of the confining pressure on the brittleness is also studied. Sichuan Longmaxi shale formation of X well in southwest China is analyzed, which verified the reliability of this quantitative evaluation method in pinpointing the fracturing candidate in hydraulic fracturing engineering.Rock brittleness evaluation has entered into many fields, especially the field of shale gas exploration and exploitation. This evaluation is an important process in the design of hydraulic fracturing operation. The consensus has been made that hydraulic fracturing contributes to the economical development of shale gas. The stimulation result is largely related with formation characteristics, including the stress diversity factor, rock elastic properties, rock anisotropy and heterogeneity, the distribution of natural fractures, and rock brittleness. Generally, the more brittle the rock is, the more easily complex fracture networks will be generated, and the better the formation conductivity will be. Therefore, rock brittleness is regarded as one of significant parts in fracability analysis by petroleum engineers, and it is the key parameter in the evaluation of “sweet spot” in the unconventional reservoir. Currently, various methods for evaluating rock brittleness have been proposed. Based on mineral composition, Among these methods, the stress-strain relationship, which integrates the information of elastic parameters, strain energy density, and the degree of rock plasticity, has the ability to reflect the rock brittleness comprehensively. Without sound theoretical evidences, nonetheless, past wisdom can hardly evaluate rock brittleness quantitatively. The rock brittleness is the character that reflects the degree of breaking under certain loading conditions. So it is necessary to investigate this character from the aspect of rock fracturing and fracture propagation.  In this paper, the new quantitative evaluation method is introduced and then verified in the following sections. Section Fractal geometry, a powerful tool to quantitatively describe the irregular and complex phenomenon in nature, has been widely used ( Numerous ways can be used to obtain the fractal dimension ( Taking logarithm on both side of equation Box counting is a suitable method to measure the fractal dimension of rock. Basic procedures are presented as follows: we firstly cover the whole rock sample surface by using small squares with the length of The degree of fracture development can be quantitatively described by the fracture density. Currently, there are three types of fracture density: line density, area density and volume density. Fracture density, generally, means line density of fracture. Many uncertainties exist when the line density is employed to describe the degree of fracture development, since both of the big crack and the small crack have the same line density while possess different breaking degree of the rock. In addition, the calculation of area density is still a huge problem. However, the volume density, defined as the ratio between the total surface area of the fracture and the total volume of the rock sample ( After the tri-axial compression test, the rock sample is scanned by CT scanner, which clearly presents the distribution of fractures on the rock and is a convenient method to calculate the surface area of fractures. Finally, we can obtain the fracture volume density by employing equation The fracture density and fractal dimension are calculated respectively according to different lithology of rock specimens. The connection between these two parameters is investigated. The fractal dimension, therefore, can be expressed by fracture density after employing the fitting method. Reliable results can be obtained by the quantitative analysis of rock brittleness from the aspect of energy dissipation in fracture mechanics. Since the increasing tendency of rock plasticity can be regarded as the gradual growing effect of energy dissipation mechanism ( However, almost all kinds of rocks have plasticity in different degrees. Some types of rocks contain high percentage of brittle minerals, such as quartz, but the rest clay minerals indicates the plasticity of rock and these brittle minerals also possess some degree of the plasticity. Therefore, the energy dissipation of the interior area cannot be neglected. The ratio between dissipated energy and intrinsic cohesion reflects the property of rock brittleness. It should be noted that the above theoretical model is reliable only when the dimension of interior area is infinitely small. Also, the value of propagation resistance of the fracture cannot be calculated without a complete set of mechanism of energy dissipation, indicating this model is merely applied to the pure phenomenal description. The research of This paper combined the dissipated energy with the rock brittleness based on the shielding configuration of frontal zones. As shown in Further study has been continued on the research of the stress distribution of a fractal crack. We calculate the elastic solution outside the frontal zone and substitute it into energy-balance equation which contains the variable of fractal dimension. A functional relation between rock brittleness index and fracture density can be established, based on the correlation between fractal dimension and fracture density obtained in the experimental study. We first analyze the linear elastic area outside the frontal zone of fractal crack and deduce the elastic solution for this area. In the polar coordinate system, the complex variable Thus, the derivative of the above equation can be obtained: According to equations As for the fracture type Finally, the elastic solution of stress distribution near crack tip for a fractal crack can be expressed as: Shear stress is essential for Model Thus, we can obtain the following equation: In the fracture propagation, the dilation frontal zone around the crack tip for the second configuration exerts persistent influence in a weak layer. Consequently, the process of energy dissipation resides in the frontal zone and can be analyzed by J-integral ( The stress-strain function curve of the rock under external loading is shown in Obviously, equation In order to calculate the width of weak layer According to the loading condition shown in The steady state is achieved when conditions Since the stress-strain functional relation in the loading process can be obtained in the laboratory experiment, we could calculate the value of the average strain energy density Considering the bending propagation of fracture and the roughness of its surface, actually, numerous experiments indicate that the new surface energy generated by material fracture is larger than 2γ Generally, according to the principle of fractal geometry, the pattern of the rock fracturing is a coupling process combining intergranular with transcrystalline fracturing. Based on this fact and experimental tests, Therefore, we can replace equation According to the above equation, we can get the result of the total steady-state resistance Finally, based on the definition of rack brittleness index presented above, the calculation model can be represented by the following relation: It should be cautious that this model is established on the assumption that mode Uni-axial and Tri-axial compression tests were conducted on standard rock samples by using high-pressure servo test system built by GCTS. These rock samples were cut into standard cylinders with the diameter of 25 mm and the length of 50 mm. And two ends of cylinders were polished to keep them parallel with each other but vertical to the axis. Three types of rock samples were selected in this test: shale, sandstone and granite. We set the confining pressure ranging from 0 to 40 MPa. After that, computed tomography (CT) scan was employed to create cross-sectional images of the scanned specimen. A three-dimensional image of the internal structure of the specimen was generated from a series of two-dimensional tomographic images with the aid of digital geometry processing. This device and its technology provided a convenient way to analyze the fracture density and the fractal dimension of the specimen. In our experiments, five specimens for each rock type (shale, granite, and sandstone) were collected from the same rock block respectively. These three types of rock blocks were supposed to be homogeneous in small scale (cubes with edge length 20 cm). Thus, the properties (such as permeability, porosity and mineralogy) were considered as similar for each type of specimens. Meanwhile, the specimens were drilled in the same direction to eliminate the effects of potential anisotropy. Stress-strain tests were performed on these specimens signed from S0 to H4. According to three-dimensional images of the internal structure, fracture density of each specimen could be predicted. Comparing the imaging results among three types of rock, we discover sandstone, featuring lowest value of fracture density, mainly possesses a single fracture. The main fracture and its relatively small scale of secondary fracture concentrate in the one direction. However, the fractures generated in granite and shale are denser and their networks are more complex. By employing box-counting method, the result of fractal dimension can be obtained. Squares are selected with different sides The fitting results of sandstone specimens from S0 to S4 under different confining pressures are shown in According to the results of fractal dimension and fracture density of each type of rock, the correlation between these two parameters could be obtained. Still, linear fitting method is employed and thus empirical relations are generated with relatively high correlation coefficients. It suggests the reliability to discover these relations for different types of rocks. According to the fitting results shown in It should be noted that the above equations are based on the homogeneous assumption. The physical properties (such as porosity, permeability and mineral components) are identical in specimens for each rock type respectively. Since the correlations between fracture density and fracture diameter for each type of rock are discovered, the brittleness index could be calculated. Based on equations In addition, for each type of rock, the diagram of relations between confining pressure and brittleness index are drawn in Previous studies ( The comparison is made among these three different types of rock with the identical confining pressure. We conclude that sandstone features relatively low brittleness and possesses low value of fracture density under stress-strain tests. And shale is more brittle than any other two types. However, degrees of brittleness of shale and granite become closer with the increase of confining pressure. Comparing the results of the same type of rock with different confining pressures, we discover that rock brittleness index decreases when the confining pressure increases, which agrees well with the study results made by As indicated in the beginning, high rock brittleness contributes to the high complexity of hydraulic fracture networks, which leads to high shale gas production. Thus, Sichuan Longmaxi shale formation (from 1480 m to 1540 m of X well) in southwest China was analyzed to verify the reliability of this quantitative evaluation method ( Shale core samples were collected in the section 1490 m–1505 m and section 1520 m–1530 m, respectively. Then Tri-axial Compression Tests were performed under the same confining pressure, 20 MPa. Finally, three rock brittleness indexes (B1, B2, Bc) are calculated by elastic parameter method ( Elastic parameter method: Mineral components method: Because of their simple form as well as commonly used parameters which can be obtained easily, these two methods are widely employed in the rock brittleness evaluation of shale formation. Therefore, we choose these two methods for comparison. The calculated results are listed in The above results indicate that the results of brittleness index B1, B2 calculated by elastic parameter method and mineral components method are quite similar, which cannot reflect the actual fracturing evaluation condition. However, the results calculated by the new method show larger values of rock brittleness index in the second section (1520 m-1530 m), which supports that brittle failure and larger scale of fracture networks are more likely to occur in this section. As stated in the former field tests, the stimulation effect is much better in section (1515 m-1530 m), indicating higher rock brittleness index in this section. It is safe to say that our calculated results are in accordance with the field tests. Thus, the reliability of the new method is verified. The essence of these three brittleness evaluation methods is analyzed, and the defects of former two classic method are discussed below. The elastic parameter method only considers elasticity modulus and poisson's ratio, both of which are the elastic parameters obtained in the stage before rock failure and cannot fully reflect the rock brittleness. In the situation that the degree of rock plasticity is relatively high, especially, the empirical relationship between elastic parameter and rock brittleness is not valid any more. Meanwhile, mineral component method only focus on the fractions of different components in the rock, but omits other essential aspects such as diagenesis and mechanical effects. Thus, this method cannot explain the situation that rock samples with quite similar mineral components present significant difference of rock brittleness. However, the new quantitative evaluation method is based on the solid theoretical foundation, and the fractal geometry is combined to reflect the realistic fracture surface. Also the whole rock failure process is considered in the framework of energy dissipation of fracture mechanics. Therefore, this method is more reliable to evaluate rock brittleness.  The empirical relations between fractal dimension and fracture density are obtained under fractal theory and experimental research on three types of rock. The experimental results show the positive correlation between these two parameters. It is possible to obtain the fractal dimension by calculating the fracture density, which is the essential to analyze the rock brittleness quantitatively. Based on frontal configuration and crack-tip stress distribution of type The model discussed in this paper is applied to the calculation of brittleness index of different types of rock. The results show that shale has the highest value of brittleness index under the relatively low confining pressure. Also, within the same lithology, the increase of confining pressure would make the rock less brittle. It should be cautious that this conclusion is based on the homogeneous assumption. All the specimens for each type of rock are obtained from the same small cubic rock block which can be regarded as homogeneous. Also the influence of anisotropy is eliminated by drilling in the same direction. Still uncertainties exist since not two specimens are total the same. More experiments on testing physical properties (rock porosity, permeability, mineral components, etc.) for different types of rock will be performed in our future researches. Different brittleness evaluation methods are compared, and the defects of traditional elastic parameter method and mineral component method are analyzed. Based on the field test data, we verified the reliability of this quantitative evaluation method, which can be employed in the fracability evaluation of hydraulic fracturing. The model proposed currently is based on the assumption that mode The authors are grateful for the support of the  Number of objects with specified feature Linearity of the characteristic object Constant of proportionality Fractal dimension Total surface area of the fracture, cm Total volume of the rock sample, cm Volume density of fractures in rock sample, m Potential function Stress intensity factor of type Fractual crack parameter Shear stress for model Frontal zone width, m Limit stress value in stress-strain function, Pa Up limit of integral of strain in stress-strain function Fractrue propagation resistance in the frontal zone, J m Rock intrinsic cohesion, J m Total steady-state resistance, J m Far-field shear stress, MPa Far-field normal stress, MPa Friction coefficient of fracture surface Equivalent shear stress of the fracture surface, MPa Limit equivalent shear stress, MPa Young's Modulus, GPa Poisson's Ratio Included angle between the direction of axial stress Material toughness, Pa m Average strain energy density Fracture-surface energy, J m Rack brittleness index