A liquid chromatography–tandem quadrupole mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) multi-residue method for the simultaneous target analysis of a wide range of pesticides and metabolites in fruit, vegetables and cereals has been developed. Gradient elution has been used in conjunction with positive mode electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry to detect up to 171 pesticides and/or metabolites in different crop matrices using a single chromatographic run. Pesticide residues were extracted/partitioned from the samples with acetone/dichloromethane/light petroleum. The analytical performance was demonstrated by the analysis of extracts from lettuce, orange, apple, cabbage, grape and wheat flour, spiked at three concentration levels ranging from 0.01 to 0.10mg/kg for each pesticide and/or metabolite. In general, recoveries ranging from 70 to 110%, with relative standard deviations better than 15%, were obtained. The recovery and repeatability data are in good accordance with EU guidelines for pesticide residue analysis. The limit of quantification for all targeted pesticides and metabolites tested was 0.01mg/kg. The selectivity and robustness of the LC–MS/MS method was demonstrated by a 1-year comparison of its analytical results with those obtained from our validated GC and LC multi-residue methods applied to more than 3500 routine samples. The validated LC–MS/MS method has been implemented in our analytical scheme since 2004, replacing four of the conventional detection methods, i.e. GC-flame-photometric detection (acephate, methamidophos, etc.), GC-nitrogen–phosphorus detection, LC-UV detection (carbendazim, thiabendazole, imazalil and prochloraz) and LC-fluorescence detection (N-methylcarbamate pesticides). During a 3-year period, the LC–MS/MS method has been applied to the analyses of more than 12,000 samples.Pesticides comprise a large number of substances that belong to many different chemical classes. They are applied to crops at various stages of cultivation to provide protection against pests and during post-harvest storage to preserve quality. To ensure the safety of food for consumers and regulate international trade, legislation, such as the European Union directives, has established maximum residue limits (MRLs) for pesticides in foodstuff. Thorough monitoring of pesticide residues is crucial for proper risk assessment of human exposure through food. Comprehensive monitoring programs are conducted in most European countries on domestic and imported produce. In the Netherlands, pesticide residues have been tested under the national monitoring program of pesticide residues in foodstuff for more than 30 years. Therefore, reliable, cost-effective multi-residue methods are required to monitor pesticide residues in food. Analytical methodologies employed must be capable of residue measurement at very low levels and must also provide unambiguous evidence to confirm both the identity and the concentration of any residue detected. Chromatographic techniques, mainly gas chromatography (GC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (LC) have usually been applied for the determination of pesticide residues in food samples. In recent years, LC has emerged as an excellent alternative technique, especially for the analyses of polar and thermo labile pesticides that are not readily amenable to gas chromatography or require derivatization before GC analysis. However, conventional LC detection methods are not always sufficiently selective or sensitive because of the variety and complexity of food matrices and the trace levels of pesticide residues detected. To analyze the large number of samples whose pesticide treatment history is usually unknown, the Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority (VWA) uses analytical methods capable of simultaneously determining a large number of pesticide residues. These multi-residue methods can determine about 450 pesticides and their metabolites with MRL tolerances. In our laboratory, traditionally gas chromatography in combination with mass spectrometric detection (GC–MS) and element-selective detection techniques have been used for the routine analysis of pesticides in foodstuff The introduction of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) instrumentation with atmospheric pressure ionization (API) has revolutionized the way analyses using liquid chromatography are approached. This technique combines the advantages of LC and MS for the separation and unequivocal identification of pesticides at low micrograms per kilogram levels in real matrices, such as food and environmental samples. LC–MS/MS greatly reduces the need for excessive clean-up steps and provides little chance of false positive findings, resulting in reduced analysis time and costs. Pesticide analysis by LC–MS/MS is already used in the regulatory arena due to its superior capability to perform multi-residue analyses. Although many LC–MS/MS applications for various pesticides have been reported, only a limited number of these studies describe a comprehensive (>50 pesticides) multi-residue method for the screening of pesticides belonging to various classes in crop or processed (baby) food. Taylor et al. The choice of the solvent(s) for extraction is one of the most crucial decisions to be made when developing new multi-residue methods. Nowadays, the solvents most commonly used for multi-residue analysis of pesticides are acetonitrile, acetone and ethylacetate. Each solvent has some advantages and disadvantages in terms of selectivity and convenience. Since the 1980s, we have applied an acetone-based extraction method that is amenable to all our chromatographic separation systems. In brief, it is a streamlined and miniaturized version of the Luke method The combination of LC–MS/MS and GC–MS can currently provide the most effective and efficient means to both quantify and identify hundreds of pesticide analytes in a variety of complex matrices. Comparing the LC–MS/MS analytical results with those from GC–MS, it was concluded that LC–MS/MS is the preferred approach for those pesticides that are compatible in both analytical systems. The LC–MS/MS method outperformed the large-volume injection (LVI) GC–MS method in the experiments. This was mainly caused by the better intrinsic instrument sensitivity and selectivity of the LC–MS/MS triple quadrupole system used in multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mode compared with the GC–MS ion trap system used in full scan mode. The MRM feature of the LC–MS/MS system, and user-friendly software, permitted easier and faster peak identification, integration and data processing operations than the GC–MS approach. This encouraged us to transfer as many pesticides as possible to the LC–MS/MS method, thereby maximizing screening efficiency without sacrificing data quality. Annually, the analytical scope of the LC–MS/MS method has been extended with new approved pesticides, and pesticides that give poor performance with GC–MS. This study reports the validation, and 3-year optimization, and QA/QC data of a LC–MS/MS method to determine a large number of different pesticides and their metabolites, which is complementary to GC–MS analysis. Methanol (hyper grade for liquid chromatography), glacial acetic acid, formic acid, ammonium formate and anhydrous sodium sulphate were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). HPLC grade water was obtained by purifying demineralized water in a Milli-Q Plus ultra-pure water system (Millipore, Molsheim, France). Pestiscan grade acetone, dichloromethane, toluene and light petroleum (b.p. 40–60 Organically grown samples were used as blank control matrix in recovery experiments and for the preparation of matrix-matched multi-level calibration solutions. The organically grown samples were previously determined to be free of pesticide residues. A schematic view of the extraction method is given in For routine analyses of samples, test portions of 15 In case of non-compliance with the MRL for pesticides with an average recovery lower than 70% obtained with extraction method A, re-analysis using an alternative acetone-based extraction method was applied. A test portion of 7.5 Individual stock solutions of the pesticides at a concentration of 1.0 Serial dilutions of the mixed working standard solutions were performed to give four calibration solutions (2, 10, 40 and 200 The chromatographic system consisted of an Alliance separations module 2695 (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) equipped with a quaternary solvent delivery system, degasser, autosampler and column heater. Chromatographic separation was performed using an Alltima C API-MS detection was achieved using a Quattro Ultima tandem mass spectrometer (Waters, Micromass, Manchester, UK), equipped with an electrospray ionization interface (Z-spray) operating in the positive mode. Typical source parameters were as follows: capillary voltage, 2.0 The multiple reaction monitoring experiments were conducted with a dwell time and inter-channel delay of 20 and 10 The following parameters were determined during validation of the analytical method: linear dynamic range, matrix effects, limits of quantification (LOQs), accuracy and precision. The accuracy and precision of the method was tested via recovery experiments with fortified samples of six representative commodities: lettuce, orange, apple, cabbage, grape and wheat flour. Recoveries were determined for six replicates at three fortification levels (0.01, 0.02 and 0.10 The initial LC–MS/MS method, developed in our laboratory Initially, no changes were made to the LC–MS/MS acquisition method when calibration standards were injected under methanol–ammonium formate gradient conditions. For 10 basic pesticides, such as carbendazim, imazalil, thiabendazole and morpholines, retention times shifted and had to be determined again. Pesticides exhibiting insufficient response in this experiment were tuned in the LC–MS/MS system for optimum conditions. With the ammonium formate buffer, the presence of ammonium ions suppressed the formation of sodium adducts, which are more common under acidic conditions, and therefore, pesticides formed predominantly [M+H] With the increased sensitivity, we needed to inject just 5 In total, the ionization of 188 pesticides in the positive mode electrospray ion source was investigated. Conditions for interfacing the LC system to the MS were evaluated. Modifications of desolvation gas flow-rate, cone gas flow-rate and source temperature did not drastically improve the sensitivity. For the capillary voltage, it was noticed that the pesticides gave somewhat higher responses with a capillary voltage of 1 The time-scheduled data acquisition sequence involves nine overlapping functions, ranging from 10 to 32 MRM channels. The MRM transitions setup in the acquisition method for individual pesticides is consistent with those found by other research groups Tandem mass spectrometry provides a powerful confirmatory tool for pesticide residue analysis in food, because it discriminates efficiently between the analyte and the matrix signal. Existing quality control procedures requires qualitative confirmation of positive results, for LC–MS/MS preferably via a second MS/MS transition. With the present analytical scope of 171 pesticides, this results in monitoring 342 transitions. Stacking more transitions within a time window would drastically reduce the number of data points across a chromatographic peak leading to unsatisfactory peak shapes. Therefore, a confirmatory MS/MS transition has only been included for those pesticides that are frequently found or cannot or hardly be confirmed with GC–MS, in order to minimize the chance of false positive results. Confirmation of the identity of the pesticides was based on the ion ratio statistics for the transitions monitored Despite the high specificity of MS/MS detection, chromatographic separation (resolution) with gradient elution was decisive for the determination of three pesticides ( Chromatographic separation as well as unit mass resolution (<0.7 Since the 1980s, we have developed and applied in our laboratory a considerably miniaturized acetone-based extraction method, which is based on the original Luke extraction method Recently, we have performed an intercomparison validation study between our two acetone-based extraction methods (A and B), and the QuEChERS extraction method for two matrices, lettuce and orange. The results for the QuEChERS extraction method have been reported in a separate paper Because of the very good results of extraction method B for both polar and non-polar pesticides, we decided to fully validate this extraction method for our LC–MS/MS scope. In routine analysis, extraction method A is still used as first extraction method. For this moment, application of extraction method B is done only in case of non-compliance with the MRL for those pesticides with an average recovery lower than 70% obtained with extraction method A. In this paper, we report about the two acetone-based extraction methods (A and B) that have been validated under repeatability and reproducibility conditions, respectively. Although extraction method B results in more matrix interferences for some pesticides in GC–MS analysis, this method will be soon chosen as first extraction method for our routine analysis. All the problematic pesticides in GC–MS analysis, for which identification/quantification is hampered by matrix interference using extraction method B, will therefore be included in the LC–MS/MS method. Calibration curves were constructed from calibration solutions in extracts of six representative, blank matrices (lettuce, orange, grape, cabbage, apple and wheat flour), and in solvent (methanol), at seven different concentrations in the range of 1–200 Matrix effects, due to ion suppression, are notoriously variable in occurrence and intensity. In general, matrix effects are compensated by preparing calibration standards in matching matrices Matrix effects were tested more extensively during routine analyses of regulatory samples. Within each batch of samples analyzed, a matrix-matched calibration standard was prepared freshly as an indicator. The detector response of the pesticide in the matrix extract was compared with the detector response from the corresponding concentration of the calibration standard in solvent. During a 1-year period, a calibration level (2, 10, 40 or 200 For more accurate results, pesticide residue concentrations in non-compliance samples, and validation experiments were calculated using matrix-matched calibration standards, excluding any influence produced by matrix effects, as recommended in EU guidelines Recoveries and repeatability of the LC–MS/MS method were established to evaluate the method performance using extraction method B. Previously, we have demonstrated the effectiveness of our LC–MS/MS method for 137 pesticides in lettuce and orange Lower recoveries and/or large RSD values are mostly linked to pesticides that may not be stable or decompose during sample extraction. The extraction method disclosed some problematic pesticides, such as asulam, pyridate and thiophanate-methyl. These pesticides showed a recovery lower than 60% in one of the matrices tested. Asulam is an herbicide with a unique structure containing phenyl, sulfone, ester, and primary and secondary amino groups. Thus, it is not surprising that it was not recovered completely with the method. In particular, asulam gave very low recoveries (<20%) in the matrices apple and grape. In plants, pyridate is hydrolyzed to its principal metabolite 3-phenyl-4-hydroxy-6-chloropyridazone with a half-life ranging from a few minutes to days. Therefore, it was decided to replace pyridate for its metabolite into the new assigned analytical scope. The metabolite of pyridate consistently gave 76–99% overall recovery in four matrices tested. Contrary to orange, thiophanate-methyl was recovered less than 50% in lettuce, while the recovery for carbendazim (>100%) was increased. A loss due to degradation to carbendazim, depending on the pH of the typical matrix, is the most likely explanation for this behavior. For this reason, thiophanate-methyl was left out from the recovery experiments in apple, cabbage, grape and wheat, in order to avoid a positive bias for carbendazim. Differences between matrices can be discerned, and interestingly, oranges gave slightly more reproducible results than lettuce, even though orange is generally conceived to be a more complicated matrix. This may be related to the greater stability of most pesticides in an acidic matrix. Pymetrozine, a very basic pesticide, showed variable recovery results. For the matrices apple, citrus and grape, the recovery was significantly lower than the other matrices tested. This behavior of pymetrozine can partly be attributed to its polarity and/or extraction efficiency at lower pH levels inherent associated with the matrix tested. Furthermore, degradable pesticides with their metabolites were also included in this study, because they are well known as difficult pesticides in multi-residue analysis Validation of the LC–MS/MS method using extraction method A was conducted by means of analyzing quality control samples fortified at different levels during routine analyses of regulatory samples. To obtain the highest quality results, processes must be in place to assure that the instruments are operating properly and that analyses are performed correctly. This assurance is provided by quality control samples. To facilitate assessment of the analytical performance, multi-level calibration standards in solvent (methanol), procedural blank samples, fortified control samples, and a matrix-matched single-level calibration standard (corresponding with the fortification level) were included in each batch of samples. Over a 3-year period, quality control samples have been prepared with varying matrices, pesticides and fortification levels. The recovery of the pesticide in the quality control samples was calculated with the matrix-matched single-level calibration standard. In 2004 and 2006, a fortification level at 5 Several pesticides (e.g. aldicarb) with sulfoxide and sulfone oxidation products were omitted from the working standard solution in the year 2005. As can be concluded from Performance of the method was further demonstrated by participation in European proficiency tests in the years 2004–2006 In 2004, the LC–MS/MS method was still running with a methanol–5 The validated LC–MS/MS method was applied in routine analysis to regulatory samples taken from the Dutch market. Predominantly, sampling was done at auctions, importers, warehouses and supermarket distribution centers. The accuracy, selectivity and robustness of the LC–MS/MS method was demonstrated by a 1-year comparison of its analytical results with those obtained from our validated GC and LC multi-residue methods applied to more than 3500 routine samples. Throughout this testing period, no false positive and/or negative results were generated for pesticides in fruit and vegetables above the 0.01 In 2005, pesticides were withdrawn from the analytical scope for the viable reason of never having found these pesticides in regulatory samples, and other pesticides were added to the method according to a flexible scope approach. Further expansion of the analytical scope was based on frequency of occurrence of pesticide residues in our national monitoring program during most recent years. Pesticides, which had previously been analyzed with GC–MS, were also included in the analytical scope after tuning for optimal response in the ion source of the LC–MS/MS. For example, organophosphate insecticides, mepronil, propargite and propyzamide showed an excellent response in LC–MS/MS. Annually, the analytical scope of the multi-residue methods is updated with newly approved pesticides in the European Union. Examples of those pesticides included in the LC–MS/MS method are boscalid, carpropamid, clothianidin, cyazofamid, dimoxystrobin, ethiprole, famoxadone, fenamidone, fluquinconazole, halofenozide, indoxacarb, isoxaflutole, mefenacet, methoxyfenozide, nitenpyram, spirodiclofen, triticonazole and zoxamide. At this time, the analytical scope of the LC–MS/MS method comprises 171 pesticides/metabolites, thereby covering almost 80% of the various pesticides found in our national monitoring reports. In 2006, 125 out of 158 reported pesticides were detected utilizing the LC–MS/MS method. GC-based methodology still needs to be applied for the remaining pesticides, mainly pyrethroids, most organochlorine and some organophosphate pesticides, which do not lend themselves to analysis in LC–MS/MS. The proposed LC–MS/MS method for the determination of 171 pesticides and metabolites is suitable for the application in pesticide residue monitoring/enforcement programs, enabling the particular advantage of high throughput screening in a wide variety of matrices. The validation results have shown excellent recoveries (70–110%) and precision (RSDs