Titanium and its alloys are widely used in medical implants because of their excellent properties. However, bacterial infection is a frequent cause of titanium-based implant failure and also compromises its osseointegration. In this study, we report a new simple method of providing titanium surfaces with antibacterial properties by alternating antibacterial chitosan domains with titanium domains in the micrometric scale. Surface microgrooves were etched on pure titanium disks at intervals of 60μm using a modified 3D printer and were then coated with chitosan antibacterial polysaccharide. The dimensions of the patterned microgrooves made it possible to fix the chitosan domains to the titanium substrate without the need for covalent bonding. These domains were stable after 5days of immersion in water and reduced the surface contact angle. Preliminary cell adhesion assays demonstrated that MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblasts preferentially adhered to the titanium regions, while C2C12 myoblasts were uniformly distributed over the whole surface.Titanium and titanium alloys are widely used in medical devices such as dental and orthopedic implants However, despite the superior properties of this material, implant failure may still occur, very often due to bacterial infection Even though the levels of success are relatively high, unsuccessful cases involve a large number of patients, as the percentage of the population given implant surgery increases every year Several strategies have been proposed to modify the titanium surface to inhibit bacterial infections. Some of these include: adding inorganic molecules capable of killing bacteria to the implant surface, e.g. silver Also of interest is coating the titanium surface with organic, antibacterial materials such as chitosan In principle, the ideal implant should fulfill the following criteria Many attempts have been made to functionalize titanium with chitosan, via: silanization The method we developed to obtain titanium surfaces with alternated antibacterial chitosan domains consisted of two steps: the first consisted of etching parallel microgrooves on smooth titanium surfaces, and the second of filling the grooves with chitosan. Pure cp-titanium disks 10 The samples were then placed under a nitrogen flow to remove any shavings. Next, the surface of the samples was gently rubbed with P2000 sandpaper to remove the burrs left behind after the mechanical process. The final cleaning consisted of washing the samples three times for ten minutes in an ultrasonic bath with distilled water, ethanol, and distilled water, respectively. The samples where then allowed to dry at room temperature. The grooves made in the titanium surfaces were then filled with chitosan. For this, 3% w/v practical grade chitosan solution (Chitosan from crab shells. Practical grade. CAS 9012-76-4 with a deacetylation degree of around 85%, and viscosity average molecular weight 1.5 Different microscopy techniques were used to determine the actual separation and depth of the grooves. Optical microscopy was performed by an Olympus Lext OLS 3100 instrument. Scanning confocal laser microscopy by Nikon C1 microscope was used to obtain a cross-sectional view of the grooved surfaces. The stripe-like pattern of the chitosan inside the grooves of the titanium was observed with a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope) at an excitation of 488 To calculate the separation between the grooves, three images were taken by confocal microscopy in different zones; the distance between the grooves was calculated measuring the distance from the middle of a valley to the middle of the following valley and the mean value was calculated. The width of the microgrooves was obtained by measuring the horizontal distance between the walls halfway between the highest point of the adjacent ridges and the deepest point of the valleys. The depth of the grooves was also measured. The results are expressed as the mean Contact angle measurements were performed at room temperature in a Data Physics OCA 20 set-up and SCA20 software. Droplets of 2 The stability of the chitosan inside the titanium microgrooves immersed in water was analyzed to make sure that the chitosan would not come out of the grooves during cell culture. A chitosan-functionalized titanium sample was immersed in distilled water for five days. The weight of the sample was checked before and after the test (with the sample always dry). Fluorescent microscopy was also used to determine the presence of chitosan once the experiment had concluded. To sterilize the supports before cell culture, functionalized and non-functionalized circular titanium samples with chitosan lines were exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light for 1 Two different cell lines were used: mouse C2C12 myoblast and mouse MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblast. C2C12 and MC3T3-E1 cells were grown in 75 Average and standard deviation of the dimensions of the grooves was determined using the software of the confocal microscope. A total of 25 groove sections taken from 3 different samples were randomly selected. In the case of water contact angle average and standard deviation was determined with Data Physics OCA SCA20 software, each values was the result of the measurements of a total of 6 drops. Statistical analysis was done by two-way ANOVA using GraphPad Prism software. Statistical significance was set at p The work involved producing a new type of surface by creating parallel microgrooves on the surface of pure titanium samples. Images obtained by optical microscopy showed neat parallel microgrooves on the surface of the titanium samples ( The separation between the grooves was controlled in the patterning of the sample surface using IT software (using our own algorithm in The chitosan coating was fixed to the bottom of the grooves only by physical interactions with no covalent bonding to the titanium surface. The coating only required solvent casting of chitosan from the aqueous solution, followed by cleaning the ridges of the grooves and final deprotonation of the amine groups by immersing the substrate in a sodium hydroxide solution that yields an insoluble chitosan coating. Chitosan’s self fluorescence was used to obtain a qualitative assessment of the presence of chitosan in the grooves. The image obtained in the fluorescence microscope just after chitosan neutralization is shown in FESEM images ( The surface patterning of hydrophilic and hydrophobic stripes is expected to yield an increase of surface wettability, with respect to either the flat or grooved titanium surface. Wettability is a clue property in cell adhesion and in the integration of the prosthetic implant in the host tissue. When the water drop is deposited on the grooved sample, it spreads to some extent in the direction of the grooves, due to capillarity, so the contact angle measured in the direction of the grooves is always higher than that measured in the direction perpendicular to the grooves, as shown in A preliminary study of cell adhesion was performed on the hybrid chitosan/titanium surfaces using two different cell types to determine the different response of the different types to the hybrid surface. MC3T3-E1 is a pre-osteoblastic cell line that has been frequently used to test biomaterials for bone implants or bone regeneration scaffolds In this study, the cells were seeded on the substrates at the same cell density. The results after two days of cell culture can be observed in The cell culture experiments included in this study were only preliminary, with the aim of confirming cell attachment to the metal and chitosan topographies. Long term experiments would be necessary to assess not only cell proliferation and behavior when the culture becomes confluent, but also the stability of the coating subjected to cell activity for longer periods of time. This paper describes a procedure designed to obtain hybrid Titanium/Chitosan surfaces with alternate strips of the organic and the metallic domains. Chitosan was deposited in the form of a thin coating on the bottom of 16 The authors are grateful for the financial support from the