Undoubtedly, age estimation represents one of the most significant contributions of forensic odontology to human identification of the living and the deceased. Age estimation of the living is most of the times linked with criminal processes, immigration, or human trafficking. In the case of deceased, it is one of the most significant information of the biological profile. Also in mass-disaster scenarios, dental age estimation is used for clustering the victims according to their age.
               All dental age-estimation methods are based on the changes that take place throughout the lifespan that comprises growth and development for aging the subadults, and postformation changes for aging the adults.
               Methods based on tooth formation and development rely on the evaluation of developmental changes on conventional radiographs, CT-scan, or magnetic resonance imaging. Methods based on postformation changes rely on conventional radiographs, macroscopic or microscopic evaluation of certain postformation changes in teeth.
               The combination of methods has shown to increase the accuracy of the estimates. So, whenever possible, dental age estimation should be combined with skeletal and biochemical methods in order to achieve more accurate results. The age estimation of the living has a legal and humanitarian background since, most of the times, it is linked to age assessment of the individual in different scenarios such as criminal processes, immigration, or human trafficking. Regarding the deceased, building up a biological profile (which is a general description of the individual’s sex, ancestry, age, and stature) is the first step in the identification process of an unidentified body. Also in mass-disaster scenarios, dental age estimation is used for clustering the victims according to their age. All dental age-estimation methods are based on the changes that take place throughout the lifespan that comprises growth and development, and postformation changes. Tooth formation and developmental changes are processes that occur throughout the progressive morphological development of the crown, root, and apex of teeth and/or its timely emergence and eruption sequence Mineralization of deciduous tooth development allows the teeth to be visible on radiographs. These will appear at the second trimester in utero in the form of cusp tips. The challenge in dealing with fetal and neonates is to preserve and find these cusp tips and incisal edges that could be easily misplaced or lost after soft tissue decomposition When a systemic disturbance occurs, the enamel mineralization process is interrupted and the currently developing stria will appear darker. The physiological stress suffered at birth will be reflected in the enamel mineralization process, by the appearance of the darkest and largest incremental growth line in the deciduous teeth, which is called the neonatal line The eruption of deciduous dentition takes place from birth to 2 years of age; and the eruption of the permanent dentition takes place between the approximate ages of 5 and 14 years. At the age of 15, all permanent teeth reach maturation except the third molar; although it is the most variable tooth in development, it is the only age indicator based on dental development. Although there are several skeletal age indicators in subadult individuals, techniques that utilize dental growth and development criteria have been established as the most reliable and accurate means to estimate age Once the third molar development is completed, age-estimation techniques must focus on degenerative or postformation changes of teeth. These postformation changes include occlusal or incisal attrition, periodontal status of the tooth, apical root resorption, pulp-to-tooth-size ratio, secondary dentine apposition, cementum apposition, dentine transparency, and cementum annuli According to that, dental age-estimation methods can be divided into two main groups: (1) those based on dental growth and development, which will be applied on subadult individuals; (2) and those based on dental postformation changes, which will be applied on adult individuals. Similar to anthropological age-estimation methods, adult age-estimation methods by dental means, based on degenerative changes, show less accuracy than subadult dental age-estimation methods based on growth and development. Apart from the age range of the individual, other criteria should be taken into account at the time of choosing a dental age-estimation method, such as if the individual is alive or deceased, if x-rays can be performed to that individual just to estimate age, but not for therapeutic purposes, or if the tooth sample can be destroyed in the process of the methodology application. All these criteria will affect the decision of the type of methodology to be applied. Nowadays, adult and subadult dental age estimation is a hot research topic of forensic odontology due to its significance in the clinical and the forensic field. Growth, development, and aging process are of great importance in clinical disciplines such as pediatric dentistry, orthodontics, Dental eruption is being used from long ago in history as a means of age assessment. More than 200 years ago, Romans determined the age of military conscription through the evaluation of the second permanent molar eruption After the execution of King Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoniette during the French Revolution, his son Louis XVII was imprisoned and died of tuberculosis at the age of 10 years, on June 8, 1795 in the Temple prison Also in the 1800s in Great Britain, the Penal Code and the Child Labor Laws presumed that an individual younger than 7 years didn’t have the capacity to commit crime. Since birth registration was not required and certificates were not issued, proving chronological age was often difficult. To overcome that difficulty, Professor Thomson suggested the eruption of permanent first molars as a criterion for chronological age assessment, so if the permanent first molar had not “protruded,” the child has not passed his seventh year A significant contribution for age-estimation studies was the discovery of ionizing radiation by Röetgen in 1895. Its development as a dental diagnostic tool opened up a new perspective for dental development investigation. But age-estimation studies at those times presented methodological shortcomings; the early research of dental age development did not report sample sizes, and in some cases not even the source of their data Dental age-estimation techniques based on tooth formation and development can be divided into two categories: atlas or chart style and incremental staging techniques of tooth development. In 1941 Schour and Massler developed a 21 developmental stages chart, which was later on (in 1944) updated including 22 stages of tooth development from 5 months in utero to 35 years of age In 1963 Moorrees, Fanning, and Hunt developed an incremental staging system of dental age estimation, consisting of five stages of resorption and exfoliation of deciduous mandibular canines and molars In 1973 Demirjian developed a chart, later updated in 1976, consisting of eight stages of dental development (from A to H), that includes the evaluation of all left mandibular teeth except the third molar Ubelaker developed an atlas in 1989, including data of permanent dentition of the American-Indians and the deciduous dentition mostly from the United States Whites In 1993 Mincer, Harris, and Berryman applied Demerjian’s molar development just on third molars In 2001 Lewis, Senn, and Silvaggi developed the computer software UT-age, which was updated in 2008. UT-age estimations rely on third molar development according to Demerjian’s staging criteria AlQahtani in 2010 developed the London Atlas, which consists of 31 stages from 30 weeks in utero to 23.5 years of age Both atlas style and incremental staging technique rely on dental radiographs. However, while Ubelaker and AlQahtani’s atlas style techniques do not distinguish between males and females, they can be applied to all ancestries, from archeological and forensic context; incremental staging techniques do distinguish between male and female individuals, and ancestry must be taken into account. Moreover, the combination of methods results in increased accuracy of the estimation. Schmeling et al. in 2004 proposed age estimations combining dental and skeletal indicators, using third molar, hand and wrist bones and clavicle development Advances in microscopic techniques have also been applied to dental age estimation of developing teeth. The neonatal line becomes microscopically visible due to the physiological stress of birth, which causes an interruption of the enamel mineralization process on the developing teeth. So, a distinctive darker line is formed and its presence can be used to assess, if a child died before or after birth. Different studies have been conducted on neonatal line, using different microscopic imaging techniques Computerized tomography (CT) and specific software have also been implemented for age estimation of developing teeth. Different authors have applied Moorrees, Faning, and Hunt, as well as Demirjian’s criteria for age estimation using CT-scan images CT-scan has been largely applied to the study of Egyptian mummies and also for age estimation. In 2005 CT-scan was performed on the Mummy of Tutankhamen; dental age estimation through the third molars maturity, combined with the evaluation of the epiphyseal plates fusion, estimated age of the “Boy King” to be about 19 years at the time of his death But all those methods mentioned above rely on conventional radiographs or CT, and both techniques require ionizing radiation emission. And this is an important concern when dealing with living individuals. Facing this limitation, age-estimation studies have been performed using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on third molars. As the appearance of MRI molars differs greatly from that on radiographs, specific staging technique is required to classify the maturity of the third molars on MRI. Research conducted by De Tobel et al. has showed promising results for its application, achieving accurate age estimates, and opening the opportunity to complement the dental estimate with the MRI evaluation of other skeletal age indicators Once the third molars have completed their development showing a closed apex, developmental changes can no longer be used to estimate the individual’s age. So, adult age-estimation techniques can only rely on postformation changes on dental tissues. Gustafson in 1950 evaluated six postformation changes and their correlation with chronological age, those six changes have been traditionally referred and they are attrition, periodontosis, secondary dentine deposition, cementum apposition, root resorption, and root translucency However, some concerns of Gustafson study are that all variables are considered equally effective on age assessment, the staging methodology was equal for all the variables, and statistical independence of each variable was assumed Bang and Ramm in 1970 developed a method of adult dental age estimation focused just on root transparency, which shows to be not affected by sex or ancestry The order of usefulness for age assessment of all six variables used by Gustafson from the best to the least is root transparency, secondary dentin, attrition, gingival recession, cementum apposition, and root resorption, which was found to have insignificant correlation in dental estimation of age Therefore, the formula developed by Gustafson was simplified by Mapples, using only root transparency and secondary dentine deposition, according to Johansen staging method Even though tooth wear is traditionally used to estimate age in ancient remains Postformation changes in dental tissues used for age assessment can be affected by pathology, traumatic occlusion, and dental treatment. Thus techniques that rely on the evaluation of nonrestored teeth in normal occlusion tend to be more accurate Kvaal and Solheim in 1994 developed a method to estimate age by evaluating progressive pulp size changes due to secondary dentin apposition Color changes in dental tissues can also be used to estimate age. Tooth color evaluation by visual comparison, using a tooth shade guide, shows a significant interobserver error; however, the use of spectrophotometry offers a more objective and accurate color evaluation Moreover, Draft Age Estimation Quicksheets have been developed to expedite and simplify the calculations of age estimation techniques, they are available for Moorrees, Fanning, and Hunt; Demirjian; Kvaal; and Cameriere calculations.  Dental age estimation may require its application on the dead and the living. Forensic cases at medical examiner/coroner offices or clustering the victims in mass disasters are the most common scenarios, where dental age estimation is applied on the dead; criminal and immigration cases are the ones where dental age estimation is often applied on the living. In all these cases, dental age estimation offers a scientific, inexpensive, and reasonably fast means of age assessment. Dental age-estimation methods are based on changes throughout lives that comprise of growth and development, and postformation changes. Therefore, those methods, based on tooth formation and development, will be applied on subadult individuals and they rely on the evaluation of developmental changes on conventional radiographs, CT-scan, or magnetic resonance imaging; while methods based on postformation changes will be applied on adults and they rely on conventional radiographs, macroscopic or microscopic evaluation of certain postformation changes in teeth. However, the combination of methods results in increased accuracy of the estimation. So, whenever possible, dental age estimation should be combined with skeletal and biochemical methods in order to achieve more accurate results. It means that in age estimation, as in all other fields of forensic science, multidisciplinarity represents a clear benefit on the results.