The study evaluated the environmental performance of the construction and demolition waste (C&DW) management in the area of PCJ Watershed, located in the São Paulo State, Brazil, by means of an attributional Life Cycle Assessment. The entire C&DW management under the responsibility of the municipal government was considered. The potential environmental impacts were assessed by using two specific life cycle impact assessment methodologies, CML baseline (v3.03) and Impact 2002+ (v2.12). The results obtained by both methodologies highlighted the importance of the avoided impacts from recovered materials, mainly those related to steel, glass and plastics recycling. In particular, the CML baseline indicated “Human Toxicity” as the most important category, mainly due to the avoided impacts from steel recycling and the generated impacts from transportation in all the C&DW management stages. The Impact 2002+ highlighted instead the role of the categories of “Respiratory Inorganics” and “Global Warming”, in accordance with the results related again to steel recycling and transportation but also to landfilling of solid residues. The study considered some alternative scenarios of the mineral fraction management, which quantified the expected advantages of increasing C&DW recycling and improving the quality of recycled aggregates.The high generation rates of construction and demolition waste (C&DW) is a crucial aspect of the building sector ( C&DW comprise a wide variety of materials, as a result of different techniques and activities of the construction sector ( According to Brazilian environmental regulation ( The environmental impacts resulting from solid waste management practices must be interpreted in an appropriate way in order to be useful in the decision making process. Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is generally considered as one of the best tools to obtain a reliable quantification of environmental impacts of C&DW management systems ( This study aims to evaluate the potential environmental impacts of the C&DW management in representative municipalities from PCJ Watershed, located in the São Paulo State, Brazil. The main focus is the C&DW management under the responsibility of public sector, considering the wastes generated by small generators, which may represent up to 70% of the total C&DW generated ( The methodology comprises two major steps: the study area description and the life cycle assessment. The study area ( A general questionnaire (reported in the The LCA study has been developed in accordance with the requirements of ISO 14.040 and ISO 14.044 standards ( The overall goal of this study is to evaluate the environmental performance of the C&DW management in the municipalities from PCJ Watershed, considering the current (base case scenario) and some alternative scenarios. The primary audience is that of the municipal departments responsible for the C&DW management and the PCJ Watershed Committee, both interested in assessing the environmental profile of current and alternative management scenarios. The results may also be useful to LCA practitioners and C&DW planners from other Brazilian regions, if adjustments in geographical, time and technology coverage are performed. The system of interest comprises the C&DW management stages whose responsibility belongs to the municipal government. The functional unit has been defined as the management of 10,000 tonnes of C&DW per year. Only four municipalities have carried out C&DW characterisation studies ( The LCA analysis utilises an attributional approach and has been developed with the support of SimaPro® 8.0.2 software. An attributional LCA aims at describing the potential environmental impacts of a system over its life cycle ( Most of the direct burdens for the life cycle inventory have been obtained from official reports or technical visits to infrastructures. The remaining direct burdens, indirect burdens related to materials and energy required for C&DW management operations, and avoided burdens have been obtained from the literature and The life cycle environmental impacts have been evaluated by using CML baseline v.3.03 ( The base case scenario comprises the current C&DW management of the PCJ Watershed and assumes that 30% of the C&DW generated in each municipality is sent to illegal storage areas ( The alternative management scenarios (   The scenarios 1 and 2 have considered the construction of recycling facilities in the six municipalities that currently do not have such facilities, and, scenarios 3.1 and 3.2 assume that those municipalities use the recycling facilities of the nearest municipalities (Fig. S2.3), in order to analyse the influence of the transport distances.   The inventory took into account a specific proportion of the C&DW generation rate of each municipality, with reference to the functional unit (10,000 tonnes), as indicated in  The inventory of transportation stages has been developed based on primary data about the distances, and direct and indirect burdens of transportation have been calculated considering the emissions from the process “passenger car” and “lorry 16–32 tonnes (EURO 4)”, according to The direct and indirect burdens from inert landfilling are related to energy use for operation, as leachate emissions have not been considered. This assumption appears reasonable since the waste material disposed in this type of landfill has low pollutant content and is chemically inert to a large extent ( The containers used for the C&DW storage, the infrastructure and its maintenance, and the transport equipment maintenance have not been considered, due to the lack of reliable data. Anyway, these burdens are almost similar for the considered alternative scenarios, and then the assumption will not affect the validity of results. The inventory of MixC&DW, land-derived material and wood recycling have been elaborated based on primary data obtained in the recycling facilities and updated with data from The  The normalised results highlight the importance of the avoided impacts provided by steel recycling, and, for a lesser extent, glass recycling. The environmental benefits of steel recycling derive from the avoided consumptions of coal for “Abiotic Depletion (fossil fuels)”, pig iron for “Global Warming”, coke for “Human Toxicity”, and sinter iron for “Photochemical Oxidation” and “Acidification”, which are used in the primary steel production. The contribution of glass recycling for “Human Toxicity” and “Acidification” is related to the avoided emissions of selenium and sulphur dioxides, both from the primary glass production. The recovery of PVC and HDPE are the main responsible for the environmental benefits of plastics recycling, which are related to the avoided consumption of crude oil and natural gas (for “Abiotic Depletion (fossil fuels)”), and to the avoided emission of sulphur dioxide from primary plastics production (for “Acidification”). The transportation stages are responsible for the consumption of 76% of the total crude oil used throughout the C&DW management system, which justifies its contribution for “Abiotic Depletion (fossil fuel)”. C&DW freights from generator to sorting areas and those for mineral fraction from sorting areas to recycling facilities appear as the main stages responsible for the air emissions of carbon dioxide (for “Global Warming”) and nitrogen oxides (for “Acidification”). The contribution for “Human Toxicity” is related to air emissions of antimony from brake wear of trucks. The impacts of C&DW landfilling are important for “Global Warming” and “Photochemical Oxidation”, due to emissions of biogenic methane related to paperboard waste landfilling.  “Respiratory Inorganics”, “Global Warming”, “Carcinogens”, “Non-Renewable Energy” and “Non-Carcinogens” appear the crucial categories, accounting for 95% of the total impacts, as reported in Table S4.3. The contribution analyses for these categories are available in the figures from S4.7 to S4.11, and Table S4.4. It is important to point out that the results of local impact impacts (“Respiratory Inorganics”, “Carcinogens” and “Non-Carcinogens”) represent the European context, which may be different from the study area. The histograms of The impact of plastics recycling for “Non-Carcinogens” is due to emissions of arsenic into soil related to the electricity consumption in the recycling process. The avoided impact for “Carcinogens” is related to aromatic hydrocarbons emission, mainly from the production of HDPE granulates. The remarkable contribution for “Non-Renewable Energy” indicates that plastic recycling allows savings of crude oil and natural gas, which also justifies the avoided impact for “Global Warming” category. The avoided impacts of glass recycling for “Non-Renewable Energy”, “Respiratory Inorganics” and “Global Warming” are related to the avoided consumption of diesel and emissions of PM The diesel used in the inert landfill operation is the main responsible for the generated impact of “Respiratory Inorganics”, due to emissions of NO Transportation gives important contribution mainly for “Global Warming”, due to emissions of carbon dioxide, and “Respiratory Inorganics”, due to emissions of NO The most important impact categories are the same in the two LCI methodologies, with the exception of “Photochemical Oxidation” of CML baseline.  With reference to the categories of “Acidification” and “Respiratory Inorganics”, there is again a large contribution of transportation and C&DW landfilling for the generated impacts, as it is shown in In this LCA stage, a sensitivity analysis has been developed by following two criteria: (i) comparing the LCIA results of alternative and base case scenarios and, (ii) analysing the effect of variations of transportation stages. As aforementioned, the alternative management scenarios defined in In both LCIA methodologies, the increase of the recycling rates improves the performances in the impact categories “Abiotic Depletion (fossil fuels)”, “Global Warming” and “Non-Renewable Energy” in scenarios 2a and 2b; otherwise in scenarios 1a and 1b this not occur because the higher the recycling rates, the greater are the diesel consumption. It is important to note that in the scenarios 2, it was assumed that the recycling facilities consume the lowest possible amount of diesel in order to produce the higher amount of medium quality aggregates. Thus, considering the results of “Global Warming”, “Abiotic Depletion (fossil fuels)” and “Non-Renewable Energy”, in both LCIA methodologies scenarios 2a and 2b appear as the better option. Although the increase in recycling rates decreases the need of inert landfilling and, therefore, decreases the diesel consumption used in the landfill operation, this reduction is not significant in the overall management system.  The results obtained by presented LCA study indicate steel recycling as crucial for the avoided impacts of the C&DW management system, since it is the main contributor for “Global Warming” (77%), “Acidification” (65%) and “Respiratory Inorganics” (82%). LCA studies about end-of-life phase of residential buildings reported the same importance of steel recycling for the avoided impacts of the C&DW management ( LCA studies have been adopted different approaches to calculate the environmental credits of recycled steel, which may provide different results. Although the avoided impacts resulting from glass and plastics recycling are lower compared to those of steel recycling, these fractions cannot be neglected. Glass recycling contributes to the avoided impacts of “Human Toxicity” (29%), “Acidification” (22%), “Non-Carcinogens” (51%) and “Respiratory Inorganics” (11%). In this study, it has been assumed that recycled glass (glass cullet) can be used as raw material in the glass package production, with the substitution ratio of 1:0.82 ( In accordance with Wood recycling provides minor avoided impacts for all selected categories (less than 3%), with exception of “Non-Carcinogens”. Usually, the wood wastes from construction sites are mixed with other materials (such as concrete, mortar, metals), therefore, it was assumed that 30% of wood wastes are sent to landfills, based on the study of Although the mineral fraction accounts for approximately 87% of C&DW, the results pointed out that its impacts are insignificant. Considering the selected municipalities, 15% of the mineral fraction is recycled, 25% landfilled and 60% stored for future use. The avoided impacts of recycling represent less than 2% for the selected impact categories and, the sensitivity analysis showed that the increase of recycling rates only improve the results for the categories “Acidification” and “Respiratory Inorganics”. It is important to highlight that this type of mineral, such as soil, gravel and sand, are not considered in the impact categories of “Abiotic Depletion” of CML baseline and “Mineral Extraction” of Impact 2002+. In this context, As highlighted in several studies ( The potential environmental impacts of the C&DW management of thirteen municipalities located in the PCJ Watershed (São Paulo State, Brazil) were evaluated by means of an attributional LCA, taking into account two LCIA methodologies: CML baseline and Impact 2002+. The results obtained by CML baseline indicate that “Human Toxicity” was the most important category, where the avoided impacts of steel recycling and the impacts generated by the transportation were the main contributors. The results obtained by Impact 2002+ indicate that “Respiratory Inorganics” and “Global Warming” were the most important categories, where the avoided impacts of steel recycling had a crucial role, together with the generated impacts of transportation and landfilling. In general, the results highlighted the importance of the avoided impacts from recovered materials, mainly those related to steel, glass and plastics recycling. In this sense, the municipalities should invest in programs to encourage the sorting at construction sites, improving the quality of the recovered materials and, increasing the recycling rates. Moreover, this result indicates that LCA studies of C&DW management should avoid analyses focusing only in the mineral fraction, neglecting the presence of other materials. The results of the alternative scenarios indicate that the increase of recycling and the production of medium quality RA improve significantly the impact categories of “Acidification” (CML baseline) and “Respiratory Inorganics” (Impact 2002+) with reference to the base case scenario. However, although the mineral fraction represents a large quantity of the C&DW, its recycling does not appear remarkable for the avoided impacts. Conversely, its contribution to the impacts of transportation was significant, accounting to the consumption of 76% of the total crude oil used throughout the management system. In this context, it is important to develop studies determining the impacts of the scarcity of natural aggregates used in the construction sector, in order to improve the benefits of the C&DW recycling. The authors acknowledge the Environmental Department of each Brazilian municipality for providing the primary data used in this study. One of the authors (LPR) gratefully acknowledges Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:    