Following a few preliminary remarks on the tunneling methods at the beginning of the 20th century, the successful applications of the full-face method also in difficult conditions are underlined. The attention is posed on the use of a systematic reinforcement of the face and of the ground, by means of fiber-glass elements. A selection of tunnels where this method was used successfully is reported with the purpose of illustrating the wide spectrum of ground conditions where it has been applied. Then, following a description of the main concepts behind the method, the attention moves from the so-called “heavy method”, where deformations are restrained, to the “light method”, where deformations are allowed with the intention to decrease the stresses acting on the primary and final linings. The progress in the application of the “light method” is underlined, up to the development of a novel technique, which relies on the use of a yielding support composed of top head steel sets with sliding joints and special deformable elements inserted in the primary lining. The well-known case study of the Saint Martin La Porte access adit, along the Lyon-Turin Base Tunnel, is described. In this tunnel, a yield-control support system combined with full-face excavation has been adopted successfully in order to cope with the large deformations experienced during face advance through the Carboniferous formation. The monitoring results obtained during excavation are illustrated, together with the modeling studies performed when paying attention to the rock mass time-dependent behavior.No established method was available at the beginning of the 20th century for the design and excavation of tunnels in difficult conditions. However, with the need of new transportation lines and the increasing mobility, spectacular tunnels were excavated and completed. Important examples in Europe are the Frejus and Simplon railway tunnels through the Alps and “ The need to improve the way of thinking of the time was soon recognized in order to make tunneling a more systematic and efficient work. Simplon Engineers Andre and Rothpletz emphasized the advantage of full-face excavation already one hundred years ago (e.g. Tunnel construction in such conditions (e.g. in poor quality ground or in squeezing or unstable ground) is very demanding and reliable predictions at the design stage are difficult if not impossible, so that most often the use of the “interactive observational approach” is advocated. If consideration is given to the construction of deep tunnels (such as the new Alpine Tunnels in Europe, e.g. Lötschberg, Gotthard, Lyon-Turin, and Brenner Base Tunnels), alignment constraints, and uncertainties of geological exploration, it is not always possible to avoid difficult conditions. Therefore, the selection of the most appropriate excavation-construction method is highly problematic and uncertain. The choice is in all cases between mechanized tunneling (tunnel boring machine, TBM) and conventional tunneling. In mechanized tunneling, due to the fixed geometry and the limited flexibility of the TBM, allowable space to accommodate ground deformations is restricted. On the contrary, in conventional tunneling where a considerably larger profile can be excavated in order to allow for large deformations, inevitable excavation will take place with a low rate of advance. It is however true that, if the work is well planned and appropriate stabilization measures are implemented, excavation may proceed at an acceptable rate of advance even in very difficult ground conditions, as in squeezing conditions. The purpose of this paper is to describe the full-face excavation method, which has been experienced successfully so far under various conditions, at depth or near the ground surface. In doing this, the attention is paid to the use of the so-called “heavy” and “light” methods of tunneling, meaning that limited or significant deformations of the ground around the tunnel are allowed to take place in a controlled manner. An attempt is made through a case study to outline some of the geotechnical issues in view of modeling the tunnel behavior and observation and monitoring during excavation. Full-face tunneling has been applied in Italy for more than 30 years, with cross-sectional areas ranging from 120 m Based on the wide experiences gained so far, the most important component of successful design and construction of tunnels when full-face excavation is considered is the ability to understand the importance of the ground deformational response. This is strictly linked to the formation of the “arching effect” (i.e. the ability of the ground to stabilize and sustain itself), needed for reaching stability of the underground excavation, in the short and long terms. As illustrated in When full-face tunnel excavation is carried out, stresses and strains do develop in the surrounding rocks, including the “core” ahead of the advancing tunnel face. This “core” is the main tool for reaching the tunnel stability by means of stabilization and reinforcement measures as appropriate. The full-face method, as applied for the first time in Italy ( The transition from the confinement action due to the “core” ahead of the advancing tunnel face to that of the support along the tunnel perimeter is to take place in the most uniform and gradual way as possible, by placing the invert in the near vicinity of the face, when needed. The key component of the approach is to minimize the extrusion surface, which coincides with the tunnel perimeter and extends longitudinally, from the point of contact between the ground and the support at the crown and at the invert, respectively. In general, the major problems encountered when tunneling in squeezing rock, which is a typical difficult ground condition, are associated with the stability of the tunnel and of the face. As illustrated in As already noted, of significant importance for the understanding of the tunnel response are both the radial displacements of the tunnel wall and the corresponding longitudinal displacements of the tunnel face as excavation proceeds. The tunnel face follows the same deformational pattern as the tunnel itself, although the longitudinal displacements of the “core” ahead of the face are significantly smaller than the tunnel radial displacements. As shown by  Of the available options for conventional tunnel excavation (e.g. multiple headings, top heading and benching down, full-face), the choice falls, also in difficult conditions such as in squeezing rock, on the full-face method ( With the need to cope with high overburden and in particular very severe squeezing conditions as, for example, in the Sedrun section of the Gotthard Base Tunnel in Switzerland, the proposal was made ( As illustrated in With the “heavy method”, the primary lining is designed to be very stiff (generally composed of steel-fiber shotcrete and heavy steel sets). The tunnel cross section is entirely open and the primary lining is installed near to the face (in With the “light method”, the excavation profile is chosen in order to maintain the desired clearance and to avoid the need for re-profiling. A key point is to be able to control the development of deformations. A suitable tunnel support system is to be adopted (in The face stability when driving a tunnel consists in reinforcing the rock mass ahead by means of grouted fiber-glass elements. There are a number of fiber-glass elements that may be adopted. Both smooth and corrugated tubes are available. More recently, flat elements ( There are a number of options for the yielding support, in addition to providing sliding joints in the top hat steel sets as in the case of the Gotthard Base Tunnel in the Sedrun section. These include the LSC (lining stress controller) element ( In order to illustrate full-face tunneling in severely squeezing conditions, a case study is discussed in the following. Reference is made to the Saint Martin La Porte access adit, along the Lyon-Turin Base Tunnel, where a yield-control support system combined with full-face excavation has been adopted successfully in order to cope with the large deformations experienced during face advance through the Carboniferous formation (see The rock mass encountered during excavation, as shown in The design concept consists in the systematic use of full-face excavation and reinforcement, coupled with a yield-control support system by using a near circular cross section (radius of 6.10 m), as shown in Stage 0: face reinforcement, including a ring of fiber-glass elements around the tunnel perimeter, over a 2–3 m thickness. Stage 1: mechanical excavation carried out in steps of 1 m in length, installation of 8 m long rock dowels along the perimeter, yielding steel sets with sliding joints, and a 10 cm thick shotcrete layer. The tunnel is excavated in the upper cross section to allow for a maximum convergence of 600 mm. Stage 2: the tunnel is opened to the full section at a 30 m distance from the face, with the application of 20 cm shotcrete lining, yielding steel sets with sliding joints fitted with hiDCon elements. The tunnel is allowed to deform in a controlled manner with a maximum convergence not to exceed 400 mm. Stage 3: installation of the final concrete lining at a distance of 80 m from the face. As shown in Monitoring of tunnel convergence has been underway along the tunnel systematically. Convergences were measured by means of optical targets placed along the tunnel perimeter. Also measured were the longitudinal displacements ahead of the face. In addition, a number of sections have been equipped with multi-position borehole extensometers and strain/stress meters in the primary and final linings. A few representative monitoring data are described as follows.  One should note that the new yielding support system shown in Multi-position borehole extensometers were also used in order to observe the rock mass response in the ground around the tunnel.  Significant features of the tunnel response are the time-dependent deformations observed whenever face advance is stopped. Also, these time-dependent deformations do take place during excavation, when it is difficult to distinguish the “face effect” from the “time effect”. In addition, laboratory tests on representative specimens show a time-dependent behavior ( Many constitutive laws can be used to describe such a behavior; however, only few of them can reproduce satisfactorily all the time-dependent features involved in tunnel excavation, with a reasonably simple mathematical formulation to be used in design practice. With the phenomena observed in the Saint Martin La Porte access adit in mind, the SHELVIP (Stress Hardening ELasto VIscous Plastic) model was formulated ( With the objective to analyze the tunnel response based on the available monitoring data previously described, the axisymmetric finite difference model shown in As shown in Back-analysis carried out with the model has led to the values of the constitutive parameters listed in This paper presented the state-of-the-art in full-face tunneling in difficult conditions, when the tunnel stability relies heavily on the ground reinforcement ahead of the tunnel face (the so-called “core”) and, in cases, on a ring around the tunnel. The developments of the method, with the primary lining designed to be very stiff (generally composed of steel fiber shotcrete and heavy steel sets), as initially applied mostly in Italy, were mentioned. Then, the early applications of full-face tunneling under difficult conditions by using a yielding support system were described. The well-known case study of the Saint Martin La Porte access adit, along the Lyon-Turin Base Tunnel, which experienced severely squeezing conditions during excavation in the Carboniferous formation, was taken as representative. In this tunnel, which has been widely studied by the author, an innovative tunnel excavation and construction method was introduced which combines full-face excavation and face reinforcement by means of fiber-glass elements with a yield-control support. The results of in-situ performance monitoring and numerical modeling with consideration of the rock mass time-dependent behavior were illustrated. The author wishes to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The case study briefly presented in this paper is a summary of the research work carried out on behalf of LTF (Lyon Turin Ferroviaire SAS) through a research contract with Politecnico di Torino, already illustrated in a number of previous publications in conference proceedings and refereed journals. The author wishes to acknowledge the work of the many people who have contributed very significantly to this research effort.