The dry sand/rubber-wheel abrasion tester is widely used to evaluate the low-stress abrasion resistance of materials for the mining/mineral processing industry particularly for the oil sand mining industry. Since wear loss is usually proportional to the applied load, this test is often performed under a fixed load at a fixed sliding speed to rank materials. However, inaccurate or misleading information might be generated under an inadequate load. It has been observed that D2 tool steel exhibits very different responses to variations in the applied load. Above a certain load level, further increase in the applied load may lead to a decrease in wear loss of D2 steel. In order to understand this phenomenon, computer simulation was performed to investigate wear responses of several engineering materials, including D2 tool steel, stainless steel, Al 6061 and Cu 110, to variations in applied load under the dry sand/rubber-wheel abrasion condition. It was demonstrated that the decrease in wear loss of D2 tool steel with an increase in the applied load was attributed to failure of the abrasive sand. Wear losses of the materials with respect to the sliding speed were also investigated. The prediction from the simulation was compared to experimental observations.The dry sand/rubber-wheel abrasion test It is generally accepted that the volume loss of a material is proportional to the applied load. Materials are therefore often tested under a fixed load at a fixed sliding speed to have all materials tested under the same condition. However, wear is a complex surface process and wear of a material differs from one to another and this makes the accuracy of the one-load testing procedure questionable. Recent work on D2 tool steel has demonstrated that this material shows different response to variations in the applied load, not obeying a linear relationship between the load and wear loss In this work, a micro-scale dynamic simulation model (MSDSM) The modeling in this study was made in two-dimensional space and the model has been described elsewhere This model (MSDSM) can also be used to deal with two-phase materials and details have been given in another paper Volume losses of several engineering materials as a function of load were predicted using the MSDSM. Al alloy (Al 6061), Cu 110, 17-4Ph stainless steel and D2 tool steel were selected for the study. Nominal compositions of the materials are given in  The wear losses of these materials were also experimentally evaluated using a dry sand/rubber-wheel abrasion tester and results of the test are shown in In order to explain the unusual abrasion behavior of D2 steel, we checked changes in the size of abrasive sand particles during abrasion test. In the case of D2 tool steel under higher loads, the damage to the sand particles considerably increased, leading to less wear of the tool steel. This result explains the variations in the relation between the wear losses of the tested materials and the applied load. As the hardness of the target material increased, the sand became less effective to abrade the material. The damage to sand under high loads was so high that a decrease in the volume loss of the target material could occur as the applied load was increased such as in the case of hard D2 tool steel. Previous work of SEM surface analysis The decrease in wear due to the loss of angularity of abrasive sand was also demonstrated by modeling abrasive wear using spherical sand and square sand with four angles. Effects of the sliding speed on abrasion were also studied.  In the modeling, the damage to the abrasive sand was also determined by counting its site losses for different target materials at different sliding speeds. In this work, the relationship between the wear behavior of several materials and the applied load as well as the sliding speed under the dry sand/rubber-wheel abrasion condition was investigated. In particular, the mechanism responsible for the unusual behavior of D2 tool steel was explored by analyzing the damage to the abrasive sand. It should be pointed out that the abrasive wear process is complex. Other factors may also influence this relationship, such as the sand flow and hardness of the rubber wheel. However, the present computational “experiments” were performed under the same condition for all materials. Therefore, the above-mentioned influences could be excluded. The consistence between the modeling and experimental observation as well as previous sand surface analysis imply that the damage to the abrasive sand should be the main factor responsible for the unusual wear response of D2 steel to variations in the load and sliding speed. The relationships between the volume loss of a target material and the applied load as well as the sliding speed under the dry sand/rubber-wheel abrasion condition were studied, using a computer modeling approach. Four engineering materials, Al alloy (Al 6061), Cu 110, 17-4Ph stainless steel and D2 tool steel were investigated. It was demonstrated that the wear loss generally increased as the load was increased. However, such a trend may change oppositely above a certain load level when the target material had its hardness closer to that of the abrasive sand, such as D2 tool steel. Regarding possible effects of sliding speed on abrasive wear, the wear loss of D2 steel decreased (after an initial increase) as the sliding speed was increased in the tested speed range. However, the sliding speed did not show significant effect on wear losses of other materials. The modeling suggested that the increase in the damage of the abrasive sand was responsible for the unusual responses of D2 tool steel to high loads and high sliding speeds, respectively. The predicted phenomena have been compared to experimental observations in this paper. The authors are grateful for financial support from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Syncrude Canada Ltd. and Alberta Science and Research Authority (ASRA).