MCDM methods can be used in many areas when decision making process is weighed on the basis of many influential parameters. Results of this study show that MCDM methods, such as TOPSIS and VIKOR, can also be applied for flotation machine selection.
                  Five flotation machines were evaluated by three experts using ten criteria divided in three groups: constructional, economical and technical and the results of their evaluation were the basis for application of VIKOR and TOPSIS methods. In the first step of the selection the results obtained with these two MCDM methods were different: machine A
                     4 was seen as the best alternative by TOPSIS, while VIKOR recognized machine A
                     3 as the best alternative. In order to determine which of these two machines was really the most appropriate one, the machines were re-evaluated based only on two groups of criteria: constructional and economical. The results of the additional evaluation showed that the machine A
                     4 was the best ranked by both methods.Flotation is a separation technique used in many industrial areas ( Flotation machines also have a huge impact because they are devices in which all elementary processes of flotation take place, starting from collision of air bubbles with mineral particles, through their attachment to hydrophobic particles and the formation of the “mineral particle - air bubble” aggregate, levitation or sputtering aggregate “mineral particle - air bubble” on the surface of the pulp and the formation of mineralized foam until it is removed into a concentrate ( Bearing all this in mind, choosing the adequate flotation machine is very important, but also a very complex process, precisely due to large number of factors having an impact: size and the shape of the tank, construction of aeration and agitation systems, etc., so the planner who is making the decision about the most appropriate machine for the facility has a difficult task ( In recent years a large number of methods for decision making have been applied for solving similar problems. From the beginning of the 1970s up to now, a significant number of multiple criteria decision-making (MCDM) methods, as well as their extensions, have been introduced. A summary overview of these methods, as well as their applications, was considered by All these MCDM methods can be used to solve a wide variety of problems from different areas. Compared to some other areas, the application of MCDM methods in solving problems related to mineral processing is still in the early stages. Mineral processing as a scientific area is very suitable for application of MCDM methods because of large number of parameters that influence the final outcome of the process. In recent years some of the researchers have recognized positive aspects of the application of MCDM methods for solving different problems in mineral processing. All these examples show that MCDM methods are very applicable for solving various problems in mining and mineral processing, but no examples for flotation machine selection were found. That is the reason why MCDM approach for the selection of flotation machines is proposed in this paper. MCDM methods TOPSIS and VIKOR were used for ranking five flotation machines based on ten criteria. Flotation machines from mineral processing equipment manufacturers, FLSmidth: DO-70 RT and DO-100 RT ( Machines were marked A The first step in every MCDM method is the selection of criteria that would be used, as well as the determination of their significance. In the professional and scientific literature, several methods for determining the significance of the criteria have been proposed, and as some of the most prominent the following could be mentioned: AHP ( In cases of evaluation where sub-criteria are also used, the final weight of the sub-criteria is determined in the following way: TOPSIS method, or Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to an Ideal Solution, was proposed by Similarly, the relative distance from the anti-ideal point After that, in the next step, the relative distance According to the TOPSIS method, the alternative with the highest value of The ideal and anti-ideal points in TOPSIS method are determined as follows: Finally, it should be noted that TOPSIS method uses vector normalization procedure, as follows: VIKOR method was proposed by The VIKOR method is based on the idea of ideal and compromise solution. The best alternative in this method is determined on the basis of the overall ranking index The average score As it was said earlier, flotation machines are very important in the flotation process because all elementary processes take place in them. For that reason, choosing an adequate flotation machine is one of the things that is essential for receiving the best results of the flotation process. When choosing a flotation machine, a large number of parameters should be considered. All these parameters can generally be divided into three groups: constructional, economical and technical. In the first group there are such parameters as the size and the shape of the machine, the volume or the capacity of the machine, the construction of agitation and aeration system and number of the machines. The economical parameters include: investments (the price of the machine unit, transportation costs and installment costs), terms of payment and maintenance and operating costs. In the third group of parameters, technical parameters, there are: warranty period, delivery time and maintenance conditions. All these parameters are important for selection of the flotation machine but they do not have the same importance. Therefore, every parameter was given appropriate weight which shows a significance of the parameter. In this approach, three experts performed the direct assignation of the weights of the criteria, as well as the sub-criteria, based on their experience. Using the Delphi method, after several iterations, the values shown in In this session a numerical illustration is given in order to present the proposed methodology. At the beginning of evaluation, three experts determined the ratings of alternatives in relation to the select set of sub-criteria. As in the case of determining the weight of the criteria, the Delphi method was also used here. For evaluation, 1–9 scale, shown in The ratings of five alternatives in relation to the selected set of sub-criteria are shown in The normalized ratings determined by using Eq. The optimization directions of the criteria are also shown in In next step, on the basis of values from normalized decision-making matrix, the ideal and anti-ideal points are determined. The ideal point and anti-ideal point, determined by Eqs. On the basis of data from The above mentioned distances from the ideal and anti-ideal point, as well as the relative distance of each alternative to the ideal solution are shown in As it can be seen from the The similar evaluation is performed by using VIKOR method. After determining As it can be seen from It should be noted that the difference between the first and second placed alternatives is very small in the case of ranking based on the TOPSIS method, i.e. In order to see the impact that individual group of criteria have on ranking order of the machines, partial rankings were conducted by assigning weight 1 to one criterion group, while the other two had weight zero. The results of the partial ranking of the alternatives according to individual group of criteria, Constructional, Economical and Technical, respectively are shown in As can be seen from The TOPSIS and VIKOR methods gave the same ranking order of alternatives in relation to the first and the second group of criteria, TOPSIS and VIKOR methods did not give the same ranking order in relation to the third group of criteria, Alternative It is also notable that the first and second group of criteria rank machine Based on the above, it is obvious that alternatives denoted as The solution of this problem could be found in reassigning new weights to criteria, adding some new criteria or sub-criteria or reducing some of the criteria or sub-criteria. The reassigning of new weights would be inconsistent with the previous analysis, since it would alter the relative weights between the sub-criteria. Similarly, adding new criteria or sub-criteria was also deemed inconsistent. In this case, an attempt was made to reduce the number of criteria by eliminating the influence of one of the criteria groups and recalculating the weights of other criteria and sub-criteria, thus accomplishing an additional analysis, or an analysis “what if” for the case of similar values of technical parameters. In other words, the selection would be made only by using criteria with higher impact based on their assigned weights. According to the original scenario, all three criteria groups, constructional, economical, and technical, were deemed important, with weights, respectively 0.35, 0.40, and 0.25. The detailed analysis, by which the recalculation could be attempted by eliminating each of the criteria, is mathematically sound, but not justifiable because of the actual meaning of the criteria. While the Warranty period (sub-criteria C Even though this is not an established practice in MCDM approaches, some similar cases in which a reduction in the number of criteria is considered can be found in literature, such as: In order to determine what will happen when the influence of the technical parameters is omitted by setting the value of In order to continue to fulfill the condition The essential data obtained by recalculation using TOPSIS and VIKOR methods are shown in As can be seen from It is necessary to mention that more precise MCDM models for flotation machine selection can be formed using a greater number of criteria, as well as sub-criteria. In most cases proposed model with 3 groups of criteria or 10 sub-criteria should give an appropriate selection. However, in some extreme cases, when a selection cannot be done with a whole set of criteria, like in previously considered example, an adequate selection can also be made on the basis of a smaller number of criteria or sub-criteria. Selection of the appropriate flotation machine is very difficult and also very responsible task, because it has a long term influence on the flotation process. There are many parameters that have a significant role, so the process designer has to take them all into consideration. MCDM methods can simplify decision making process, but also there are certain things that should be taken into account. Results of the study given in this paper, show that MCDM methods, VIKOR and TOPSIS, can be successfully used for selection of flotation machines. Five flotation machines from two flotation machine suppliers were evaluated. The first step is the selection of the criteria that would be used and which must be carefully chosen because of the existence of too many criteria, but also insufficient number of criteria can lead to an inappropriate selection. Weight of the criteria is also important because it can have an impact on the selection process. Weight can be determined either subjectively by decision maker or using some mathematical methods. In this study direct assignation approach of the weights of the criteria was used. Three experts in mineral processing equipment design were consulted and asked to give weight to each criterion. Weights of criteria, as well as sub-criteria, were determined by using Delphi method and direct assignation method. Using two methods for solving the same problem can sometimes lead to a different outcome. It is not very common for MCDM methods to have disagreement regarding the final result, but it can happen. In this case, VIKOR and TOPSIS had different alternative for best flotation machine. When something like this happens it is difficult to tell which method is right, or which machine is the most appropriate for this study. In order to determine the best alternative, additional analysis was needed, so a repeated evaluation by changing the number of criteria, i.e. by setting the weight of one group of criteria to zero was done. Re-evaluation of flotation machines by changing weight of criteria C This paper presents results from the project