Valgus-impacted proximal humerus fracture is a classic but rare entity in shoulder traumatology. Surgical treatment is controversial, with increasing use of minimally invasive techniques. Our technique uses a minimally invasive approach under fluoroscopic control. Raising the humeral head to reduce the valgus enables spontaneous and well-positioned reduction of the tuberosities and screw fixation between the greater tuberosity and the humeral shaft. Indications comprise valgus-impacted fracture without comminution of the medial epiphyseal-metaphyseal hinge or greater tuberosity; the rotator cuff contributes to reduction and must be intact. This type of fixation restores proximal humerus anatomy and achieves consolidation with low risk of secondary necrosis. Minimally invasive single-screw fixation is an alternative of choice for surgical treatment of valgus-impacted proximal humerus fracture.Proximal humerus fracture accounts for 5% of all fractures, 14% show valgus displacement. It was first described by De Anquin and De Anquin We report an original fixation technique for proximal humerus fracture with valgus displacement. A single screw is positioned via a short approach, restoring satisfactory anatomy and function. The technical note is backed up by clinical and radiological results for a long-term series. We use this fixation technique in 3- or 4-part valgus-impacted proximal humerus fracture with less than 3 weeks’ progression. Several CT criteria are to be respected: medial epiphyseal-metaphyseal hinge continuity, as advised by Hertel et al. Surgery begins under general anesthesia with the patient semi-seated. The fluoroscope is positioned at the patient's head, with the rotation arc parallel to the patient ( After radiologic control, passive self-rehabilitation by stretching and spa-therapy is initiated at week 3, until full recovery of passive ranges of motion. Active limb use begins at 6 weeks. A retrospective series included 12 patients: 8 female, 4 male, mean age at surgery, 54 years (range, 31–72 years). Ten had 4-part and two 3-part fracture. Mean preoperative valgus of the humeral head was 188° (range, 160–210°). At follow-up, function was assessed on Constant score and subjective shoulder value (SSV). AP X-ray in neutral rotation and lateral view assessed consolidation and humeral head inclination and screened for secondary necrosis. Two patients died, but their radiology data were analyzable, with respectively 9 and 18 months’ follow-up. One patient was lost to follow-up. At a mean 71 months’ follow-up (range, 9–192 months), 11 patients underwent radiological and clinical assessment. Mean Constant score was 88.3 (range, 76–95) and mean normalized Constant score 97.8% (range, 84–100). Mean SSV was 94% (range, 80–100). At last follow-up, all fractures showed consolidation; mean humeral head inclination was 132° (range, 128–150°). There were no aseptic necrosis and no revision procedures. Valgus proximal humerus fractures are a classic but rare entity in shoulder traumatology; treatment is controversial. Anatomic reduction provides favorable clinical recovery and avoids secondary osteoarthritis Our surgical technique involves a short approach without arthrotomy and minimal and inexpensive one-screw internal fixation without secondary removal of material Indications for the technique are infrequent, with strict selection criteria: intact medial hinge, untorn rotator cuff indirectly assessed on preoperative CT, no osteopenia, and greater tuberosity size sufficient to allow fixation by a screw descending toward the humeral shaft. This original internal fixation technique is reproducible and well codified. It gives satisfactory clinical and radiological results compared to other minimally invasive methods reported in the literature. L. Nové-Josserand reports personal fees from 3S ORTHO, outside the submitted work; G. Walch reports personal fees from Tornier/Wright, other from Imascap, outside the submitted work. The other authors declare that they have no competing interest.