A time-series of benthic oxygen consumption, water-column and sediment chlorophyll concentrations, and temperature in the southern North Sea was subjected to inverse modelling in order to study benthic-pelagic coupling in this coastal marine system. The application of a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) on a simple box model allowed deriving deposition rates and temperature-dependent remineralization rates of both phytopigments and bulk carbon, as well as estimates of uncertainty for each of these processes. Together with organic matter availability, temperature had an important effect on benthic respiration rates thus delaying remineralization of spring bloom material until the late summer when temperatures were at their highest. The sediment at our station clearly acts as a buffer, removing large quantities of nutrients from the pelagic system during the spring bloom and only slowly releasing them back into the water column as temperatures increase later during summer.The coastal zone accounts for less than 10% of the global ocean in terms of surface area, but has a disproportionally high contribution to some biogeochemical fluxes and budgets. For instance, benthic mineralization on the shelf represents over 80% of global benthic remineralization ( In temperate continental shelf systems, organic matter production and deposition show high seasonality. For instance, in the Southern Bight of the North Sea, the spring phytoplankton bloom is an annual recurrent event. As oligotrophic Atlantic waters enter through the Straits of Dover, they receive input from a series of major rivers and estuaries with catchment areas covering some of the most densely populated areas in the world. Nutrient levels in the North Sea are highest in winter, as remineralization continues to some extent while primary production by phytoplankton is limited by temperature and irradiance. In early March, rising temperatures and irradiance trigger a phytoplankton bloom which, although initiated by an early silicate-controlled diatom bloom (about 200 mgC m A recent model-based estimate, using only water column data, puts annual net primary production in the Belgian coastal waters at 213 gC m Oxygen demand is an often-used proxy for total mineralization, as it integrates microbial aerobic respiration, oxidation of reduced metabolites, and faunal respiration ( This study analyzes a series of oxygen consumption measurements and chlorophyll-a measurements, both in the water column and in the sediment, from a well-studied station in the Belgian coastal zone. We address several questions: what is the extent of the time-lag between the input of organic matter and the inventory of very labile organic matter, as represented by chlorophyll-a, and remineralization of the bulk of the organic matter, as represented by oxygen demand? What is the relative importance of settling bloom material versus temperature in determining the seasonality of sediment oxygen demand? How important is the sediment column in this shallow system for the functioning of the pelagic compartment? To achieve this we use a simple pulse-response model, similar to those used by From September 2002 until October 2003, the sediment and near-bottom water at station 115bis on the Belgian continental shelf were sampled monthly. This station is located at 51°09.10′ N 02°37.10′ E in an area known as the Western Coastal Banks, at a depth of approximately 15 m ( Sediment was collected with a 180 cm Phytopigment concentrations in the sediment and water column samples were determined using a Gilson high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system, equipped with a Spherisorb C18 column, an Applied Biosystems 785A Programmable Variable Wavelength Detector, a Hewlett–Packard Diode Array Spectrophotometer and a Gilson 121 Fluorometer. After slicing the cores, each sediment layer was freeze-dried. Then the dry weight was determined, and acetone was added to extract the pigments. Finally, the fluid was filtered on a 0.2 μm nylon filter. HPLC solvents and gradients applied were slight modifications of the method of Sediment community oxygen consumption (SCOC) measurements were performed in two subcores. The cores were placed in a water bath that was preconditioned in an acclimatized room at in situ temperature, and kept in the dark. They were closed with a detachable lid, containing a YSI 5739 oxygen electrode and a Teflon-coated magnetic stirrer, which were mounted at a predetermined depth to ensure the same volume of water was used for every incubation. Care was taken to avoid trapping air bubbles inside the cores. The stirrer mixed the water without any visible disturbance of the sediment surface. The oxygen concentration in the water was monitored every 2 min for a period of 18 h. SCOC, expressed as mmol O A simple box model describes the transfer of chlorophyll-a (chl Degradation of both chlorophyll and carbon (mg m The model was implemented in FORTRAN and integrated using the ode method of the R package deSolve ( For estimating parameter values and their uncertainties we used the R package FME and followed the procedure outlined in The sensitivity of the model output to parameter values was estimated by calculating the sensitivity functions Identifiability analysis estimates the linear dependence (or collinearity) of all possible parameters sets ( Once a suitable set of parameters is elected, their values are estimated by fitting the model variables SCOC and chl In order to estimate the uncertainty on the parameter estimates resulting from the fitting procedure, a Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation was used. This method samples from the conditional probability distribution (also referred to as the posterior distribution) of the parameters, given the model and the data. The algorithm in the FME package uses an Adaptive Metropolis method ( Finally, global sensitivity analysis was used to determine how parameter uncertainty translates to model output uncertainty. This was done by running the model 100 times with parameter values sampled from the probability distributions obtained using the MCMC. From this, uncertainty envelopes could be calculated around each data point. Measurements of temperature, sediment community oxygen consumption (SCOC), sediment chlorophyll-a concentration and water-column chlorophyll-a concentration are shown in The sediment oxygen uptake rate ranged from 4 to 32 mmol m The sensitivity, identifiability and MCMC results presented below are based on the best-fit parameter set, which was obtained only after a suitable set of parameters was selected, i.e. after an initial round of sensitivity analysis and identifiability analysis based on the literature derived parameter set ( The results from identifiability analysis are given in Fitting the model resulted in the optimal parameter set presented in A Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation was used to quantify the uncertainty on the parameter estimates by sampling their probability distributions. After 10,000 iterations, 2706 parameter sets were accepted. The full Markov Chain is shown as a pairwise plot in Our bottom-water chlorophyll data show a clear phytoplankton bloom starting between mid-January and late February as a result of improved light conditions, and peaking in late April. The observed pattern corresponds very well to the blooms recorded in 1995 and 1997 ( This study aimed to estimate several parameters related to the dynamics of the benthic system, such as organic matter degradation rates and their dependency on temperature, using a biogeochemical modelling approach. A similar approach has been used by other studies, for example, to study seasonal patterns in deep sea benthic ecosystem functioning ( Using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo procedure we obtained estimates of the mean and uncertainty for each of the parameters. The posterior probability distributions were very well constrained, especially considering the very broad parameter ranges imposed prior to the procedure. This shows that the Markov Chain performed well. The deposition velocity Carbon to chlorophyll ratios of spring phytoplankton blooms vary widely, between 30 and 200 ( The mean chlorophyll degradation rate constant at 20 °C of 0.0163 ± 0.0032 d The MCMC procedure yielded a mean carbon degradation rate constant of 0.0057 ± 0.0022 d The mean The dynamics of the benthic ecosystem at station 115bis in the Belgian Part of the North Sea have been thoroughly studied in the last decade. Macrobenthic biomass at this station is at its highest in autumn. The seasonal increase in macrofaunal biomass measured by Bacterial biomass was also measured at station 115bis and appeared to respond quickly to the input of bloom material. Bacterial biomass was found to be about four times higher in April (5.9 ± 1.2 gC m Our modelling results have confirmed the important role that temperature plays in the functioning of the benthic compartment at the study site. Organic matter degradation rates in the sediment will more than double for an increase in temperature of 10 °C, which corresponds more or less to the water temperature difference between the peak of the spring bloom and late summer, when temperatures are at their highest. The resulting uncoupling between deposition and remineralization has important consequences for the functioning of the pelagic compartment as well, as large quantities of nutrients will only be recycled after the system has moved back to its light-limited state. Indeed while two thirds of the sedimentation in our model takes place between the onset of the spring bloom in late February and its end in mid-June, only about one quarter of the annual benthic respiration, and therefore nutrient release, takes place during that same period. Additionally, the accumulation of bloom material allows a rich macrofaunal community to develop, thereby making the fine sediments of the Western Coastal Banks an important foraging area for seabirds. Despite this, it is of note that these results only apply to the fine sandy sediments of our study area. The Southern Bight of the North Sea consists of both cohesive fine sandy sediments along the coast, and permeable sediments further offshore. Permeable sediments are subjected to advective pore water flow caused by pressure gradients along the surface, which has a profound effect on their metabolism and oxygen dynamics. Advective flow enhances the supply of electron acceptors deep into the sediment, removes waste products of the mineralization processes, and can even make the sediment act as a filter system when organic particles are injected into the sediment and get trapped ( We would like to thank the crews of the RV Zeeleeuw and RV Belgica for assisting us throughout the sampling campaign. This paper contributes to the Westbanks project (