Short rotation woody crops have many advantages as perennial bioenergy feedstocks, including high biomass yields, high carbohydrate and low ash contents, and marginal land utilization. Through short rotation coppicing management, these biomass resources can be harvested year round. The challenge of year round harvesting is feedstock quality variability due to leaf content during periods of non-senescence. The low quality leaf fraction results in higher ash and moisture contents and lower carbohydrate content. Mechanical techniques, such as air classification, provide an economically feasible process to separate heterogeneous biomass samples based on particle density, size, and shape. In this work high moisture (>45%) hybrid poplar and shrub willow short rotation crops were air classified using a series of fan speeds for anatomical fractionation of the material. Air classification using an air velocity of ∼4.7 m/s removed a majority of the leaf material while retaining 88% and 87% of the hybrid poplar and shrub willow, respectively. At this velocity, the ash content was reduced from 2.34% to 1.67% for hybrid poplar and 2.60% to 2.14% for shrub willow. Concurrently, the carbohydrate content increased from 56.32% to 60.62% and from 54.03% to 55.99% for these same materials. As drying is a cost intensive step for processing high moisture biomass materials, the cost benefits (∼$3/Mg dry biomass) for removing low quality, high moisture materials prior to drying were also demonstrated.
                  ©Battelle Energy Alliance, LLC, contract manager for Idaho National Laboratory.Biomass resources, including agricultural and forestry residues, energy crops, and wastes, are widely available renewable feedstocks for bioenergy and bioproducts. It is projected that by 2030 these resources will potentially be sustainably available at quantities over one billion tons in the United States to help meet energy needs [ Woody energy crops, like poplar and willow, have many advantages as bioenergy resources. Under the right management strategy, they can be freshly harvested year round, unlike many herbaceous resources which are harvested annually. Poplar has a rapid growth rate, high biomass yields, and advantageous chemical properties for biochemical conversion processes, including high cellulose and low ash contents [ While short rotation woody crops (SRWC) show promise as bioenergy feedstocks, there are still obstacles preventing their use in biorefineries. These biomass types typically contain higher moisture and ash contents when compared to other woody resources [ Feedstock variability and quality for year round harvested poplar and willow coppice needs to be better understood. Both of these species senesce during winter, losing leaves and translocating plant nutrients to the roots. Harvesting SRWC with leaves during the growing season impacts moisture, ash, and available carbohydrates. Dou et al. found that the leaves accounted for 37% of the biomass composition in poplar short rotation coppice [ Air classification (AC) techniques offer a low cost mechanism to separate physiological heterogeneous samples by shape, size and density [ Materials were harvested using a New Holland FR 9080 forage harvester with a FB130 coppice header producing chip dimensions about 1″ x 2″ x ½”. The materials selected for this study were harvested during periods of non-senescence to ensure the presence of leaf. Hybrid poplar ( Air classification (AC) separates the samples into two fractions, light and heavy, as the material is passed over a screen covered fan. The lighter fraction is blown upward and removed while the heavy fraction (air classified material) remains. Air classification was performed on wet samples using a 2x Air Cleaner equipped with an Iso-flo dewatering infeed shaker set to 58 Hz (Key Technologies, Walla Walla, WA). Material was air classified using two methods referred to in this work as sequential AC and selected AC. The fans speed settings for sequential AC were 10, 12, 15, 18, 22, 28, 32, and 40 Hz corresponding approximately to 2.1, 2.5, 3.2, 3.8, 4.7, 6.2, 7.1, and 9.2 m/s air velocities. These fan speeds were selected based on the ability of each speed to separate the materials into anatomical or visually unique fractions and previous air classification work evaluating these same fan speeds for pine residue materials [ Anatomical fractions were separated by hand using 2.5–3.5 kg subsamples of each material into leaves, twigs, branches, free bark, chips with bark, clean chips, and fines. In order to reduce manufactured fines, each material was separated wet to prevent breaking of fragile fractions, such as leaves. Twigs were defined as full branches that were small enough to go through chipping with bark attached. Branches were similar to twigs but were distinct in that they were larger in diameter and broken along the axis during chipping. The fines fraction consisted of material that was too small to identify and screened using a 2.0 mm standard sieve (W.S. Tyler Co., Mentor, OH). Both air classification and anatomical fractionation were done in triplicate for all samples using one of the 2.5–3.5 kg subsamples for each replicate. For ash analysis and compositional characterization, the raw samples, air classified fractions, and anatomical fractions were ground to pass a 2.0 mm screen using a Thomas Model 4 Wiley knife mill (Thomas Scientific, model no. 3375-E55, Swedesboro, NJ). Aliquots of 1–2 g of each sample were analyzed for ash content using a LECO Thermogravimetric Analyzer 701 (St. Joseph, MI) following ASTM The processing costs estimated were estimated by Idaho National Laboratory's Biomass Logistics Model (BLM) [ Anatomical fractionation was used in this study to determine the ratio and ash content of specific fractions to understand and interpret the impact of air classification on removal of these anatomical fractions. Clean chips, the highest quality fraction, made up only 64.63% and 50.69% of the overall biomass material, while leaves account for 9.08% and 10.01% for hybrid poplar and shrub willow, respectively ( Despite being high moisture, 45.4%, sequential AC fractions for the hybrid poplar contained visually distinguishable anatomical fractions. The below screen fraction contained much of what was considered fines during anatomical fractionation, specifically the heavy fines, and other dense particles created during handling and the air classification process ( Sequential AC for the high moisture, 52.6%, shrub willow chips had similar results to the hybrid poplar even though the willow leaves were significantly smaller than poplar leaves. The below screen and 2.1 m/s fractions contained the fine material and smaller leaf components, 2.5–3.8 m/s fractions contained much of the leaf material, 4.7 m/s fraction removed a majority of the remaining leaves, along with a portion of the bark and twigs, and 6.2–9.2 m/s fractions had varying degrees of bark, twigs, branches, and chips (both clean and with bark). Air classification of the high moisture SRWC samples was shown to potentially reduce the overall ash content by 72% and 68% for hybrid poplar and shrub willow samples, respectively, using a 9.2 m/s air speed ( To demonstrate feedstock quality improvement using the identified optimal fan speeds, the whole tree, hand separated clean chips, and heavy fractions generated from the selected AC methodology using 4.7 m/s and 6.2 m/s air speeds were chemically analyzed ( Estimated processing costs were used to compare between performing AC before and after drying using the 4.7 m/s fan speed. Performing air classification, with an air speed of 4.7 m/s, prior to drying provided a cost benefit of $3.10 and $4.08 to the processing of hybrid poplar and shrub willow materials, respectively ( Year round harvesting of short rotation woody crops could be beneficial for biorefineries to avoid storage associated issues; however, leaf content during periods of non-senescence decreases feedstock quality. Air classification was shown to potentially improve feedstock quality by removing a majority of the lower quality leaf content for both short rotation coppice crops while retaining higher quality materials. Furthermore, the hybrid poplar quality was improved to the point of meeting biochemical conversion specifications in terms of available carbohydrates. An important outcome of this study was the successful removal of leaves prior to any drying, demonstrating the potential to remove low quality fractions immediately following harvesting and reducing downstream supply chain costs. Future cost considerations for this work should necessarily include disposal or usage strategies for the removed materials. The US Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for US Government purposes. The authors have no relevant affiliations, or financial involvement, with any organization or entity with a financial interest in, or financial conflict with, the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript. The authors would like to thank Brad Thomas, Eric Fillerup, Michelle Walton, Kastli Shaller and Tim Djernes from Idaho National Laboratory for collecting the characterization data on the materials. The authors would also like to thank Mark Eisenbies, Tim Volk, and Obste Therasme from College of Environmental Science and Forestry State University of New York and Brian Stanton and Rich Shuren from Greenwood Resources for providing both materials and general collaboration. This research was supported by the funding award #