Population balance models are routinely used for modeling particulate processes involving breakage, agglomeration, crystallisation, etc. In this study, a comparison between three different numerical solution strategies for breakage population balance models is presented. Results are obtained for the fixed pivot technique, moving pivot technique and the cell average technique. These techniques are first compared for models whose solutions are analytically available. The comparison shows that fixed pivot lacks the accuracy of both moving pivot and cell average at coarser grids. At finer grids, all the three solution strategies give similar errors. With increasing grid fineness, all the three methods converge to a grid independent solution. Moving pivot is computationally the most expensive methods, followed by the cell average and fixed pivot. These methods are then applied to a conical screen mill modelled by a continuous population balance equation. For all the discretizations considered, cell average computes a higher median particle size value than the fixed pivot and moving pivot.Milling or particle size reduction is an important processing step in the manufacturing chain of the pharmaceutical industry. Milling is used to delump blended active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), reduce particle size of oversized granules or to break compacted ribbons. The particle size distribution (PSD) of the granules is an important critical quality attribute that influences the quality of the final product, e.g., extremely fine granules tend to have poor flowability, while large granules have a detrimental effect on tablet strengths. The PSD of the seed material to a crystallizer affects the morphology and size control of the crystals. Even prior to the drug product manufacturing stage, milling remains an important step, e.g., the PSD plays an important role to improve the dissolution rate of the Biopharmaceutics Classification System II drugs [ The cone mill is a popular size reduction equipment used regularly in the pharmaceutical industry for a variety of reasons. It has been used for delumping blended APIs, wet and dry granulated materials, and to break tablets for API recovery. The cone mill consists of a rotating impeller which causes impacts between the particles and the impeller. The particles stay in the mill until they are reduced to a size smaller than the screen aperture. Different impeller shapes are available along with a variety of screens with different shapes and apertures. The screen size is the most significant parameter affecting the particle size of the milled product [ Despite the importance of milling in the solid dosage manufacturing, the mechanistic understanding of the process remains poor. This is primarily due to the lack of first principle models describing particle breakage. However, the Quality by Design initiative pushes for the development of mechanistic or semi-mechanistic predictive models that can enhance the black-box nature of the process and contribute to its better understanding. To this extent, various approaches have been utilised to describe comminution processes. Fracture mechanics based models utilize the Hertzian theory of normal stresses and flaw analysis to describe particle breakage [ The focus of this work lies on pure breakage population balance models. Population balance models have been successfully used in modeling particulate processes like granulation, dissolution, crystallisation, mixing, etc. A large body of literature considers application of PBMs for breakage processes as well. For processes involving pure breakage, and under the assumption of well-mixedness, a 1-dimensional batch PBM in terms of particle size can be formulated as: The term ℬ( This property states that the total volume of particles formed due to the breakage of a particle is equal to the volume of the original particle itself. Given the complex integro-differential nature of the equations, analytical solution of the PBM is available only for a few simplified cases. Most often, numerical techniques are required to solve the PBM. Several numerical schemes have been proposed to solve the PBM. These methods include, among others, the method of successive approximations [ Sectional methods divide the continuous size distribution into discrete bins by discretizing the continuous property vector (in case of this 1D PBM, the particle size). The partial integro-differential equation is then converted into a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) describing the time evolution of the particle number in each bin. Sectional methods focus on predicting certain selected properties of the system like total particle number and total mass. These methods are highly popular in engineering applications because of their simplicity and low computational costs. A variety of sectional methods have been proposed in the literature [ The objective of this paper is to compare the numerical results obtained by three different sectional approaches applied to an engineering system described by a population balance model. The fixed pivot [ The article is organised as follows. First, the three numerical techniques to solve the PBM are described along with the cone mill model which will be used. Next, the three techniques are numerically compared for various case studies for which analytical solutions are available and for the cone mill model. The first subsection describes the three numerical schemes which will be used to solve the PBMs in this paper. The case studies with analytical solutions are introduced in the second subsection, whereas the cone mill model developed by Barrasso et al. [ The fixed pivot technique (FPT) proposed by Kumar and Ramkrishna [ The general idea behind the FPT is to redistribute the particles formed in a size class into neighbouring classes. If a new particle is born at a size other than that of the pivot, it is divided between the neighbouring pivots such that any two integral properties are conserved. The equation for the FPT by conserving the number and mass are given as follows However, the main disadvantage of FPT is that it overpredicts the number density in the finer size range for coarse grids. To overcome this issue, the authors proposed the moving pivot technique which is described next. The moving pivot technique (MPT) aims to address the issue of overprediction by allowing a varying pivot location. This allows to account for the non-uniformity of the size distribution in a size range. The equations for MPT conserving the first two moments: the total number and total mass are Eq. The cell average technique (CAT) was proposed by Kumar et al. [ The PBM for breakage can be discretized to give the following form The terms ℬ The average volume of the particles in a cell, The total breakage in a cell is calculated as The discrete volume flux is computed as The discontinuous Heaviside function is described by The The set of ordinary differential equations obtained by the methods described above can be solved using any ODE solver to obtain the total number of particles in each cell. However, standard ODE solvers might lead to negative number densities. So, the tolerances of the integrators must be checked or positivity should be forced. As mentioned previously, analytical solutions of pure breakage processes described by Eq. Case 1. The first case considers linear breakage function and a monodispersed feed of size Case 2. The second case considers quadratic breakage function and a monodispersed feed of size Case 3. The third case considers linear breakage function and a feed size described by Case 4. The fourth case considers quadratic breakage function and a feed size described by The model of Barrasso et al. [ Here,  The birth and death of the particles is represented by ℬ( The breakage rate depends on the particle and process parameters and is represented as The volume of the parent particle is represented by The unknown tuneable parameters in the above model are estimated from experimental data. The estimation of these parameters is not the focus of this work, and the parameters obtained in [ In this section, the performance of the FPT, MPT and CAT will be evaluated and compared for the four test cases described in  In For the second case, the selection function In the third case, the initial particle distribution is an exponential function of the particle size, with a linear selection function. It can be noticed from The fourth case has an exponential initial condition and quadratic selection function. In general, it can be said that although MPT performs the best for all cases and discretization, the computational cost might not warrant the use of this technique. CAT is relatively fast and overcomes the drawback of FPT effectively. In this section, the PBM for cone mill as described by Eqs.  The EOC of FPT, MPT and CAT for 400 discretizations is 0.32,  In an experimental system, the output PSD is usually measured by sieving the product from the cone mill. To simulate these conditions, the number density obtained is converted to volume fraction by assumption of spherical particles, and then reassigned to a coarser grid representing the sieve sizes. In most cases, the parameters of the model need to be estimated using the experimental sieving data. Based on The numerical solutions to PBMs obtained by three sectional methods have been compared for different cases. At very coarse grids MPT provides the best approximation of the analytical solution for the cases considered in The results for the cone mill follow a similar trend as those for the analytical cases. With increasing grid density, the This work was supported by Project G0863.18 of the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders. SB holds an IWT-Baekeland grant [IWT150715].