We report the thermoelectric properties of flexible Bi2Se3-Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) based polymer nanocomposites (PNC) over a temperature range from 250 K to 350 K. The two-dimensional Bi2Se3with nanoplate like structure is synthesized using the reflux method and is dispersed with the PVDF matrix. A significant reduction in the thermal conductivity of the PNC in comparison to the individual phases of Bi2Se3 and PVDF is observed. The overall thermal conductivity value of the PNC is measured to be 0.06 W/m-K at 300 K. An order of magnitude reduction in the thermal conductivity in the PNC is explained using the acoustic impedance model. The Seebeck coefficient and the electrical conductivity are decreasing with the addition of PVDF to Bi2Se3. The figure of merit of PNC is determined to be about 0.004 at 300 K, and the flexible nature of Bi2Se3-PVDF nanocomposites is also demonstrated. The mechanical properties of the PNC are quantitatively measured using nanoindentation technique.Flexible thermoelectric (TE) materials are attracting immense research interest due to its potential application in wearable and portable electronic devices. In recent times, several studies have demonstrated the importance of flexible TE materials because it offers the possibility of waste heat recovery from uneven surfaces that has the potential for large area coverage applications. [ Bi The X-ray diffraction pattern for Bi The surface morphology of Bi Further, the high-resolution transmission electron microscope is used to investigate the existence of both the phases in the PNC. The HRTEM images for Bi The Seebeck coefficient (S), electrical resistivity (ρ), thermal conductivity (κ) and the figure of merit (ZT) as a function of temperature for Bi The electrical resistivity of Bi Polymer materials consist of very low intrinsic thermal conductivity as they consist of a discrete set of individual chains. We have measured the thermal conductivity (κ) of Bi The figure of merit estimated using S, ρ, and κ as a function of temperature for the Bi To explore the mechanical properties of the polymer nanocomposite, the nanoindentation measurement technique is employed on the PNC pellets. Nearly 9–12 indentation measurements are performed with the varying loads from 1 mN to 4 mN with a load rate of 100 μN/s and a hold time of 10 s on Bi The Bi A. Kumar and D. K Satapathy designed the experiments. A. Kumar performed the experiments and written the manuscript. A. Kumar, Ravi Kumar and D.K. Satapathy revised the manuscript. We acknowledge financial support from the