The effect of Graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) content on mechanical and tribological properties of AZ31 Mg matrix composite was investigated. Hardness was increased up to 14% by applying FSP and 41% via adding GNPs due to grain refinement, dynamic recrystallization and pinning effect of GNPs. Mechanical properties were improved by increasing the GNPs content which act as obstacle against dislocation glide. Quasi cleavage fracture of base metal was changed to dimple rupture in nanocomposite. Coefficient of friction was decreased 25–45% compared to base metal, by adding GNPs. Intensity of adhesive, abrasive and delamination wear mechanisms was decreased by increasing the GNPs through forming a lubricant layer which not only restricts frictional heat but also improves the load carrying capacity of nanocomposite.Magnesium (Mg) has widespread applications in aerospace and automotive industry due to the superiority of high stiffness and specific strength together with low density which are affecting the fuel consumption reduction [ Scientific researches are the foundation for the development of practical applications of GNP-based nanocomposites. Most of the researches on GNP-based nanocomposites includes the optical, electrical and thermal properties of GNPs [ Herein, the purposes of this study were to fabricate AZ31/GNPs Mg composite by FSP and to suggest a light-weight material providing a satisfactory wear resistance by finding the most suitable volume percent (vol%) of GNPs. Moreover, the COF value and the main wear mechanisms were studied. The effect of the GNPs content on grain refinement, Vickers hardness and tensile properties were also investigated. AZ31 Mg alloy with 2.63 wt% Al and 1.27 wt% Zn and a kind of GNPs, named xGNP-H15, with an average thickness of 15 nm, average particle diameters of 15 μm and typical surface area of 50–80 m The nanocomposite was fabricated by inserting a rotating threaded tapered tool into the GNPs filled groove by optimized set of FSP parameters comprising 700 rpm of tool rotational speed, 90 mm/min of traverse speed, 0.3 mm of plunge depth and 3 degrees of tilt angle. Two FSP passes were employed while the advancing direction for the second pass was in the opposite direction to the first one. A FSP tool with a profile of 1 mm pitch, 18 mm shoulder diameter, 4 mm pin length and 6 and 5 mm larger and smaller diameters of the pin, respectively, was cut from H13 tool steel. Seven experiments were designed, shown in The Vickers hardness and tensile properties were determined for materials characterization and comparison. The hardness measurement was carried out applying a load of 100 gf for 10 s along the cross-section at 0.5 mm below the surface according to the ASTM Crushing pin-on-disc test, based on ASTM The hardness values versus distance from center of SZ diagram of all samples are shown in  Tensile properties depend on various microstructural factors such as grain size, density of dislocations and the interaction between the matrix and reinforcements [ The maximum value of strain-to-failure, 31.1% strain, was obtained in S-FSP. The strain-to-failure value of S-FSP was increased by 2.3 times compared to that of S-BM. The variations in the tensile diagram of S-FSP can be due to several factors including grain refinement, DRX, reduction in structural defects, dissolution of eutectic phases of AZ31Mg alloy (e.g., β-Mg The addition of GNPs leads also to variations in the tensile properties. A decrease in YS, an increase in UTS and strain-to-failure value was observed in nanocomposites in comparison with S-BM. The GNPs, as second phase particles, act as obstacles against dislocation glide. Thus, more stress is required to overcome the dislocation-obstacle interaction. Moreover, the UTS value was increased up to 278 MPa in S-4 by increasing the amount of GNPs. Large difference between the elastic modulus of the matrix, 45 GPa for Mg alloy, and the reinforcements, 1 TPa for GNPs, can probably be the cause of nucleation of cracks by separating the interface of matrix/reinforcement. Hence, it reduces the strain-to-failure of nanocomposite in comparison with that of S-FSP. The strain-to-failure value was decreased from 31.1% for S-FSP to 20.5% for S-1 by adding GNPs. It was more decreased to 15.8% by increasing the amount of GNPs for S-4. This can be due to several reasons including: (i) an increase in the number of obstacles that prevents free movement of dislocations, (ii) expansion of the area of interfaces which can act as crack nucleation site and (iii) more tendencies for GNPs to accumulate, all intensifying by increasing the amount of GNPs. In this situation, growth and joining of the cracks occur at a higher rate which leads to less strain-to-failure and ductility. When a composite contains hard reinforcements with less capability of plastic deformation than the matrix which do not deform at the same rate as the matrix, voids and dimples nucleate to accommodate the inconsistency. The nucleation of microvoids can be originated from fracture of hard reinforcements or interfacial failure between the reinforcements and the surrounding matrix. In macroscopic scale, the failure occurs when the voids, generated due to the presence of second phase particles, grow sufficiently and ultimately interconnect.  The voids and dimples on the fractograph of S-FSP, shown in The SEM fractographs of tensile fracture specimen for S-1 to S-4 are demonstrated in Coefficient of friction (COF) versus sliding distance diagram for S-BM and S-FSP are shown in As shown in Regarding the fact that the wear test parameters except the vol% of GNPs were kept constant, a reduction in COF value was attributed to the role of GNPs in increasing the wear resistance and its effects on wear mechanisms. The backscattered electron scanning electron microscopy (BSC-SEM) images of the worn surfaces of S-1 to S-4 are shown in The wear rate can be assessed by the volume of worn material, the groove depth or both of them. It can be calculated by a simple model represented as:  What makes it difficult to study the wear mechanisms is that wear does not occur with a single mechanism, but mainly several mechanisms with different effects and intensities control the wear. In order to determine the main wear mechanisms, both worn surfaces and wear debris should be analyzed. The worn surface of S-BM is shown in  The worn surface of S-2, illustrated in  A smooth surface with very few traces of wear is the most obvious characteristic of the worn surface of S-4, shown in The sample edges of S-1 and S-4 are shown in Each wear mechanism produces certain wear debris of different size, shape and chemical composition. Therefore, study of the wear debris provides significant mechanistic information. The size and shape were evaluated by the SEM and FESEM and the chemical composition was determined using the EDS analysis. Moreover, the number of wear debris is another sign of wear intensity, which was decreased in nanocomposites including S-1 to S-4 compared to S-BM. Similar results have reported in other investigations [   The average hardness was increased up to 14% by applying FSP and 41% by adding GNPs due to the grain refinement, DRX and pinning effect of GNPs. The value of strain-to-failure was increased up to 130% by FSP compared to that of base metal because of the uniformity of microstructure that makes it easier to slip by dislocation glide, which as a result, leads to an increase in workability by delaying nucleation and growth of cracks. Therefore, fewer slip and work hardening will be needed, which results lower UTS value and ductile fracture. An increase in the UTS and strain-to-failure and a decrease in the strain-to-failure of nanocomposites observed by increasing the amount of GNPs were due to content of GNPs which act as obstacles against dislocations glide. The quasi cleavage fracture of base metal was changed to ductile fracture in nanocomposites. The dimple rupture is due to the interfacial failure between GNPs and the surrounding AZ31 Mg alloy matrix. Uniform appearance of the ductile fracture surface of FSPed specimen not only reflects the refined grain structure resulted by FSP, but also shows the uniformity of the plastic deformation which results in more strain-to-failure. The COF value was decreased 25–45% relative to the base metal with addition of GNPs. The intensity of adhesive, abrasive and delamination wear mechanisms was decreased by increasing the percentage of GNPs. Wear rate was reduced from 24 μg/m for base metal specimen to 10.2 μg/m for the nanocomposite with the maximum content of GNPs. The presence of GNPs increased the wear resistance by forming a lubricant layer between the sliding surfaces which prevents the local temperature elevation and improves the load carrying capacity of the nanocomposite. None.