Following an extensive program of model system experiments, a laboratory-scale teetered bed separator (TBS), with jigging facility, was operated continually to process a feed containing coal and mineral matter, with a particle size range less than 2.0 mm and greater than 0.25 mm. The first two experiments were conducted as jig runs using a pulsed water supply, controlled at a frequency of 1 Hz. This frequency was considered to provide the best performance in the preliminary work. A third run was conducted as a TBS, with no water pulse. One of the jig runs was conducted using an average fluidisation velocity equivalent to the base level used in the TBS run. In the second jig run the average fluidisation velocity was 60% of that used in the first run. Samples from the three runs were analysed to produce partition curves. These data indicated a very similar separation performance, demonstrating little additional benefit when a cyclic pulse is used to supply the fluidisation water to a TBS.In a teetered bed separator (TBS), an upward current of water fluidises a bed of particles, thus producing an autogenous medium suitable for separating a feed sample predominately on the basis of density. Lower density particles report to the overflow launder and the denser particles discharge through a valve outlet at the base. The suspension density is measured and used to control the underflow discharge rate. The density of the fluidised suspension is governed primarily by the fluidisation rate, and secondly by the bed density set point which controls the extent to which denser particles are retained. Higher suspension densities, achieved at minimal fluidisation rates, favour a separation based primarily on the particle density ( The primary aim of this study was to determine the extent to which the practical operating size range of a single TBS unit could be increased by applying cyclic variations to the fluidisation water supply. This variation in the water supply rate should, in principle, promote an additional separation mechanism generally referred to as jigging ( A laboratory-scale fluidised bed, referred to here as a TBS, was constructed from Perspex with an internal diameter of 0.074 m and a height of 1.36 m. The water flow control system was designed to allow both steady and pulsed water flows to be supplied to the fluidisation system. The hardware consisted of a 1/2 in. Burkert pneumatic control valve with a parallel, or by-pass, manual needle-valve. The water flow rate was measured using a rotameter. The water was supplied via a head tank to ensure a constant supply pressure. A PC fitted with a 24 channel D to A card was used to provide the 0–20 mV control signal to the Burkert valve, with the software, “Lab View”, used to generate the control signal. Various waveforms were generated with the software including simple square and sine waves, and saw-tooth patterns. An additional fast-acting solenoid valve was later added in series with the Burkert valve. Consider a conventional TBS processing a feed that consists of a continuous variation in both particle size and density. The separation achieved at steady state is characterised by the D In a fluidised bed, these particles should form a mixed bed suspension at a fluidisation rate typical of that used in a TBS. Thus, this system of particles represented the separation limit of a TBS. If this combination of particles could be separated by introducing a pulsed water supply, we would have convincing evidence that the jigging provides a fundamental mechanism for improved separation. Clear evidence of separation was possible because of the use of particle species having different colours. The purpose of part one of the study was to determine the optimum waveform and cycle frequency for inducing a separation of the coloured particles. A systematic study of square, sine, and saw-tooth waveforms at various frequencies and amplitudes was conducted (45 tests, in total), and photographs taken of the coloured particles so that careful comparisons could be made. The feed sample was a combination of a lower Hunter Valley preparation plant spirals product and reject, identical to that used previously ( The three runs were conducted at solids throughputs of approximately 3.7 t/m Despite our exhaustive formal and informal tests covering various waveforms, average fluidisation rates, waveform amplitudes and frequencies, only very subtle improvements in separation performance were noted ( It was apparent that the introduction of the fluidising water in a cyclic fashion offered virtually no additional separation performance over that achieved by virtue of a high suspension density. Nevertheless, we proceeded with the three experiments conducted on a continuous steady state basis using a feed exhibiting a continuum in both particle size and density. The cycle used in these runs was based on conditions that gave some minor indication of improved performance, with the frequency set at 1 Hz, and the waveform kept as simple as possible by using a solenoid valve. Our aim was to seek less variation in the D The balanced product and reject ashes, listed in Clearly, these results indicate that the jigging produced virtually no change in the separation performance of the TBS and certainly no new opportunity to extend the operating size range of a TBS. Indeed, the variation in the D A jigging cycle is capable of producing a satisfactory separation, however, it appears that such a separation is not much better than can be achieved by steady fluidisation at a high suspension density. This suggests that the high suspension densities that develop during jigging are responsible for the existence of a satisfactory separation. The overall results were disappointing in that dramatic improvements were not observed when jigging was combined with the TBS process. Close examination does, however, show that the two jigging runs performed better in rejecting fine mineral matter particles from the overflow, however, the jigging runs performed more poorly at preventing the loss of coarse coal particles from the underflow. For instance, the ashes for the −0.50+0.25 mm fraction of the overflows for Runs 1, 2, and 3 were 21.8%, 19.1%, and 24.4% respectively, indicating that less fine reject material reported to the product in the two jigging cases, Runs 1 and 2. For the case of the −2.0+1.4 mm size range of the underflow streams, the respective ashes were 59.6%, 61.3%, and 64.4%. These differences may be accredited in part to the lower reject rate in Run 3 and hence the higher yield. These results may also be attributed to the jigging action of the fluidisation providing better separation by density, but increased mixing caused by the pulsed water flow in the lower parts of the bed. It is noted that the upward pulses of the fluidising water flow resulted in waves propagating up through the bed. The impact of theses waves decreased at higher levels in the bed. In this study, the vessel had a large height to diameter ratio, much greater than could be applied to commercial scale systems. Consequently, the mixing produced by the jigging in this study must be less than the level that would develop in a larger system. This study has shown virtually no improvement in the separation performance of a TBS as a result of applying a jigging cycle. The overall partition curves for the two jigging cases and the conventional TBS run were virtually the same, in terms of the The authors would like to acknowledge ACARP for funding this research.