Preparing concrete with the copper tailing as micronized sand to modify manufactured sand (MS) contributes to both the utilization of copper tailing and improvement on the concrete performance. In this paper, experiments on preparing concrete with copper tailing as micronized sand were investigated. Parallel investigations on the properties, such as compressive strength, elastic modulus, chloride permeability coefficient, dry shrinkage and pore structure as well as heavy metal leachability test of concretes prepared with MS, RS, MR and MC were conducted. The results show that the gradation of MS is optimized by replacing it with 20% copper tailing. MC concrete has better anti-segregation ability and long-term strength development. It is found that MC increases elastic modulus and chloride permeation resistance of concrete, however, the dry shrinkage ratio of MC concrete is the higher than other groups. The ITZ between aggregates and paste of MC concrete become tighter. Although the porosity of concrete is increased in MC concrete, its pore size distribution is refined. Finally, the heavy metal leaching of copper tailing was significantly reduced when copper tailing was immobilized in MC concrete, which could eliminate the environmental impacts from copper tailing.Copper tailings are the uneconomic fraction (gangue) left over after the flotation process to separate the valuable fraction from copper ore. China is the largest producer and consumer of copper tailings around the world, discharging more than 30 billion tons of copper tailing from 1949 to 2014, with most are dumped in tailing ponds and may result in serious spillage problems Concrete has been the most extensively used building materials all over the world for a long time. China has built nearly 6.5 billion m To improve the properties of fine aggregate and make full use of solid industrial wastes, different kinds of mixed sand were applied in preparing concrete Analysis on the particle size distribution of the common components in concrete shows there is a gap between the manufactured sand and cementitious materials ( In this paper, experiments on preparing concrete with copper tailing as micronized sand were investigated. Parallel investigations on the properties, such as compressive strength, elastic modulus, chloride permeability coefficient and dry shrinkage of concretes prepared with MS, RS, MR and MC were conducted. Image processing method was employed to investigate the distribution of coarse aggregate to characterize the segregation situation of these concretes. Interfacial transition zones of these concretes were observed by SEM and the pore structure of these concretes were characterized by mercury intrusion porosimetry. Heavy metal leachability test was conducted to explain the environmental benefits of the utilization of copper tailing as micronized sand to prepare high performance concrete. Portland Ordinary cement (P.O 42.5) produced in Gezhouba Corporation, China was used in this investigation. Its properties and chemical composition are shown in Copper tailing produced in Daye, Hubei province was used to prepare the copper tailing modified manufactured sand in this investigation. Its chemical composition, properties and size distribution are listed in Two kinds of sand were used in this experimental investigation, i.e. the river sand excavated in Wuhan, Hubei province and the manufactured sand produced by Guoluan quarry in Guangxi province. Their physical properties are listed in Crushed stone with two gradations, i.e. 9.5–25 mm (1#) and 4.75–9.5 mm (2#) provided by a commercial concrete premixing station in Wuhan were used. The apparent density of the crushed stone is 2710 kg/m A polycarboxylate superplasticizer, provided by BASF, with a trade name as SP-CR8 was used in this paper, of which water reducing ratio is 28.5%. Concretes were prepared with four types of fine aggregates. The water dosage was adjusted on site according to the workability of the fresh concrete mixture, while the dosages of cement and water reducer were fixed. The goal slump of concretes in this investigation was set as 170 ± 10 mm. The mixing proportions are listed in The concretes were prepared in the laboratory with a forced mixer. The mixing times of each mixture were set as 240 s. By adjusting the dosage of water, the slumps of fresh concretes were controlled at 160–180 mm. The cubic concrete specimens were formed in 150 mm × 150 mm × 150 mm molds. Each group of molds was vibrated for 40–75 s till the specimen became consolidated. After being demolded at 24 h later, concrete specimens were cured in a chamber with 100% relative humidity and a temperature of 20 ± 2 °C. The cubic specimens were tested for compressive strength at the age of 3, 7, 28, 60,90 and 180 days according to the Chinese standard GB/T 50081–2002 The specimens for image analysis of coarse aggregates distribution in the concretes were prepared by vertically cutting the cubic specimens, which are same as the compressive strength specimens. The sections perpendicular to the top and bottom surfaces of each cubic specimens were wet up to improve the contrast between the coarse aggregates and mortar. After the images of vertical sections taken by digital camera, an image analysis software, named IP6.0, was applied to characterize the distribution of coarse aggregates. The specimens for static elastic modulus tests were formed in 150 mm × 150 mm × 300 mm molds and tested at the age of 28 days according to the Chinese standard GB/T 50081–2002 The specimens for NEL method chloride permeability tests were prepared by cutting the 100 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm cubic specimens vertically to 100 mm × 100 mm × 50 mm specimens. And the chloride permeability of each specimen was calculated by Nernst-Einstein equation (Eq. The prism specimens for dry shrinkage measurement were formed in 100 mm × 100 mm × 515 mm molds. The prism specimens were dried at 60 ± 5% relative humidity and a temperature of 20 ± 2 °C after an initial standard curing of 3 days according to the Chinese standard GB/T 50082-2009 The specimens for microscopic observation of the interfacial transition zones (ITZs) were obtained from the interior mortar fragments, which were gathered shortly after the test of 28-days compressive strength. The specimens were dried in vacuum and covered with layers of platinum before observation. The interfacial transition zones around the four kinds of fine aggregates were observed by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Zeiss Ultra Plus). The specimens for mercury intrusion porosimetry were obtained from the interior mortar fragment of the 28-day compressive strength specimens. After been dried in vacuum, the specimens were tested for the information of pore structure. The heavy metal leachability test was performed according to the US EPA method 1311. The samples less than 9.5 mm in size were gathered form crushed MC concrete. The preliminary evaluation of the samples was conducted to determine the appropriate extraction fluid before this test. Extraction fluid#1(5.7 ml glacial CH In this experiment, 10%, 20% and 30% of manufactured sand were replaced with copper tailing. With 0%, 3%, 5% and 7% of particle finer than 0.075 mm regarded as powder of the MC mixing sand, it is very clear that the copper tailing optimizes the gradation of MS, while the remaining fine powders were considered as micronized sand and improve the particle size distribution of the concrete. The fine modulus of each kind of mixed sand are listed in The gradation curve of copper tailing modified sand was expected to be similar to Fuller curve as much as possible and be classified into zone II. With the increase of copper tailing content, the number of particles ranging from 0.075 mm to 0.6 mm increased, which decreased the convex level and slope of mixed sand gradation curves. When 10% manufactured sand were replaced with copper tailing, the gradation curve of mixing sand was classified into zone I and that of the sand with origin powder content was closest to fuller’s curve. When 20% manufactured sand were replaced with copper tailing, the gradation curve of mixed sand was classified into zone II and the that of the sand with 5% powder content was close to both the median of zone II and fuller’s curve. When 30% manufactured sand were replaced with copper tailing, the gradation curve of mixed sand was classified into Zone II but deviate to the fuller’s curve. Therefore, the gradation of manufactured sand could be optimized when replaced with 20% copper tailing. The sand and silt particle in copper tailing modified the gradation of MS, and the powder finer than 0.075 mm fills in the gap between the fine aggregate and cementitious materials in concrete and serves as micronized sand. In this experiment, the flowability and segregation resistance of concretes prepared with various sands were tested to evaluate the workability of concrete. The slumps were controlled in a narrow range (170 mm ± 10 mm) when the dosage of water reducer was fixed. Hence, the flowability can be qualified with the water demand of concretes. The higher water demand, the less flowability and vice versa. The results are illustrated in The coarse aggregate distribution in MS, MR and MC concretes were observed and analyzed with digital image software to characterize the segregation resistance of fresh concrete. Patterns of coarse aggregate distribution are illustrated in The compressive strength of various concrete at 3, 7, 28, 60, 90 and 180 days are illustrated in Although the water/cement ratio of RS concrete was less than that of MS, MC and MR concrete, the compressive strength at different ages of RS concrete is the lowest among these concretes before 90d curing. Comparing to river sand, the manufactured sand has the more angular particles, which will facilitate its bonding with the main hydrations. While the river sand will have weaker interlocking connection with hydrations. Moreover the manufactured sand usually has a certain amount of stone powder, which could promote the formation of hydrations at early time When the same amount of water was used, the compressive strength of MR concrete was slightly lower than that of MS concrete at each age, due to the weaker interlocking effect from MR. The biggest difference was observed at 60 days and the compressive strength of MS concrete was 2.3% higher than that of the concrete with MR concrete. After 90 days, the strength of MR concrete and MS concrete become very similar. In Concrete can be modeled as a three-phased material consisting of aggregate particles, surrounded by a transition zone, embedded in the cement paste matrix. The variation of each phase will change the elastic modulus of the concrete. As is shown in the The results of chloride permeability are shown in Generally speaking, coarse aggregate is considered as an inert constitute of concrete, which contribute to the volume stability of concrete, while the higher volume fraction of paste results in the higher dry shrinkage of concretes Same to MS and MR, the improved gradation and the fine copper tailing as micronized sand of MC also contributed to restrict dry shrinkage. Nonetheless, due to the water demand of MC concrete is the highest in this research, the evaporation of water in MC concrete is more significant than that of others and the paste volume is the largest, thus led to a higher dry shrinkage. With the effect of these two aspects, although dry shrinkage ratio of MC concrete is the highest, it is just 4% higher than that of MS concrete at 120 days. In this experimental investigation, the dry shrinkage ratio of concretes prepared with various sands have very similar shrinkage ratio, so the higher shrinkage ratio of MC concrete is not necessary to be regarded as a substantial drawback on its utilization. A ZEISS ultra plus Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope was employed to observe the microstructure of the concretes prepared with MS, MR, MC and RS. The differences of the ITZs between the fine aggregates and the paste of the four kinds of concrete has been emphatically studied in this investigation. The ITZs of RS are presented in An AutoporelV95/0* mercury injection apparatus was employed to characterize the pore structure of the concretes with the four kinds of fine aggregates. The characteristic pore size and porosity are listed in Form The influence of pore on concrete properties is related to its size From Heavy metal leachability tests were conducted to evaluate environmental implication of the utilization of copper tailing as a part of fine aggregates in concrete. The results of the leachability tests on copper tailing and MC concrete are presented in The concentrations of AS, Cr, Cd and Pb are found lower than the regulatory limits, while that of Cu is extremely high in copper tailing leachate, which could lead to severe heavy mental contaminations and poses a threat to the surrounding ecosystem. In comparison, with the immobilization effect of concrete on heavy metals, the concentrations of these metals in MC concrete leachate were significantly decreased, which is similar to the observation from Onuaguluchi et al. In this paper, the effects of copper tailing as micronized sand on concrete were investigated. The main results obtained are as follows. The gradation of MS could be optimized by replacing it with 20% copper tailing, and the powder finer than 0.075 mm could fill in the gap between the fine aggregate and cementitious materials in concrete and serves as micronized sand. MC could reduce the flowability of concrete, while digital image analysis found that its distribution of coarse aggregates tends to be more homogeneous and have a better anti-segregation ability. Although the strength at early age of MC concrete is lower due to the higher water demand, MC promoted long term strength development significantly and led to the highest strength at 180d. The increased elastic modulus of MC concrete provide a better deformation resistance. The chloride permeation resistance of MC concrete is the best among other groups. The dry shrinkage ratio of MC concrete is the highest and 4% higher than that of MS concrete at 120 days. The ITZ between aggregates and paste of MC concrete become tighter, which proves that the copper tailing could enhance the microstructure of concrete. Although the porosity of concrete is increased in MC concrete, its pore size is refined. The heavy metal leaching of copper tailing was significantly reduced while copper tailing was immobilized in MC concrete, which contributes to elimination of the environmental impacts from copper tailing.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This project was financially supported by the 13th Five-Year national key research project (2016YFB0303603), Scientific Project of Guangdong Province Transportation Office (2012-03-006, 2011-02-057) and the Science and Technology Project of Hubei Province Highway Administration Bureau.