A detailed investigation has been carried out to determine the effect of antimony(III) on the electrocrystallisation of zinc from sulphate solutions containing sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS). The results indicated that addition of Sb(III) at trace level to the electrolysis bath without sodium lauryl sulphate decreased the current efficiency (CE) and deteriorated the quality of the zinc electrodeposits. However, its addition to the bath containing sodium lauryl sulphate increased the current efficiency and also improved the surface morphology of the zinc electrodeposits. There was no trace of antimony found in any of the deposits. Cathodic polarisation curves were traced and analysed to determine the kinetic parameters, exchange current density, Tafel slopes and transfer coefficients so as to elucidate the nature of the electrode reactions. Presence of Sb(III) alone in the electrolyte depolarised the cathode and SLS alone polarised it; however, presence of both gave a balanced condition suitable for zinc electrowinning.Zinc is a metal of considerable economic importance throughout the world. The multipurpose use of zinc has put it in a significant position in the metal world. The present-day extractive metallurgy of zinc is dominated by the electrolytic process, which now accounts for almost 80% of the world's zinc production. During electrowinning of zinc, the presence of some foreign metal ion impurities in the electrolyte is very detrimental as they interfere in the deposition process and cause decrease in current efficiency (CE) and poor deposit quality Zinc solution was prepared by dissolving analytical grade zinc sulphate (ZnSO A 250 mL electrolysis cell made of glass was filled with 200 mL of zinc sulphate solution containing 55 g L For polarisation study, 100 mL of zinc electrolyte containing 55 g L The surface morphology of each of the deposits was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL, JSM 353F) and a Phillips PW1050 X-ray diffractometer was used to examine the zinc deposits for determining the preferred crystal orientations relative to the ASTM standard zinc powder. To estimate the effect of Sb(III), experiments were conducted from the baths containing Sb(III) and SLS separately and in the presence of both. The results are given in The zinc deposits obtained were of high purity (99.99%) without any contamination of antimony. The zinc deposit obtained from the addition-free solution was bright but not smooth. Addition of Sb(III) to the electrolysis bath even at parts per billion level deteriorated the quality of the deposits. At 0.08 mg L The zinc deposit obtained from addition-free solution consisted of hexagonal platelets of moderate size with (101) (002) (100) (103) as the preferred crystal orientations ( Addition of SLS to the zinc electrolyte affects the zinc deposit quality in a different manner to that of Sb(III). The results on preferred crystal orientations The addition of Sb(III) to the zinc electrolytic solution containing SLS had marked effects on both crystal orientations and deposit morphology, and such changes appeared to be different from those observed with Sb(III) or SLS alone. For example, addition of 0.01 mg L Potentiodynamic methods are promising techniques to characterise polarisation behaviour of the cathode during zinc electrodeposition from a solution containing Zn The nucleation overpotential (NOP) value obtained in the blank solution was 116 mV. Addition of 0.02 mg L However, the addition of 1 mg L  From the cathodic polarisation curves for zinc deposition, Tafel slopes (  Presence of Sb(III) alone at trace levels decreased the CE; however, in combination with SLS, an increase in CE by ∼8% is possible when compared with addition-free solution. Presence of Sb(III) in the electrolyte causes depolarisation of the cathode, whereas presence of SLS in the electrolyte polarises the cathode. An optimum combination of both results in a balanced deposition potential, that is, in between the potential due to Sb(III) or SLS. An optimum combination of Sb(III) and SLS results in higher CE and better deposit than with Sb(III) or SLS alone. Antimony(III) at lower concentrations causes grain refining effect. The authors are thankful to B.K. Mohapatra for SEM and B.S. Acharya for XRD analyses.