The paper presents the studies of the possibility of leaching uranium ores using a membrane contactor. Membrane contactor with helical flow equipped with a tubular metallic membrane was used as an alternative to the traditional method of leaching using the stirred tank. The influence of such process parameters as: the feed flow rate and rotation frequency of the inner cylinder placed in the membrane module on leaching efficiency was investigated. High effectiveness of leaching uranium and associated metals was achieved by using the membrane contactor equipped with the rotor. Among many advantages of a new approach of conducting the leaching process, energy saving and the possibility of combining two process steps in one apparatus: leaching and separation of solid phase from post-leaching solutions, should be mentioned. Furthermore, the application of a helical membrane contactor allows the control of hydrodynamic conditions inside the apparatus and promotes turbulence. This ensured stable and efficient separation of phases after the leaching process by decreasing the intensity of the membrane blocking phenomenon by suspended particles of uranium ore.combining two processes in one apparatus; energy savings; conducting process at room temperature; better mixing effects resulting in rapid fixing the process conditions; stable and efficient separation of phases after leaching process due to hydrodynamic conditions inside the apparatus; novel, advanced equipment; compact apparatus simplicity of equipment; availability of system components; easy operation; lack of frequent interruptions associated with cleaning of the installation; well known process and apparatus the necessity of periodic cleaning of the membrane module that may cause interruptions in the operation of the plant and generation of secondary waste; limitations related to the concentration of the feeding solution; risk of membrane blocking the need to supply heat for the process, the reaction proceeds at temperature of 80 high capital costs, need for use of the materials of resistance to elevated temperature; high energy consumption; conducting the leaching and separation processes in two separate units The technology of uranium recovery from its ores is essentially modern, although some of its elements have evolved from extraction technologies of other metals such as gold or vanadium ( Leaching studies were performed in the Centre of Nuclear Chemistry and Radiochemistry at Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology in order to develop a suitable method for extraction of uranium from Polish uranium ores: dictyonema shale and sandstones ( The technology of uranium extraction in general is well elaborated, however, there is still a need of increasing a process efficiency due to the fact of high cost of whole venture. This can be achieved in various ways, primarily by developing innovative processes based on new materials and novel apparatus designs. It can be done by increasing the efficiency of each process step but it is usually associated with a significant increase in process parameters. Another way is to combine a few process stages in one step. There are some examples in the literature where authors present modifications of the process for uranium recovery, which are based on combination of several process steps in one stage in order to improve the efficiency and economics of the process. The present work, described in this paper concerns the combination of two process steps: leaching and phase separation in one apparatus. For this purpose, the membrane contactor with helical flow equipped with tubular metallic membrane was used. Application of similar construction of the membrane module for radioactive waste processing was described in the previous paper ( Results from uranium leaching conducted in the membrane contactor were compared with those obtained in experiments carried out using mixer-settler system. Leaching process using mixer-settler system was described in detail in the previous paper ( All chemicals used in experiments were of analytical grade. Sulfuric acid with min. concentration of 95% (POCH BASIC) was used as a leaching agent. As an oxidizing agent manganese dioxide (Centrofarm) was used. Uranium ore (dictyonema shale samples) used in the studies originated from Bransk wellbore. The chemical composition of the ore determined by using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is shown in The contactor used in the studies of uranium leaching was a custom made membrane module with tubular membrane. The system and its purpose were described in European Patent ( In the inner space of the membrane the rotating shaft creating helical flow was placed in the acentric manner. The scheme of the membrane contactor is shown in In the membrane contactor used in experiments, the SIKA-R 0.1 AS (GKN Sinter Metals) metallic tubular membrane with 0.1 The membrane contactor applied in uranium leaching experiments was a part of the experimental set-up showed schematically in The procedure of leaching of uranium ores was as follows: portion of 3 The particle size distribution of the sample of uranium ore used was determined with particle counter WQA 2000 (ATR Instruments, Inc., USA) and is presented in As can be seen from this figure, regardless of the concentration, the smallest particles of the size ranged from 10 to 20 The sample of uranium ore with addition of 0.6 Furthermore, during the experiment, every half hour, permeate flow was measured using a flowmeter (MIK-6FT10AC34P, Kobold) to assess the efficiency of separation process. In order to compare results obtained in experiments with using membrane contactor experiments in the mixer–settler system were also performed using the same uranium ore sample. The scheme of the installation using the stirred tank and the settler is shown in In these experiments, the procedure of leaching uranium ore was as follows: portion of 3 Studies on application of the helical membrane contactor included determination of the leaching process efficiency depending on process parameters, namely: velocity of the feed flow ( The influence of hydrodynamic conditions inside the membrane contactor in order to ensure stable and efficient separation of phases after leaching process was also under investigation. Leaching efficiency of uranium, lanthanum, thorium and vanadium was analyzed and compared to results obtained by leaching conducted in the stirred tank at 80 Comparison of leaching efficiency of uranium obtained by both methods is presented in As can be observed results of experiments conducted in the membrane contactor were comparable to those obtained by leaching process conducted in the mixer-settler system. Thus, conducting leaching process of uranium ore in the membrane contactor does not lead to a clear decrease in efficiency of this process in comparison with the efficiency which can be achieved in case of using the mixer-settler system. Below a series of figures ( As can be observed, both considered process parameters: velocity of the feed flow ( When considering the influence of the rotation frequency of the rotor on the leaching efficiency a correlation similar to that described above, was observed ( In the case of lower feed flow rate, significant positive effect of the rotation frequency on the efficiency of the process occurred. While in the case of higher The above observations indicate that mutual interactions between these two parameters occur when the membrane contactor operates. This was confirmed by the previous research of the authors, when the influence of process parameters on the mean residence time in the same module ( The increase of the leaching efficiency with the rise of the rotation frequency, observed for The rotational Reynold's number in case of Couette-Taylor flow can be expressed as: The axial annular Reynolds number is: Suspension Reynolds number was calculated as: In case of our studies the annular axial Reynold's number is (Re Based on results from experiments carried out in the membrane contactor, it can be concluded, that optimum conditions, enabling the achievement of the greatest efficiency of the uranium leaching are as follows: The effect of the duration of the leaching process on leaching efficiency of uranium, lanthanum, thorium and vanadium was also examined. As can be observed in A slight increase of efficiency of leaching uranium and vanadium with time was observed in the process. In case of other metals: lanthanum and thorium, the increase was bit more significant. In general, high leach effectiveness of uranium and associated metals was achieved by using the membrane contactor with helical flow. The efficiency of leaching of studied metals is as follows: 68.93% for uranium, 77.92% for lanthanum, 64.56% for thorium and 25.57% for vanadium. Results of studies under discussion were comparable to those obtained in leaching process conducted in the mixer and settler. During leaching process conducted in the membrane contactor solid particles of crushed uranium ore can be deposited on the membrane surface and block the pores which results in fast permeate flux decrease (membrane fouling). CTF flow in the inner space of the tubular membrane minimizes this phenomenon, what has been described in ( Reduction of the membrane blocking by changing the hydrodynamic conditions in the apparatus was also a subject of the present studies. The rate of permeate flux decline was compared for three different experimental conditions: static ( The flux decline is related to the accumulation of the solid particles on the membrane surface as was mentioned above. The thickness of the deposit can be calculated using the following formulas: A value of the K parameter (deposit permeability) for uranium ore was assumed according to the data found for shale from the North Sea ( A change of the thickness of the deposit layer formed on the membrane surface in time of experiment for different process conditions is presented in As expected, the highest thickness of the cake layer was noticed in case of static condition, where δ was in the range of 0.9 to 1 Application helical membrane contactor has number of other advantages that exculpatory to such a solution of leaching process. One of advantages of helical contactor over simple stirred tank for uranium ore processing is energy efficiency caused by lowering of process temperature from 80 Another, very important benefit, is a possibility of combining two processes in one apparatus: leaching and separation of solid phase from post-leaching solutions. This reduces the capital costs, as well as the use of materials that do not require resistance to high temperatures. The installation is compact and does not require large space. The only drawback of the system is the phenomenon typical in membrane processes - membrane fouling resulting in risk to block it by small particles. The response to this hazard are well known and well established methods of control of concentration polarization and periodic cleaning of the membranes, also on-line without interrupting the process. A systematic list of advantages and disadvantages of both methods of leaching of uranium ore is presented below in form of table ( The membrane contactor with helical flow can be applied for recovery of uranium and associated metals from uranium ores. The leaching efficiency obtained by using the membrane contactor was comparable to the efficiency that can be achieved in the stationary reactor with heating and mixing. The main advantage of using the membrane contactor is a possibility of combining two processes in one apparatus: leaching and separation of solid phase from post-leaching solutions. Such an approach results in reduction of total cost of operation with no consequences to the separation efficiency. Another advantage of using the helical contactor is the possibility of conducting the leaching process, usually requiring application of higher temperatures, at room temperature with the same efficiency. This results in less energy consumption. Effective and stable operation of the membrane contactor without the interruption to processing is also very important. The limitation for operational stability can be membrane fouling, which results in continuous product flux decline. By application of helical flow which allows the control of hydrodynamic conditions inside the apparatus and promotes turbulence, the efficient reduction of the membrane fouling is possible. This ensures stable and efficient separation of phases after leaching process. The authors wish to thank Dr. E. Chajduk for his valuable help in carrying out the test work. The studies were supported by the