The effect of chromium(VI) on current efficiency, deposit quality, polarisation behaviour, crystallographic orientations and surface morphology during the electrocrystallisation of cobalt from sulphate solution has been studied as a function of pH, chromium concentration, temperature and cobalt ion concentration. The behaviour of chromium is found to be very sensitive to the pH of the solution. Addition of Cr(VI) to cobalt electrolyte results in a decrease in current efficiency and this effect is greater at higher pH. The deposit quality is severely affected at higher pH and cobalt deposition stops when Cr(VI) concentration exceeds 25 mg/L. At lower pH (1.5), it is possible to achieve cobalt deposits in the presence of Cr(VI) concentration as high as 100 mg/L. The current efficiency decreases at higher current density and with increasing temperature. The presence of chromium also affects the crystal orientations, surface morphology and polarisation behaviour of the cobalt deposition process.The electrocrystallisation of cobalt from acid sulphate electrolytes is very sensitive to the presence of foreign ions in the electrolyte. The cobalt electrolyte generated from different cobalt-containing sources is usually contaminated with a number of cations and anions. The cations are known to affect the current efficiency, deposit morphology and product purity. Cobalt is associated with nickel laterite and secondaries such as super-alloy scrap, cobalt granules, stellites, cobalt sludge, etc. During production of cobalt electrolyte, though chromium is separated along with iron, the purified electrolyte is always contaminated with chromium. It has been reported The present study, therefore, aims at determining the effect of chromium(VI) on current efficiency, deposit morphology, crystal orientations and polarisation behaviour during cobalt electrocrystallisation. A 500-mL beaker fitted with a porous refractory diaphragm was used as the electrolytic cell. The electrolysis was carried out using one stainless steel cathode and one Pb–Sb (Sb 7%) anode. Both had the same dimensions, i.e. length and width, and kept face to face 2.5 cm apart. The effective cathode area was 15 cm The electrolyte was prepared from reagent grade cobalt sulphate crystals (CoSO The volume of the solution taken for each experiment was 200 mL. The electrolyte contained 60 g/L cobalt. Its pH was adjusted to the required value by adding sulphuric acid. Addition of chromium was made as aliquots from its stock solution. All the electrowinning experiments unless otherwise stated were conducted for 2 h at a current density of 200 A/m Photographs of the deposit surface were taken with an optical microscope to examine their quality and appearance. X-ray diffractometry was carried out for determining the crystallographic orientations. The surface morphology of the deposit was examined by SEM. Deposit composition was determined by dissolving it in HNO Linear sweep voltammetry was carried out at 25°C to determine the polarisation characteristics of cobalt deposition in the presence of chromium. A platinum foil was used as the anode and a saturated calomel electrode as the reference electrode. A freshly cobalt-coated platinum disc of area 0.1257 cm The effect of chromium(VI) concentration on cobalt deposition at three different pHs in the concentration range 0–200 mg/L was investigated. The current efficiency is found to decrease in the presence of chromium at all the pH studied. The effect of chromium in reducing the current efficiency is much more pronounced at higher pH (∼2.5). At this pH, it is observed that the current efficiency decreases sharply by 25% when chromium concentration in the solution is increased to 25 mg/L. An increase in chromium(VI) concentration beyond this concentration results in drastic fall in the current efficiency (15% at 50 mg/L Cr(VI) and further reduces with increase in Cr(VI) concentration) and no cobalt sheet deposition is observed (formation of a few cobalt granules at the edges). When the bath pH is decreased, the plot of current efficiency vs. chromium(VI) concentration shows different behaviour The cathode contamination and fall in the current efficiency due to presence of chromium(VI) may be explained as follows. Chromium in a dilute chromic acid solution may be present as a monomer CrO The chromate ion in basic solution, however, is a much weaker oxidiser. The electroreduction reaction takes place according to: The reduction rate of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) increases when the pH decreases During electrodeposition of cobalt from aqueous solutions, the hydrogen evolution reaction takes place more readily because of its position in the emf series. This may lead to formation of OH The hydrogen evolution reaction during electrodeposition of cobalt is given by: At more acidic pH, the surface is covered by hydrogen and the reaction proceeds Co It is observed from the above equations that cobalt deposits through discharge of cobalt hydroxides. In addition, the reactions given in The present study deals with the electrodeposition of cobalt in the presence of Cr(VI) as an impurity which is added to cobalt electrolyte at mg/L levels. It has been discussed earlier that by the addition of chromic acid to cobalt electrolyte Cr(VI) may be present as Cr Addition of Cr(VI) to cobalt electrolyte results in a decrease in current efficiency and this effect is greater at higher pH Under present experimental conditions, though the cathodic cobalt is contaminated with chromium, the impurity content is negligible (in the range of 0.02–0.04%). This contamination may be due to adsorption of Cr(OH) The presence of a small amount of chromium(VI) in the cobalt electrolyte (∼5 mg/L) severely affects the deposit at a pH above 2.0. But when the solution pH is decreased to 2.0, smooth sheet is obtained until the chromium concentration reaches 25 mg/L. At higher chromium concentration, i.e. >25 mg/L, pitting of the deposit starts The effect of chromium(VI) with increasing current density on current efficiency for cobalt deposition was studied in the range 200–600 A/m The effect of temperature on current efficiency and cathode contamination during electrocrystallisation of cobalt was studied in a temperature range of 30 to 60°C in the presence of 50 mg/L of chromium(VI). The results on the current efficiency are given in The fall in the current efficiency and chromium contamination of cathode may be explained as follows. An increase in temperature increases the rate of cobalt deposition as well as hydrogen evolution due to decrease in activation overpotential. This should result in an increase in the rate of both cobalt deposition and hydrogen evolution reactions. The present result (fall in cathode current efficiency under the present experimental conditions) shows that probably the rate of hydrogen evolution only increases with increase in bath temperature. Due to hydrogen evolution, the surface pH increases. The condition favours the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) and the precipitation of Cr(OH) The change in current efficiency with increasing cobalt concentration in the presence of 50 mg/L chromium(VI) was studied in the range 15–60 g/L of cobalt. The results The cathode cobalt deposits obtained in the presence of chromium(VI) were subjected to X-ray diffraction to determine the crystallographic orientations. The results are given in The SEM photomicrographs of cobalt deposits obtained in the presence of chromium(VI) at different magnifications under different experimental conditions were taken to determine the surface morphology Potentiodynamic scan curves for electrodeposition of cobalt in the presence of chromium(VI) were recorded. (1) The presence of (Cr(VI)) decreases the current efficiency for cobalt deposition. At higher pH 2.5, no deposit is obtained when the chromium concentration increases beyond 25 mg/L. (2) The current efficiency increases initially and then decreases gradually as the current density is increased in the range 200–600 A/m (3) The current efficiency decreases with rise in electrolyte temperature. (4) The cathode contamination due to chromium is negligible under the experimental conditions studied. (5) The (110) plane remains the most preferred orientation throughout. At pH 2.0 and in the presence of 50 mg/L of chromium(VI), the growth along the (100 ) plane is promoted while suppressing the growth in the direction of (112). When the pH is lowered to 1.5, the crystal growth along (101) is promoted in the place of (112). (6) The current potential behaviour of cobalt deposition in presence of chromium is different below and above 1.0 V vs. SCE. Below a cathode potential of 1.0 V vs. SCE, the addition of chromium(VI) shifts the potential to more positive values whereas above it the shift is to more negative values. (7) Presence of Cr(VI) in the electrolyte is found to affect the deposit morphology of cobalt.