The effect of Cr3+ on the cathodic current efficiency (CE), deposit morphology, crystallographic orientations and polarisation behaviour during nickel electrodeposition from acidic sulfate solutions containing boric acid was investigated. A progressive decrease in CE was seen with increase in Cr3+ concentration showing a maximum decrease in CE of ∼10–13% at concentration ∼100 mgdm−3. The presence of Cr3+ did not change the fcc structure of the electrodeposited nickel but affected the peak intensities of the crystal planes. Polarisation of the cathode was seen in the presence of Cr3+ in the electrolyte along with a shift in the electroreduction potential of nickel (II) ion towards more negative values. The effect of Cr3+ on the electrokinetic parameters: Tafel slope (b), transfer coefficient (α) and exchange current density (i
                     0) has also been investigated.Nickel is generally electrodeposited from sulfate, sulfate chloride or sulfamate electrolytes with or without additives. Several investigators have studied the electrodeposition of nickel with respect to current efficiency (CE), polarisation behaviour and structural characteristics ( Nickel electrodeposition is sensitive to the presence of metallic impurities, particularly Cr The effect of Al The purpose of the present investigation is to evaluate the effect of Cr Nickel electrodeposition was carried out in a rectangular flow through cell made from perspex, consisting of separate cathodic and anodic compartments and separated by a microporous Daramic separator. The cathode and anode, each of area 20 cm All the electrodeposition experiments were conducted for 2 h at a current density of 200 A The chromium content of the nickel electrodeposits was analysed by dissolving sections of the nickel deposits in dilute HNO The preferred crystal orientations of the electrodeposited nickel and the deposit surface morphology were determined by using standard X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) methods as described in our previous paper ( All the experiments for studying the polarisation behaviour of nickel electrodeposition were carried out in a glass cell with 100 cm The cathode potential was scanned in the range 0 to −1000 mV at a rate of 10 mV The CE data for nickel electrodeposition from the nickel sulfate baths in the presence and absence of Cr The electrodeposition potential for nickel in the chromium free bath is found to be −0.86 V. While the presence of lower concentrations of Cr The effect of the addition of Cr The standard electrode potentials for Ni The nickel electrodeposits obtained at different Cr Typical SEM photomicrographs of the electrodeposited nickel are shown in The effect of Cr A typical The NOP value for nickel in the absence of Cr The cathodic polarisation data for nickel electrodeposition on stainless steel or nickel substrates were used to calculate the electron transfer kinetic parameters, Tafel slopes ( The addition of up to 100 mg The transfer coefficients for nickel electrodeposition both on nickel and stainless steel substrate remain essentially unaffected in the presence of the investigated concentrations of Cr A decrease in The  The CE of nickel electrodeposition from acidic sulfate baths is not affected by the presence of low concentrations of Cr The presence of Cr Based on the surface quality the tolerance limit of Cr Increase in the Cr The presence of Cr Addition of Cr USM would first like to thank the CSIR for granting him a research fellowship. The authors thank P. Fallon for assistance in SEM, K. Seymour for XRD and T.B. Issa for general assistance throughout the work. Mohanty, Tripathy and Das also thank Dr. R.P. Das, Adviser and Dr. V.N. Misra, Director, Regional Research Laboratory Bhubaneswar for encouragement. Financial support was partly received from the A.J. Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy.