This paper presents the use and evaluation of enrichment ratios (ER) from different batch flotation protocols. Two protocols under flotation time extensions (>20 min) are analysed, which favour steady recoveries to be obtained at the end of the process. Agar’s criterion is used to evaluate the consistency between the maximum recovery obtained by regression and the total measured recoveries. A good agreement is observed under critical flotation times (t
                     crit) lower than 40% of the total flotation time, where t
                     crit corresponds to the time at which the incremental concentrate grade equals the feed grade (grinding product).
                  A discretized ER is used as an approximation of instantaneous ER to characterize the evolution of the enrichment along the process. This discrete ER is defined as the ratio between the incremental concentrate grade and the grade of the solid in the flotation cell prior to the respective flotation interval. Discrete ERs greater than 1 along with significant discrete recoveries are feasible, suggesting that further analyses are required to evaluate the process exhaustion. Four size-by-size tests are also studied to assess the distribution of the discrete ERs at long flotation times. Almost all the evaluated classes present discrete ERs greater than 1 in the last flotation intervals. Therefore, the non-selective mechanisms (i.e., entrainment, true flotation of gangue and gangue association) cannot be considered as the predominant contributions to the overall discrete recoveries. Exceptions may be laboratory tests under very fast kinetic responses, high mass recoveries, long flotation times and high content of non-floatable valuable minerals.Flotation kinetics allows the comparison of different operating conditions from performance indexes such as recovery rate, concentrate grade, equilibrium recovery, enrichment ratio (ER = Concentrate Grade/Feed Grade) and mass recovery. Kinetic studies are commonly conducted in batch or continuous tests by measuring incremental mass flows as well as concentrate and tailings properties. This information has been typically used to calculate time-recovery, grade-recovery and separability curves, among other possible representations. The enrichment-recovery curves consider the ER along with the process efficiency in the same plot, which have made it possible to compare different flotation schemes under the same levels of selectivity. Several studies have highlighted the predominant non-selective behaviour at the end of the flotation process. For example, Non-selective recovery mechanisms typically represent the most significant contribution for the recovery of overall solids later in the flotation processes. However, industrial data has shown that enrichment may still be obtained by the end of a flotation stage. Examples of mass balances along industrial flotation circuits have been reported by The information provided above presents two different points of view for the flotation behaviour under long flotation times. Mineral exhaustion has been typically determined by kinetic studies in flotation. This paper presents the use of enrichment ratios to analyse six batch flotation processes with different protocols and levels of selectivity. Three aspects were studied: (i) the consistency between the Six batch datasets were studied to characterize the ERs along the flotation process. Each flotation test (namely Test A to F) considered different ores, laboratory protocols and mass recoveries. Tests A, B and C correspond to the rougher separation of copper minerals from different gangue, Test D to the rougher separation of copper-lead from a complex ore (Pb-Cu-Zn) and Tests E and F to the rougher separation of sulphides from silicates. Each ore presented different mineralogy and grain sizes, which imposed specific constraints to the feed particle size. Tests A and B involved the flotation of different samples from two mine sites (55 and 85 samples for Tests A and B, respectively). Tests A and B were studied for unscreened concentrate and tailings products, whereas Tests C to F were also analysed size-by-size. The size-by-size tests included replicates and/or the evaluation of different operating conditions, according to the material availability. The size classes were defined based on the particle size distribution of the feed solid. The ores were initially crushed and wet ground to obtain the required particle sizes. The pulps were then poured into the flotation cells for conditioning and flotation. Lime was used as a pH regulator in all cases and make-up water (at the operating pH) was used to adjust the pulp level. Manual scraping was conducted in all the evaluated datasets. In Tests A and B, the scraping frequency was adjusted at a rate of one every 5 s for the three first minutes, followed by once every 15 s. In Test C, the scraping rate was set at one every 10 s along the whole experiment. In Tests D to F, the scraping was set at an approximate rate of one every 1 s (fast scraping rate). In all cases, the finest class of the studied products was wet screened (  To complement the information obtained from the kinetic studies, the following analyses are proposed: (i) comparison between the total measured recoveries and the Agar’s criterion was used to compare the maximum recoveries obtained by regression with the total measured recoveries at the end of the tests. This criterion defines the flotation time at which the optimal separation of two liberated minerals is achieved. This critical time The incremental recoveries for flotation times longer than The incremental ERs were plotted as a function of time and the The discrete ERs along with the discrete recoveries were also studied for long flotation times. The discrete ERs were obtained from mass balances, using the grades and solid weights of the tailings and concentrates. This procedure made it possible for the back-calculation of the grades and weights of the solid that was in the flotation cell before the concentrate removal. The mass balance was iteratively applied to all the flotation intervals to account for the evolution of the discrete ERs and recoveries as a function of time. The same back-calculation procedure was applied to size-by-size tests, according to their availability. The size-by-size analyses allowed typical distributions of the discrete ER to be observed as a function of particle size. These distributions made it possible to infer the potential contributions of the different recovery mechanisms for valuable metals at the end of the flotation tests. The unscreened Tests A and B were used to evaluate the consistency in the estimation of potential recoveries. These tests presented long flotation times and a high number of runs, which was suitable to obtain a representative database. The relative difference between the estimated  The flotation kinetics of Tests A and B were obtained from moderate low-grade ores and batch tests subject to selectivity constraints. Other systems may present deviations regarding the results observed in The discrete enrichment ratios were also studied for Tests A and B. Although entrainment critically influences the mass recovery as the valuable minerals become exhausted, the discrete ERs at the end of Tests A and B (2.8 and 6.0) suggest a significant effect of the selective processes on the overall discrete recoveries. The size-by-size tests allowed the distribution of the discrete ERs to be evaluated under different flotation protocols and levels of selectivity. Tests C to F presented the decreasing or similar trends to those observed in  Incremental ERs of Pb are presented in   The incremental enrichment ratio and Agar’s criterion were applied to different Cu flotation tests. The results showed a good agreement between the measured total recoveries and the estimated maximum recoveries (regression), under flotation times significantly longer than the critical times obtained from Agar’s principle. The flotation tests showed that obtaining discrete ERs < 1 for the valuable metals is not straightforward, even for long flotation times and low-selectivity processes. Some experimental conditions may also present non-negligible discrete recoveries in the last flotation intervals. Therefore, the separation process cannot be considered completely depleted at long flotation times, despite the low incremental recoveries. The study of the incremental ERs presented here is also applicable at the industrial scale. Discrete ERs ≫ 1 in the last cell of a flotation circuit can justify the potential for recovery increases. Operating variables that increase the flotation rates ( The discrete ERs were also greater than 1 in almost all the size-by-size experiments, except for Test E, which showed low selectivity and high flotation rates. Non-selective processes commonly define the mass recoveries for In summary, a level of exhaustion that guarantees discrete ERs close to 1, for long flotation times (non-selective separation), can be only obtained under specific experimental conditions. In addition, the low incremental recoveries commonly observed at the end of the batch processes cannot be only attributed to the non-selective recovery of valuable metals. Six different batch flotation protocols were used to study the incremental and discrete enrichment ratios along the laboratory tests. The former index was employed along with Agar’s criterion to evaluate the agreement between the total measured recovery and the maximum recovery estimated by regression. Both parameters were more consistent when critical flotation times Discrete ERs significantly greater than 1 were observed in processes close to exhaustion. In addition, discrete recoveries may be significant even though the cumulative recoveries as a function of time approach a plateau. Thus, further analyses of the laboratory data are required to evaluate the process depletion. Four size-by-size tests were studied to determine the distribution of the discrete enrichment ratios at the end of the processes. All the size-classes presented discrete ERs greater than 1 at long flotation times, except for one condition subject to fast kinetic response, high mass recovery, moderately long flotation time and high content of non-floatable valuable mineral in the coarsest class. Therefore, although the non-selective mechanisms ( The authors are grateful for the financial support from the  Kinetic responses in flotation are obtained from recovery estimates as a function of time. Eq. The definition of ER in Eq. Similarly, for an arrangement of flotation machines in series, the ER in the n-th cell is defined as the ratio between the concentrate and feed grades in that specific cell. In a batch process, this discrete parameter can be estimated from the ratio between an incremental concentrate grade and the grade of the material that is processed in the evaluated flotation interval. This discrete ER approximates the instantaneous ER. The same approach can be used to define a discrete recovery, using as a reference the material that is in the cell prior to the flotation interval.  The incremental ERs of Cu in Test F are presented in