The determination of hardness and approximate mineral composition of rocks and classifying these lithologies aids in controlling various processes in the plant, such as reducing the grinding process, which accounts for about 50% of its energy consumption. In this paper, a new method for rock lithological classification is presented, based on color as well as 3D laser based features. The method uses color and laser range images, acquired from rocks on a conveyor belt, to compute Gabor and LBP (Local Binary Pattern) features. Various Gabor and LBP features are tested, including rotation invariant features. The images are tessellated into sub-images in which the features are computed. The classification is performed in two stages. In the first stage, the sub-images are classified by using a support-vector machine (SVM) classifier. In the second stage, the classification is improved by a voting process among all the sub-images of each rock. The method was tested on a database with five different rock lithologies taken from a copper mine which has been used in previous studies, allowing comparison with our new results. The results show that the classification performance was improved significantly by adding the 3D laser texture features, and using a combination of rotation invariant Gabor and LBP features, achieving a classification accuracy of 99.24% on the database. Using the CMIM (Conditional Mutual Information Maximization) feature selection method showed that only 10% of the total extracted features are required to achieve the maximum correct classification rate and that using the 3D laser features, (for the first time in our rock classification method to the best of our knowledge) is important for maintaining high classification performance.Rock type classification is of great importance in many stages of mine operations. Possible applications range from mine planning to the control of processes, such as grinding ( One of the first methods to measure the size of rocks, using computer vision techniques in 2D images, was proposed by Other methods have been developed since then, such as the one presented in An industrial rock classification system that combines local texture information and co-occurrence likelihoods was introduced in In A method based on neural networks combined with PCA and frequency measures to classify 26 rock types was introduced in A method that uses genetic algorithms, Rock classification performance was improved with methods using shape and size information in laser range 3D images. The 3D information is not affected by color or illumination variations. Moreover, using 3D information, it is easier to detect the rocks near the surface without occlusions, to classify shape, and to improve segmentation. A method for segmenting aggregates on a conveyor belt using a laser triangulation scanner was introduced in In Textures have specific orientations for some rock lithologies as has been reported in previous research for classifying types of granites ( In this work, we introduce 3D laser range images to improve lithological classification. Our proposed method extracts color features as well as 3D laser range features for classifying the rock type. Our hypothesis is that classification performance can be improved by combining 3D laser range and color features. Invariant features have shown to be very relevant in image processing, see for example The lithological classification method proposed in this paper is based on color and laser range (3D) images. A SICK ColorRange Ranger-E55444 camera As explained above, the acquired color and range images are composed of 3072 and 1536 columns, respectively. The images were transformed, obtaining images of 3017 columns with isotropic pixels of approximately 0.12 After registering the color and range images, rocks are segmented to be able to classify each rock type. Range images are segmented first because it is simpler to identify each rock in the range images. Range images contain noise produced by reflections of ambient light from the rock surfaces. Morphological closing and opening is performed with a square structural element of 3 The color image is segmented after the range image. First, the color image is transformed into grayscale, and a bilateral filter ( Features are extracted from the range and color images which are tessellated into sub-images of 60 All extracted features are computed within the sub-image. These features are based on Gabor filters, Local Binary Patterns (LBP), and chromatic features. Gabor filters and LBPs are complementary features, because the Gabor filter can extract global features, whereas LBP captures the local structure of the texture ( Gabor filters are frequency filters, localized in space, and with a particular orientation. Gabor features are computed using 5 scales defined by 0 ≤       The LBP features use binary comparisons between pixels by sampling within a neighborhood around each pixel where the code is computed to characterize texture. The gray level of a pixel The LBP is computed at each pixel in the image, and the texture is described by the histogram vector of these LBPs. Given    First, the neighbors of The BRINT_M is based on the complementary LBP, CLBP_M (CLBP-Magnitude), proposed in The BRINT_M local binary pattern is defined by using the BNT_M as: The last LBP included in the BRINT_CS_CM is the BRINT_C which represents the center pixel in one of two bins: Finally, the BRINT_CS_CM Two chromatic features are extracted, besides the texture information in gray scale. The image is transformed into the HSV color space, and then the mean and standard deviation of the H and S channels are used as chromatic features. These chromatic features are used together with the texture features (Gabor filters, LBPs) computed on the image in gray levels. Lithological classification is performed in two stages: classification by sub-image, and classification by rock, which are described as follows: The computed features are concatenated, obtaining a feature vector in each sub-image. For example, 80 features are obtained if the Since the aim of our work is to propose a new and improved method for lithological classification of rock using new features, a state-of-the-art classification method must be used to evaluate the performance obtained by using the different features. The Random Forest and the SVM were the classifiers with best performance in As described in A database was built using ore samples from a copper mine in Chile ( For testing each type of feature using the available information, the performance was first measured using color and range images together (see Finally, a feature selection method based on mutual information (    In order to perform a comparison between the result obtained by using CMIM and by using the classical PCA method, the first 144 principal components of the training features obtained using The same set of rock samples was used in this work as in our previous work In  Rock classification is an important task in mining operations. Classification information can be used to control many processes, such as grinding or mine planning. The aim of this study was to develop a new method of rock type classification using color and laser range images. According to our literature review, this is the first method that uses 3D laser range features from rocks to classify rock type. Our study shows that the 3D laser range features can be used to improve rock type classification significantly. The images were tessellated into sub-images and a classification process with two stages was performed. In the first stage, every sub-image was classified using an SVM. In the second stage, a voting process was performed among the sub-images within the rock boundary to improve the classification. The contour information of each rock was used to select those sub-images intervening in the voting process. The experiments were performed using a database with 5 types of lithologies acquired from rocks on a conveyor belt for experimentation. In order to use its complementary nature ( A set of features was selected using a leave-one-out 10-fold cross validation in the database ( The CMIM feature selection method was used to analyze the number of features needed for classification. The result obtained, (99.22%) accuracy using only 10% of the features, was not significantly different from that obtained using all the features. This method allowed a reduction in the number of features from 1440 to 144 with no significant loss in classification performance. This set of 144 features still has some degree of redundancy; therefore, a greater reduction in the number of features could be achieved, but with a small drop in performance. For example, a classification performance of 96.8% was achieved using only 29 features ( This work was supported by