In this work, the effect of quasicrystal I phase (Mg3Zn6Y) on electrochemical behaviors and discharge properties of as-cast Mg–Zn–Y alloys with different Zn/Y ratio for Mg-air batteries are systematically investigated in 3.5 wt % NaCl electrolyte. The Mg–6%Zn–1%Y (wt.%) alloy is composed of Mg matrix and I phase, while the Mg7Zn3 phase appears in Mg–10%Zn–1%Y alloy. The Mg–Zn–Y anodes have higher open circuit potential, electrochemical activity and corrosion resistance than the contrasted ZK60 anode. They also have higher cell voltage, specific capacity and anodic efficiency with more stable discharge curves. The I phase is responsible for such improvements. The Mg–6%Zn–1%Y alloy achieves its best discharge capacity and anodic efficiency at the 40 mA cm−2, with the values of 1162.79 mAh·g−1 and 55.14%, respectively, which are 22.38% and 23.14% higher than ZK60 anode. Shallow pits with smooth surfaces are observed in Mg–Zn–Y anodes after discharge process. Some small holes associated with the desorption ability are detected as well.Magnesium alloy, the lightest metal structure material, has been applied in aviation, vehicle and electronic technology [ The Mg-air battery has a high theoretical voltage of 3.1 V and the high specific energy density of 6.8 kW h kg The Mg anode usually holds the key to the efficiency of Mg-air battery, and therefore, researchers struggling to improve the anodic efficiency of the Mg-air battery. The alloying method is the most commonly used method. The metal elements are added to the Mg anode to adjust the chemical composition. For example, the addition of Li, Al and Ce can increase the electrochemical activity and reduce the self-corrosion rate of magnesium [ The quasicrystal was found by Shechtman et al. in Al–Mn alloys, which has a unique icosahedral symmetry structure [ The chemical composition of investigated Mg–Zn–Y alloys and the ZK60 alloy (set as the control group) used in this work is listed in Samples for microstructure characterization were taken from the casted ingots following the request of microscopy with the diameter of 15 mm × 15 mm × 5 mm, which were ground by different SiC papers. They were then polished and etched using a solution of 4.2 g picric acid to reveal their microstructures. The metallography of investigated alloys was obtained using OLYMPUS microscopy (BX53) with polarized light. More than 20 fields of view were captured for each sample. The phase composition was tested by XRD (monochromatic Cu Kα radiation with wavelength of 0.154056 nm, the step size and the scan rate for data acquisition of 0.02° and 4°mm The electrochemical behaviors of investigated alloys were tested in a ChenHua CHI660E electrochemistry workstation, using a classical three-electrode cell. The Mg–Zn–Y alloys served as the working electrode. The platinum foil was the counter electrode, and the saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was the reference electrode. The tested anodic materials with an area of 1 cm The discharge performance of investigated Mg–Zn–Y anodes for Mg-air battery was tested and recorded using the NEWARE battery testing system. A self-designed Mg-air battery was employed, as shown in    The discrepancy of phases in these three alloys is attributed to the different reactions during the solidification process. As for ZW61 alloy, due to the low Zn/Y ratio, a eutectic reaction and a peritectic reaction occur, as shown in Eq. At the early stage, the α-Mg starts to solid at first. Then the eutectic reaction occurs to form the W phase (Mg   Base on the discussion above, three processes appear during the EIS test from high frequency to low frequency, which can be reflected by two capacities in high frequency and one inductor in low frequency. A proposed equivalent circuit fitted by ZSimpWin 3.20 software is shown in  Thus, it is obvious that the Mg–Zn–Y anodes not only have higher cell voltage but also have stable discharge curves than ZK60 anode. The unique microstructure of Mg–Zn–Y anodes should respond to such positive results. The properties of Mg-air battery are usually affected by the internal resistance of battery, electrode polarization and discharge products [  According to the results above, there is an evident difference in terms of the discharge properties of ZK60 and the Mg–Zn–Y anodes. The microstructure especially the phase composition should be responsible for this result. The magnesium has two unique characteristics, namely the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, as shown in Eq. The HER during the discharge process can produce Mg(OH)  Thus, it is clear that the Mg–Zn–Y anodes have completely different surface morphologies than the ZK60 anode. Deep and dense holes dominate the discharge surface of ZK60 anode. It should note that this structure is a double-edged sword. These holes increase the superficial area of metal anode. However, discharge products can be accumulated easily particularly at large current density. Unfortunately, according to the EIS results, the ZK60 anode has poor desorption ability, which means that the adverse effect of these holes is larger than the beneficial effect. Therefore, the discharge curve of ZK60 anode shows sight upward trend at 2.5 mA cm In this study, the effect of quasicrystal I phase of Mg–Zn–Y on discharge and electrochemical behaviors as the anode for Mg-air battery was investigated in 3.5 wt % electrolyte. The results show that ZW61 alloy contains I phase only while the Mg There is no conflict of interest of the submitted paper. This research was financially supported by the