The purpose of this study was to evaluate the poly-axial locked plating system inserted through a minimally invasive approach for the treatment of three-part fractures of the proximal humerus. Twenty-three patients with a three-part fracture of the proximal humerus treated with a poly-axial locking plate through a percutaneous approach were available for clinical and radiological analysis at a minimum of 2 years follow up (average 36 months; range, 24–54 months). To assess objective and subjective outcomes the Constant Score (CS) and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score were obtained. All complications were recorded. There were 17 women and 6 men, with a mean age of 62 years (range, 18–86). All fractures healed. At final follow up, the mean forward flexion, external rotation and internal rotation were 126°, 44° and L1, respectively; the mean CS was 64 and the mean DASH score was 23. Twelve patients (52%) had a postoperative complication, which included screw cut-out, stiffness and infection. The poly-axial locked plating system through a minimally-invasive approach may be an appropriate treatment for three-part fractures of the proximal humerus and may reduce the biological aggression of conventional plate fixation.Fractures of the proximal humerus account for about 5% of all fractures in people older than 65 years of age, only behind hip and wrist fractures in frequency. Despite the biomechanical benefits of locked plating, and the early promising results published, a high incidence of complications has been reported, including screw cut-out, varus positioning of the head and avascular necrosis. The purpose of this study was to investigate if a poly-axial locked plating system through a minimally invasive approach is an appropriate treatment modality for three-part fractures of the proximal humerus, with a specific emphasis on complications and functional outcome. Between January 2006 and December 2008, 25 patients older than 18 years of age who sustained a three-part fracture of the proximal humerus were treated operatively through a minimally invasive approach with a polyaxial locking screw plate. Two patients were excluded because they were lost to follow up. The remaining 23 patients were included in the study with a complete preoperative clinical evaluation, operative records, and a minimum 2-year follow-up period (average 36 months; range, 24–54 months). There were 17 women and 6 men, whose ages ranged from 18 to 86 years (mean 62 years). The dominant extremity was involved in 12 of the 23 cases. The mechanism of the injury was a fall from standing height in twenty patients, a bicycle accident in two patients, and a motorcycle accident in one patient. The fractures were defined according to the Neer classification of proximal humerus fractures. The average time from the initial injury to the time the patient underwent fixation was five days (range, 1–12 days). Two patients had additional fractures at the time of the injury: one wrist fracture which was treated with closed reduction and cast immobilisation, and one contralateral proximal humerus fracture which was treated conservatively. No patient had undergone any previous surgical procedure or reported any significant prior trauma to the ipsilateral shoulder. All patients were treated surgically under general anaesthesia in the beach chair position. Fluoroscopic assistance during surgery is critical to achieve a good reduction and avoid inadvertent intraarticular placement of screws. A 3 to 5 cm midlateral skin incision was performed 1 cm distal to the lateral border of the acromion, avoiding deltoid detachment ( After bursectomy, heavy non-resorbable #2 sutures (Fiberwire, Arthrex, Florida, USA) were placed using a modified Mason–Allen stitch through the subscapularis, the supraspinatus and the infraspinatus tendon. Reduction of the head fragment was obtained by pulling on the different sutures as in a puppet to achieve an adequate tuberosity to head fragment reduction. After the tuberosities were reduced, the sutures were tied to each other and the head fragment was reduced to the diaphysis emphasising medial calcar apposition. All the fractures were fixed percutaneously with a NCB plate (Non-contact Bridging plate®, Zimmer, Winterthur, Switzerland). The critical steps of the surgical technique have been well summarised by Roderer et al. Proximal screws were inserted through the proximal skin incision while the distal screws were inserted through a special cannula that is fixed to the plate to avoid soft tissue damage. The screws can be inserted at a 30°-variable angle while still being able to achieve locking of the screw by use of a cap that is screwed onto the plate. The essential part of the procedure is fracture reduction and osteosuture synthesis of the greater tuberosity to the subscapularis anteriorly, to the shaft of the humerus and also to the plate through specific holes. All shoulders were placed in a sling for three weeks. During this period they were instructed on the use of pendulum exercises five times a day and were allowed to use the arm for light everyday activities as far as pain allowed and depending on fracture stability and bone quality. If no displacement was observed, they were instructed to increase flexion exercises progressively, avoiding rotation exercises until healing was observed, usually at six weeks. All patients entered a standardised physical therapy programme once the immobilisation was removed. Our Institutional Review Board approved a review of the medical records, as well as an invitation to patients to return for evaluation. All patients were contacted and returned to our hospital for an interview, physical examination, and radiographic evaluation. Clinical and radiographic evaluations were performed by two of the authors who had not been involved in the treatment of the patients. The outcome assessment included the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire (DASH), which is a validated thirty-item self-reported outcome instrument that assesses symptoms and physical function in patients with upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders. The score is scaled between 0 and 100, with higher scores indicating worse upper-extremity disability. Physical examination included measurement of the range of motion of the shoulder in active forward elevation, external and internal rotation. Shoulder strength was measured with the aid of a dynamometer and was measured in pounds. With the information collected from the interview and the physical examination, a physician-based scoring system was used to define the results. The shoulders were evaluated with the Constant Score. Radiographic evaluation was performed in all patients. At the time of the most recent follow-up examination, plain anteroposterior and axillary radiographs of the shoulder were used to evaluate the degree of degenerative changes, presence of avascular necrosis, tuberosity malposition or resorption, varus malunion or hardware failure. A varus or valgus malunion was noted if a cervicodiaphyseal angle of less than 120° or greater than 150° was present, respectively. A malunion of the greater tuberosity was defined as a displacement of 5 mm or more. For all calculations, standard statistical software was used to analyse the data. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used to compare the differences in values between groups of patients. A significant difference was defined as p <0.05. No patient needed conversion from the minimally invasive approach to a deltopectoral approach due to inability to achieve adequate reduction and stabilisation. No significant intraoperative complications were reported. One patient had slight atrophy of the anterior deltoid but with negative EMG changes of the axillary nerve. No patient had a nonunion of the fracture. Two patients had an infection postoperatively. One patient had a sub-acute infection one month after surgery and was treated with removal of the plate and debridement. At the most recent follow up, 36 months after surgery, he had an adjusted CS of 55, limited motion but no pain. The other patient presented 18 months after surgery with pain and purulent discharge from the wound. She was treated with debridement and removal of the plate. Twenty-six months after the initial operation she had an adjusted CS of 72, with mild pain in the shoulder. Six additional patients underwent removal of the plate and screws: in three patients due to pain and limited motion attributed to cut-out of the screws after fracture collapse, two due to postoperative stiffness, and one additional patient because he complained of plate prominence on the shoulder ( One patient sustained a fall 27 months after the initial fracture and sustained a new fracture at the level of the lower screws of the original plate. Clinical evaluation at the 2-year follow up, before the second fracture occurred, had shown severe functional limitation with a pseudo-paralytic shoulder due to a non-repairable massive rotator cuff tear, mild shoulder pain and a CS of 33. The new fracture was treated by plate removal and new fixation with a longer plate ( The mean satisfaction score on the VAS was 7.8 (range, 0 to 10). According to patients' own assessments, 20 patients (87%) were satisfied with the result of the operation and 3 (13%) were not satisfied. The DASH score at the time of the latest exam averaged 23 points (range, 0 to 93). At the most recent follow up, 20 patients had no pain or very mild pain with unusual activities, 2 had moderate pain and 1 patient had significant daily pain. The average VAS for pain was 1.5 points (range, 0 to 10). At the latest follow-up examination, the mean range of motion was 126° of forward elevation (range, 30° to 170°), 44° of external rotation (range, 0° to 80°), and the ability of reaching L1 (range, gluteus to T7). The mean CS was 64 points (range, 26–89). The mean adjusted CS was 74 (range, 32–96). We analysed the results according to patients' age and compared the functional outcome in patients older or younger than 65 years of age ( There were no cases of avascular necrosis. All cases showed bone union at the last radiographic follow up. Twenty-one patients (91%) achieved an anatomic reduction. The mean cervico-diaphyseal angle was 133° (range, 110° to 146°). A varus malunion was observed in two patients. Both patients had medial calcar comminution at fracture presentation. A tuberosity malunion was observed in one case with a 5 mm displacement. Radiographic examination of one patient showed a minimal posterior–superior cut-out of one screw but she had no pain and refused an operation. One patient had evident loosening of 2 non-locked proximal screws without clinical consequence. One additional patient showed fracture collapse without screw penetration into the joint or angulation of the humeral head. The purpose of this study was to investigate if a poly-axial locking plate fixation system through a minimally invasive approach would improve the results of surgically treated three-part fractures of the proximal humerus. More specifically, we aimed to clarify if by reducing soft tissue damage, the rate of stiffness and avascular necrosis could be reduced. To date, there is very little information on the clinical outcome of surgically treated three-part fractures exclusively. Our results show that at a mean follow up of 36 months, the majority of our patients had a satisfactory clinical outcome. It has been shown by other authors that the short-term results of three-part fractures may be good, but longer follow up may reveal the presence of clinical complications, including avascular necrosis. Minimally invasive approaches were developed to diminish soft tissue disruption and avoid healing problems. Twelve complications were observed in 12 patients (52%). Eight of these patients required a reoperation (35%). Implant-related complications were observed in 4 cases, corresponding to intraarticular screw cut-out in three patients and a prominent plate in a very thin patient. Non-implant related complications included stiffness and infection in six patients. Stiffness may be related to the severity of the injury, the surgical approach, a conservative rehabilitation or to adhesions of the plate to the subdeltoid space. Although the numbers available for this study did not allow a more specific analysis, stiffness is probably caused by a combination of all these factors. Two other patients, with massive rotator cuff tears, had a very poor clinical outcome (CS 26 and 27, respectively). It is possible that other forms of treatment, such as reverse arthroplasty, might be better for elderly patients with massive rotator cuffs associated with three-part proximal humeral fractures. Although our patients were generally satisfied with the function of their shoulders, those who did not have a complication had better subjective (mean DASH scores of 14 vs. 31) and objective scores (mean CS of 70 vs. 58). However, with the numbers available to this study, we did not find any statistically significant difference ( Our study has some limitations. First, it is not a single-surgeon series, so differences in outcome may be attributable to technique. Nevertheless, the surgical technique was protocolised, and both surgeons were trained in trauma and had experience with the use of locking plates. Second, there is no control group, and therefore we cannot determine if another method of treatment would lead to different results. In this regard, recent evidence suggests that good functional results can be achieved with non-operative management. Poly-axial locking plates through a minimally invasive approach may reduce the biological aggression to soft tissue and therefore decrease the incidence of avascular necrosis in complex proximal humerus fractures. This technique yields reliable results when performed correctly. The incidence of implant-related complications remains high, but could be reduced by meticulous technique and appropriate use of fluoroscopy. The authors state that they have not received any financial benefits or any payments from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.