Sintering, a thermally activated diffusion process, is used to densify particulate materials. During the densification process, there is concomitant volumetric shrinkage of the powder compact to the final desired part shape. Additionally, shear deformation can occur in response to deviatoric stresses in the body, such as gravity, thermal stresses, and stress gradients due to internal density differences. Finite element modeling of sintering deformation can greatly aid in reverse engineering green part shapes, thus improving dimensional precision of final parts. However, the constitutive equations that govern the rheological response of a porous body during sintering are notoriously difficult to characterize. In situ video-imaging of a simply supported beam, deforming under its own weight during sintering, has been effectively employed in determining the apparent viscosity of the densifying material. This paper describes this experimental technique and the implementation of the results in a finite element analysis. It demonstrates the efficacy of the characterized constitutive equations by a finite element simulation example using 316L stainless steel with 0.2% boron addition.Powder metallurgy (P/M) allows fabrication of large volumes of high quality, complex parts to close tolerances in an economical manner. Monitoring of the sintering process can be done by tracking bulk properties, such as density; microstructural parameters, such as neck size; and mechanical properties, such as hardness or other parameters, such as X-ray absorption Supersolidus liquid phase sintering (SLPS) is a process for full densification of coarse alloy powders. Prealloyed powders are heated to a temperature between the solidus and the liquidus. Upon heating, liquid forms along the grain boundaries within the particles, between the particles and inside the particles. The liquid spreads and rearrangement of the grains due to capillary forces causes densification Viscosities of ceramic materials undergoing densification are typically measured by applying compressive or tensile stress to the specimen, which causes creep deformation and densification. Loading dilatometry has been used to measure the viscosity during sintering of certain ceramics In this paper bending beam analysis is performed on boron doped stainless steel 316L powder compacts to calculate the apparent axial viscosity during constant heating rate sintering experiments. The measured viscosity is used to characterize the constitutive equations of sintering for a linear viscous porous solid as setup by Olevsky Water atomized stainless steel 316L powder mixed with 0.2 The bending beam geometry during the tests is shown in The synchrovision system uses high intensity strobe lighting in combination with high speed shuttering to obtain high definition images with good contrast at high temperatures. The apparatus consists of a controller unit, a camera with high speed shuttering, and a strobe with xenon flash lamp. Both the camera and the strobe light were triggered in unison by the controller. A Fresnel's lens was used in conjunction with the strobe light to focus a parallel beam of light into the furnace tube. The controller unit controls the strobe intensity and frequency. The horizontal tube furnace was fitted with specially designed quartz window to allow for viewing inside the furnace. The camera collected the strobe light reflected from the sample through a mirror placed at 45° angle in the center of the Fresnel's lens. The in situ image was displayed on TV and also recorded in a standard VCR on an 8 Dilatometer tests were run using the same thermal profile, 5 Bending beam analysis allowed the calculation of the viscosity of the solid–liquid mixture during sintering. In the case of uniform loading of elastic beams, the general deflection equation is expressed as For small deflections, i.e. d Solving Eq. During sintering, the porous material demonstrate linear viscous rather than linear elastic behavior at a given density. Using the analogy between these deformation modes, one simply replaces Assuming pure Newtonian viscous flow allows Eq. As the viscosity measured by means of Eq. The constant heating rate experiments were repeated four times to check the repeatability of the bending experiments. The results were repeatable and the average was considered for further analysis. From the knowledge of the heating rate, the deflection can be plotted as a function of time during sintering. Curve fitting the data gives the deflection as a function of time. Deflection rate is calculated as a function of time by taking the time derivative of the deflection curve. Eqs. The apparent viscosity is calculated by entering the deflection rate, density and thickness changes into Eq. The magnitude of viscosity values obtained in this study ∼0.2–0.6 Hooke's law, the constitutive equation for behavior of an isotropic linear elastic material is: Taking the linear elastic–linear viscous analogy one step further, an equivalent set of constitutive equations for isotropic linear viscous behavior is Eq. The potential a porous compact has to shrink during sintering is described by a hydrostatic stress term called the sintering stress In this study, we will measure the uniaxial apparent viscosity, however, we have to assume models for the sintering stress and viscous Poisson's ratio in order to fully characterize Eq. According to Eqs. Eq. Eqs. The dimensional change, measured by the dilatometer during a 5 The finite element simulation was run using ABAQUS 6.4 with the CREEP subroutine, programmed using the constitutive equations defined above Based on the initial simulation results, an iterative process was followed to scale the apparent viscosity and observe the affect on the simulated experiment. It was found that by doubling the apparent viscosity defined in Eq. The definition of the shear viscosity needed further scaling until a more accurate simulation of the distortional events was achieved. It was found that scaling the shear viscosity Eq. (14a)(14), by a factor 5 resulting in a simulation that closely mimicked reality. The comparison between the simulation and experiment of the midpoint deflection against temperature is shown in It is difficult to separate the influence of changing density from the temperature influence using this method of measuring apparent viscosity. With the influence of density included in the measurement, it is not possible to evaluate the validity of the linear-viscous assumption for the sinter model. However, simulation results from these experiments indicate that the form of the apparent viscosity function yields promising results. The apparent viscosity as determined through in situ video-imaging of a bending beam during sintering can be used to characterize the constitutive equations of sintering as defined in this paper. However, reasonable results are only obtained through scaling this value, assuming that definitions for sintering stress and Poisson's ratio are correct. This initial study indicates that the linear elastic–linear viscous analogy can be used with success to describe the rheology of supersolidus sintering deformation. Further study could explore this application more thoroughly by using samples that do not change density during the deformation process, thus isolating the temperature effect on apparent viscosity and determining the validity of a linear-viscous assumption for the sinter model.