Due to the limited availability of fresh water sources, recycled water and sea water, generally with high salinity, have been widely used in mining industry in arid regions, which can significantly affect the interactions of mineral particles, chemical additives and air bubbles in mineral processing (e.g., flotation). In this work, the surface forces and interaction mechanism of Si3N4 tip and a model mineral (i.e. sphalerite) in various aqueous solution conditions have been studied using an atomic force microscope (AFM). The Si3N4 tip was functionalized with octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) to tune the surface hydrophobicity. The sphalerite substrate was either freshly cleaved or treated with conditioning solutions: activator (i.e. CuSO4) and collector (i.e. potassium amyl xanthate, PAX) in various background solutions (i.e., Milli-Q water, 0.46M NaCl, saline water to mimic diluted sea water/industrial process water). The force-separation profiles indicate that in addition to the classical Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) interactions, hydration interaction plays an important role for the surface interaction in saline water (with addition of divalent cations, Ca2+ and Mg2+) at short separation distance, while hydrophobic force dominates the interaction when Si3N4 tip and sphalerite are both hydrophobized. The surface force measurements further demonstrate that solution salinity and presence of divalent cations can significantly influence the adhesion between particles. The micro-flotation tests of sphalerite and silica mixtures of varying surface hydrophobicity can be well interpreted by the force measurements. This work provides useful insights into the fundamental interaction mechanisms of suspended particles possessing different hydrophilic and hydrophobic characteristics in complex aqueous media.Interactions of particles in complex fluids play an important role in determining the properties and behaviors of the suspensions Sphalerite (zinc sulfide) is the most important source mineral of zinc metal. Zinc sulfide itself also has many engineering applications such as lubricant additives Considerable effort has been made to investigate the surface interaction mechanisms involving sphalerite (or synthetic ZnS) aiming to understand the forces governing the bubble-particle attachment and particle-particle coagulation in the flotation of sphalerite Due to the limited availability of fresh water sources, recycled water and sea water, generally with high salinity, have been widely used in mining industry, which can significantly affect the interactions of mineral particles, chemical additives and air bubbles in mineral processing (e.g. flotation) and thereby cause many challenging issues. The presence of salt ions and the elevated salinity in water medium can impact the surface properties of mineral particle and the adsorption of chemical reagent additives to mineral surfaces, which in turn influence the particle-particle and particle-bubble interactions and flotation efficiency. In previous studies, we have reported that water composition had significant effects on the adsorption of xanthate on sphalerite and on the bubble-sphalerite interactions Sphalerite was purchased from Ward's Natural Science. Silicon wafers with 0.5 All AFM experiments were conducted on an MFP-3D AFM (Asylum Research). Silicon wafers were immersed in concentrated H The AFM force measurements on the sphalerite samples were conducted in various The AFM tips were characterized using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) equipped with a scanning Auger microprobe (JAMP-9500F, JEOL Ltd.). Prior to the FE-SEM imaging, the AFM tips were coated with a layer of gold (5 Following a procedure reported previously Zeta potential was measured using a Zetasizer Nano ZSP (Malvern Instruments, UK). 0.02 The micro-flotation tests were conducted on four sets of mineral mixtures: hydrophilic sphalerite-hydrophilic silica, hydrophilic sphalerite-hydrophobic silica, hydrophobic sphalerite-hydrophilic silica, and hydrophobic sphalerite-hydrophobic silica in a custom-made Hallimond tube. The hydrophobic sphalerite was obtained by treating sphalerite particles in 0.1 Typical topography AFM images of freshly fractured sphalerite and treated sphalerite are shown in Contact angles  Tip hydrophobicity was tested by water contact angle measurement. The cantilever substrate was instantly wetted by a water droplet indicating a hydrophilic nature of Si  The  The correlation of the surface potential In 0.46 Force-distance profiles measured between Si The force-separation profiles for an OTS-modified Si As shown in Four sets of mineral mixtures: hydrophilic sphalerite-hydrophilic silica, hydrophilic sphalerite-hydrophobic silica, hydrophobic sphalerite-hydrophilic silica, and hydrophobic sphalerite-hydrophobic silica were tested. Hydrophilic silica has a contact angle of < In this work, the interactions of Si We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at