Chlorella vulgaris and rice husk were selected from microorganisms and agricultural waste, respectively, to create new gold-eluteable adsorbents for adsorption of gold–thiourea complex, and compared with activated carbon. The maximum gold adsorption of heated-immobilised C. vulgaris, heated rice husk, and activated carbon was 10.34, 28.22 and 35.88 mg Au/g adsorbent, respectively. FTIR spectrum, thermodynamic study and elution tests indicated that heated-immobilised C. vulgaris and heated rice husk adsorbed gold by chemical adsorption: co-ordinate covalent bond. The active functional groups of heated-immobilised C. vulgaris were ketone, carboxylate and ester, while the groups of heated rice husk were ketone, carboxylate and siloxane. Activated carbon mainly adsorbed gold by physical adsorption. Gold adsorbed onto heated-immobilised C. vulgaris, heated rice husk, and activated carbon was able to be eluted by 0.5 M Na2S2O3 to 100, 87 and 41%, respectively. Although heated-immobilised C. vulgaris had the highest eluteability, it adsorbed less gold. Therefore, heated rice husk could be used as an alternative adsorbent for gold–thiourea pre-concentration.Activated carbon is generally used in pre-concentration processes but there are problems in simultaneous adsorption of free thiourea and difficulties in gold elution (  An infrared spectrum of heated-immobilised   Gold adsorption isotherms of heated-immobilised Pre-concentration was carried out in a column disposable syringe (0.5 cm in diameter and 10 cm height, Nissho Nipro), packed with 0.0500 g of adsorbent. The column was loaded with 10 ml of gold with a concentration of 10.0 mg/l, washed with 5 ml of de-ionised water to remove nonadsorbed molecules and then eluted with 5 ml of 0.5 M Na The mechanism of gold–thiourea adsorption by heated-immobilised Thermodynamic study supported the mechanism of gold–thiourea adsorption. The maximum gold adsorption ( This confirmed that the mechanism of gold–thiourea adsorption by heated-immobilised No buffer is added in the real gold process. Therefore, the maximum gold adsorption ( Sodium thiosulphate (Na Gold adsorbed onto heated-immobilised The mechanism of gold–thiourea adsorption by heated-immobilised The authors wish to thank National Research Council of Thailand for financial assistance.