Based on the theoretical analyses, the adhesion of fine gold particles to oil–carbon agglomerates was quantitatively investigated in terms of adhesion kinetics, rate constant, collision rate, attachment probability and surface energy change. The suitability of the special ‘first-order’ adhesion kinetics, which incorporates the common operating parameters, was confirmed. The relationship between the attachment probability and the surface energy change can be well described by a proposed ‘nucleation model’. Experiments about the influence of various factors, such as the use of different collectors, agglomerate size and agitation intensity, on collision rate, attachment probability and adhesion rate constant were conducted.A process called coal–gold–agglomeration (CGA) has been investigated for recovering gold since early 1980s In flotation, some efforts have been made to modelling the process in order to obtain a deep understanding of how a mineral particle to attach a bubble. In relation to their functions, both bubble and agglomerate are carriers to collide with and attach mineral particles, so it seems that there must be some things in common to model them, for example, some well-established concepts in flotation models, such as collision rate, collision probability, attachment probability, etc. However, on the other hand, agglomerates in the CGA are unlike gas bubbles used in flotation in terms of density, strength, interfacial interactions and moving trajectory in a fluid, and so on. Hence, this paper will uniquely and quantitatively present the gold adhesion kinetics, the influences of agglomerate size, agitation intensity and the use of collectors on gold adhesion, and the relationship between attachment probability and surface energy change as well. To construct a relatively simple model, the following assumptions will be reasonably adopted in this paper: The agglomerates and gold particles are spheres in structure. After adsorption of gold particles and agitation, the density, shape and size of the agglomerates do not significantly change. Owing to the huge size difference between fine gold particles and agglomerates, the agglomerate surface can be considered as a plane in contrast to the tiny contact area of the gold particle with the agglomerate. There is an oil film on agglomerate surface, and the properties of this oil film are assumed similar to the corresponding bulk oil. So, like chemical reactions, the adhesion process of a fine gold particle and a comparatively large agglomerate, in the presence of collector KAX, can be symbolized as an ‘adhesion reaction’ as shown in It is very difficult to obtain a general model of collision rate for turbulent fluids because of their complexity and variety. Based on specific hypotheses and restricted conditions, different forms of collision calculation have been proposed For particle For our turbulent mixing system,  Therefore, if the collision probability is taken into account, the ‘actual collision’ is expressed as follows by combining Suppose that subscripts Rearranging the above equation, the collision number of a single gold particle with agglomerates, After having established the collision model, it is possible to transform it into an adhesion model because it is collision that gives rise to gold adhesion. After each collision with agglomerate, a gold particle is likely either to attach to the agglomerate, or to continue to freely travel in the suspension. If this attachment probability is represented by a factor It is interesting to note that the recovery of gold particles ( After it attaches agglomerate, one gold particle rests or sticks at a position on the agglomerate surface and reaches an equilibrium state, as shown in For a stationary state, Young's equation may be used to express this situation exactly at point Moreover, it appears that from What is more, if the total energy change Δ  Synthetic gold ore made by mixing gold powder (99.99% Au, nominally −50 μm, its average size 2 Potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX), purchased, may contain up to 1% ethanol. Potassium amyl xanthate (KAX), commercial yellow pellet form, bulk density 0.62 g/cm Sodium decanethioxanthate (DX), synthesized in the laboratory, shiny yellow powder, water-soluble and used as an aqueous solution of concentration 0.5%. Oil–graphite agglomerates pre-formed by agglomerating oil tetradecane plus a surfactant with graphite powder slurried in water The adhesion tests were carried out in a 600-ml beaker equipped with two baffles 180° apart. The contents of the beaker were stirred at 1100 rpm except specifically stated by a four-bladed stainless-steel impeller. The general adhesion tests involved the following procedures: (i) wetting the mixture of gold powder (20 mg) and sands (40 g) with 400 ml deionised water for 5 min; (ii) if appropriate, adding collector and agitating for 5 min; (iii) adding agglomerates and stirring for a given time; (iv) screening the mixture on a 0.5-mm sieve in water to separate the gold-loaded agglomerates from the pulp; (v) filtering the agglomerates, drying them overnight at 80 °C in a drying oven and weighing them. The adhesion recovery of gold into the agglomerates was assessed by analysing the amount of gold in these ‘dry agglomerates’. In terms of the above experimental description, in one batch of adhesion test, the gold particle concentration is The gold content in the dry agglomerates was analysed in following manner: (i) roasting the dry agglomerates to ash at 850 °C overnight in a muffle furnace; (ii) treating the ash with aqua regia to dissolve gold; (iii) analysing the diluted gold solution by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The measurements of interfacial tension and contact angle were carried out using the Krüss Hamburg tensiometer and goniometer, respectively. The gold sheets used for contact angle measurement were prepared by coating gold film on glass plates in an argon gas atmosphere with vacuum 0.1 mbar, and the resultant gold film is about 40 nm thick on the glass slides. A set of experiments was conducted using different xanthate collectors mainly with different chain lengths, and the results are shown in It can be perceived from the previous theoretical model analyses that the size of the agglomerates has an effect on the adhesion process presumably in relation to both collision rate and attachment probability. The influence of varied sized agglomerates on the rate constant Furthermore, in terms of collision rate and attachment probability the influence of varied agglomerate size can be analysed as in The above-mentioned fact that larger agglomerate has a larger attachment probability gives us a hint that impact energy might be important to adhesion. By directly adjusting impact energy through changing agitation intensity, one set of results was obtained as shown in The adhesion process symbolized as in To simplify the above problem, here, only the surface energy is taken into consideration. As to the surface energy change during surface contacting, Δ So, one set of tests and measurements were designed by conducting the adhesion experiment and measuring interfacial tension and three-phase contact angle (oil/gold/water) over the KAX concentration range of 0–50 mg/l. Combining the attachment probability It seems that an empirical relationship between the attachment probability On the other hand, Hence, these similarities convince us that the adhesion process could be somewhat compared to a ‘nucleation process’, i.e., oil film on the agglomerate surface nucleates on the surface of gold particles. So, its model mainly exhibited in In general, the kinetics models are not related to the operating parameters of processes, and the attachment probability is studied as a ‘concept’ or just qualitatively or only in a static or controlled fluid. In the present paper, however, based on the theoretical analyses and tests, a dynamic system has been quantitatively investigated, and the following conclusions can be drawn. The adhesion kinetics of gold particles to agglomerates can be described by a ‘first-order’ model, which involves nearly all common operating parameters (the dosage and size of agglomerates, agitation intensity, contacting time) and makes it possible to predict the influence of all these factors on this adhesion process. Agitation intensity affects not only collision rate and also attachment probability, and there exists a maximum attachment probability over a range of agitation intensity. The agglomerate size is another factor affecting the attachment probability. Chemical collectors greatly enhance attachment by modifying gold surface and the resultant free energy change of the whole adhesion process. The longer is the collector carbon chain, the more efficient is the attachment of gold to agglomerates. The addition of KAX can triple the attachment probability of gold particles, compared with no chemical collector, while the longer chain-length collector DX can further double the attachment probability. The surface energy change of an adhesion process can be calculated by a formula, Δ