This study presents a novel chemical process for the extraction of high purity silica from diatomite. The process involves leaching of raw diatomite with acid prior to alkali extraction, solubilization of treated diatomite with alkali solution to form sodium silicate solution, and precipitation of silica gel by adding sulfuric acid. Besides, the process includes washing of silica gel with hot solution of 6 M hydrochloric acid for three hours. The morphology and the chemical composition of the raw diatomite, the derivative products, and the final purified silica were determined by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray fluorescence, X-ray diffraction, and inductively coupled-plasma optical emission spectroscopy. The results indicate that raw diatomite contains over 80 wt% of amorphous micro-porous silica (SiO2) with particle size, 10–35 μm. We were able to enrich the content of silica in diatomite to 90.2 wt% by step-wise acid leaching. Moreover, in this study, boron (B) was removed from silica slurry using mannitol as a complexing compound. The elimination ratio of boron based on this method was about 70%. Incorporation of mannitol in the final stage of the acid washing of silica gel led to a silica product with lower B content. The final purified silica is 99.99 wt% (four nines) pure.Making solar-grade silicon with 99.9999 wt% (six nines) and achieving precise impurities control is a crucial step in silicon based solar cell industry. Initially, the natural silicon materials (silicon dioxides or silicates) are reduced with carbon in electric arc furnace ( Currently, silica is produced by autoclaving the quartz sand (sand stone) with strong alkali solution to form silicate solution, and subsequently forming silica gel by adding acid to lower the pH to <10.( Among the solutions, diatomaceous-earth has been suggested as one of the most promising, stable, and steady sources to extract pure silica for the production of SOG-Si ( Natural diatomite source material was collected from mine of Algeria. The standard solutions for inductively coupled plasma optical spectroscopy were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%), Nitric acid (HNO Shown in 10 g of leached diatomite sample (i.e., SiO To remove residual SiO2, obtained Na2SiO3 solution was centrifuged several times, and then collected in a Teflon beaker. After that Na To obtain higher purity, the silica-slurry (Si (OH) For additional B elimination, we added 1 g of mannitol polyhadroxyl alcohol to the HCl acid solution, and subsequently 100 ml of 0.25 M NaOH solution was added to the gel. The slurry was then centrifuged for 15 min at 2500 rpm. The clear supernatant was discarded, and the washing step was repeated with deionized water. The precipitated silica was subjected to the second-time purification. The slurry resulting from this stage was transferred into a beaker and dried at 80 °C for 12 h. Major advancements in the present method were incorporation of: (1) an initial acid leaching, (2) mannitol compound to eliminate B from silica gel, and (3) final washing method of the silica slurry. The morphology of the raw diatomite and purified diatomite were observed under JEOL JSM5000 scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The Crystalline phases was identified by PANalytical X'Pert PRO system at θ-2θ mode using CuK To understand the structural properties of the raw diatomite, we have taken SEM images as Shown in   To get a quantitative idea of the constituent elements of the raw diatomite more accurately, we have performed ICP-OES measurement. ICP-OES measurement indicates that the content of the SiO In this work, the raw diatomite powder was treated with hot-acid solution of 2.2 M HNO The effect of acid treatment on the chemical composition of diatomite is presented in The ICP-OES analysis of the as-precipitated silica is shown in Although Na, Al, and Fe-oxides were effectively dissolved in HCl acid used for washing silica gel, the B elimination ratio was only about 35% as mentioned in The silica precipitate is 99.9 wt% (three nines) pure. This refined silica product is suitable for various applications, particularly because of its low Fe-content (139 ppm). However, the impurity level is still higher than the required level for SOG-Si. Thus, to attain more higher purity level of silica, we performed repetition of all the procedure (Step (1) to step (4)) that we define as second-time purification. The silica gel, before the drying step, was dissolved in 2.5 M NaOH and kept at 80 °C for one-hour. The pure gel is rapidly soluble due to the relative absence of the polyvalent cations in its unit structure. The drying process in this study was kept as much simple as possible. The silica slurry was dried on hot-plate at 80 °C. The final silica precipitate was analyzed with ICP-OES, and results are shown in the  In this study, we have investigated a wet chemical method for the purification of the raw diatomite. High purity silica of four nines with minimal mineral contaminants was obtained through our proposed low-energy method. The initial acid leaching of the diatomite resulted in a silica precipitate with lower contents of Ca, Mg and Fe materials. The final washing of silica slurry led to a silica product with lower Na and Fe contents. Incorporation of mannitol in the final acid washing stage resulted in a pure silica with B content <6.5 ppm. The final silica product is 99.99 wt% (four nines) pure. We believe this silica powder is fairly adequate for the production of the SOG The authors thank the reviewers for their kind suggestions that improved the presentation of data in this manuscript. They also thank Professor Hideto Yanagihara and Dr. Hiroki Koizumi from the Graduate School of Pure and Applied Sciences of Tsukuba University for XRF measurements.