Nowadays conventional stem-only harvest where logging residues are left on the site is often displaced by whole-tree harvest, in which logging residues are harvested for use as bioenergy. Logging residues consist of tree branches and tops of stems with needles. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of logging residue harvest on soil enzyme activities involved in C, N and P cycling, namely β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase, protease and acid phosphatase in relation to other soil characteristics (i.e. soil respiration, net N mineralization, microbial biomass C and N). Soil samples were taken from the humus layer of five study sites, differing in fertility, dominating tree species and time elapsed after treatment. The study sites were Norway spruce (Picea abies, (L.) Karst) and Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris L.) stands in different parts of Finland. Four of the study sites were single-tree experiments, where thinning was performed 4–5 years before this study and 3–4 different doses of logging residues (from 0 up to 37.5 Mg ha−1) were distributed on a circle around a single tree in 3 replicates. The last field experiment had been thinned twice, 23 and 13 years ago; the treatments in 3 replicates were whole-tree harvest and stem-only harvest. In the whole-tree harvest vs. stem-only harvest experiment, activities of β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase, acid phosphatase were similar in both treatments. In general, in the single-tree experiment with pine, enzymes raised the activity in response to increasing amount of logging residue. The pattern was less clear for the spruce single-tree experiment, but acid phosphatase and protease activities increased with the increase in amount of logging residue. In general, other soil characteristics were less affected than enzyme activities by logging residue removal; however, in some sites logging residues seemed to increase net C and N mineralization with increasing logging residue amount. Our results suggest that retaining logging residues on the site can increase soil enzyme activities and C and N mineralization.According to Kyoto Agreement, nations must maintain emission of CO In traditional forest management only tree stems are removed (stem-only harvest, SOH). In whole-tree-harvest (WTH), most of the aboveground tree parts are removed, namely stems, branches and stem tops with needles. Logging residues are harvested in both clear-cutting and thinning stands ( Logging residues with needles provide rich input of nutrients to the forest ecosystem, but also provide compounds that affect soil properties and decomposition processes, including enzyme activities. Whole-tree harvest in Norway spruce and Scots pine stands decreased the rates of net N and C mineralization ( Changes in site productivity and soil decomposition processes after logging residue harvest may originate from changes in the enzyme machinery in the soil, as enzymes are the keys to making nutrients available to plants. Enzyme activities in different forest soils were widely studied before (reviewed by The experiments were long-term field experiments established by The Finnish Forest Research Institute. They differed in characteristics and in experimental design ( One composite sample, consisting of 20 subsamples, was collected systematically with a steel cylinder (d = 58 mm) from the humus layer (Ofh) of the circle surrounding each tree in the single-tree experiments and from each study plot in other experiment (Ruokolahti). Sampling from Ruokolahti and Kannonkoski was done in September and October 2009, and from the other experiments in September 2011. The fresh soil samples were sieved (4 mm mesh) after the plant material and roots had been removed. Soil samples were kept in plastic bags at +4 °C in cold room. The enzyme analyses were performed within a few days after sample collection. Dry weight (+105 °C, 16 h) was determined, and organic matter content was measured as loss on ignition (+550 °C, 4 h). Soil pH was measured in a soil-water suspension consisting of 15 ml soil in 25 ml ultrapure water. Activities of β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase, protease and acid phosphatase were measured as described previously ( Briefly, for measurements of protease activity, 0.2 g of soil was mixed with buffer and substrate, hemoglobin (modified from To study acid phosphatase activity, 0.2 g of soil was mixed with acetate buffer and with substrate, p-nitrophenyl phosphate (modified from To study β-glucosidase activity, 0.2 g of soil was mixed with acetate buffer and with substrate, p-nitrophenyl β- To study β-glucoaminidase activity, 0.2 g of soil was mixed with acetate buffer and with substrate, p-nitrophenyl N-acetyl-β- Soil characteristics, described below, were now determined for three experiments (Kiikala, 409; Salla, 406; and Jämsä 416). With regard to Kannonkoski (746) and Ruokolahti (735) this information was presented earlier for samples taken 1 year before ( Total C and N in the soil were measured as described by For the single-tree experiments having 3–4 levels of logging residues Pearson's correlation coefficient was determined to reveal any linear relationships between the amount of logging residues and enzyme activity or other soil characteristic. In cases where there was no linear correlation differences in variables between treatments were tested using ANOVA followed by Tukey test. For the Ruokolahti experiment having WTH and SOH treatments, differences between treatments were tested using one-way ANOVA. Pearson's correlation coefficient was determined to reveal linear relationships between enzyme activities and soil characteristics. P < 0.05 was considered as significant. For all statistical analyses we used SPSS. In the Ruokolahti spruce experiment, activities of β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase, acid phosphatase were similar in both SOH and WTH. However, proteolytic activity had a higher value in the SOH treatment ( In the single-tree spruce experiment in Jämsä, acid phosphatase and protease activities increased significantly with increasing amount of logging residue, whereas β-glucosaminidase and β-glucosidase were not dependent on amount of logging residue ( In all pine single-tree experiments sites, in general, enzyme activities tended to increase with increasing amount of logging residue ( For Kannonkoski experiment, linear correlation between the amount of logging residues and organic matter content, C mineralization and glucose-induced respiration has been already described ( For the new single-tree experiments, the relationship between the amount of logging residues and soil characteristics appeared not to be linear (no significant linear correlations; results not shown). ANOVA revealed some significant differences between the treatments ( Results from Salla, Kiikala and Jämsä were used to find relationship between enzyme activities and other soil characteristics as sampling from these sites was done in the same time for both enzyme activities and other soil characteristics. Enzyme activities, except proteases, showed some correlations with soil characteristics. Carbon and N mineralization and microbial biomass N were positively correlated with acid phosphatase and glucosaminidase activities ( Since logging residue is commonly used as a bioenergy source, we need to estimate all the ecological costs of whole-tree harvest. Earlier papers ( In the Ruokolahti experiment, with thinnings done 13 and 23 years before β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase, acid phosphatase activities did not differ between stem-only harvest and whole-tree harvest; however, proteases showed higher activity in SOH. Studies done earlier on the same site and some other sites with a similar history showed that harvesting of logging residue decreased the rates of net N mineralization and the amount of C and N in the microbial biomass; C mineralization also tended to decrease ( The other experiments were more short-term studies; 4–5 years had elapsed since their establishment. Therefore most of the changes in the humus layer may have been caused by decomposing needles and perhaps by leachates or volatiles from the thicker wood material ( In other experiments the increase in enzyme activities was not as clear, but similar trends were observed, i.e. the overall results showed strong relationship between the amount of logging residue left on a site and activity of β-glucosidase, protease and acid phosphatase on the pine sites (Salla, Kiikala), and for acid phosphatase and protease on spruce site (Jämsä). For β-glucosaminidase activity there was no clear relationship, but still the positive trend was observed. One reason could be that logging residue does not directly provide more substrate for that enzyme, chitin. Moreover, as stated by We compared changes in enzyme activities to other soil characteristics of humus layer, as it is proposed that enzyme activities correlate well with other soil properties, like soil respiration ( We observed site specific differences in response to logging residue removal. These differences in the response to the logging residue harvest of both enzymatic activity and other soil characteristics may origin from various factors: site fertility, age of the tree stand, climate conditions, time elapsed after logging residue harvest, distribution of the logging residue on the site, quantity and chemical composition of compounds in the logging residue. Inconsistent effect of different stress/disturbance (freeze-thaw events, wet–dry cycles, Cu addition, and changing pH) on biochemical properties of soils was observed earlier by In conclusion, logging residue removal affects soil processes, including the enzyme machinery which is standing behind all the biochemical processes in the soil. In general, enzymes involved in N, C and P transformations, namely protease, β-glucosaminidase, β-glucosidase and acid phosphatase, increased their activities in relation to the amount of logging residue left on a site. Moreover, some of enzyme activities correlated well with net N and C mineralization and substrate-induced respiration. An increase in enzymatic activity after leaving logging residues on a site indicates that these materials are an important factor in supporting the sustainable productivity of the forest ecosystem. The ecological effects of logging residue harvest needs more study. Increased understanding of the relationship between enzymatic activity and harvesting practices will allow us to determine the effects of logging residue harvest on nutrient availability for subsequent tree growth as enzymes are the key to making nutrients available to trees. We are grateful to Dr Joann von Weissenberg for checking the English language of this paper. In addition, we thank Anneli Rautiainen for helping with laboratory work. This study was funded by