A non-traditional method for ferrotitanium production using aluminothermic reduction of ilmenite was investigated. It included preliminary melting of ilmenite in mixture with lime and anthracite for production of a liquid titanium slag. The liquid phase generated was reacted with Al in a separate reactor. Preliminary thermo-analytical investigations (DTA/TG) of the reduction were performed. These investigations were instrumental for finding out the start temperature of the reactions for different compositions of the charges. These experiments for ferrotitanium production were carried out using the novel application of electroslag crucible remelting (ESCR) furnaces of the portable and the stationary types. The ferrotitanium produced, which had a composition (wt.%) 25–28 Ti, 4 Si, 46–50 Fe, 14 Al and was also of high purity with respect to other detrimental elements, has an industrial application in specialty steels production. The safety and the cost effectiveness of the process were demonstrated as compared to the traditional technologies.Ukraine has a reasonable amount of titanium oxide ores in various deposits. Their composition is very close to the titanate FeTi Previously ferrotitanium for the Ukrainian metallurgical industry has been primarily supplied by Russian production. The Ukraine also has industries that generate a great deal of the titanium scrap while at the same time it has the availability of its own titanium ore deposits. The domestic production of the ferrotitanium from titanium scrap started not long ago primarily with the application of the traditional approach using induction melts of the low-carbon steel scrap with the titanium scrap or titanium sponge. The typical technology of handling ore in the ferrotitanium production was reported by The charge contains a blend of the ilmenite concentrate, iron ore, aluminium powder, ferrosilicon and lime. It is put into the crucible in portions. The process begins with the application of a starting mixture that contains iron ore, aluminium powder, ferrosilicon, sodium chloride. The method is simple enough. Productivity may reach 17 Another ATR approach consists in preliminary melting of the aluminium part of the charge. This option eliminates the need for the application of the igniter. This process using an electric arc furnace with a basic lining was investigated by Recently Such approach with a liquid start of the ATR has several advantages. It is safer since no ignition mixture is needed for starting the ATR. Moreover the final alloy does not have additional contamination or pickup from the igniter material. The conditions created by liquid start provide kinetic facilitation of the proceeding reactions along with the more complete separation of phases. The metallic melt is protected from interaction with the air by the liquid slag that has been formed. That is why the trials showed the lower content of nitrogen and oxygen in the final product. The available option for providing the ATR melt by the definite portion of heat provides the conditions for tight control of the temperature. Such options can not be obtained with a solid start of the ATR. So it was demonstrated that the ATR process could be managed more tightly after this comprehensive study. This resulted in seeing the need for carrying out the detailed fundamental investigations of the ATR when of state of the art methods are applied. As reported by The investigations showed the changes that occurred in the ATR mixture. The specifics of the ATR reactions that happen with ilmenite were determined. The DTA curve of pure ilmenite without Al additions of the heating process up to 1300 The typical DTA curves of ATR of ilmenite with addition of 25 Although the form of the DTA curves is different, the temperature of the ATR start determined by the detectable peaks is the same – 800 It was found out that the ATR reaction started with some components of the charge in the solid state. This fact we proved from the theoretical modelling. This is very important since this confirms applicability of the DTA/TG equipment although it provides relatively low temperatures up to 1500 The melting point of Al was observed at 660 Some splashing effect was observed after the finishing of the beginning stage of ATR. The dramatic decrease of the mixture weight was fixed at the same time. It was connected with extraction of the combined OH groups and with the process of reduction of the oxides. Melting of the ilmenite base charge in the first stage of the non-traditional ATR process was a new application for the ESCR furnace. As described by There are different types of the ESCR furnaces. During the preliminary stage of the trials we used the smallest industrial version of such furnace available in Ukraine which is shown in For the second stage of the process it is necessary that the melting area is protected from fume and sparks since ATR is accompanied by generation of these substances caused by the violent character of the reaction. An additional safety device was constructed. It includes a local air funnel over the melting crucible and an enclosure under the area for ATR. Also the ATR reactor has higher mouth ( The beneficiated titanium ore of Verhniedneprovskyi deposit was used as raw material for experiments for production of ferrotitanium. The composition of the two batches used is shown in The charge of the first melt of 12.43 The next experiments were performed in the furnace equipped with a larger basic crucible. The initial charge contained 42 The additional experiments were done in a stationary industrial furnace ( The results of the analyses of some melts are shown in The content of the dissolved nitrogen does not exceed (wt.%) 0.03, phosphorus – 0.01, sulphur – 0.05. The non-metallic inclusions in a sample from the melt #2 were analyzed qualitatively. They were also compared to ordinary ferrotitanium produced solely from titanium scrap. The non-metallic inclusions are visible in the structures of the metal samples shown in The main parameters of ferrotitanium production in the experimental melts are shown in The schematic of the material flow and the material balance of ferrotitanium production as a result of the above industrial experiments is shown in The new ATR of ilmenite was investigated in detail. It included preliminary melting of the initial blend of ilmenite, lime and anthracite with a partial reduction of the contained iron oxide. For the first stage ESCR furnaces of different sizes were used for producing of the initial melt. This melt was poured into the ATR reactor where aluminium had been placed. The process is safer in comparison with the traditional technology since ignition mixture is not needed for starting. It has been proved that the thermo-analytical investigations (DTA/TG) were instrumental for the preliminary studies of the ATR processes. Namely the temperature of the start for the ATR process was found out for different compositions of the initial charge. This value is very important in corresponding technological developments. The repeatability of the results while changing the sizes (0.5 and 1.2 English was edited by John J. DuPlessis – consultant, (Elizabethtown, KY). The authors are grateful for the financial support given by the STCU under regular project #3385 to the development of this research.