In this paper, a novel air–water bubbly flow heat transfer experiment is performed to investigate the characteristics of pressure drop of airflow and heat transfer between water and tubes for its potential application in evaporative cooling. The attempts to reduce the pressure drop while maintaining higher heat transfer coefficient have been achieved by decreasing the bubble layer thickness through the water pump circulation. Pressure drops of air passing through the sieve plate and the bubbling layer are measured for different height of bubble layer, hole–plate area ratio of the sieve plate and the superficial air velocity. Experimental data show that the increase of bubble layer height and air velocity both increase the pressure drop while the effect of the hole–plate area ratio of the sieve plate on the heat transfer coefficient is relatively sophisticated. A pressure drop correlation including the effects of all the tested parameters is proposed, which has a mean absolute deviation of 14.5% to that of the experimental data. Heat transfer coefficients of the water and the outside tube wall are measured and the effects of superficial air velocity, heat flux and bubble layer height are also examined. Through a dimensional analysis, a heat transfer correlation with a mean absolute deviation of 9.7% is obtained based on experimental data.total area of the plate holes, m average tube wall temperature, °C average water temperature, °C outer diameter of heating tube, m heat transfer coefficient, kW/m height of the bubbling layer, mm Nusselt number, heat flux, kW/m Reynolds number, sieve plate area, m frontal air velocity of the sieve plate, m superficial air velocity, m airflow rate, m flow rate, kg pressure drop, Pa hole–plate area ratio heat conductivity, W kinematic viscosity, m dry air experimental data dry plate prediction by correlation Evaporative coolers or condensers have been extensively used in practical industries, such as refrigeration and chemical engineering. The conventional design for evaporative cooler or condenser employs water spraying onto the heat transfer tube bundle with air blowing over it. In most cases the convection thermal resistance of the water film outside the tubes is the dominant thermal resistance in the heat transfer process. To reduce the convection heat resistance, the present authors have proposed a uniquely designed air–water bubbly flow heat exchange mechanism with heat transfer tube bundle submerged into the bubble or foam layer. Bubbly flows can be found in a number of technical and industrial processes, such as effluent treatment, flotation processes, and bubble column reactors The use of air–water bubbly flow as gas–liquid contacting evaporative cooling process was first investigated by Mizushina and Miyashita Tong et al. Li et al. Although the purposes of the above works were different, they all dealt with the heat transfer surfaces submerged into a water pool. In order to keep relatively high gas fraction of the bubbly flow, high blowing fan energy should be supplied. So far, no research on the heat transfer of low liquid or bubbly layer is found in the open literatures. In this study a novel air–water bubbly flow heat transfer experiment is performed to investigate the characteristics of pressure drop of airflow and heat transfer between water and tubes for its potential application in evaporative cooling. The attempts to reduce the pressure drop while maintaining higher heat transfer coefficient has been achieved by decreasing the bubble layer thickness through the water pump circulation and the height of weir. Correlations of pressure drop and heat transfer are obtained based on the experimental data. The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in The thickness of the sieve plates is 2 In the experiment, the outer surface temperatures of heating coil, the inlet and outlet temperatures of water, the air temperature at the entrance and exit, the pressure drop across the sieve plate and the air volume flow rate are all recorded by a data acquisition system (i.e., an HP3457A/HP3488A precise data acquisition system). The tests are conducted by varying the hole–plate area ratios of the sieve plate, the heights of the weir, the airflow rates (or the superficial air velocities) and the heat flux inputs. The superficial air velocity, The heat transfer coefficient can be obtained using the following equation: The instrumental errors involved in this experiment are shown in For the variable  When spraying water onto the sieve plates, the pressure drop, which is the sum of that through the sieve plate and the bubbly layer, have similar behavior as dry plate case ( When the height of the foam layer is increased to 100  It is worth noting that, in Mizushina and Miyashita A correlation of pressure drop for air passing through the sieve plate and bubbling layer has been developed based on regression analysis of the experimental data, as following: The mean absolute deviation of the above-mentioned correlation is defined in Eq. Heat transfer characteristics of the horizontally submerged heating tubes in the bubbly layer are tested for all the sieve plates at several different superficial air velocities, heat fluxes and bubbly layer heights. From the analysis to the data of all the tested sieve plates, the heat transfer performances of the four sieve plates are quite similar. Only the experimental results of the No. 3 plate, which has an intermediate hole–plate area ratio, will be shown in this paper as the representative of heat transfer results.   The effect of the height of bubbling layer on the heat transfer coefficient is also investigated. To obtain a heat transfer correlation of the present experiment, a dimensional analysis is carried out on the specific process of the bubbly flow and heat transfer. Four governing dimensionless groups are obtained to depict the heat transfer process. The first one is the Nusselt number, The experimental correlation above has a mean absolute deviation of 9.44% to that of the experimental data. The comparison of the calculation values of the correlation and the test data is shown in  The pressure drop from sieve for dry plate increases as the air velocity increases and not effected by the hole–plate area ratio of sieve plate. At wet conditions, for lower weir height of the test range, the pressure drop is almost not affected by the hole–plate area ratio. When weir height increases higher, however, hole–plate area ratio affects the pressure drop under lower superficial air velocity. Higher superficial air velocity causes larger pressure drop across the sieve plate and bubbling layer. The increase of pressure drop is small as the height of bubbling layer increases. At the condition of considerably lower height of bubbling layer (i.e., Correlations for pressure drop and heat transfer are developed based on the experimental data. They both have a good agreement with the test data. The authors, Qinghua Chen, Wenzhi Cui, and Longjian Li, acknowledge the support of this work by the National Nature Science Foundation of China Grant No: 50276073. Dr. Tien-Chien Jen, Mr. Qinghua Chen, and Mr. Quan Liao would also like to acknowledge the partial financial support from National Science Foundation through GOALI DMII-9908324.