Carbothermal treatment tests of electric arc furnace dusts (EAFD) using the Waelz kiln process were carried out in pilot-scale for the production of zinc oxide. The association of halides in the EAFD, and the recycled products, such as zinc oxide fumes and high-grade iron contents fractions were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis. XRD reveals the presence of chlorine and fluorine in the dusts in the form of KCl, NaCl and CaF2. An ultra-pure fraction of zinc was obtained after the Double Leaching Waelz Oxide (DLWO) process was performed on the zinc oxide fumes. The halide contents were reduced to approximately 100 ppm Cl and 700 ppm F. The rest of these elements are in the form of CaF2. About 65% F is volatilised as lead and zinc fluorides, 15% is expected in the magnetic fractions and 20% in non-magnetic fractions as CaF2 and MnF2, respectively.The main areas of environmental concern associated with the Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) process are emissions of CO EAF process generates about 15 kg of dusts for one metric tonne of steel produced. These dusts may have zinc and lead contents that are higher than 30%. Additionally, these dusts possess high concentrations of chlorine and fluorine that may create a major technical problem in the metallurgical processes. These halogens form a dross in the gas stream resulting in higher zinc losses and operation problems during recovery of zinc. The halogen contents may also degrade the products value ( It is expected that the volume of the dusts generated by EAF processes will continue to increase on the short and medium terms. World production of EAF dusts is estimated to be about 3.7 million tonnes per year, about 0.7 million tonnes of which contain zinc. Europe generates between 500,000 and 900,000 tonnes of dusts per year. The USA produces 700,000–800,000 tonnes per year. The annual growth rate is 4–6% ( Several studies claim that no correlation has been established between chemical composition of EAF dusts and the furnace size, the collection system or other factors. On the other hand, it is important to state that the concentrations of zinc and lead in dusts depend on the characteristics of scrap charged in the furnaces. During heating and melting of scrap in the EAF, about 98% of the zinc is volatilised and carried out in the fumes (75% in primary fumes, and 23% in secondary fumes), about 0.1–2% of the zinc resides in the slag and steel, respectively ( Several processes have been developed to recycle or to stabilize EAF dusts, and it is necessary to consider environmental impact and the sensitivity of zinc prices for the selection of the best methods for treating any dusts generated by the EAF process ( There are two common practices for handling EAFD: inertisation (stabilisation) and metal recovery (zinc or lead recovery). More than 10 processes in various stages of commercial development are used worldwide to manage EAFD ( In order to recover zinc from EAF dusts by conventional electrolytic methods using hydrometallurgical methods, the halogens (such as chlorine and fluorine) concentrations should be controlled to less than 100 ppm ( The association of halogens (chlorine and fluorine) was investigated in EAF dust and oxide fume produced from direct current (DC) arc furnace tests, both before and after leaching ( This study reported was performed on electric arc furnace dusts (EAFD) recycling, to improve the current technologies of the Waelz method of recovering zinc by volatilisation, and to recycle iron in the process. The main objective of this work is to minimise the presence of chlorides; fluorides contained in the volatile and recycled factions. A full thermodynamic consideration of the interactions of fluoride compounds in the EAF dusts with the atmosphere of treatment is almost impossible, because of unlimited interactions of phases contained in these dusts. Consequently, in this paper, the most favourable reactions of fluoride compounds with metal oxides in the presence of silicon or carbon are examined. The investigation of the evolution of standard free energies may be useful in the determination of the probable main reactions.   The reactions from (9) to (16) show the reduction of zinc and lead fluorides in the presence of metal oxides. The order of the thermal stability of these reactions between 1200 and 1400 °C is the following: (13)<(9)<(15)<(11). On the other hand, the reduction of lead fluoride with carbon to lead metal in the presence of MnO The reduction of ZnO to metallic Zn without reduction of iron oxides is dependent on the CO/CO  The investigated sample of dusts was taken from the ASER S.A plant in Spain. Characterisation of EAFD was realised by using one representative sample taken from the ASER, S.A. plant, which is supplied by different European industries. The investigation was performed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) for qualitative analysis using a PHILIPS PW1404 spectrometer. Electron microprobe analyses (SEM) were performed using a Jeol unit, model JXA-840, which is provided with scanning electron microscopy and a microanalyzer, which permits the performance of energy dispersion and wavelength analyses. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted to identify the crystallised phases contained in EAFD. The particle size distribution of EAFD was analysed with two screen sizes (i.e., 500 and 15 μm). EAF dusts are very fine; more than 70% of particles are <15 μm. Calcinated petroleum coke was used as a reducing agent in this work. It contains about 99.4% fixed carbon, 0.3% S, 0.5% volatile substances, 0.1% ashe and 0.1% H Several samples of EAF dusts were tested in rotary furnace at ASER S.A in Spain using the Waelz kiln. EAF dusts are washed and mixed with petroleum and pelletized ( The non-volatile fraction is passed through a magnetic separator to recover iron in the magnetic fraction. The non-magnetic fraction mostly contains slag, which is used in building construction after passing “TCLP” standard test leaching. The high-grade iron is sent to steelmaking processes. The zinc oxide contains some impurities and is washed to recover the halogen contents. The process concept is shown in Laboratory-scale, zinc oxide reduction tests were carried out in CENIM (Spain), using a muffle furnace, which can reach 1400 °C. The experimental set-up is showing in In this paper, the investigation is focused on the characterisation of the products obtained from the carbothermal treatment and leaching processes. This process is the principal commercial method for the recovery of non-ferrous metal (particularly zinc) from EAF dusts. It is considered by the industry as the best process for the recovery and recycling of dusts containing more than 15% zinc. This process consists of a rotary furnace, which was designed for the roasting of zinc concentrates in 1900. Afterwards, it was modified to treat the EAFD. This process can treat between 45,000 and 90,000 t/year of EAF dusts. Two products are obtained during this process: Zinc and volatile non-ferrous metals (Waelz Oxides). Iron rich material. The XRF shows that the investigated EAFD contain two different categories of chemical elements: Majority elements: Zn, Fe, Pb, Si, Ca, Mn, C Minority elements: S, Cu, Mo, Cd, Ni, Cr, Ti, K, P, Al, Mg. The EAFD is a fine material with a complex mineralogy, as indicated by X-ray diffraction analysis. The morphological aspects of EAFD were observed via SEM analysis. This technique shows that these materials contain very fine particles, i.e., less than 10 μm. Some particles are spherical and EDS reveals the presence of zinc and oxygen, which is attributed to Zincite (ZnO), or contain only iron and oxygen such as iron oxides (hematite and magnetite). Other particles contain mainly iron, zinc and oxygen. This is attributed to Franklinite. These were also confirmed by XRD analysis. The products of the reduction tests of EAFD were analysed using SEM and XRD analysis. The X-ray diffraction spectra of the reduced pellets clearly shows the presence of MnF The main sources of fluorine in EAFD are lead and zinc fluorides, which form as a consequence of the reaction between lead and zinc silicates and calcium fluoride: Fluorine is found for the most part in combination with lead, forming PbF The zinc oxide extracted from gas before leaching contains 61% Zn, 7% Pb, 7.5% halides and 3.4% iron. This material is acceptable for further processing in conventional zinc smelters but has a high concentration of halides, which usually represents a problem for this operation. It (WO) can not be used directly in the electrolysis process to obtain zinc of high purity. For this reason, a new process, double leaching Waelz oxide (DLWO) which was developed and patented by ASER. SA (Spain) was used to eliminate the halogen and alkaline compounds contained in WO. The first step of this process is to leach “WO” with a solution of soda at pH=9, with an optimum retention time of 1.5 h between 60 and 80 °C. As shown in The chemical composition of DLWO is shown in The fluorine reaches the oxide in two ways: by mechanical driving and by volatilization. The pelletization of the steel-mill dust previously mixed with coal prevents the presence of fluorine due to the mechanical driving. The volatile fluoride, especially that which combines with Pb and Zn, formed in the zinc volatilization process in the electric furnace, can also be fixed by means of pelletization, provided the heating is carried out slowly and that a sufficiently long intermediate heating stage (950–000 °C) is included. In fact, when the operation is carried out in this way, after the reducing treatment, the fluorine was detected in the solid fraction in the form of MnF Although the by-product of the reducing treatment permits the concentration of the non-volatile products in the residual pellets, especially iron, the detection of MnF The investigation of characterisation of EAFD shows that the examined dusts contain Zincite (ZnO), Magnetite (Fe The reduction of pellets with 10% petroleum coke at 1200 °C for 2 h shows the best results obtained from several carbothermal tests. However, without adding coke to the composition of the pellets, the consumption of reducing agent in the reducing bed increases considerably. With the reduction tests, it is possible, to recover all the Zn content in the EAF dusts, producing a slag with 0.14–0.29% Zn. Slag is obtained in the form of a pellet (residual pellet) with high iron and slagging elements, which could be given a commercial outlet by first recovering the metallic Fe in the waste, and then selling the wastes as they come out of the reduction process. The halogens contained in EAF dusts and in the WO products are leachable. It is possible to eliminate them via water leaching. This process may reduce the halide concentrations to approximately 100 ppm Cl and 700 ppm F. The magnetic separation of the reduced pellets may concentrate all metallic iron and a large part of fluorine goes to the non-magnetic fraction, along with calcium and magnesium. ZnO obtained from the DLWO process is of good quality and free of impurities such as fluorine, sulphates and chlorine. There are two possibilities for eliminating fluorine in the thermal reducing process: the fixing of fluorine in the by-product as MnF From this investigation, it was confirmed that CaF The authors thank the Ministry of Culture and Science of Spain for sponsoring the exchange program between Spain and Sweden. This work was supported by funding from the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). The authors also thank ASER SA in Spain for providing samples of EAFD.