Intercondylar fracture of the femur is an inherently difficult injury to manage due to the thin cortices, frequently associated comminution and articular surface disruption. In the past two decades, numerous reports have shown that internal fixation is a better option to non-operative treatment An 82-year-old hypertensive lady suffering with multi-infarct dementia, cerebro-vascular related epilepsy, ischaemic heart disease, congestive cardiac failure, and macular degeneration tripped and fell over on the pavement onto her left knee. She sustained a comminuted intercondylar fracture of her left femur ( In view of the complexity of the fracture, her medical condition and her mobility requirements, a trial of non-operative treatment was considered and the fracture fragments were reduced and immobilized in an above knee cast. X-ray after 1 week showed a loss of alignment and a second attempt at manipulation under anaesthetic was undertaken. At 2 weeks, the fragments had redisplaced, so under general anaesthetic, a knee arthrodesis nail was inserted. The patient was able to sit out of bed the next day and started partial weight bearing with a Zimmer frame from the 5th post-operative day. She was seen in the clinic at 6 and 12 weeks and for a final review 14 months post-injury. By 12 weeks, the radiographs showed good callus and satisfactory healing. She had shortening of 5 A variety of treatment options exist for the distal femoral fractures in the elderly and the choice of treatment has to be individualized according to the personality of the fracture. The development of the condylar blade plate offered a reasonable operative treatment. The difficulties in the insertion of the blade plate have been overcome to some extent by the dynamic condylar screw and this remains the most widely used implant at present This patient was grossly osteoporotic and had a low mobility requirement. The foremost consideration was early mobility and it was with this aim that an antegrade knee arthrodesis nail was planned. Transarticular fixation was described for the treatment of non-union of supracondylar fractures of femur using a Kuntscher intramedullary nail