Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have high surface area, tunable pore size, and high loading capacity, making them promising for drug delivery. However, their synthesis requires organic solvents, high temperature and high pressure that are incompatible with biomacromolecules. Zeolitic imidazole frameworks (ZIF-8) which forms through coordination between zinc ions and 2-methylimidazole (MeIM) have emerged as an advanced functional material for drug delivery due to its unique features such as high loading and pH-sensitive degradation. In this study, we took advantage of a natural biomineralization process to create aluminum-containing nanoZIF-8 particles for antigen delivery. Without organic solvents or stabilizing agent, nanoparticles (ZANPs) were synthesized by a mild and facile method with aluminum, model antigen ovalbumin (OVA) and ZIF-8 integrated. A high antigen loading capacity (%) of 30.6% and a pH dependent antigen release were achieved. A Toll-like receptor 9 agonist cytosine-phosphate-guanine oligodeoxynucleotides (CpG) was adsorbed on the surface of ZANPs (hereafter CpG/ZANPs) to boost the immune response. After subcutaneous injection in vivo, CpG/ZANPs targeted lymph nodes (LNs), where their cargo was efficiently internalized by LN-resident antigen-presenting cells (APCs). ZANPs decomposition in lysosomes released antigen into the cytoplasm and enhanced cross-presentation. Moreover, CpG/ZANPs induced strong antigen-specific humoral and cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses that significantly inhibited the growth of EG7-OVA tumors while showing minimal cytotoxicity. We demonstrate that ZANPs may be a safe and effective vehicle for the development of cancer vaccines.Vaccination is one of the safest and most powerful medical tools to protect against or treat diseases like various infections, but the development of vaccines against cancers remains a great challenge [ A possible carrier to meet these challenges may lie in the recently developed structures known as metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). These hybrid porous materials are built from metal ions or clusters and organic ligands, and they feature tunable pore size, ultra-high surface area (up to 8000 m Despite their remarkable properties, packaging antigen into MOFs has been rarely studied [ The current preparation methods of ZIF-8 include solvo/hydrothermal synthesis, microwave-assisted heating and sonocrystallization synthesis [ Herein, we mainly explored the lymph node targeting ability of ZANPs and the role of aluminum adjuvant in enhancing immune response. We show here that CpG/ZANPs co-loaded with ovalbumin (OVA) and CpG can be efficiently internalized by APCs in LNs, and elicit antigen-specific humoral and cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity, and significantly inhibit EG7-OVA tumor growth in mice ( 2-methylimidazole (99%), Zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO To prepare ZIF-8, MeIM (10 mL, 5 mg mL The size distribution and zeta potential of the nanoparticles were analyzed using a Nano Zetasizer (Malvern, Worcestershire, UK). The morphology and surface properties of nanoparticles were observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, H-600, Hitachi, Japan) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-7500F, JEOL, Japan). BET surface area of ZIF-8, ZNPs and ZANPs were calculated from the N The cytotoxicity of the synthesized nanoparticles was evaluated by MTT assay. Briefly, DC2.4 cells were incubated with nanoparticles (concentrations range from 10 to 500 μg mL BMDCs, DC2.4 cells and RAW264.7 macrophages were seeded on 12-well plates at a density of 1 × 10 DC2.4 cells were pretreated with dextran sulfate (100 μg mL BMDCs seeded on a 12-well plate were stimulated with different vaccines formulations for 24 h. The cells incubated with PBS were used as a negative control. After three times washing with PBS, BMDCs were stained with FITC-anti-CD40 and PE-anti-CD86. The expression of CD40 and CD86 on BMDCs were analyzed by flow cytometry. The supernatants were also collected to detect the secretion of IFN-γ and IL-12p70 by using ELISA kits. The capacity of nanoparticles to stimulate cross-presentation of DCs To evaluate the ability of nanoparticles to target LNs, free OVA, ZNPs or ZANPs containing a concentration of 20 μg mL Female C57BL/6 mice were injected subcutaneously at the footpad with the following vaccine formulations: free OVA, ZNPs, ZANPs, OVA + CpG, CpG/ZNPs or CpG/ZANPs (containing 10 μg OVA and with or without 0.45 μg CpG) on day 0, 7, 21, and sacrificed on day 28. Blood was collected to detect OVA-specific antibody titers with the ELISA kit. Spleens were collected and mechanically grinding, passed through 70 μm nylon mesh followed by lysing the red blood cells in ammonium-chloride‑potassium (ACK) lysing buffer (8 mg mL Female C57BL/6 mice were footpad immunized on day 0 and day 7 with different vaccine formulations as described above. On day 14, the immunized mice were injected intravenously with 1 × 10 Percentage specific lysis (%) = 100 × [1-(CFSE To assess the therapeutic vaccination effect, female C57BL/6 mice were challenged with EG7-OVA cells (1 × 10 [ Statistical analysis of data was performed using a student ZIF-8 were prepared in aqueous solution at a molar ratio of Zn Nitrogen sorption measurements showed the (BET) surface area to be 1325 m X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is shown in The toxicity of nanoparticles was examined by MTT assay on DC2.4 cells. Pure ZIF-8 nanoparticles showed a remarkable toxicity to cells at concentrations of 400 × 10 The amount of OVA released from ZNPs and ZANPs was measured at pH 5.0 and 7.4 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Within 24 h at pH 5.0, >80% of the antigen had been released from ZNPs; antigen was released significantly more slowly at pH 7.4, indicating pH-sensitive antigen release behavior. ZANPs showed slower release both in pH 5.0 and 7.4 than ZNPs ( Vaccine internalization by APCs, specifically DCs and macrophages is critical for immune activation [ To identify the pathways of ZANPs uptake, internalization was measured in the presence of inhibitors that block specific endocytotic pathway. Uptakes was unaffected by methayl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD) and nystatin, suggesting that it was not taken up by caveolar-mediated pathway [ Activated DCs show upregulated expression of surface markers CD40 and CD86 [ In addition to up-regulation of CD40 and CD86, DC maturation is associated with increased production of proinflammatory cytokines [ Eliciting efficiently CD8 The fate of nanoparticles after internalization into BMDCs was analyzed using confocal microscopy. After incubating cells with ZNPs and ZANPs (containing Cy5.5-OVA) for 1 h, discrete fluorescence signal for OVA (green) or lysosomes (red) fluorescence was negligible ( Effective induction of an effector T cell response requires that the vaccine be taken up by APCs either resident in LNs or at the site of injection, which then drain into the LN [ Effective systemic immune responses require efficient co-delivery of antigen and adjuvant to the same APCs. Therefore, we assessed the ability of CpG/ZANPs to co-deliver OVA and CpG to LN-resident DCs (CD11c Encouraged by these Consistent with these results, we found that the percentage of IFN-γ After DC maturation, CD8 We then investigated the ability of ZANPs to slow the growth of EG7-OVA tumors in mice. These tumors consist of EL4 cells expressing OVA epitopes. Female C57BL/6 mice were implanted with EG7-OVA cells, and then vaccinated on days 3, 7 and 11 ( Eliciting strong antigen-specific immune responses requires delivering antigen and adjuvant to the same APCs in LNs [ Our design was inspired by the recent demonstration of biomimetic mineralization of ZIF-8 as a protective coating for biomacromolecules [ We prepared ZANPs in aqueous solution at room temperature without using protein stabilizers, making our approach a facile, green, efficient way to package antigen and adjuvant. Another approach has been described in which 200 nm antigen loaded ZIF-8 was prepared in methanol solutions by using ultrasonication with the help of polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) [ ZANPs were efficiently internalized by DCs As represented in An ideal vaccine delivery system should activate effectively CD8 Consistent with their ability to stimulate cross-presentation and subsequent humoral and cellular response, CpG/ZANPs significantly inhibited tumor growth and prolonged survival in mice bearing EG7-OVA tumors, and CpG/ZANPs showed significantly stronger antitumor effects than CpG/ZNPs and OVA +CpG. ( In summary, we have developed the first facile, green synthesis of aluminum-integrated nano-MOF to co-deliver antigen and adjuvant by taking advantage of a natural biomimetic mineralization process. Their optimal size and surface characteristics help CpG/ZANPs target LNs and be taken up by APCs. This co-delivery system enhances antigen cross-presentation and elicits strong CTL activity. In fact, CpG/ZANPs show stronger immune response than CpG/ZNPs, reflecting the ability of AlO(OH) to increase the uptake of nanoparticle by DCs and promote antigen cross-presentation. Moreover, CpG/ZANPs significantly inhibit tumor growth in mice bearing EG7-OVA tumors. These results show the potential of aluminum-integrated nano-MOFs for co-delivering antigens and adjuvants to treat cancers. The authors declare no competing financial interest. We acknowledge the financial support of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at