In this study, electrochemical performances of the Pb–MnO2 composite anodes in sulphuric acid electrolyte containing different manganese concentrations were investigated. The anodic electrodeposited MnO2 layers on the composite anodes were studied and their properties were compared with those of an industrial Pb–Ag anode.
                  The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and potentiostatic polarizations were accompanied by chemical analysis of the electrolyte to investigate the Mn(II) oxidation and oxygen evolution rates on the fresh anodes. The long term effect of the deposited MnO2 on the electrocatalytic properties of the anodes was studied by galvanostatic polarizations. The results revealed that the Pb–MnO2 anodes operate at lower potentials than the Pb–Ag anodes in a Mn-free electrolyte, indicating higher electrocatalytic activity of the composite anode. The Mn(II) oxidation proceeded at different rates on the Pb–Ag and Pb–MnO2 anodes. The oxygen evolution reaction was depolarized in the presence of Mn(II) ions. However, formation of the MnO2 layers might lead to higher anodic potentials. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were utilized to characterize the deposited MnO2 layers and also the corrosion product layers on the anodes. The MnO2 layers on the anodes were found to have different properties. While MnO2 layers on the composite anodes were uniform, compact and adhesive, the deposited layers on the Pb–Ag anodes were flaky, porous, and loosely adhered. These layers provided the anodes with different degree of protection against electrochemical oxidation.Zinc electrowinning (EW) is an electrolytic reduction of zinc ions from an acidic solution to produce high purity zinc metal. The main anodic reaction in this process is the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) (Reaction (1)) ( The overpotential for this reaction determines the anodic potential and influences the total cell potential of the process. The OER overpotential depends on the electrocatalytical capacity of the anode material ( The lead–silver alloy (Pb–Ag) is the most widely used anode in the zinc electrowinning process. As an alloying element, silver improves mechanical properties, corrosion resistance, and electrocatalytic activity of lead anodes ( Among the electrocatalytic metal oxides, manganese dioxide (MnO Manganese is often encountered as an impurity in the zinc electrowinning electrolyte ( Moreover, the evolution of chlorine as a hazardous and corrosive gas can be hindered in the presence of manganese ( Despite these positive effects, if the MnO The overall reaction for the electrodeposition of MnO Many studies proposed the electrochemical–chemical–electrochemical (ECE) mechanism for MnO The other suggested mechanism for MnO The anodic electrodeposited layer is not the only form of MnO Formation of the MnO In this study, the effects of manganese in different concentrations on the anodic performances of Pb–MnO Manganese dioxide and lead particles (from Baker & Adamson and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively) were used to fabricate composite anodes. Disk-shaped samples were prepared through single-action pressing of the powder mixture at room temperature. The fabrication process of the composite anodes has been explained in detail in previous publications by the authors ( The fabrication process of the composite anodes caused porosity in the samples and also some micro-defects on the anode surface, which have been shown in previous publication ( Electrochemical experiments, including potentiostatic and galvanostatic polarizations, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), were performed in a water-jacketed glass container and a standard three-electrode cell. A silver/silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl, E The samples were polished with 600-grit SiC paper before each experiment and rinsed in distilled water after each step. A 1 All of the electrochemical experiments were performed in 180 The concentration of Mn(III) ions resulting from oxidation of Mn(II) (Reaction (6)) was measured by reacting the electrolyte with ferrous ammonium sulfate. Manganic (Mn(III)) ions reduce to Mn(II) through oxidation of ferrous to ferric (Reaction (12)). Permanganate solution was then utilized to back titrate the left over ferrous ions through Reaction (13). The concentration of Mn(III) ions were calculated from the amount of consumed ferrous ions to reduce Mn(III). In this study, fresh anodes represent the sandpapered anodes during the first 1–2 The morphology of the anodic layers formed during galvanostatic and potentiostatic experiments was studied using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (Sigma FESEM, Zeiss). The chemical states of the deposited MnO The phase structure of both the anodic surface layers on the polarized anodes and the deposited MnO  The Nyquist plots of the Pb–Ag and Pb–MnO The Nyquist plots of the composite anode were smaller than those of the Pb–Ag anode in Mn(II)-free electrolytes. This indicates lower oxygen evolution charge transfer resistance on the Pb–MnO  On the Pb–MnO A positive effect of Mn(II) on the oxygen evolution rate on the fresh anodes was shown in the previous section. How this influence changes over time is dependent on the properties of the anodic electrodeposited MnO As The negative effect of the MnO Surface morphologies of the MnO In the presence of 0.5 According to these results, different properties of the MnO The formation rate of the MnO The amount of sludge at the bottom of a cell is a function of the formation rate of MnO Many factors can be considered as causes for different observed properties of MnO The XPS analyses were carried out to investigate the oxidation state of manganese in the electrodeposited MnO X-ray diffraction was used to investigate and compare the structure of the deposited MnO In Similar to what was observed for the MnO Presence of ramsdellite and pyrolusite phases in addition to the mentioned defects in the structure of MnO A wide range of microtwinning percentages (6–100%) has been reported for electrochemically deposited MnO Formation of ε-MnO According to the XRD results, γ-MnO Comparing these features, it may be concluded that the mechanism of MnO As an electrochemical reaction, MnO As seen in The average current densities of the Pb–Ag and Pb–MnO Chemical composition and surface properties of the anodes might influence the deposition of the MnO First, it has been shown that the MnO Surface defects that are present on the composite anode may also enhance the properties of the deposited MnO The presence of defects on the surface of the composite anode can also increase its actual surface area exposed to the electrolyte. In other words, the actual current density of the composite anode might be lower than that of the Pb–Ag anode. This difference may be another reason for different properties of the MnO The X-ray diffraction spectra of the 72-hour polarized Pb–Ag and Pb–MnO Comparing XRD diffraction patterns of A lower Pb peak in the XRD pattern of Comparing the XRD patterns in The depolarizing effect of Mn(II) on the PbO In this study, the anodic performance of the Pb–MnO The Pb–MnO The rates of Mn(II) oxidation and MnO The Mn(II) ions catalyze the oxygen evolution reaction on both types of fresh anodes. Formation and growth of the MnO The Pb–MnO The uniform and dense MnO The authors are grateful to Dr. Alberto Gonzalez from Teck Resources Limited and Mr. Michael Mahon from UBC for constructive discussions. The authors would also like to thank