The response of erosional landscapes to Quaternary climate oscillations is recorded in fluvial terraces whose quantitative interpretation requires numerical ages. We investigate gravel-capped strath terraces along the western edge of Colorado's High Plains to constrain the incision history of this shale-dominated landscape. We use 10Be and 26Al cosmogenic radionuclides (CRNs), optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), and thermally transferred OSL (TT-OSL) to date three strath terraces, all beveled in shale bedrock and then deposited upon by Lefthand Creek, which drains the crystalline core of the Front Range. Our study reveals: (i) a long history (hundreds of thousands of years) of fluvial occupation of the second highest terrace, T2 (Table Mountain), with fluvial abandonment at 92±3ka; (ii) a brief occupation of a narrow and spatially confined terrace, T3, at 98±7ka; and (iii) a 10–25 thousand year period of cutting and fluvial occupation of a lower terrace, T4, marked by the deposition of a lower alluvial unit between 59 and 68ka, followed by deposition of an upper alluvial package at 40±3ka. In conjunction with other recent CRN studies of strath terraces along the Colorado Front Range (Riihimaki et al., 2006; Dühnforth et al., 2012), our data reveal that long periods of lateral planation and fluvial occupation of strath terraces, sometimes lasting several glacial-interglacial cycles, are punctuated by brief episodes of rapid vertical bedrock incision. These data call into question what a singular terrace age represents, as the strath may be cut at one time (its cutting-age) and the terrace surface may be abandoned at a much later time (its abandonment age), and challenge models of strath terraces that appeal to simple pacing by the glacial-interglacial cycles.Fluvial strath terraces form as rivers cut laterally into bedrock and then incise vertically to abandon a beveled bedrock surface capped by a thin mantle of alluvium (e.g., Along Colorado's western High Plains, terraces of similar elevation on tributaries to the South Platte River were thought to represent a fairly consistent elevation of the Denver Basin surface during exhumation driven by base-level fall of the South Platte River (e.g., Recent dating studies suggest that the history of Quaternary incision into the Denver Basin is complicated. While long-term erosion rates inferred from the presence of a regional mid-Pleistocene volcanic ash on abandoned surfaces are regionally consistent ( Previous CRN dating within the Denver Basin focused on individual terraces of different elevations along different fluvial systems ( We focus on dating terraces within one fluvial system in order to eliminate the confusion that arises from the natural variability between different fluvial systems. This allows us to interpret the timing of strath beveling, terrace deposition, and terrace abandonment within the constraints provided by geomorphic position and longitudinal profiles across terrace surfaces. We also test the assumption that lateral terrace beveling and alluvial deposition are correlated with glacial cycles, whereas terrace abandonment is correlated with interglacial cycles. We use two CRNs ( The Lefthand Creek (LHC) basin is a 145-km The preserved series of strath terraces cut and deposited by LHC provides insight into the evolution of the western edge of the High Plains north of Boulder, Colorado. Age estimates for terraces formed by LHC range from early Pleistocene to Holocene, based on relative dating of the alluvium (e.g., The next-oldest terrace (T2), locally known as Table Mountain, is the most geographically extensive terrace preserved along LHC. The T2 terrace surface is very smooth, and is isolated from the mountain front by lower terraces ( The narrow width of terrace T3 ( Formation of terrace T4 post-dated the capture of paleostream to the south. The T4 surface is wide, indicating a significant period of lateral planation. The drop in elevation of the longitudinal profiles across T4 indicates that LHC migrated farther to the south (toward 4B; Relative age estimates for T4 are late Pleistocene in age ( Prior to the research of With the exception of Haystack Mountain (T1), T2 is higher in elevation and therefore older than the other strath terraces formed by LHC. Therefore, the interpretation by Terrace T2 is 1668–1714 Terrace T3 is 1659–1721 Terrace T4 is 1650–1709 We combined CRN ( On terraces T2 and T3, we employed To measure depth profiles at each sample site, we collected 6–8 samples in ~ First, CRN samples were crushed to between 250 and 850 Background aluminum in the samples was high enough that For the measurement of aluminum in T2 samples, we extracted two aliquots of differing volumes from the quartz samples that were dissolved in hydrofluoric acid. We then added 25  In a strategy similar to that in For OSL sampling, we covered soil pits to ensure darkness and collected samples in white PVC tubes driven into the soil pit wall. In rocky sediment, we removed large cobbles from the soil pit wall and used film canisters to collect sediment from behind the excavated cobbles, following We conducted sample collection and mineral extraction following methods described by We conducted sample collection and mineral extraction following methods described by We performed statistical analyses using the The The Sample OSL-T3-3, from the loess-derived soils on terrace T3 (see Age constraint on the loess-derived horizon was used to adjust CRN sample depths and hence lower CRN production rates in the χ The CRN concentrations for Independent The We attempted to use OSL dating on the upper and lower alluvium, but the majority of samples were saturated. Two samples at the Low terrace site (OSL-T4-4 and OSL-T4-5) did yield results that were not saturated. However, these results were unrealistically young and likely reflect the infiltration of finer surface material (see Supplemental material). We therefore concentrated our efforts on using TT-OSL to constrain the age of the lower alluvium. The Minimum Age Model (MAM) ( The Alluvium at terrace T2 has been exposed at the surface for between 90 and 95 As we commonly assume that the transport time for fluvial sediment is negligible compared to the residence time within a terrace (e.g.,  We employ two possible scenarios for evolution of the alluvial thickness on T2, following the deposition of the original alluvial package. In the first scenario, the surface remains unaltered for a specified duration (the burial time) and is then instantaneously stripped to its present thickness at 92  For the progressive stripping model, we applied a constant erosion rate between 150 and 92 We cannot argue that our best model result represents a unique solution to the history of sediment thickness on this terrace; many of the model results we present generate a similarly good match to the measured concentrations of Although the solution is not unique, to reproduce the measured We contend that only fluvial erosion could accomplish removal of the required ~ Model results suggest that alluvium was deposited on terrace T2 hundreds of thousands of years ago. The thickness of alluvium deposited was > A stripping event must have occurred at least once in order to truncate the alluvium and expose the once-buried sediments at the modern surface. While we do not see evidence of fluvial reworking in the remaining alluvium, it is possible that cycles of deposition, erosion, and reworking could have occurred several times during the fluvial occupation of T2, within the upper alluvium that has since been removed. Similarly complex histories of deposition, erosion, and long fluvial occupation have been documented on other broad terraces bounding the Front Range ( Remarkably, the surface topography bears no hint of this fluvial stripping event. No remnants of the once deeper alluvium exist ( The linked χ After LHC rapidly incised down to the T3 terrace, the river occupied T3 for only a brief period of time (given the constraints of abandonment ages). The terrace morphology supports this assertion; the T3 terrace is spatially confined on either side by higher terraces, indicating the river spent little time widening the corridor by lateral planation. The brief occupation of T3 was terminated by the subsequent capture of LHC by a channel flowing to the south of T2 (Table Mountain; One potential issue with the above interpretation is the low-modeled Following the capture of LHC to the southern channel alignment, LHC initiated bedrock strath-cutting and occupied the terrace T4 for tens of thousands of years. Alluvium was deposited at our study site by ~ Loess cover would lower CRN production rates within the alluvium by shielding. Intermittent coverage of terrace surfaces with plausible (< While we can know neither the thickness nor the duration of past loess cover, the following scenarios illustrate how intermittent loess could affect the modeled CRN fluvial abandonment ages for terraces, in this example at terrace T2. The following two scenarios result in fluvial abandonment ages at terrace T2 that are 15 Conceptual models of the generation of strath terraces suggest that lateral planation occurs during periods of high sediment supply, which allows aggradation and hence armoring of the channel floor, which in turn favors lateral erosion of valley walls over vertical incision (e.g., Numeric dating along the Colorado Front Range supports a conceptual model in which Front Range rivers experience a complex and basin-specific history consisting of long periods of sediment cover and lateral planation, punctuated by brief episodes of rapid incision into bedrock. While similar histories of long fluvial occupations exist along the Front Range, we note that the range of ages is not necessarily correlative between terraces of similar elevation (for example T2 and Rocky Flats). We argue against the frequently employed correlation of terraces across drainages within large sedimentary basins in the western U.S., and instead advocate for determination of individual terrace chronologies using compatible numeric dating methods. Our new dating of these terraces suggests that the link between terraces and climate is not straightforward. One cannot identify a one-to-one match between terraces and glacials. In this setting at least some terraces can be occupied through several glacial-interglacial cycles, as has occurred at terrace T2 along Lefthand Creek and at Rocky Flats along Coal Creek ( Our interpretation of the history of deposition and abandonment on strath terraces along Lefthand Creek is based upon numeric age constraints, analysis of longitudinal profiles, and numerical modeling. We suggest that long occupations of strath terraces may be to blame for the apparent mismatch between dating techniques on such surfaces. Documenting Our results echo those of other recent CRN studies of strath terraces along the Colorado Front Range ( The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We thank the following for their support with field work, laboratory processing and measurement, and/or discussion of results: Paul Bierman, Peter Birkeland, Sarah Crump, Miriam Dühnforth, Vanja Dukic, Clayton Jenson, Craig Jones, Fred Luiszer, Rich Madole, Peter Molnar, Simon Pendleton, Joanna Redwine, Paul Rindfleisch, Nate Rock, Wendy Roth, Andy Wickert, Eric Winchell, William Yeck, University of Colorado (CU) Introduction to Geophysics 2013, and CU Science Discovery 2013. CRN samples from the T3 terrace were prepared at the University of Wyoming (UW) under the direction of Cliff Riebe; all other samples were prepared at CU, with methodology adapted from UW and the University of Vermont. We thank landowners Tim and Teresa Brown and Scott and Lisa Christianson for allowing us access to their property and assisting in the excavation of large soil pits. NEON provided access to the permanent soil pit on the T2 (Table Mountain) site. Financial support was provided by grants from: