The effect of cadmium and copper, temperature and reaction time on the removal of cobalt from zinc sulfate solutions using zinc dust was experimentally studied. The results show that the rate and extent of cobalt removal are enhanced when cementation takes place in the presence of less than 400 mg/L of cadmium. Cementation residues were analyzed using electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) to investigate the distribution of phases in the cementation products and the mechanism of cobalt removal. It was found that formation of Zn–Co and Zn–Cd alloys on the zinc dust particles can enhance cobalt removal whereas the presence of Zn–Cu and Cu–Cd alloys can inhibit cobalt removal.Most of the world's zinc is produced by electrowinning from a sulfate electrolyte. Trace impurities (e.g., Co) present in the zinc electrolyte solution can catalyse hydrogen evolution effectively, lowering the current efficiency ( The objective of this research was to elucidate the mechanism of Co removal from zinc sulfate electrolytes using cementation with zinc dust in the presence of Cd Batch cementation tests were carried out in a 1-L beaker. An axial type impeller was used to agitate the solution at 1000 rpm. The synthetic solution contained 140 g/L, Zn added as analytical reagent ZnSO The residues obtained after the cementation process were analyzed by EPMA. The removal of Co as a function of the amount of Cd As the Cd The effect of temperature on the removal of Co was studied by fixing the initial amount of Cd in solution at 400 mg/L. Batch tests were carried out for 1 h at 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 °C. Results are presented in The removal of Co as a function of time was studied at 400 mg/L Cd and 90 °C. Experimental results are shown in To evaluate the effect of Cu on Co removal, a series of experiments were conducted at 400 mg/L Cd, 90 °C and at 1 h of reaction. Results are shown in The residues obtained from the cementation studies carried out at 90 °C after 1 h of reaction were studied by EPMA. Three residues were analyzed: without addition of activators, in the presence of 400 mg/L cadmium ion and in the presence of 400 mg/L cadmium together with 100 mg/L copper. Hydrogen evolution is a parasitic reaction during the cementation process. As a result of hydrogen evolution, the pH in the vicinity of the zinc surface can increase, and basic zinc salts could precipitate on the surface of the zinc particles. As shown in As shown in As shown in Cd is a beneficial activator for the removal of Co from zinc sulfate solutions. In purification circuits it is important that Cd is not totally removed prior to the Co cementation step as the presence of less than 400 mg/L Cd greatly enhances the rate of Co removal. In the absence of activators, a large quantity of basic zinc sulfate surrounding unreacted zinc dust can be formed. Formation of this salt is unwanted as it can significantly inhibit the removal of Co. The presence of Zn–Co and Zn–Cd alloys is thought to enhance cobalt removal whereas Zn–Cu and Cu–Cd alloys are considered to hinder the removal of cobalt.