By using a specific chemical process, it was possible to extract a pyrochlore RE2Ce2O7 phase directly from waste materials composed of allanite–monazite minerals mixed with aluminosilicate and other phosphate phases. The pyrochlore phase is well known for its interesting thermal properties. Monazite (Ce, La, Nd, Pr, Th) PO4 is a mineral rich in rare earth elements (cerium, lanthanum). Polycrystalline waste samples were submitted to a series of chemical treatments followed by alkaline fusion. After reaction with nitric acid and addition of oxalic acid, soluble ions were separated from insoluble ones, resulting in rare earth oxalate intermediate phases. After filtration, these oxalate phases were dried and heated at 900 °C. The resulting solid was analyzed by transmission electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction. These analyses showed that the as-extracted phase was composed of a complex RE2
                     3+Ce2
                     4+O7
                     2− system, rich in cerium and lanthanum along with other rare earth elements (RE). The mean crystal structure of these complex phases was determined from Rietveld diffraction profile refinement; it was close to pyrochlore structure La2Ce2O7 with space group Fd3m. The refined cell parameter a, and the lattice distortion ɛ, calculated from profile broadening analyses, were related to the presence of RE3+ ions occupying the La site.Rare earth elements (RE Mixed compounds such as pyrochlore La Since solid solutions can easily be formed with RE In the present work, we deal with the low cost creation of new phases based on rare earth elements that could be used for their thermal behavior, ionic conduction, and catalytic properties in miniaturized devices. Ceria (CeO • Develop low cost materials for industrial applications based on rare earth elements; • Test new materials for electronic and catalytic applications associated with high temperature uses (thermal barriers, catalysis, ionic conduction). Recently, we proposed a first approach, allowing the extraction of cerium-based materials from monazite-based waste materials ( To reach this objective, we are currently using a starting material composed of a natural complex mineral consisting of monazite–allanite mineral (Ce Leaching processes are used to prepare such materials under low cost conditions. These processes allow us to solve the complex problem of separating rare earth elements. It is important to remember that these monazite and allanite mixtures are rich in Ce and La, but contain other elements such as neodymium, praseodymium, thorium and iron. Thus, the leaching operation is one of the main steps of the separation process. The leaching operation begins with alkaline fusion using sodium carbonate or sodium hydroxide, which allows us to separate rare earth elements from phosphates and silicates. The leaching process is based on the pair-exchange reaction, where cerium/lanthanum phosphates and silicates react with an alkaline reagent to produce soluble sodium carbonate, and an insoluble rare earth oxide mixture. The extraction process involves 5 successive steps: Preparation of the initial mineral source Alkaline solid state reaction Solubilization from chemical treatment Separation (filtration) Precipitation (addition of reactant). The mineral source obtained in the form of a mineral block was crushed and ground in a mill. The powdered material was then sifted using 80–200, 200–250 and 250–400 mesh sieves to separate fine and coarse particles. Samples with grain size dimensions lower than 250–400 mesh (38 µm), were selected for this work. Powder samples were heated in an oven at between 650° and 1000 °C, to remove organic materials. During this step, it was necessary to control the local chemical composition through the use of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. The TEM equipment (TECNAI G2 microscope) allows local Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) analyses. The presence of elements belonging to specific phases (phosphate, silicate, allanite or monazite) can be observed at the scale of small crystallites or grains and statistical analyses can be performed. The composition of the main elements present in this initial mineral waste is shown in After mineral roasting, the powders obtained from sifting were fused under air, at 900 °C, using a Bunsen burner, in a platinum crucible, for 10 min under stirring. An excess amount of sodium carbonate (ten times the stoichiometric composition) was used in this fusion process. The alkaline leaching process using sodium carbonate or sodium hydroxide can be represented by the following stoichiometric reactions (1a and 1b) in which the excess of sodium based reactant is not indicated: The Ln At this step, the silicate phosphate based phases are assumed to be fully eliminated. In the next step, the residue was solubilized in hot concentrated (70%) nitric acid and a nitrate rare earth solution was obtained. This is illustrated by reaction (2) below: To avoid the loss of acid vapors, a Graham condenser with reflux was used in the upper part of the Erlenmeyer. After solubilization in acid medium, the addition of ammonium oxalate allowed rare earth oxalates to be precipitated. The precipitate was dried in an oven at 70 °C and characterized by TG-DTA, which allowed mass loss to be identified as well the related exothermic and endothermic effects during the heating process. The chemical equation below represents the rare earth oxalate precipitation reaction (Ln represents the rare earth elements present in the mixtures): After the drying process, oxalates are heated at 900 °C in a furnace to obtain a mixture of rare earth oxides. The final step is oxide formation (Ln The various samples were characterized using TEM and XRD analyses. Transmission Electron Microscopy was carried out using a TECNAI G2 microscope, with a tension of 200 kV. The equipment allows local EDS analyses. The powders resulting from processes A and B were analyzed by X-ray diffraction, using a D5000 Siemens-Bruker diffractometer in Preliminary analyses showed that the waste mineral was composed of monazite and allanite minerals mixed with iron aluminum silicates. The results are shown in TEM analysis allows us to determine the efficiency of the alkaline leaching process using sodium carbonate and sodium hydroxide. The results of analyses reported in From these analyses, it is possible to propose a first approximate chemical formula: Ce 0.455 La 0.353 Nd 0.112 Pr 0.059 Th 0.016. In this compound, the La atoms account for 67% of the rare earth elements.  To characterize the successive polycrystalline phases obtained during the chemical process, X-ray diffraction analyses were performed using a classical D5000 Bruker-Siemens diffractometer in a To determine all the crystallographic parameters, we first observed that the pattern exhibited superstructure peaks of the typical fcc structure of the La The oxygen atoms were located on three possible sites compatible with the space group Fd3 m: the three oxygen atoms are noted in Next, we used a Rietveld procedure, using classical Fullprof software ( The lattice was assumed to be distorted because of the presence of disordered RE atoms having different ionic radii; this conditioned our profile analysis. In the calculations, the software uses a function describing the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of Bragg peaks: The All refinement results are reported in The Δ Cell parameter distortions seem to be the major cause of peak profile broadening. A final cell parameter distortion of about Δ In addition, we observed that some improvement in residual  The cell parameter observed for this RE To simulate this cell parameter, we can consider the limit of ideal ceria CeO The cubic cell parameter can be related to the ideal CeO Cell parameter of solid solution: Mean bond distance in the pyrochlore structure: Mean bond distance from the La site: Ceria parameter (2 The O–O distance was evaluated in this system as being the contact distance in ceria (in these cubic structures ceria has the shortest O–O distance). It resulted in: We can now consider that, at the ideal La site, all the RE atoms are statistically distributed. The mean RE radius in the present pyrochlore structure can be defined as: Using Vegard's linearity hypothesis, we can assume: The mean radius for the RE site is therefore: <R(RE)> In this last equation, we considered Nd as representative of the Nd In this study, we have clearly shown that it was possible, through optimized chemical processes, to separate rare earth elements and synthesize a specific pyrochlore phase similar to La In the structural determination, we have shown that cell parameter (linked to the concentration in Re atoms), and lattice distortion (linked to the effective distribution of Re atoms) might provide good quality criteria for the final product, depending on both source and process. It should be remembered that the presence of additional Re atoms and the existence of atom disorder are generally required to improve the thermal resistance of a thermal barrier. The next steps in our study will consist of analyzing the electrical, thermal and catalytic properties of these phases and in studying thin layers, as a function of temperature and in the presence of various gases. This research work was carried out in the general framework of a CAPES COFECUB agreement (project Ph 570/07, 2007–2008). We acknowledge the Council of Region PACA for additional financial support for the collaboration between USTV and UFRN in ARCUS –Brazil project (2008). We also acknowledge the General Council of Var and agglomeration of Toulon Provence Mediterranean for their financial support.