In nickel hydrometallurgical operations, the removal of iron from process liquors was critical, with the method of choice commonly being crystallization (precipitation). In this paper special attention was given to the magnetite precipitate. Potential/pH diagram for Fe–H2O system was derived at 100°C, and indicated that the iron ion may precipitate as magnetite at the lower oxidation potential. And the crystallization experiments proved that the iron ion partly precipitate as magnetite by slow oxidation at pH2.0–2.2 and temperature 90–100°C. The precipitates could be efficiently separated from the solutions by magnetic flocculation and separation. Further, analyses with Environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) provided a fundamental understanding of the magnetite precipitation process.Since the early 1970s, various hydrolysis–precipitation methods have been developed for iron removal from hydrometallurgical solutions. The widely used techniques, for examples, include the Hematite Process ( While the iron removal processes are widely used for solution purification in the zinc industry, their application to nickel sulfate projects has also been explored. Generally, the rejection of iron by precipitation in the hydrometallurgical processing of nickel follows the same routes used in the zinc industry, and an understanding of these processes therefore comes from the studies centered on the processing of zinc. Research has focused on the removal of iron by goethite precipitation from iron-containing nickel sulfate solutions ( This study conducted goethite process at a lower pH value by V.M method, and found that the iron could partly precipitate in the form of magnetite. The magnetite particles would offset the bad settleability and filterability of the precipitates by magnetic flocculation or magnetic separation. Further Environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis provided a fundamental understanding of the characteristics of the precipitates. And the Eh–pH diagram of iron was plotted for providing persuasive evidence. Concentrated acidic NiSO The experiments were carried out in a 2 Different materials were subjected to chemical analysis and Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICP-AES) analyses for mass balance purposes, and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis for characterization of the crystalline phase. Qualitative and semi-quantitative data from Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM) analyses were indicative of the phases and genesis of precipitated particles, thus were used to support the XRD, XRF and chemical analysis findings. A brief method for construction of The calculation required to obtain the Values of Average activity coefficients of electrolyte changed with temperature variation. According to ( In this work, David's equation was used to calculate the average activity coefficient of electrolyte at 25 According to the thermodynamic data in Refs. ( Due to the different types of reaction in Fe–H The XRD analyses were performed to find out the composition of the precipitates ( In the magnetic field, the magnetic particles aggregated with each other to form chain and net structures (   This study proved that the iron ion could be partly precipitated as magnetite by controlling the oxidation potential and pH value. The magnetite particles contributed to the efficient solid–liquid separation by magnetic flocculation and separation. The magnetite precipitation provided a novel method for iron removal from nickel-rich solutions, but it needed to be improved by further studies. This work was supported by autonomous exploration project of graduate student, the 111 Project (No. B14034) and Collaborative Innovation Center for Clean and Efficient utilization of Strategic Metal Mineral Resources.