In this chapter, the thermal decomposition of organic wastes is analyzed considering different approaches. Firstly, a brief revision of the processes related (pyrolysis, combustion, and gasification) is analyzed and the influence of the operating conditions (heating rate, temperature, and pressure) is also considered. Secondly, the thermal analyses: thermogravimetry (TG), derivative thermogravimetry (DTG), differential thermal analysis (DTA), and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) are presented. Thirdly, the use of TG/DTG to study the decomposition of the wastes is reviewed, analyzing many recent contributions with different goals. Fourthly, the analysis of the volatilized fraction and the kinetics of the process are discussed, with special attention to the reactions involved. Fifthly, the evolution of volatiles is discussed considering different apparatus: TG/MS (thermal analysis/mass spectrometry), TG/FTIR (thermal analysis/infrared spectroscopy), TG/GC/MS (thermal analysis/gas chromatography/mass spectrometry) and other complementary apparatus, such as pyrolyzers and laboratory reactors. Lastly, the thermal effects measured by DTA and DSC are analyzed.Low High Value of Moderate value of Value of Value of Value of Value of Low value of Value of Low value of   High value of E Under the denomination of organic wastes, different origins can be considered: natural polymers—lignocellulosic materials; synthetic polymers—plastics, resins; urban wastes—municipal solid wastes, sewage sludge, oils; and industrial wastes with a different composition including some of the previous materials. Thermal decomposition is mainly due to the effect of increasing the temperature, under different operation conditions of pressure and atmosphere. The study of the thermal decomposition of wastes is useful for their characterization, recovery, recycling, production of fuels and chemicals, and energetic valorization or stabilization/destruction. When the thermal decomposition is carried out under an inert atmosphere (nitrogen, helium, or argon), the process is called pyrolysis, and the different products evolved are consequences of the chemical reactions promoted by the high temperature. These compounds evolved from the decomposition include gases (CO When the atmosphere is air or oxygen, the process is called oxidative pyrolysis or combustion because the oxygen interacts with the initial material or with some products formed. The term oxidative pyrolysis is used from different points of view. Some authors use this term for atmospheres with normal or low oxygen concentration (e.g., N Torrefaction of wastes is a pyrolysis process at low temperatures (200–320°C) to obtain a dry solid with a higher net calorific value than the initial waste. Another process that can be considered is gasification, with an initial step of pyrolysis and combustion and gas-solid reactions with a flow of solids and gasifying agent in parallel or countercurrent. The gasifying agent is frequently air, although oxygen, water, and carbon dioxide can also be used. Another thermochemical process is liquefaction (low-temperature, high-pressure using a catalyst to obtain valuable liquids), but this process is not analyzed in this paper, which is devoted to the thermal analysis of wastes. Primary and secondary reactions differ in the decomposition process. In primary reactions, the reactant is the initial raw material that is decomposed or reacts with other compounds (oxygen, water, carbon dioxide) and the products formed are called “primary products.” When these primary products decompose or react, the reaction is called a “secondary reaction” and the products “secondary products.” The secondary reactions can take place inside the particle or drop, or outside in the surroundings of particles or drops or in secondary reactors with other operating conditions. In many combustion processes, pyrolysis is the initial step of thermal degradation and the pyrolytic products react with oxygen. In other processes, however, the presence of oxygen accelerates the thermal decomposition as a consequence of the reactivity of the oxygen on the surface of the material. There can be competitive reactions between pyrolysis and combustion. When a material (solid or liquid) is pyrolyzed or burnt, many compounds are formed as a volatile phase and a solid residue. There can be a parallel process, mainly in liquids, where part of the initial material is vaporized. A general scheme would be the following: In these cases, the volatiles also include the vaporized material. The residue can be a char including the inorganic material in the pyrolysis process or ash in combustion. The semivolatile and volatile compounds form the liquid phase, obtained from the condensation of the reaction products, composed of water, organic liquids with low boiling points, and tars with high boiling points. The decomposition process can also be considered as Both schemes of reactions are oversimplifications of the whole process, formed by many primary and secondary reactions, including parallel, competitive, and sequential reactions of different types. The most common reactions are radical reactions consisting of an initiation, cracking, propagation, recombination, reaction with oxygen (molecular or/and radical), and the final reaction. The net formation of a specific compound will be the result of its formation and its destruction during the thermal process. Considering only the gas, liquid, and residue fractions, their yields depend greatly on the operating conditions, mainly the heating rate and final temperature. Reaction time is a critical parameter controlling the reaction advance. Pressure can also influence the product distribution because it modifies the kinetics of the process. The thermodynamics of pyrolysis has been considered by some authors. Gunawardena and Fernando The following aspects must also be taken into account: Normally, conventional pyrolysis is carried out at 0.1–1°C/s, fast pyrolysis at 10–200°C/s, and flash pyrolysis with a heating rate greater than 1000°C/s Low final temperatures ( At low temperature ( High temperature ( High pressures lead to the formation of condensable phases. In combustion, the process is spontaneous and exothermic, so the thermodynamics predicts the formation of oxygenated compounds such as H In many combustors, the decomposition takes place in two chambers the first one, called the primary chamber, with a temperature gradient from room temperature to 600–1000°C and with primary air (substoichiometric oxygen, residence time to 40–60 the second one, called the secondary chamber, with high temperature (> All these concepts are useful to understand the meaning and the limitations of thermal analysis. In a thermal analysis, three aspects must be considered: the sample, the operating conditions (atmosphere, heat flux, or variation of temperature), and variation of the signal (weight loss, heat flow, difference of temperature) vs. time. For the study of thermal decomposition of organic wastes, the following techniques can be taken into account: thermogravimetry (TG), derivative thermogravimetry (DTG), differential thermal analysis (DTA), and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The analysis of the decomposition of organic wastes is measured by the TG and DTG techniques, related directly to the weight loss and its derivative, respectively. Nevertheless, some useful information can be obtained by DTA and DSC, measuring a variation of temperature or heat flow with respect to that registered by a reference substance, respectively. TG is a technique to study the decomposition and/or reactivity of a small sample (normally from 1 to 100 Runs can be carried out at an approximately constant heating rate (dynamic runs), at constant temperature (isothermal runs) with an initial high heating rate, with ramps with distinct heating rates, dynamic Crucible must be considered as a microreactor in the decomposition process, assuming that all the physical and chemical steps that occur in any big size reactor are also present here. In pyrolysis, in addition to the chemical decomposition, the mass transfer steps of volatiles and heat transfer stages are present. These physical transfers can be located inside the particle or drop, inside the sample between particles or liquid, from the top of the sample through the wall (heat transfer), and through the upper part of the crucible if the sample is at the bottom. In combustion or with reactive atmospheres, the mass transfer of the reactive compound adds new physical steps of mass transfer. The internal and external temperature gradients can be important when the reactions are exothermic, as occurs in combustion. Internal resistance effect of the solids is normally considered negligible when working with powders or fine particles, although it can be tested when considering homogeneous fractions with the same chemical composition but a different size particle. Alternatively, this effect can be estimated by taking into account the characteristics of the material and the process, with values of conductivity, diffusion coefficients, enthalpy of the process, and diameter of particle or drop, if all these data are known. Another important effect is that corresponding to the amount of the sample inside the crucible. Interparticle and from sample to surroundings steps can depend on the amount of sample. Therefore, the most representative results of the chemical decomposition must be obtained with small samples (up to 5–7 On the other hand, there may be other aspects that cannot be ignored: vaporization processes (in this case, the size of the crucible is important), autoignition of the sample, boiling of liquids, fast decomposition, etc. The parallel analysis of the thermal effects by DTA and DSC can help to analyze the decomposition. In addition, the testing of the TGA can be carried out with a selected stable substance for this purpose, Avicell cellulose  The previous figures correspond to a homogeneous material, where there is apparently only one decomposition process. Normally, the TG/DTG variations of wastes can present several peaks and/or broad peaks with shoulders indicating the heterogeneity of the sample. The variation of TG/DTG is very useful for characterizing the wastes or materials. By this technique, it is possible to obtain: The temperature decomposition interval of the materials or wastes and the temperature of the peaks when the decomposition rate is high. The presence of several decomposition intervals, when there are several peaks in the DTG plot. The testing of a waste observing the TG/DTG variation which can be considered as a fingerprint of the waste. The presence of unexpected inert materials or in a greater or lesser quantity than expected in wastes, including carbonates. Proximate analysis: volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon, in addition to moisture content. Determination of the ignition temperature, peak temperature, and burnout temperature in TG/DTG combustion. The determination of the concentration of a material inside the waste analyzing the peaks observed in the DTG plots. The analysis of the decomposition process with the possible formation of a carbonaceous residue comparing pyrolysis with combustion. The synergistic interactions on the mixture of residues. The synthesis of new materials from mixtures of wastes with polymers. As a reactor for analyzing the influence of the ambient reaction, pyrolysis in nitrogen or argon, combustion at different oxygen: nitrogen ratios, or reactive gas or gasifying agent. The influence of the catalyst on the reactions of decomposition (mainly primary reactions) introduced in the material or waste. The beginning of the thermal degradation to facilitate the briquetting of wastes. The kinetics for the primary decomposition of the waste, for analyzing the process and for designing pyrolysis, combustion, or gasification reactors.  There are other apparatus which measure the evolution of some gases and/or volatiles with time, so they must be considered valid as thermal analyzers. Lee et al. An important aspect of the TG runs is that only the mass fraction of volatiles is deduced and the final weight fraction at infinite time can be the sum of the final residue formed during the decomposition and inert materials.  A general expression for both pyrolysis and combustion can be as follows: The total mass fraction From Eqs. On the other hand, taking into account the formation of volatiles and the previous Eqs. If the scheme of reaction is written considering that the mass coefficient On the other hand, it is obvious that The kinetic law, considering the previous equivalences can be written as In Eq. Different expressions for Many authors prefer to work with expressions considering In many fitting models, the reaction order is assumed to be equal to unity due, firstly, to the simplicity, and secondly, because homogeneous behavior is plausible, so the reaction rate is directly proportional to the nonreacted mass of the initial solid. Nevertheless, there are many factors for considering that the reaction order can be different from unity: particles sintered, solid-gas reactions, coarse particles with heat and mass transfer limitations, variation of the reaction surface or active centers, heterogeneity of the sample with different reactive zones, etc.   All the data from the dynamic and the dynamic From In a previous paper Normal values of The strong correlation between In a previous study When the activation energy is low or the reaction order is high or both of them, there are probably many reactions involved in the apparently single reaction. When the reaction order is zero or less than unity and the apparent activation energy is high (e.g., 150–250 When the reaction order is zero and the apparent activation energy is small (e.g., 30–60 When two peaks appear in the DTG instead of one, for example, as occurs in the pyrolysis of flexible polyurethane foam In this case the kinetic model, following the same criteria as in the previous equations presented for a single reaction are the following:  The parameters Considering a mathematical model, the values of The conversion degrees The volatile mass fraction at any time can be related to the conversion degree as The kinetic laws, following the reaction-order model, can be expressed as The total conversion degree By integration of the differential equations, considering as fit parameters for the reaction-order method the two activation energies, the two reaction orders, the two preexponential factors (or parameters as indicated in Eq.    In this case, the parameter In this case, the value of the volatile mass fraction at infinite time   When reaction 1 is complete, the mass fraction of volatiles evolved For reaction 2, the degree conversion is defined as  When there are two separated peaks in the DTG plot, as in this case, and when the residue at infinite time does not depend on the heating rate, as occurs also in this case, both the two parallel reactions scheme and two sequential reactions scheme can be valid, and the selection must be done analyzing the waste or from the TG-MS or TG-FTIR data as explained in the following sections.  The kinetic parameters were obtained from 17 runs (dynamic and dynamic It must be emphasized that these models are simplifications of the complex systems, including many reactions, each of them including many elemental and radical reactions. In addition to the reaction-order model, there are other kinetic models that can be useful for analyzing the decomposition of the materials. For the reaction-order model  The variation coefficient VC has been calculated as This can be useful to propose alternative kinetic models in both directions: from a reaction-order model to a specific model and vice versa. More details on this analysis can be found elsewhere It must be emphasized that a kinetic model will be more representative of the waste decomposition when it is obtained from different operating conditions and distinct types of runs. In addition to the previous models, another one with infinite independent reactions and variation of the activation energy with a constant preexponential factor is the so-called distribution activation energy models (DAEM) Isoconversional methods have also been used in the analysis of the decomposition of organic wastes. Taking values of All the kinetic models must be considered as fitting models because they considered global decomposition of the waste or their fractions and do not discuss the mechanisms of the reactions. Nevertheless, there are some contributions considering the mechanisms of reaction, so in this case the preexponential factor, the activation energy, and the reaction order have clear physical-chemical significance. For example, Ranzi et al. The evolved gas analysis (EGA) from a thermobalance can be done by analyzing the evolved gas by the following techniques: TG-MS, TG-FTIR, and TG-GC-MS. In TG-MS, a mass spectrometer (MS) analyzer is usually coupled with TGA to analyze the evolution of some ion mass with time. Both apparatus are connected with an interface kept at moderate temperature (avoiding condensing and cracking) and with a high flow in order not to modify the primary products evolved, but this fact cannot be ignored to analyze the conversion degree of the secondary reactions. The mass used and the heating rate must be selected considering the MS characteristics to obtain reliable results. Samples around 5 The limitation of this technique is due to the fact that only the majority compounds and with values of Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) coupled with Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis is also another technique to analyze the presence of functional groups corresponding to the chemical compounds evolved. The transfer line between both apparatus must be at an adequate temperature.  The information obtained from the TG-MS and TG-FTIR are useful and complementary to characterize the steps of decomposition, both pyrolysis and combustion. Some of the most relevant facts, considering The first step of pyrolysis starts breaking the urethane bonds as can be confirmed by the detected compounds such as cyanates (―NCO) and amines (―NH―) and which come from the urethane bond (―NH―C ( The second step of pyrolysis, observed in this study at 673 Concerning the TG-MS and TG-FTIR data during the combustion, three steps can be taken into account, the first two steps with the evolution of different compounds (CO, CO Kwon and Castaldi The information that can be obtained from TG/MS or TG/FTIR, following the evolution of Other authors have completed the study of the thermal decompositions with the evolution of volatiles with some laboratory reactors, where a small sample is introduced into the reactor. Depending on the operating conditions, as well as the presence or absence of packing, the volatiles evolved can also correspond to primary, secondary, or primary Becidan et al. Ranzi et al.   From oxygenated wastes by pyrolysis. In all combustion and gasification processes from any waste. The ratio CO/CO As secondary products in the combustion/gasification of the char previously formed, and which can easily be detected in the TG/DTG, TG/MS, and TG/FTIR tests.  From oxygenated wastes by pyrolysis or combustion.  In the pyrolysis or gasification of any waste or carbonaceous waste when reacting with water. In combustion, the presence is very small.  From the pyrolysis and combustion of halogenated wastes, such as PVC and brominated flame retardants.  From the pyrolysis of wastes with sulfur. In combustion, the concentration is small.  From the pyrolysis and combustion from wastes with sulfur. As secondary products from the combustion of SH  As the primary and secondary products of any nitrogenated waste by pyrolysis and combustion.  From the pyrolysis of nitrogenated compounds. From the combustion of primary products, such as NH From nitrogen and oxygen at temperatures higher than 1100°C.  From the pyrolysis and combustion of any waste.  From the pyrolysis and combustion of any waste, mainly at temperatures higher than 700°C.  By pyrolysis and combustion.  By pyrolysis and combustion of nitrogenated wastes, such as polyurethanes and/or nitrogenated adhesives present in the wastes.  By pyrolysis and combustion of halogenated wastes. The previous simplified list shows some possible compounds detected in the gases and volatiles evolved. The majority of compounds can be detected by TG/MS, TG/FTIR, and TG/GC/MS and from pyrolyzers depending on the initial amount of mass and the concentration obtained in the corresponding apparatus. Many compounds, including those in the list presented, can be detected from laboratory reactors/GC/MS from small samples (less than 1 or 0.1 Thermal effects during thermal decomposition analysis of wastes can be measured by two techniques: differential thermal analysis (DTA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). These techniques measure the temperature difference or heat flow between the sample and the reference that can be an empty pan or a pan with a reference material such as Al Characterization of the sample Testing the performance of the TGA, comparing the melting temperature measured by the DTA with the correct value Presence of inert materials, liquids, or special substances Quality of compost Assessment of soil organic matter and humic substances Enthalpy calculations  In DSC ( It can be deduced that the variation of DTA and DSC obtained from the same substance is very similar, observing the same endothermic peaks and the same exothermic shoulder. The thermal effects can also be observed in big samples. Corbetta et al. I thank the support received from the projects funded by the Spanish Government and the PROMETEO projects of the Generalitat Valenciana. I also appreciate the help made by Mrs. Maria Angeles Gallego for the presentation of the manuscript.