This paper presents a scale-up procedure of parameter estimation in the selection function and breakage function from single particle impact breakage to inform the predictions at the process scale of an impact pin mill. The selection and breakage functions used in population balance model (PBM) for particle breakage in the literature are briefly reviewed. Single particle breakage tests are conducted in a vertical impact tester subject to varying impact velocities. The single particle breakage results further serve to provide the database for the parameter estimation in Vogel and Peukert model (Vogel and Peukert, 2005). The estimated parameters in the particle level are upscaled in an impact pin mill using the population balance model, which is implemented in the software gPROMS (Process Systems Enterprise, UK) (gPROMS® 4.1 Release Notes, 2016). The impact milling tests were carried out in an impact pin mill UPZ100 subject to four feed rates, providing the dataset for model validation. The sensitivity analysis of the PBM parameters was conducted to help identify their leverage on the particle size distribution. The scale-up procedure by specifying the parameters from single particle level to the process level of PBM demonstrates an approach to help predict the size reduction process subject to the prevailing mechanism in an impact pin mill and other milling processes alike.fitting parameter, – fitting parameter, – breakage function, – fitting parameters, – quantile n in particle size distribution, – hardness, MPa impact number, – fracture toughness, Pa m mother particles mass, g debris particle mass, g population density of length function, m number of breakage events, – breakage probability of particle size breakage ratio, – breakage rate, s particle size, mm threshold breakage size, µm impact velocity, m s particle density, kg m material parameter, kg J mass fraction, – mass specific impact kinetic energy, J kg threshold kinetic energy, J kg Milling is an intended size reduction process as an integral unit operation in the particulate solids processing industries such as mineral, chemical, food and pharmaceutical engineering. However, milling is well known to be an energy-intensive process, requiring a massive amount of energy consumption in the milling process for the desired size reduction. For example of large ball mills, less than 1% of the total energy is spent on the fracture process whilst 85% is dissipated as heat, making the milling process notoriously inefficient in particle breakage With the advancement of computational modelling methods, considerable efforts have been made to promote the understanding of energy consumption and size reduction over a milling process. Amongst these computational methods, population balance model (PBM) has been widely used to predict the product size distribution as a Model Driven Design (MDD) approach. For example, Austin and Bagga This paper presents a scale-up procedure of parameter estimation of selection function and breakage function from single particle impact breakage to inform the predictions at the process scale of an impact pin mill. The selection and breakage functions for particle breakage in the literature are briefly reviewed, which can be well suited in the context of population balance model. Single particle breakage tests are conducted to provide the database for the parameter estimation in Vogel and Peukert model Population balance modelling has been widely used to track particle attribute evolution in the particulate processes. The dimension of the population balance model is dependent on the number of phases (solid, liquid, and gas) to be considered. Most population balance models in the literature are one-dimensional, usually considering only the variation of particle size or volume. A key feature of the population balance model is the inclusion of rate process kernels such as consolidation, aggregation, and breakage. Given a well-mixed milling process where only breakage is the rate process kernel, a general form of population balance model for a batch grinding is given The breakage kernel is composed of two essential functions: the selection function ( The breakage rate The breakage probability is usually defined as the mass loss of particles after breakage as a function of stressing load, i.e. impact velocity in this work. Rozenblat et al. The breakage function indicates the size evolution of broken particles resulting from impact loading. A summary of some common breakage functions was given by Rozenblat et al. Prior studies on single particle breakage test focus on understanding the effects of impact velocity and impact angles on the selection function and breakage function The schematic of the single particle impact rig is shown in The target was housed in a Perspex collection chamber and the impact product was collected and sieved after each impact event. A filter paper is placed on the bottom of the impact chamber to retain the progeny particles after impact breakage. After each impact test, the particle remnants and progeny particles are collected on top of the filter paper for breakage probability and breakage fragment distribution analysis. The test particles of zeolite 4AK were chosen as semi-brittle material and shown in The single particle impact experiments were performed over the impact velocity ranging from 5 m/s to 30 m/s (maximum velocity controlled by the air pressure difference). The relative humidity and lab temperature are recorded as 25–30% and 20–25 °C respectively. The process level of milling tests is carried out in a selected impact pin mill UPZ100 (Courtesy from Hosokawa Micron Ltd. UK). The UPZ100 pin mill is a centrifugal impact pin mill, generating considerable impact between particles and pins, leading to a dramatic size reduction due to impact breakage. As shown in The nest spacing (pin spacing minus pin radius) is diminishing outwards for both stationary and rotary discs due to the fact that the size of particle size is reduced radially during the milling operation. However, the pin spacing and net spacing in rotary disc are larger than that in stationary discs because the feed particles first pass through the rotary disc and then the stationary disc in turn. A batch of 500 g zeolite particles (1.2–2.0 mm) was used for each milling experiment. The feed rate was set to 9, 14, 19, 24 kg/h in every rotary speed of 10000 rpm for zeolite particles. After each milling test, the particle size distribution is analyzed using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 particle analyzer (Malvern Instruments, UK). The readers are referred to There are several methods to characterise the selection function on the basis of single particle impact. For example, breakage ratio proposed by Ghadiri et al. The characterisation method of breakage probability, i.e. breakage ratio, is adopted to describe the breakage propensity. The breakage ratio The initial mass of feed particles was scaled before impact and the mass of particles after impact was scaled to calculate breakage rate as a function of the mother particles mass ( The breakage function, i.e. the breakage size distribution after impact loading is characterized in a traditional way using sieve analysis, enabling a construction of mass-based percentage of the breakage particle distribution. Unlike the characterisation of selection function, there is a series of sieve cut to define a wider spectrum of mass-based breakage fragment distribution including the screening sizes, 0.4 mm, 0.6 mm, 0.8 mm, 1.0 mm, 1.18 mm and 1.4 mm. The procedure for sieving analysis of impacted particle samples is described as below. The 0.4 mm sieve cut is first nested on top of a catch pan and the other sieve cuts are stacked in an ascending order until 1.4 mm. After the stacking, the sieves are slightly inclined and gently vibrated manually in one minute. The one-minute duration of manual vibration of sieving analysis to measure the impact breakage size distribution is chosen to minimize the potential of breakage induced by manual handling and in the mean time to make sure the broken particles can be retained in the right size grade. The one-minute duration is referred to the sieve analysis in a manual way by Zhang The amount of the remaining particles in each meshing size of sieve cut is weighed in the scale. The amount of remaining particles on each sieve cut will be shown for the feed particle 1.4–1.7 mm.  The effect of impact angle is not shown due to the research scope. Traditionally, the consideration of impact angle is ignored as it is assumed that the normal velocity plays a dominant way in the particle breakage. There have been many attempts to investigate the effect of impact angle on particle breakage subject to impact loading The size distribution of particles under normal impact tests was characterised using the aforementioned sieving analysis. The mass of progeny products after impact in each sieve was measured and the mass versus sieve cut is plotted accordingly. In It is worth mentioning that the cumulative distribution functions subject to the impact velocity 3.7 m/s and 8.3 m/s are not shown in Particle size distribution (PSD) is an important indicator for the product particle quality to evaluate the milling performance. The input parameters in the chosen selection function and breakage function can be categorized into four types: material-dependent parameters (e.g. As seen from As inferred from the single particle impact tests, the breakage parameters to estimate in the selection function are The Eq. Substituting natural logarithm in Eq. Rearranging Eq. The Eq. It can be seen that Eq. Hence, the fitting parameters To demonstrate the fitting quality with a random structure, the residual plot between the fitted and measured breakage probability and the histogram of the residual are plotted in Substituting the estimated parameter Interestingly, the impact breakage of the zeolite particles from the same supplier was carried out by Antonyuk et al. The comparative results of the zeolite breakage probability subject to different impact devices, against the Eq. There are two breakage parameters to be estimated in the breakage function, which are used to describe the breakage fragment distribution. The data used for the estimation of these two parameters Note that there are several pairs of selection functions and breakage functions in the literature. However, a systematic evaluation of these pairs of breakage kernel (selection function and breakage function) is currently not available. Especially, the bimodal mode of particle size distribution is less studied as compared to the mono-modal distribution The scale-up procedure of milling operations is a critical step in the comminution industry. The scale-up procedure for a grinding mill using population balance models is first introduced by Herbst and Fuerstenau Likewise, in the scale-up procedure utilizing the population balance model (PBM) in this paper, the single particle breakage tests are first conducted at the particle level and the dominant stressing load is impact loading pertinent to the operational conditions of impact pin mill, which is taken as the exemplar case of the milling process. The second procedure is to define a mathematical model which can be used to describe the milling process by upscaling the breakage parameters estimated from the single particle scale. Population balance model is hence chosen with the defined selection function and breakage function developed by Vogel and Peukert The numerical simulation of impact pin mill UPZ 100 is carried out in the advanced modelling platform gPROMS (Process Systems Enterprise, UK) Specifically, the pair of Vogel and Peukert model The PSD quantiles of The fiited PSD quantiles under feed rate of 9 kg/h, 14 kg/h and 24 kg/h and the predicted PSD quantiles under feed rate of 19 kg/h are depicted in The comparisons between the fitted or predicted and measured PSD are presented in The parametric study of PBM parameters is carried out herein to investigate how the variation of key input factor contributing to the response of milling product, i.e. particle size distribution. The four varying parameters are the breakage rate, impact frequency in the selection function, the minimum breakage size The summary of the abovementioned parameter with input values is presented in  It can be seen that the particle size distribution is gradually shifted to the left-hand side when increasing the breakage rate. Furthermore, the particle index of The impact frequency is varied from 5 to 400 and its influence on the particle size distribution is plotted in In  The GSA of the input parameters in PBM is carried out based on the single variate analysis method. The synergic effect of several input parameters on the particle size distribution can be achieved with further relationship built up between the process and product models. An exploratory study of population balance model (PBM) was conducted based on single particle impact as a scale-up procedure. Two functions, i.e. breakage and selection functions are emphasized in the general form of PBM. The scale-up procedure for an impact pin mill was successfully demonstrated by specifying the estimated parameters from the single particle impact tests. However, several issues are highlighted for the follow-on work. The milling tests in impact pin mill UPZ100 were carried out considering the effect of feed rate subject to 10,000 RPM. It is worth mentioning that only the data of particle size distribution after milling is used for model validation by the size index of There are massive pairs of selection functions and breakage functions in the literature. Despite some preceding work in the model assessment, the application of the majority of the literature models is still unkown. This challenge can be overcome by a holistic model assessment to determine the most suitable breakage kernels with small quantities of single particle impact database. The correlation between the breakage rate and feed rate was established in this work, of which little attention was paid and very few prior knowledge existed from the modelling perspective. However, some efforts are still required to establish the relationship between the breakage rate and the rotary speed. A further model to correlate the breakage rate with the rotary speed and feed rate is advantageous to predict the milling performance. Despite a successful PBM model validation against the impact pin mill, it is assumed with a constant input value of This paper has presented a scale-up procedure of parameter estimation in the selection function and breakage function, which is able to help predict the particle size reduction using the population balance model. The representative selection functions and breakage functions in the literature are briefly reviewed, which can be well suited in the context of population balance model (PBM). It was found that the majority of the selection functions and breakage functions are empirical. As a prelude of the scale-up procedure for an impact pin mill, single particle breakage tests were conducted in a vertical impact tester subject to varying impact velocities. The single particle impact test is designed to assess the breakage probability and size distribution of the zeolite particles. The reason for performing the impact loading test is because of the representative behavior of particle friability during comminution and its simplicity to implement in the laboratory. Most importantly, the single particle breakage results serve to provide the database for the parameter estimation in the Vogel and Peukert model The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the