Data on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols is essential for salting-out crystallisation studies. The solubilities of the quaternary system MnSO4·H2O+MgSO4·7H2O+H2O+EtOH were determined in the temperature range 293.2–323.2K over the ethanol mole fraction range of 0.00–0.12. The solubility data were used for modelling with the modified extended electrolyte non-random two-liquid (NRTL) equation. The present extension uses ion-specific parameters instead of the electrolyte-specific NRTL binary interaction parameters. This approach has feasibility for many electrolytes and mixed aqueous solution systems in principle. The model was found to correlate the solubility data satisfactorily.Manganese sulphate monohydrate is used in large volume as fertilizer supplement for manganese-deficient soil and as an additive for animal feeds, as well as starting material for electrolytic metallic manganese and electrolytic manganese dioxide production. Manganese sulphate monohydrate is mostly produced as a side product of the production of electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD) in the battery making industry, and production of hydroquinone. These by-products consist of many impurities, mainly magnesium. Salting-out crystallisation is a good procedure to separate manganese from magnesium. Its advantage as an alternative to simple heating or cooling crystallisation generally lies in the possibility of increasing crystal sizes, yields, purity and conducting the operation at ambient temperature The solubilities of inorganic salts are affected by changes in their activity coefficients in the presence of different solvents of other solutes. Generally, activity coefficient in a dilute electrolyte solution can be expressed by the Debye–Hückel equation The former and latter models represent both short-range and long-range interactions. Chen et al. Data on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols is essential for salting-out crystallisation studies. In an earlier paper This paper is a continuation of our thermodynamic research on the effect of different organic solvents on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols and also to check the accuracy of the correlations and predictions of the liquid–liquid–solid equilibrium by our modified extended NRTL model. In this study, the solubility of MnSO The solubilities for manganese sulphate–water–ethanol system at the temperature 293.2–323.2 Precalculated quantities of ethanol were weighed and mixed with a solution of fixed masses of water and magnesium sulphate tetrahydrate (APS Chemicals Ltd.) to create solutions of various mole fractions ( The concentration of salts in aqueous solution was converted to molality unit of water free basis. To improve the accuracy of the experimental results, duplicate experiments were performed for each data point. The duplicate experimental values were all within 1%. To study the effect of ethanol on the solubility of MnSO In earlier papers Crystallisation of inorganic salts is based on the phase equilibrium between the aqueous phase and the salt's crystal phase, or on the solubility product defined by activity coefficient and molality of aqueous ions as follows: In the electrolyte-NRTL model proposed by Chen et al. The Pitzer–Debye–Hückel contribution The ionic strength, based on mole fraction The activity coefficients in NRTL equation are expressed by The solubility data for MnSO According to the original NRTL equation (see Eq.  The solubilities of MnSO activity parameter of van’t Hoff equation (J/mol) Debye–Hückel constant for the osmotic coefficient parameter of van’t Hoff equation (J/mol NRTL interaction parameter for all species; molecules and ions (J/mol) parameter of NRTL equation ionic strength in mole fraction scale solubility product based on activity molality (g solvent molecular weight (g/mol) gas constant (=8.314 temperature (K) true liquid phase mole fraction based on all species; molecules and ions mole fraction ethanol on aqueous solvent (salt free) NRTL non-randomness parameter (=0.2) activity coefficient stoichiometric number the closest approach parameter of Pitzer–Debye–Hückel equation (=14.9) NRTL interaction parameter for any species in solution Pizter–Debye–Hückel equation infinite dilution unsymmetrical convention cation species anion species