This contribution is an overview of the diagnosis and management of injuries to the carpus.Injuries to the carpus are common, and usually follow a fall onto the hand, resulting in hyperextension of the wrist. Injuries range from minor sprains, to scaphoid fractures, to major disruption (e.g. perilunate dislocations). Scaphoid fractures are the commonest carpal fractures. Triquetral fractures are uncommon and all other carpal fractures are rare. Displaced or multiple fractures suggest ligamentous disruption within the carpus. Ligament injuries range from disruption of the scapholunate ligament (which is common but not often diagnosed acutely) to perilunate dislocation (which is rare). Significant injuries to the wrist can be quite subtle and should be actively sought in polytrauma, where they are often missed.     If a scaphoid fracture is suspected, tenderness should be sought in the anatomical snuffbox and scaphoid tubercle; pain should be sought on longitudinal compression. These tests have a sensitivity of 100%, but are often positive in patients without a fracture. Clinical tests to assess the integrity of carpal ligaments have been described, but are unlikely to be helpful in the acutely injured wrist.  Scaphoid views should be obtained if a scaphoid fracture is suspected from the clinical findings. These consist of at least four views: posteroanterior, lateral and two oblique views. The posteroanterior view should be taken with the wrist in ulnar deviation because this action brings the scaphoid into extension, making it parallel with the X-ray plate; this view identifies most scaphoid fractures. A carpal tunnel view highlights the pisiform and hook of hamate, but may be difficult to obtain in the acutely injured wrist. Oblique views may help to profile the ulnar part of the carpus. CT is often the only way to reliably image fractures on the ulnar side of the wrist. Scaphoid fractures comprise about 80% of carpal fractures; about 80% occur in males and about 80% are ‘waist’ fractures. Most patients are between 20 years and 30 years of age. Fractures are divided into:  middle third (or waist) fractures proximal pole fractures distal third fractures (uncommon). The scaphoid is almost completely covered in articular cartilage. The blood supply enters the bone at points of ligament attachment over the distal two-thirds of the bone, with the proximal pole being dependent on the intraosseous circulation (i.e. the blood supply of the proximal fragment is at risk in proximal pole fractures). A scaphoid fracture should be suspected in patients presenting with radial-sided wrist pain after hyperextension injury to the wrist; evidence of a haemarthrosis may be present. Tenderness in the anatomical snuffbox and over the scaphoid tubercle suggests a scaphoid fracture. The range of movement of the wrist is often normal. Most scaphoid fractures are visible on the initial radiographs, but occult fractures can occur. The care of a patient with a suspected scaphoid fracture and a normal radiograph depends on resources. MRI using an extremity coil is the most sensitive and specific way of identifying or excluding such fractures, and may identify other injuries Traditional teaching says that occult fractures may become apparent after 10–14 days due to bone resorption at the fracture site: there is little evidence for this. Immobilization in a cast for two weeks may have symptomatic benefit to patients with a wrist injury in the absence of a fracture. It may also be easier to clinically assess the patient when reviewed after this short period of immobilization. Repeat clinical and radiographic examination after this should identify most fractures, leaving a small number requiring further imaging. Early further imaging in suspected scaphoid fractures may be more cost effective than repeat visits to clinic.  The duration of immobilization must be sufficient to allow fracture healing, but must be balanced against the risk of stiffness. A period of 8–12 weeks’ immobilization, depending on radiographic evidence of union, is reasonable. There is no evidence that immobilization beyond 12 weeks is beneficial, but fractures can unite after that time without surgery. Deciding whether or not a fracture has healed by clinical examination and radiographs can be difficult and CT may be required in some cases. Fractures that are not progressing towards union after a suitable period of conservative treatment should be considered for surgery if symptomatic.   fracture displacement of >1 mm (suggests an unstable fracture or associated ligament disruption) angulation at the fracture site (suggests fracture instability) evidence of carpal instability (e.g. associated perilunate dislocation) previously undiagnosed non-union presenting after an acute injury. Other indications are:  proximal pole fractures (conservative treatment requires lengthy immobilization and the non-union rate is higher in these injuries) percutaneous fixation of undisplaced fractures (can lead to earlier return to work or sport, although it does not increase the union rate) associated injuries to bones in the hand or forearm. Fractures of other carpal bones are far less common than scaphoid fractures. Triquetral fractures account for about 13% of carpal fractures, and the remaining six bones for only about 10%. A high index of suspicion is required because radiographic appearances can be subtle. A displaced fracture or fracture of more than one carpal bone points to the possibility of carpal dislocation (about 50% of capitate fractures are associated with perilunate dislocation). Most ligamentous injuries occur in an arc around the lunate and are termed perilunate injuries or dislocations. They are caused by an indirect mechanism. A hyperextension injury occurs with varying degrees of supination and ulnar deviation. Mayfield  Stage I: as the scaphoid is forced into extension and supination, the scapholunate ligament tears from volar to dorsal, or alternatively, the scaphoid fractures. Stage II: further extension results in dorsal translation of the distal row from the lunate (there is no ligament connecting lunate to capitate). This can lead to tearing of the volar wrist capsule. Stage III: further deformation leads to tearing of the lunotriquetral ligament or fracture of the triquetrum. Stage IV: at this stage, all of the ligaments surrounding the lunate have torn, apart from the radiolunate ligaments. The carpus falls back into alignment with the radius, pushing the lunate into the carpal tunnel. Carpal ligament injury can range from minor partial tears of the scapholunate ligament to major disruptions of the carpus. Many patients diagnosed as having wrist ‘sprains’ are likely to have stage-I or -II injuries, which may subsequently become problematic. Injuries may be purely ligamentous or involve fracture of the radial styloid, scaphoid, capitate, triquetrum or a combination of these. Trans-scaphoid perilunate dislocation is the commonest. Other patterns include trans-styloid, trans-scaphoid, trans-triquetral, trans-scaphoid and trans-capitate. A number of features should be observed when evaluating radiographs of the wrist. The wrist must be in a neutral position because deviation from this will affect the relative positions of the carpal bones.   The first is the line of the articular surfaces of the proximal carpal row at the radiocarpal joint. The second is the line of the articular surfaces of the proximal carpal row in the mid-carpal joint. The third is the line made by the articular surfaces of the capitate and hamate at the mid-carpal joint. A step in these smooth arcs indicates a carpal disruption at that site. A gap of >2 mm between adjacent carpal bones points to the possibility of carpal disruption. Injury to the scapholunate ligament can cause the scaphoid to flex and appear shortened. This will also put the scaphoid tubercle into prominence (‘signet ring sign’).  Fractures of the radial styloid, scaphoid or other carpal bones may be seen. If fractures of two or more of these bones are seen, ligament disruption is likely even if the radiographs are otherwise normal.  Ligamentous injuries without subluxation are rarely diagnosed acutely but repair or stabilization may be indicated if present. The patient should be treated in a plaster slab initially and referred to a hand surgeon if ligament disruption without dislocation is suspected. Perilunate dislocations are a surgical emergency requiring urgent reduction. Opinion differs regarding definitive management, but most wrist specialists recommend open reduction and Kirschner-wire (K-wire) fixation with ligament repair or reconstruction. Internal fixation is indicated if a fracture is present. The median nerve is often compressed due to subluxation of the lunate and often requires decompression. Axial pattern injuries are rare high-energy injuries caused by crushing in an anteroposterior direction. This causes flattening of the carpal arch, leading to ligamentous and possible bony failure, separating a column of carpus and metacarpals from the rest of the hand (e.g. the hamate, pisiform and fourth and fifth metacarpals may separate as a unit from the rest of the carpus and metacarpus). These are complex, often open injuries, treated by debridement, open or closed reduction, and fixation.