This communication describes a new technique to identify and track individual bubbles moving in a bubble swarm covering bubble diameters from 0.2 to 5mm and gas hold-up from 2% to 30%, conditions relevant to mineral flotation systems. The technique employs a 2D column, slot-type spargers, a digital high-speed camera and image analysis software developed for tracking multiple moving objects. The camera collects sequences of images recorded at 2ms intervals at 1280×1024pixel size. The software allows bubble geometric properties to be measured in the image sequence and compiled into a data structure. To track each bubble, a shape and proximity criterion is applied on consecutive pictures to identify each bubble. The bubble trajectory is reconstructed from the data structure; up to 60,000 matching bubbles can be tracked per test. The bubble tracking measurements revealed a velocity–size relationship with some of the following features: faster moving bubbles speed up slower moving ones whether larger or smaller; a large population of slow moving fine bubbles slows all bubbles; surfactant type affects velocity, equivalent size bubbles in Polyglycol moving slower than in n-Pentanol. Practical implications in flotation are discussed.Bubble behaviour plays an important role in heterogeneous reactors and adsorptive bubble separation processes, such as flotation. Most studies focus on aspects of single bubble behaviour (  The rise of a bubble front can involve bubbles rising at different velocities creating segregation along the column. This characteristic helped A variety of techniques have been applied to characterize bubble swarm motion in columns operated with continuous gas injection.   The motivation for our work is investigation of flotation systems. There is no previous research characterizing individual bubble motion in bubble swarms under flotation-related conditions, typified by the presence of surfactants (frothers), bubble sizes (diameter) ca. 0.1 to 4 The technique is based on high-speed cinematography and tracking of multiple moving objects in a sequence of images. Images are generated from approximately 2D bubble swarms and recorded at intervals of 2 The experiments are conducted in a narrow rectangular transparent column with an inclined top section (15°) ( The surfactants tested were the commercial frother, Polyglycol (H(C A digital high-speed camera (Troubleshooter HR) with macro lens (Nikon, AF Micro Nikkor) is used to collect sequences of images in AVI file format (Audio Video Interleave), in 256 grey scale levels on a CMOS sensor (15.4 In order to meet the compromise of picture size (7 Backlighting is employed, which produces bubble contours ( In some cases, a number of objects remained static in a sequence of images (bubbles stuck to surfaces or image noise). To remove these objects a masking routine was developed in Matlab. Bubble images usually contain touching bubbles (bubble clusters) and irregular bubble shapes. These characteristics make it difficult to identify and isolate individual bubbles thus reducing the efficiency with which the same bubble can be tracked over a sequence of images. These problems have been noted using the sampling-for-imaging technique ( These isolated objects are converted into a data structure containing bubble properties (e.g., area, perimeter, major and minor axis) and position coordinates and time organized per picture. This structure allows the following: bubble classification (cluster bubbles vs. single bubbles), statistical computations such as bubble size distribution and aspect ratio distribution, and bubble tracking. Once the data structure is created bubble images are no longer required, i.e., no other image processing operation is needed. As a result data storage size is reduced by 95%. These characteristics convert an image processing problem into a data processing problem, speeding up analysis. A matching criterion based on object geometric properties and bubble displacement is used to track individual bubbles. An example of the procedure is shown in To compute the incidence value, and later the incidence matrix ( This function was suitable for discriminating ellipsoidal objects, and is the result of a series of model evaluations, combining geometric parameters (e.g., perimeter and equivalent diameter). The technique is sensitive enough to track a single object among a large number of bubbles of similar geometry (e.g., aspect ratio ∼ The incidence values and bubble displacement are computed for each bubble in consecutive pictures. Selecting the candidate bubbles, a bubble indices pair or “marriage objects” is obtained, which references the bubble number in the two pictures. The procedure is repeated for every target bubble and repeated for every sequence of image pairs (1 to The technique depends on picture resolution and frame rate. Picture resolution determines the precision of the incidence value, while the frame rate determines the minimum object displacement. From experience, it has been determined that to maximize the number of matching bubbles, the object displacement in two consecutive images must be least 0.25 bubble diameter and at most 1 bubble diameter. This means, for example, a bubble of 1.4 In some cases, when bubbles are unstable in shape (wobbling bubbles, which are normally bubbles > Normally, 400 to 1000 pictures are collected per test (250 to 1000 Bubble behaviour in a swarm will be influenced by degree of bubble interaction. As a measure of interaction it is common to use gas hold-up (  From the bubble tracking, velocity in the vertical (rectilinear) and horizontal direction can be determined. The interest here is the rectilinear vector. As surfactant accumulates on a bubble surface, the bubble size distribution stabilizes (coalescence is retarded), and bubbles tend to spherical and slow down. Evidence of these evolutions is shown in   The results indicate a significant difference in bubble rise velocity between the two surfactants. This was pursued to finer bubbles using the porous slot sparger to produce a Sauter mean size 0.4 The comments on Measurements were made in the presence of Polyglycol (0.2 The two distribution were generated using the slot sparger in the presence of Polyglycol (0.04 The two distributions ( The image processing technique increased the number of isolated bubbles identified in a picture to permit tracking bubbles over a sequence of pictures. By converting to a data structure data storage and time requirements were significantly reduced (up to 95%) making tractable analysis of geometric properties and trajectory mapping. The technique was applied to approximately 2D swarms generated in a column using slot spargers and in some cases employing an inclined (15°) section to reduce bubble superimposition. A combination of slot and porous slot spargers enabled a wide range of bubble size distributions relevant to flotation systems to be studied. Comparing systems was simplified by the fact that surfactant (frother) has limited impact on the bubble size distribution generated at a slot sparger. This limited impact can be credited to a slot offering fewer coalescence opportunities at the moment of bubble creation compared to other bubble generation devices. In terms of bubble interactions, the evidence points to faster rising bubbles speeding up slower moving ones ( Comparisons are compromised by the difficulty in retaining all conditions constant save for the one of interest. For example, the comparison of narrow and bi-modal distributions ( The observations regarding Polyglycol and n-Pentanol show a significant impact of surfactant type. The results are of interest as the concentrations used (0.2 The two frothers also have different effects on bubble shape. The same surface tension gradient force slowing the bubble rise opposes deformation of the bubble as well. The difference in velocity between the frothers extends to fine bubbles < Bubble size and velocity play a role in flotation, being included, for example, in fundamental models of flotation ( Features of the behaviour of individual bubbles in a swarm have been examined using image analysis techniques. A novel process was developed that increased the number of single bubbles identified, a vital step in tracking bubbles over a series of images. A matching criterion based on similitude and proximity was used to identify the same bubble and track it over the image sequence. A data structure was created that reduced processing time to yield geometric and trajectory properties. The technique was used to explore bubble interactions and surfactant effects using a 2D bubble swarm generated at slot spargers over a bubble size range of interest in flotation systems. The main findings are: Faster moving bubbles speed up slower moving neighbours; this includes not only larger faster bubbles affecting slower rising smaller bubbles but also intermediate sized bubbles (1.5–2.5 A large population of fine bubbles hinders rise velocity of all bubbles. The two surfactants (frothers) tested, Polyglycol and n-Pentanol, have different effects: Polyglycol slows bubbles to approach the velocity of single bubbles in contaminated water and causes bubbles to be spherical (up to ∼ A role of frother type on bubble motion is not considered in flotation systems: implications of the present observations remain to be identified. Funding for this work was from a) the Chair in Mineral Processing (renewal III) sponsored by Vale Inco, Teck Resources, Xstrata Process Support, Agnico-Eagle, Barrick Gold, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Flottec under the Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) program of the