   Unlike in the previous example, a method to extract and recover plasticizers and their stabilizers from solid propellants, explosives, and pyrotechnics employs supercritical fluid, CO The extraction and ingredient recovery method provides an environmentally acceptable alternative to traditional open burning and destruction of pyrotechnics. CO  System (10B) comprises an extraction system wherein is situated a rocket motor (28) including a rocket motor case with a nozzle portion attached at the aft end thereof. The rocket motor serves as the extraction pressure vessel. The pre-heated, if desired, and pressurized CO System (10C) includes a solid/liquid filtration chamber (42) which separates propellant ingredients not solubilized in CO It is evident from the above that a mixture of plasticizers and stabilizers is obtained from this method. It is theoretically possible to use different solvents, different pressures and temperatures of extraction to increase or decrease solubility of components by which attempts can be made to separate various components of the mixture. Heating polyvinylchloride, in particular plasticizer-containing polyvinylchloride, to a temperature from 250 to 500°C in the absence of oxygen gives a low-chlorine, carbon-containing residue, plasticizer, and hydrogen chloride. The disposal of plastic waste to landfill is becoming increasingly difficult; attempts must be made to utilize the material produced. One possibility in this respect is incineration with recovery of thermal energy. Low-emission power stations which are suitable for this are expensive. In addition, the toxic offgas components formed on incineration are regarded as pollution. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is regarded particularly critical in this respect. In the industrial-scale version of the process ( The carbon-containing residue present in the reactor (1) can, after cooling and, if necessary, washing or other aftertreatment, be employed as a fuel, for example in the novel process via branch line (16), or for another use. Likewise, some of the gas mixture escaping at the top of the condenser (7) can, after heating, be fed back into the process (via branch line (19)). The thermolysis of the PVC waste can be carried out using various reactor types, such as rotary kilns, multiple-hearth furnaces or fluidized-bed furnaces. Rotary kilns are particularly advantageous for carrying out the novel process. The gaseous products can be fed to an adsorption apparatus, and the hydrochloric acid obtained can then be utilized in a known manner in an oxychlorination process or for other chemical reactions. The distillate obtained in the condensation device can either be worked-up in a further step of the novel process or used as a fuel for firing the burner (2). During the manufacture of many polymer-containing materials, and particularly solid state lithium ion battery separators and electrodes, it is desirable to include plasticizers so that the components will be rendered porous after the plasticizer was removed. The review of patented technologies shows that there are some technological means developed in past to recover plasticizers. It is also noticeable that only a small number of such solutions have been patented which is surprising considering that land disposal of plasticized materials becomes increasingly more restricted and incineration leads to formation of toxic byproducts. Presence of plasticizers influences the amount and the composition of formed toxins such as dibenzodioxins and dibenzofurans. According to a non-binding resolution adopted by the European Parliament on 25 November 2015, the European Commission should not authorize the recycling of plastics containing plasticizer diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) to make soft polyvinyl chloride items such as floor coverings.