This paper examines the active mechanisms responsible for the size enlargement of nickel metal particles during reduction by hydrogen gas. The population balance, related to particle size distribution, is discretized and solved with the method of moments to model the experimental data. This data was generated in a solution of intermittently constant supersaturation during the batch reduction in an 11,000 l of autoclave. PSD and mass distributions were determined by periodically removing suspension samples. In the proposed model, only the growth mechanism is taken into account and aggregation is ignored. Comparison of simulated and experimental PSD and mass distributions show that growth was not the only active mechanisms. Results from the plant indicate that there is an increase in particle size as the cycle progresses. The model generally underpredicts the growth shift in the PSDs' for the early and the larger densifications although it correctly predicts the growth shift in the middle densifications. Constant growth is therefore not the exclusive controlling mechanism. The findings have been confirmed by the trend of the zeroth moment as a function of time.Precipitation and crystallization are very important processes in the modern chemical industry. Material for a wide variety of applications including pharmaceuticals, agricultural and especially mineral processing are produced in this way. The final product quality is often sensitive to the particle size distribution (PSD) and particle morphology. Simulation and scale up of such processes is often difficult because of complex interactions between mixing at different scales as well as nucleation, growth, aggregation and breakage. Nickel crystals are produced by reduction of a nickel salt in solution to nickel metal by hydrogen. The product characteristics are controlled by the active mechanisms. PSD data is available from a semi-batch, full-scale nickel production plant. Some qualitative work has been undertaken by previous researchers ( The PBE in crystallization/precipitation can be used to account for a change in the number of particles due to various mechanisms such as nucleation, growth, aggregation, breakage, dissolution and classification. A solution of this equation for a single mechanism or a combination of mechanisms, followed by a comparison with production data, would determine the active mechanisms in a given process. In this work, the PBE is used to model the data of a nickel powder system to determine the active mechanisms in the nickel reduction process. Only the growth mechanism is taken into account. It follows that failure to reconcile the solutions to the model with the production data will suggest that growth is not the only controlling mechanism and aggregation or breakage needs to be taken into account. The PBE as a tool, used to provide information on the number and size distribution in precipitation and crystallization processes, can also be used to identify the size enlargement mechanism in the reactor. The PBE as a tool for understanding crystallization has been widely discussed in literature by many authors, Assuming that the first property of a particle is its size, Hounslow and co-workers demonstrated that the particle can be characterized by its dimensions (  The birth of particles into a size interval by aggregation was described by Therefore:  Simulating all the possible active mechanisms individually and summing up their effects solves the PBE. However, it is known that nickel cannot nucleate homogeneously from a solution and a seed is needed on which the nickel atoms can deposit ( The partial differential Eq. An initial condition is required for the first size interval as the number of particles there cannot interact with any particle below that interval. Metallic nickel is produced by the reduction of ammoniacal solution by hydrogen under pressure (1400–2800 kPa) at about 140–250 °C in agitated 11,000 l batch autoclaves at 600 rpm. The rate of reduction is directly proportional to seed surface area ( Once the nucleation is achieved, the solution is discharged, leaving the metallic nickel in the autoclave. This serves as seed onto which crystals can grow in the next batch reduction. Each batch reduction is called a densification. With repeated densifications the nickel particles increase in size and become more compact, resulting in the production of a powder with higher apparent density. When the size of the crystals becomes too large and dense to obtain effective agitation, both the particle and the depleted solution are discharged ( In this work samples were collected after every 5th densification in order to track the evolution of the PSD. The samples were then analyzed to determine apparent density, SEM images for morphology and PSD using a laser diffraction method (Malvern Mastersizer). In order to validate the present PBE model and its discrete counterparts, its predictions are compared to some of the available experimental work in the published literature. The model was tested against that of The models were seen to behave similarly. They both showed numerical instabilities at lower size intervals, particularly when the number of particles in those intervals falls to zero and below. These were eliminated as suggested by Hounslow's model allowed better conservation of particle numbers and was therefore chosen to model the nickel process. For the purpose of this study the growth rate was modeled as constant. This can only be true if the following assumptions are correct: The nucleation rate is ignored. The assumption was validated by the process description. The autoclaves operate isothermally. The particular set of densifications being modeled occurred at a constant temperature of about 190 °C. The growth rate is surface area independent. The solution is under constant supersaturation. The process is a semi-batch process. The depleted nickel solution is intermittently replaced with pregnant nickel solution. The samples were all taken at the same stage of the cycle. This maintains an intermittently constant supersaturation level in the autoclave over the 60 densifications. From Eq. For a constant growth rate, the slope of the plot of d The growth rates estimated from the moments of the production data are shown in There is no distinct trend as the growth rates increase and decrease between densifications. It is clear from the results that the growth rates are not constant throughout the process. The conclusion that can therefore be drawn from these changes is that the assumption made before, i.e., the growth rate is not surface area dependent might be incorrect otherwise another mechanism is taking place as well as growth. The solutions to the model were therefore generated over intervals of 5 densifications at a time with a specific growth rate for each set of 5 densifications. The initial state in each figure is the data from the earlier of the two densifications. The measured data of the later densification is then compared with the one predicted by the model. Results are shown for both number and mass distributions. The measured PSD ( From The plot of the first moment as a function of batch (densification) number shows two trends ( The simulated and experimental mass distributions in From the model based on the PBE, it is possible to extract physical information regarding the active mechanisms occurring during the nickel reduction process. From the study, the main conclusions that can be drawn are: The assumption that growth was the dominant size enlargement mechanism was not valid when the experimental data and model predictions were compared; The aggregation mechanism has a significant effect on the size enlargement in nickel reduction; In the early densifications, the primary size enlargement mechanism appear to be aggregation, as evidenced by the poor fit of the growth-only model; In the later densifications, the growth-only assumption results in a better fit of the model to the experimental data, suggesting that growth is the dominant size enlargement mechanism at later stages; The model generally underpredicts the growth shift in the PSDs' therefore the hypothesis made, i.e., the constant growth only is not the exclusive controlling mechanism during the reduction of nickel by hydrogen. Nucleation rate (m s Birth rate of particles into size interval (# m Instantaneous concentration (mg l Equilibrium concentration (mg l Death rate of particle from size interval (# m Linear growth rate (m s Growth rate parameters Current size interval (μm) Lower bound on Initial size of nuclei (μm) Total length of particles (μm)  Number density function (# m Number of particles (# m Dimensionless number of particle in the range Number of crystals in the Total number of crystals in the Error function for nucleation Supersaturation, dimensionless Time (s) Total volume (m Discretization ratio for size intervals Growth equation constants (functions of Growth rate parameters Aggregation kernel (m Dirac delta function Crystal size (μm) Ordinary differential equation Population balance equation Particle size distribution The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Research Foundation (NRF).