Flotation of apatite is complicated, owing to its physicochemical similarity with other minerals in phosphate ores. Despite this, relatively few studies have been done on the effect of operating parameters, such as the mode of milling, pulp conditions and collector dosage on the kinetics of apatite flotation. In this technical note, the results of batch flotation tests and the fitting of a first-order kinetic model to assess the influence of operating variables on the flotation kinetics are discussed. Pulp pH, collector dosage and pulp temperature affected recovery significantly, but the mode of milling (wet or dry) did not. All factors influenced the concentrate grade, except for the collector dosage, while the milling mode was the only factor that did not affect the flotation kinetics significantly.The flotation of apatite, an important phosphate-bearing mineral constituent of pyroxenite and foskorite, is complicated by the close similarity in its physicochemical properties with other minerals present in phosphate ores. Although many studies have been undertaken to increase understanding of the principles of apatite flotation and its separation from other minerals ( In this technical note, the significance of collector dose, pulp pH, temperature and milling mode (wet or dry) is discussed. These conditions were investigated experimentally through batch flotation tests based on a full factorial design, while a first-order flotation kinetic model was used to assess the influence of these variables on the flotation kinetics. The particle size for both dry and wet ground samples were kept at 30% −75 μm. Four operating parameters were investigated in the experiments, viz. milling mode (1 denotes dry milling and −1 denotes wet milling), collector dosage (1 denotes 400 g/t fatty acid and 350 g/t sulphonate, while −1 denotes 200 g/t fatty acid and 175 g/t sulphonate), slurry pH (1 denotes 12.3 and −1 denotes 9.1) and temperature (1 denotes 18 °C and −1 denotes 35 °C). Two-level fractional factorial experiments were conducted, the results of which are shown in The effects of pulp temperature ( Based on the experiments described above, the best results were obtained at a pH level of 12.3, with 400 g/t fatty acid and 350 g/t sulphonate, a moderately elevated temperature of 35 °C and dry milling with 30% of the particles smaller than 75 μm. As can be seen from Higher temperatures favoured the flotation of the apatite, probably owing to the higher dissolution of fatty acid in the slurry at elevated temperatures. This observation is in agreement with the observations of other authors ( Topographical examination ( The authors wish to acknowledge Mr. J. Li for his help with the flotation experiments and Mrs H. Tan for her assistance with the chemical analyses.