Separating chalcopyrite, an important copper-containing ore, from pyrite is an important mineral-processing objective. Herein, we report the synthesis of S-hydroxyethyl-O-isobutyl xanthate (HEIBX), a novel surfactant bearing both hydroxyl and thione groups, through the attachment of a hydroxyethyl group to sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX), and its first application as a flotation collector for the selective flotation-separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite. The flotation mechanism involving HEIBX and chalcopyrite or pyrite was investigated by DFT calculations, UV–vis spectroscopy, contact-angle and surface-tension measurements, flotation and zeta-potential experiments, as well as FTIR spectroscopy and XPS. Incorporation of the hydroxyethyl group was observed to increase the molecular properties of SIBX by increasing the number of active sites, arrangement density, selectivity and hydrophobicity, thereby improving its flotation performance. Chalcopyrite was separated from pyrite using 4 × 10−5 mol·L−1 HEIBX at pH ∼8.0. Furthermore, we found that the hydroxyl and thione functional groups adsorb onto the chalcopyrite surface though the formation of COCu and CSCu bonds.Xanthate is an important chemical product that has been widely used in the medical, agriculture, wastewater-treatment and functional-materials industries ( In general, transforming an ionic xanthate into a non-ionic compound can significantly increase its selectivity and helps to separate chalcopyrite from pyrite, which is a difficult problem. For instance, the Dow Chemical Co. prepared Recently, some novel xanthate derivatives have been prepared by introducing additional active sites into the molecule. These modified molecules usually exhibited excellent collecting abilities and selectivities, and were able to efficiently separate copper sulfide minerals from pyrite.  In this study, we prepared HEIBX and report its first use as a flotation collector for the selective separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite. We also systematically investigated the adsorption mechanism of HEIBX onto the surface of chalcopyrite and pyrite. DFT calculations, surface-tension, UV–vis spectroscopy and contact-angle experiments were used to compare the molecular and surface behaviour of HEIBX and SIBX. The collecting abilities of the two surfactants were examined by single-mineral flotation experiments. Finally, zeta-potential experiments, FTIR spectroscopy, and XPS were used to study the mechanisms for the adsorption of HEIBX onto chalcopyrite and pyrite. Analytically pure ethylene chlorohydrin, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide and 4-methyl-2-pentanol (MIBC) were purchased from the Xiya Reagent Co. Ltd (Shandong, China). Sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX, purity = 93.1%) was obtained commercially; Cu Pure chalcopyrite and pyrite mineral samples were purchased from the Daye, Hubei, China. After crushing, grinding, and screening, the ore samples were classified according to the desired particle size, namely <38 µm, and >38 µm but <76 µm. Ore with the former particle size was used in the zeta potential experiments, as well as for FTIR spectroscopy and XPS, while that with the latter particle size was used in micro-flotation experiments. The purity of the two ores were determined by XRD and XRF using the ore with <38 µm particle size, the results of which are displayed in  The initial molecular structures of HEIBX and the SIBX anion were first optimized using MM2 and PM3 methods in ChemBioOffice 2014 ( The surface tensions of HEIBX and SIBX were measured using a QBZY surface tension meter (Fangrui Instrument Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) by the Wilhelmy plate method at 25 °C. In order to avoid the effects of residues, the platinum plate was cleaned successively with alcohol and water, and then flame dried. The surface-tension data are averages of five measurements determined under automated operating condition. The relationship between surface tension and the logarithm of the concentration was plotted. The critical micelle concentration (CMC) value was obtained by extrapolating two straight lines on the linear parts of the curve until intersected each other. The intersection was deemed to be the value of the CMC ( To evaluate the selective interactions operating between HEIBX or SIBX and Cu The contact angles of water droplets on the surfaces of chalcopyrite and pyrite were measured using a JC2000C contact angle analyzer (Shanghai Zhongchen Co., China) by the water-drop captive method. Chunk samples of chalcopyrite and pyrite were polished with abrasive paper, and then successively ultrasonically cleaned for 5 min in ethanol and distilled water. After drying with pure N Micro-flotation experiments were performed using an XFGII flotation machine (Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, China). The volume of the flotation cell was 30 mL and the stirring speed of the machine was fixed at 1650 rpm. In each experiment, 2.0 g of ore sample and a specific amount of water were added into the cell and stirred for 3 min. In the meantime, the pH of the pulp was adjusted to the required value using hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. A collector solution of the appropriate concentration was added and the mixture was stirred for a further 3 min, after which, a solution of MIBC (frother) was added into the slurry, with stirring continued for 1 min. Finally, the flotation test was conducted for 5 min. The concentrates and tailings were collected and dried for flotation-recovery calculations. The zeta potentials of chalcopyrite and pyrite before and after treatment with HEIBX were measured using a JS94H electrophoresis apparatus (Beckman Coulter Inc., USA). In each experiment, 0.05 g of chalcopyrite or pyrite was added to 50 mL 1 × 10 The FTIR spectra of chalcopyrite and pyrite before and after treatment with HEIBX solution were recorded on an FTIR-740 infrared spectrometer (Nicolet, USA) in the 4000–400 cm Chalcopyrite was subjected to XPS before and after HEIBX treatment using a Thermo Fisher ESCLAB 250Xi spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The pass energy was set as 30 eV with a monochromatized Al Kα X-ray source operating at 150 W and between 10 The structure of HEIBX was characterized by FTIR ( Understanding the behaviour of molecules is important for predicting their flotation abilities and selectivities. Therefore, we studied the molecular level behaviour of HEIBX and SIBX by DFT, surface-tension experiments, and UV–vis spectroscopy. Recently, the density functional theory (DFT) method has been widely used to evaluate possible collector/mineral interaction mechanisms due to its reliability and cost effectiveness ( The molecular electrostatic potential (MEP) and the associated color-graded map is an important tool for analyzing the functional sites of a molecule and predicting the interactions of its reactive sites ( Frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) theory is a well-known method for qualitatively predicting chemical-reactivity characteristics ( Dipole moment, as a measure of molecular polarity, can be used to evaluate electrostatic and van der Waals interactions between collectors and metal species ( The above DFT results show that attachment of the hydroxyethyl group to SIBX converting it to HEIBX increases the number of reactive sites and enhance its electron-donating ability, which may affect its flotation performances. The surface activity of a surfactant is an important parameter for froth flotation, and can be evaluated by measuring its surface tension ( In Eqs. As shown in Г Chalcopyrite, a major copper resource, is often found in association with pyrite ( Based on the DFT results, the surface tension and UV–vis spectroscopy data, we conclude that HEIBX will selectively interact with chalcopyrite, but not with pyrite, while SIBX will interact with both chalcopyrite and pyrite. Furthermore, the amount of HEIBX adsorbed on the chalcopyrite surface is expected to exceed that of SIBX. In general, hydrophobic minerals tend to be more floatable. Consequently, the effect of the collector on the hydrophobicity of the mineral surface needs to be studied. Contact-angle data provide a measure of the hydrophobicity of a surface. Therefore, we measured the contact angles of water droplets on the surfaces of chalcopyrite and pyrite as functions of collector concentration (at pH 8.0), the results of which are presented in In view of the difference in the molecular properties of the two collectors and their effects on the hydrophobicities of the two mineral surfaces described above, we expected to be able to apply them to the flotation separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite; hence, flotation experiments were conducted. The effects of pulp pH and collector concentration on flotation are displayed in  Compared to SIBX, HEIBX exhibited superior collecting ability and selectivity for chalcopyrite; therefore, exploring the mechanism for the adsorption of HEIBX onto chalcopyrite and pyrite by zeta potential measurements, FTIR spectroscopy, and XPS, is a meaningful objective. It is well-known that the adsorption of a collector on a mineral surface can change the surface charge of that surface ( The FTIR spectra of the various samples are presented in  The survey-scan XPS spectra of chalcopyrite samples in the 0–1200 eV binding energy range are shown in In order to investigate the mechanism involved in the reaction of chalcopyrite with the HEIBX molecule, high-resolution O 1s, Cu 2p3/2, and S 2p3/2 spectra were acquired and are shown in The O 1s peak of the original chalcopyrite sample is best fitted by three peaks with energies of 529.75, 531.30, and 532.80 eV, which correspond to O The S 2p3/2 spectrum of untreated chalcopyrite was resolved into three peaks centered at 161.13, 162.02, and 163.25 eV, and are assigned to metal sulfides (S The Cu 2p3/2 spectrum was fitted using three peaks located at 931.96, 932.47, and 934.20 eV, assigned to CuFeS Based on the DFT calculations, FTIR spectroscopy, and XPS, we conclude that HEIBX is adsorbed onto the chalcopyrite surface through the formation of O In this paper, we describe the preparation of HEIBX, a xanthate derivative, through the attachment of a hydroxyethyl group to the isobutyl xanthate ion and report its first use as a flotation collector for the selective flotation-separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite; its flotation performance was evaluated through the micro-flotation experiments. DFT calculations, surface tension measurements, and UV–vis spectroscopy were used to explore the flotation performance of HEIBX. Contact angle measurements were used to investigate the effect of HEIBX adsorption on the hydrophobicity of the minerals. Zeta potentials were measured, and FTIR and XPS spectra were acquired in order to further elucidate interactions operating between the collector and the mineral. Based on the experimental results, several conclusions are made. DFT revealed that the functional sites of HEIBX are its C Contact-angle experiments reveal that HEIBX selectively and significantly improves the hydrophobicity of the chalcopyrite surface, but has little effect on the pyrite surface. Micro-flotation experiments further verify that HEIBX has a superior collecting ability and selectivity for chalcopyrite over pyrite compared to SIBX, with chalcopyrite/pyrite flotation-separation achieved using 4 × 10 Zeta potential experiments and FTIR spectroscopy reveal that HEIBX is chemisorbed onto the chalcopyrite surface, while no obvious chemical interaction was observed between HEIBX and pyrite. The XPS results suggest that HEIBX is adsorbed onto the chalcopyrite surface through the reactions of The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the National High Technology Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: