The adhesion of bubbles to a particle surface is a ubiquitous natural phenomenon that plays a critical role in numerous industrial processes. The aim of this work is to broaden the knowledge of the hydrodynamic interactions that occur between bubbles and solids of a comparable size. Focusing on collision processes between a single rising bubble with an immobile surface (D
                     b
                     <1mm) and a larger stationary solid spherical particle, the bubble trajectory, collision efficiency and maximum collision angle were determined experimentally. All existing theoretical models of mineral flotation are based on the fundamental assumption that liquid flow around the bubble is both fore-and-after asymmetric in a vertical orientation and left-and-right symmetric in a horizontal orientation. However, when a small bubble collides with a larger spherical particle, the liquid flow around the bubble is asymmetric in all directions. Consequently the existing theoretical models enabling the estimation of the collision efficiency or maximum collision angle were tested for description of collision processes between bubbles and solids of a comparable size.The formation of bubble–particle aggregates, caused by bubble–particle interaction, is a fundamental process occurring in many industrial applications. Flotation is one of the most important examples of such a process. Originally developed in the mining industry to recover valuable minerals from mined ores, flotation employs air bubbles as carriers to recover hydrophobic entities from complex slurries. Due to its high separation efficiency, cost effectiveness and simplicity of operation and maintenance, flotation has been extended to other industries utilising solid–solid and solid–liquid separation processes. Such processes include: bitumen recovery from oil sands; the de-inking of recycled paper pulp; de-oiling in heavy oil exploration; the removal of fine solids in industrial and domestic water treatment; the treatment of multiphase toxic effluents in the chemical and mining industries; and, plastics separation and recycling. The use of flotation in plastics separation has grown in line with the need to recycle plastics (e.g. An identical mechanism of bubble–particle interaction can be assumed for both types of flotation (mineral flotation with In mineral flotation, particle motion around a rising bubble is commonly considered as motion around a spherical body with rotational symmetry in the gravitational direction. To describe liquid flow around an air bubble it is convenient to choose an axisymmetrical (polar spherical) coordinate system and a three-dimensional (3D) analysis of bubble–particle interaction is often simplified into a two-dimensional (2D) analysis. The liquid flow around bubbles typically used in flotation is fore-and-aft asymmetric ( The hydrodynamic field around a moving bubble in stagnant liquid can be described using the Navier–Stokes equations (e.g. Here, Here the bubble has an immobile surface and its velocity is the same as that of a solid sphere. The drag coefficient For bubbles with a diameter of more than 0.2  In this equation, Here, Karamanev and Nikolov ( In this equation, The empirical constants To simulate and analyse the whole bubble–particle interaction process, the effectiveness of such a process should be evaluated. Assuming that collision and attachment are independent sub-processes ( Experimental collision efficiency is most frequently determined from the particle grazing trajectory (radius Here The estimation of collision efficiency has been the focus of many published theories. Recently, In most collision models, attention has been focused on bubbles with an immobile surface. This retardation is caused by tap water impurities and surface-active agents added during industrial flotation processes.  Recently, The parameters All given models and equations were published for purposes of mineral flotation. Unfortunately, no data were found for bubble–particle interaction processes where Distilled, de-ionised water with a pH value of 6.13 and conductivity of 1.6 A schematic of the experimental apparatus is presented in Measuring began at a point 50 In order to compare the experimental results with the literature data, a high-speed video camera was used to measure terminal bubble velocity in the aqueous solution of a surface-active agent. The subsequent images (time interval 0.002 Bubble–particle collision is assumed to occur in the section of the particle surface between the angles During our experimental measurements bubble motion was captured at intervals of 0.002 While the bubble remains moving parallel to the particle vertical axis no deviation occurs. Deviation in the trajectory of a bubble occurs and increases as the distance between the bubble centre and the particle vertical axis grows; namely, as the initial angle The experimental data clearly shows the linear dependence of the collision angle on the initial angle, the proportion constant being 1.04. These results are in close correspondence with theoretical assumptions ( The value most often used to characterise flotation effectiveness is efficiency which can be described by collision and attachment efficiencies. In Eq. The experimental data on maximum collision angles are shown in The experimental results were compared with the data published for various theoretical models. It should be noted that with our experimental conditions (contaminated water), an immobile bubble surface was expected. For bubbles with an immobile surface ( According to Nguyen's model ( The experimental collision efficiency was calculated using the maximum initial angle We compared the bubble–particle interaction processes in mineral flotation and plastics flotation. This experimental study was focused only on the collision process between smaller rising bubble in contaminated water and larger stationary spherical particle which was chosen as a model particle imitating plastic material. In the case of small bubbles an insignificant liquid stream field was detected, only influencing bubble motion immediately prior to interaction with a particle. For an example, the linear dependence of the collision angle on the initial angle with low value of proportion constant was found. Although many features were confirmed to be common for both processes (mineral flotation and plastics flotation), significant differences also exist. In particular, plastics flotation shows that the flow of liquid around a bubble approaching, or colliding with, a larger stationary spherical particle is asymmetric. However, this has not been taken into account by models of mineral flotation, which means that they cannot be used to reliably estimate collision efficiency as well as maximum collision angle.  Archimedes number drag coefficient diameter, m collision efficiency gravity acceleration, m Morton number radius, m Reynolds number Tadaki number velocity, ms volume, m  bubble collision liquid maximum particle relative  dynamic viscosity, kg collision angle initial angle density, kg surface tension, mN free bubble surface This work was supported by grant No.