This chapter concerns the measurement of level and volume. Many industrial and scientific processes require knowledge of the quantity of content of tanks and other containers. In many instances, it is not possible or practical to directly view the interior. Parameters of interest are generally the level of contents, volume, or simply the presence of substances. Simple installations may be able to adopt inexpensive manual methods such as a dipstick. Automatic control applications, however, require control signals for operation of a process actuator or alarm. For these cases, several options of output signal are available; they include indirect electric contacts and electronic proportional outputs as well as direct flow and pneumatic valving. There are several methods used to measure or control level in a container, which can be divided into those that measure a continuous range of level and those that measure a small change or point level. These full-range or continuous level methods have found wide acceptance; the methods are: sight gauges and float-driven instruments.Many industrial and scientific processes require knowledge of the quantity of content of tanks and other containers. In many instances it is not possible or practical to directly view the interior. Parameters of interest are generally level of the contents, volume, or simply the presence of substances. Sensors may be needed (see  Simple installations may be able to adopt inexpensive manual methods such as a dipstick. Automatic control applications, however, will require control signals for operation of a process actuator or alarm. For these cases, several options of output signal are available; they include indirect electric contacts and electronic proportional outputs as well as direct flow and pneumatic valving. As well as the obvious liquid substances such as water, oil, petroleum, and milk, level sensors have been successfully applied to measurement of solids such as flour, mineral ores, food grain, and even potatoes and coal. Two-phase systems are also often measured—for example, liquid and froth levels in beer making and for mineral slurries. Due to the extensive need for this basic process parameter, many types of level instruments are available; their installation details are important. A useful tutorial introduction to level measurement is available in Suppliers of level-sensing systems generally provide good design support for installation, enabling the prospective user to appreciate the practical problems that arise and offering wide variation in the sensor packaging and systems arrangements. However, it is often difficult to select the appropriate sensor for a particular system, even with support from a supplier. If the system is other than a simple one, great care should be taken in product selection. Then, even greater care should be taken in the application of the sensor itself. Put the sensor where it will not be affected by the turbulence caused by the product flowing in and out of the vessel. Positioning to control errors is also important. For example, when a stilling tube is placed outside the container, its contents may be at a different temperature from those in the container. The complete sensor may need to be fully removable without imposing the need to empty the container. It is often necessary to incorporate followers, such as shown in  Corrosion effects on the components of the sensing arrangements, caused by the contents, must also be carefully considered. High temperatures, corrosive materials, and abrasion in granular-material measurement can progressively alter the characteristics of the system by producing undue friction, changing the mass of floats and simply reducing the system to an unworkable state. In recent years this has caused more reliance on noncontacting or noninvasive means of measuring level. When these devices are properly applied, they have the potential for indefinitely long operational life. The level sensor should preferably have built-in backlash, which provides a toggle action (hysteresis) so that the sensing contacts for simple high- or low-level alarms or switch controls do not dither at the control point. Some systems incorporate this feature in their mechanical design (an example is given later, in Nuclear level gauges must be installed in accordance with the specific regulatory guidelines of each country. In the United States, those guidelines are set by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). These gauges use very small-strength sources and pose an absolutely minimal hazard in themselves. They are described in Part 3. If done without due consideration, the installation itself may introduce a hazard due to the nature of the mechanical components of the system causing blockages in it. A first group of errors are those associated with problems of defining the distributed contents by use of a single measurement parameter made at one point in the extended surface of the whole. As a general guide, definition of the surface, which is used to decide the contents, can be made to around 0.5 mm in industrial circumstances. Methods that sense the surface can be in error due to surface tension effects that introduce hysteresis. Where the quantity of a particular substance is of concern, any buildup of sediment and other unwanted residues introduces error. Granular materials will not generally flow to form a flat surface as do liquids. The angle of repose of the material and the form of input and output porting will give rise to errors in volume calculations if the actual geometry is not allowed for in use of a single point sensor. Turbulence occurring at the sensor, caused by material flow in the container or by vibrations acting on the container, may also be a source of error. It is common practice to mount a mechanical level sensor in some form of integrating chamber that smoothes out transient dynamic variations. A common method is the use of a stilling pipe or well that is allowed to fill to the same level as the contents via small holes (see   Changes of the mass of floats due to sediment buildup or corrosion will alter the depth of immersion of float sensors. A systematic error also exists due to the actual depth to which the float sinks to provide its necessary buoyancy force. This varies with material density, which often varies with temperature. A second class of errors arises due to temperature and, to a lesser extent, pressure changes to the contents. Where the required measurement is a determination of the volume or mass of the contents, use is made of level as an indirect step toward that need. All materials change volume with changing temperature. It may therefore be necessary to provide temperature measurements so that level outputs can be corrected. For some forms of level sensor, external still tubes should be situated to retain the same temperature as that of the tank because localized heating or cooling can cause the contents of the still tube to have a different density from that existing in the tank. Methods that are based on use of buoyancy chambers, which produce a measurement force rather than following the surface, will produce force outputs that vary with temperature due to altered buoyancy upthrust as the density of the fluid changes. Floats are generally made from waterproofed cork, stainless steel, copper, and plastic materials. The material used may need to be corrosion-resistant. Where the contents are particularly corrosive or otherwise inhospitable to the components of the sensing systems, it is preferable to reduce, to the absolute minimum, the number of subsystem parts that are actually immersed in the contents. Considerable use is made of magnetic coupling between the guided float and the follower.  Nuclear level gauging offers the distinct advantage (see  Finally, on general choice of level-sensing system,  Contents that are traded for money, such as petrochemicals, foods, milk, and alcohol, must be measured to standards set by the relevant weights-and-measures authority. Official approval of the measuring system and its procedures of use and calibration is required. In such cases the intrinsic value of the materials will decide the accuracy of such measurements, which often means that the system and calibrations must comply to very strict codes and be of the highest accuracy possible. The use of the indirect process of determining volumetric or mass contents, based on a level measurement, means that a conversion coefficient or chart of coefficients must be prepared so that the level measurements can be converted into the required measurement form. Calibration tables for a large fabricated tank are most easily prepared using the original engineering construction drawings. This, however, is not an accurate or reliable method. This is especially true because of the difficulty in obtaining accurate “as-built” details on many vessels other than custom-built process reactor vessels. A more accurate and traceable method (known as By far the most accurate method, however, is a direct volumetric calibration of the container by which a suitable fluid (usually water) is pumped in and out to provide two readings, the tank passing it through an accurate flow-metering station. While this is in process, level data are recorded, enabling the conversion factors to be provided for each level measurement value. These results will often require correction for temperature, as has already been discussed. Another volumetric calibration method is to pump the liquid into a tanker vessel, usually a truck, which can then itself be weighed and the tare of the empty vessel subtracted to produce an accurate measure of volume. Highly accurate level measurement requires continuous monitoring of the various error sources described earlier so that ongoing corrections can be made. A continuous maintenance program is needed to clean floats and electrodes and to remove unwanted sediment. In many instances the use of hand dipping is seen as the ongoing calibration check of the level measurement. For this, rods or tapes are used to observe the point at which the contents wet the surface along the mechanical member. Obviously this cannot be used for dry substances; for those, the rod or tape is lowered until the end rests on the surface. In each case it is essential to initially establish a permanent measurement datum, either as the bottom of the tank where the rod strikes or as a fiducial mark at the top. This mark needs to be related to the transducer system's readout and to the original calibration. Methods used to measure or control level in a container can be divided into those that measure a continuous range of level and those that measure a small change or point level. These full-range or continuous level methods have found wide acceptance. A simple, externally mounted sight glass can be used for reading the level of contents within a closed container, such as a steam boiler. This generally consists of a tube of toughened (usually borosilicate) glass connected through unions and valves into the tank wall. The diameter of the tube must be large enough not to cause “climb” of the contents due to capillary action. The level will follow that of the contents.  A modern development of this sight-gauge concept is the magnetic level indicator shown in  The magnetic action also operates individual switches for control and alarm purposes. Discrimination is to around 5 mm. Magnets must not be operated beyond their Curie point, at which temperature they lose their desired properties. As a guide these systems can measure liquids under pressures up to 300 bars and at temperatures up to 400°C. In some circumstances it may be possible to view the surface of the liquid from above but not from the side. In this case a hook gauge (see  The magnetic indicator described previously is one of a class of level indicators that use a float to follow the liquid surface. Where a float is used to drive a mechanical linkage that operates a remotely located readout device of the linkage motion, there is need to ensure that the linkage geometry does not alter the force loading imposed on the float, because this will alter its immersion depth and introduce error. Frictional forces exerted by the linkage can also introduce error. Compensation for changes in linkage weight as a float moves is achieved by using such mechanisms as counterbalance masses and springs.  The production costs of precision mechanical systems can make them less attractive than electronic equivalents, but such systems do have the advantage that no electrical power supply is needed. Previously, another advantage of mechanical level systems was the fact that a wider range of plant operators easily understood them. This is no longer necessarily the case. It is commonly now recommended that noncontacting or noninvasive level measurements be the measurements of first choice where possible. The electrical capacitance  The electrode is tailored to the situation; forms include rigid metal rods, flexible cables, and shielded tubes. Capacitance sensors rely on uniform contact being maintained between the contents and a long, thin electrode. Where they are used for level sensing of granular materials such as wheat, the material has a tendency to pile nonuniformly around the electrode, producing what is known as The volume of a container's contents can, of course, be inferred from weight measurements; these are discussed in A long, vertical tubular float will exert an upward force proportional to the depth of immersion in the fluid. These are also sometimes referred to as  Upthrust depends on the specific gravity of the fluid, so instruments employing it must be calibrated for a stated density. Density varies with temperature. For the best accuracy, correction is needed; some reduction in the actual error magnitude, however, occurs due to the float becoming a little larger in volume as its temperature increases. Providing that the contents behave as a liquid that flows to equalize pressures at a given depth (some granular materials may not fulfill this requirement), pressure acting on a given area at the bottom of a tank is proportional only to the density of the fluid and the head of pressure. In most cases density can be assumed to be uniform, thereby allowing a pressure sensor, placed on the bottom, to be used as a measure of tank level. Pressure gauges are described in Lying in the same class are purge methods. The pressure needed to discharge gas or liquid from a nozzle placed at the bottom of the tank depends on the head of liquid above and its density. Obviously bubblers do not work in granular materials. The addition of small quantities of liquid or gas must not significantly affect the contents of the tank. A source of coherent radiation, such as ultrasound or microwaves, can be used to measure the distance from the surface to the top of the tank or the depth of the contents. In essence, a pulse of radiation is transmitted down to the surface, where some proportion is bounced back by the reflecting interface formed at the surface. The same concept can be used with the waves being sent upward through the material, to be reflected downward from the surface. With relatively sophisticated electronic circuitry it is possible to measure the flight time and, given that the velocity of the waves is known, the distance may then be calculated. Many variations exist on this basic theme. The choice of radiation, use from above or from below, and of frequency depend much on the material and the accuracy sought. Although pulses are sent, the repetition rate is fast enough for the output to appear continuous. The method can be made suitable for use in hazardous regions. In these methods a short-range sensor, such as a float resting in the surface or a surface sensor of an electronic nature, is used to provide automatic control signals that take in or let out cable or wire so that the sensor is held at the same position relative to the surface.  Self-balancing level sensors offer extreme ranges, and variable forces exerted by changing mechanical linkage geometry are made negligible. Very high accuracies can be provided, the method being virtually an automated tape measure. In many applications there is only a need to sense the presence or absence of contents to operate on/off switches or alarms. In some continuous-reading systems, a short proportional range is needed to control the driven measuring member. This section addresses short-range detectors of level. Movement of a permanent magnet floating in the surface of the liquid can be sensed by using the magnet to operate a switch contact set.  Liquids such as sewage, sea water, and town supply water, which contain dissolved salts, have conductivities higher than pure water. The conductivity of most liquids is much higher than that of air, so an electrical circuit, depending on current flow, can discriminate between air and liquid and so detect the interface.  Conductivity probes are used for digital monitoring of the level of boiler water. Conductivity can also be used to provide continuous range measurement, because as the liquid rises up an electrode, the resistivity between the electrode and a reference surface changes in a proportional manner. When fluid wets an optical surface, the reflectance of that surface changes considerably, enabling detection of liquid when it rises to cover the optical component. The optical arrangement that is commonly used is a prism, arranged as shown in  This method does not require the installation of electrical connections into the tank and, therefore, lends itself to use where intrinsically safe operation is needed. Typical discrimination is around 1 mm. This form of surface sensor is used in the system shown in The following are some of the other principles that have been used to sense the presence of a liquid. The turning moment exerted to rotate a turning paddle will vary when material begins to cover the paddle. The resonant frequency of a vibrating tuning fork will change as it becomes immersed. The electrical resistance of a heated thermistor will vary depending on its surroundings.