The parameters of mill load (ML) not only represent the load of the ball mill, but also determine the grinding production ratio (GPR) of the grinding process. In this paper, a novel soft sensor approach based on multi-spectral segments partial least square (PLS) model and on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm is proposed to estimate the ML parameters. At first, frequency spectrums of the shell vibration acceleration signals are obtained. Then the PLS sub-models are constructed with the low, medium and high frequency spectral segments. At last, the PLS sub-models are fused together with a new on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm to obtain the final soft sensor models. This soft sensor approach has been successfully applied in a laboratory-scale wet ball mill grinding process.Comminution consumes about 2.8–3% of the world's electrical energy production The ML of the industrial ball mill was previously controlled by measuring the power consumption of the mill motor, which cannot guarantee the optimal range of the mill filling While most of research focus on the dry ball mill, very few studies on wet ball mill have been reported to date. This might be due to the difficulty in the expression the ML of wet ball mill for the slurry during milling Experimental analysis of the shell vibration frequency spectrum shows that different vibration frequency spectral segments are caused by different grinding mechanism Therefore, we can construct different sub-models for different frequency spectral segments using the PLS algorithm. The problem needs to solved is how to weight the sub-models effectively to obtain the final ML parameters models. As the inputs of the sub-models are the different segments of the same frequency spectrum, the weighting of several sub-models can be treated as fusing multi-sensor information. Adaptive weighted fusion algorithm based on minimum mean square error (MMSE) is generally used in multi-sensor system to obtain the optimal observation values In this paper a soft sensor approach based on multi-spectral segments PLS sub-models and on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm is proposed to estimate the ML parameters. First, spectrums of the shell vibration signals are obtained using Welch's method. Then, in order to decrease the numbers of the input variables and fully reflect the contribution of different spectral segments, different PLS sub-models are constructed for low, medium and high spectral segments. Finally, the PLS sub-models are fused with a new proposed on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm, which can adjust the PLS sub-models’ weighting coefficients adaptively. This algorithm minimizes the mean square of the estimation error to achieve better prediction performance. The paper is organized as follows: Two-stage closed-loop grinding circuit is usually adopted in the iron ore processing plants in China. The GPR is always decided by the load of the ball mill in the first stage The fresh mineral ML is defined as the total amount of the mineral, water and balls in the ball mill. The outlet load is mineral slurry, which can be represented as Even if all the instruments to measure the process variables, such as levels of pump, power of mill drive motor, rotation speed of mill, slurry density, slurry pressure and slurry flow rate of the outlet of sump, are installed in the grinding circuit, we still cannot calculate the inlet load and outlet load of the ball mill accurately. One reason is that the abrasion and corrosion of the ball load The fundamental objective of a grinding circuit is not size reduction but rather to liberate valuable minerals in such a way that the subsequent separation process can be operated at its maximum economic efficiency. Occasionally, a circuit may be controlled at constant GPR trying to maximize the product fitness, but most of the time it is controlled at a fixed set point of the fitness, trying to maximize the GPR, i.e. minimizing the energy consumed per ton of mineral ML is one of the key parameters, which are affected by lots of factors. The representation of ML can be qualitatively described by the status of the ML or quantitatively described by the parameters inside the mill Studies show that GPR is affected by the properties of mineral, BCVR, MBVR, PD, CVR, recycle ratio of the hydrocyclone and rotational speed of the mill shell, etc.  The comminution of the mineral load mainly relies on the cyclical movement of the ball load inside the ball mill, which produces strong shell vibration when the ML colliding with the mill liners. The motion of the ball is shown in The ball falls from the leaving point A with a parabolic trajectory. It impacts with the mill liners at the dropping point B. The ball ascends back to point A with the rotation of mill shell. Therefore, the motion of the ball can be divided into four parts: falling, impact, grinding and sliding, which is shown in The impact force with ball-only load to mill liners can be represented as a semi-sine function as follows With the addtion of the mineral and water load, the motion of the ball load are affected by the pulp rheology. The rheological properties of the mineral pulp mainly embodies in pulp viscosity in a grinding mill, affects the coating thickness of the balls, and also indirectly influences the impact force and impact time of the balls to the mill liners. In practice, the PD should be thick enough so that the ball surfaces are coated properly for maximum exposure to grinding action, yet it should not be too thick to act as a cushion between balls The impact time of ball load to mill liners, other balls and mineral is around 0.1–0.2 When we measure the vibration of a structure and decompose the vibration signal into frequency spectrum, the modes of vibration and the large cyclical excitation forces are evidenced by peaks in the spectrum The grinding process of wet ball mill is a complex production process, which can be characterized as a process with large time-delay, strong nonlinear as well as other uncertainties. The shell vibration signal contains more ML information and is more sensitive than other signals. Therefore, based on the analysis of the previous sections, a new soft sensing methodology for ML parameters is proposed, whose structure is shown in  Although the shell vibration signals of wet ball mill are stable and periodic over a given time interval, the interested signals from grinding are buried in a wide-band random noise signal “white noise” in the time domain One of the challenges in ML parameters modeling based on the spectrum is the correlation among the high dimension of the frequency spectrum. PLS has been proved to capture the maximal covariance between input and output data using the less latent variables (LVs), which decomposes the input and output space simultaneously while keeping the orthogonal constraint By solving As the mapping between the vibration frequency spectrum and different ML parameters are different, PLS1 (single output variable PLS algorithm) is used in this paper. Assume Adaptive weighted fusion algorithm is often used for multi-sensor fusion, which makes the mean square error of the weighted fusion smaller than that of every sensor When a new test sample comes, we use the PLS sub-models to predict. Then we get the estimation values In order to on-line update The experiments were performed on a laboratory scale ball mill (XMQL-420×450), which is a continuous grinding grid mill. The mill drum is 460 The following parameters are used to calculate the PSD using Welch's method: the data length is 32,768, the section number is 32 and the overlap fraction length is 512. The detail of the PSD for different grinding conditions is show in Estimation of ML parameters is carried out using 26 samples, 13 for training and 13 for testing. For every frequency spectral segment, three PLS sub-models for three ML parameters are constructed. Therefore, a total of nine PLS sub-models are constructed. The statistic results for the percent variance captured of the former 5 LVs are shown in Based on The contribution of different frequency spectral segments is different. The percent variance of the first LV to three ML parameters for LF, MF and HF are 79.99%, 96.47% and 99.83%, respectively. This shows that the MF and HF are more sensitive than the LF. The reason is that the former are caused by the cyclical impact force, while the latter is the vibration mode of the hybrid mechanical structure, which is composed of ML and mill shell. This also shows it is necessary to construct different models for different frequency spectral segments. The sensitivity of different ML parameters to different frequency spectral segment is different. The PLS algorithm is suitable to build the soft sensor model between the frequency spectrum and ML parameters. The PLS sub-models can explain the physical meaning of the frequency spectrum more clearly than other soft sensor approach. But the PLS algorithm cannot captures the nonlinear between frequency spectrum and ML parameters. After all the PLS sub-models have been constructed, the initial weighting coefficients are calculated with  In order to illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach, we compare it with PLS, PCR, GA-PLS In order to compare with the proposed method, the number of the LVs for GA-PLS method is 5, and the contribution ratio limit of the PCs for PCA-SVM and PCA-LSSVM method is 99%. Therefore, the number of PCs of LF, MF and HF are 5, 3 and 1, respectively. The results show that the soft sensor models based on the proposed multi-spectral segments PLS sub-models and on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm have the best prediction performance. Constructing the soft sensor models with PCR and PLS algorithm using the full frequency spectrum has similar prediction accuracy. However, the PLS approach has less LVs than PCR approach. The GA-PLS approach selects the useful characteristic frequency sub-bands for different ML parameters to build soft sensor models, whose performance is better than PCR and PLS method. Although the PCA-SVM approach uses the same PCs for different ML parameters models, the kernel functions are linear kernel, radical basis function (RBF) kernel and polynomial kernel. The PCA-LSSVM uses the same RBF kernel, but the radius of RBF is 11, 40 and 68, respectively. This shows that the mapping between vibration frequency spectrum and different ML parameters is different. This paper presents an effective approach for modeling parameters of wet ball mill load based on the vibration spectrum of the mill shell. It has made the following contributions: the PLS algorithm is used to construct different frequency spectral sub-models for different ML parameters, which enables deeper understanding of the grinding mechanism; a new on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm based on means and variances on-line updating method is proposed; the on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm is used to fuse estimation value of sub-models to obtain the final model; the experimental results indicate that the proposed soft sensor approach produces higher fitting precision and better predictive performance. However, the PLS algorithm cannot capture the nonlinear characteristics between the frequency spectrum and ML parameters. The on-line adaptive weighted fusion algorithm updates the weighting coefficients with every new sample. In addition, the test of the model is based on a laboratory-scale wet ball mill grinding process with limited samples. Therefore, Future research and more experiments should be done on the industrial wet ball mill. The work was supported by the