Background
                  Functional scores and radiographs are often used to assess function and predict development of osteoarthritis in patients with multi-fragmentary tibial plateau fractures (TPFs). Locomotion, which is the primary goal of fracture treatment, is rarely assessed. The objective of this study was to assess functional ability of patients after TPF fixation using spatio-temporal gait analysis (STGA), and to compare STGA variables with self-reported functional scores and preoperative fracture characteristics.
               
                  Methods
                  Preoperative CT scans of 21 patients with complete articular multi-fragmentary TPFs were evaluated for number of fragments, maximum gap between the fragments and maximum articular depression. All patients underwent STGA (velocity, cadence, step length of the affected and the unaffected leg, single-limb support by the affected and the unaffected leg, and double-leg support) and filled the Knee Society Score and the Short Form-12 questionnaires on average 3 years (SD = 1.56, range, 2–5.8) post-injury.
               
                  Findings
                  Step length and single-limb support time of the affected leg were shorter compared to the unaffected leg (p = 0.02 and p = 0.007, respectively). Number of fracture fragments correlated with cadence (R = −0.461, p = 0.04) and velocity (R = −0.447, p = 0.04).
               
                  Interpretation
                  Given that both higher fracture comminution and deformity on the one hand and the above gait parameter alterations on the other hand are associated with knee osteoarthritis, STGA may be used for routine postoperative evaluation of patients after TPF fixation.Tibial plateau fractures ( Quality of locomotion, which is the primary goal of treatment, is seldom quantitatively assessed on postoperative follow-ups. Instead, surgeons use imaging and functional questionnaires to evaluate operative results and predict future disability ( Deleanu et al. have presented a series of 25 patients who underwent spatio-temporal gait analysis ( Elsoe and Larsen have performed STGA in 23 patients twelve months after fixation of tibial plateau fractures. They reported high gait assymmetry in the study subjects compared to healthy population, indicative of previously mentioned persistent disability. Interestingly, gait parameters had only moderately correlated with a health-related quality of life score ( The objective of this study was to assess functional ability of patients after tibial plateau fracture fixation using STGA, and to compare STGA variables with self-reported functional scores and preoperative fracture characteristics. After receiving approval from our institutional ethics committee, we reviewed medical files of all patients with multi-fragmentary tibial plateau fractures AO/OTA Type 41-C3 treated in a single tertiary care hospital between January 2007 and January 2012. Subjects of age between 18 and 70 years and good TPF reduction and healing were contacted and offered participation in the study. Good TPF reduction and healing were defined by congruent articular surface, axial alignment, joint stability and knee full range of motion following surgery ( A total of 21 patients were included in the study group. All surgical interventions were performed by the senior author (ELS). A lateral approach for fixing the fracture with a single lateral plate was used in 12 patients. A combined lateral and medial approach for fixing the fracture on both sides with 2 plates was used in 9 patients. All 21 patients had the same postoperative protocol that included wearing a protective hinged knee brace with early passive range of motion without weight-bearing for a period of 8–12 weeks. The preoperative CT scan and a 3-dimensional reconstruction of the fracture were used to quantify the severity of fractures using the following parameters: number of fragments that were bigger than 1 cm The patients were recalled for postoperative functional evaluation at a mean and standard deviation ( Following the clinical assessment, the participants underwent STGA using a floor-based photocell system (Optogait, Microgate, Bolzano, Italy). Two 4-m long transmitter-receiving bars were installed parallel with a 0.6 m distance between them. Ninety-six LED diodes were positioned on each bar every 1 cm, about 3 mm above the floor. Each patient was to walk 4 times the same distance between the bars at a self-selected speed. While passing between each transmitter-receiving unit, the participants would block signal and a step was recorded. Time, foot size and distance was sensed, while other spatio-temporal parameters were calculated automatically. The participants were instructed to start walking 3 m before and finish 3 m after the measurement area to allow for sufficient acceleration and deceleration time. After completing four walking measurements, values of the following spatio-temporal gait parameters were averaged: velocity (cm/s), cadence (steps/min), step length (cm) of the affected and the unaffected leg, single-limb support by the affected and the unaffected leg (% of the gait cycle) and double-leg support (% of the gait cycle). Statistical analysis was conducted with SAS 9.2 for Windows. Means and SDs were used to describe continuous variables, and categorical variables were presented as numbers (percentages). Paired student's Nineteen males and two females were included in the study group. Their average age was 44.3 years (range, 19–68) ( Functional scores and STGA parameters are detailed in Correlations between baseline fracture characteristics and spatial gait analysis parameters, as well as correlations between functional scores are described in The present study evaluated correlation between fracture characteristics and postoperative spatio-temporal gait parameters in a uniform group of patients with the most severe type of tibial plateau fractures. As expected, bone comminution, i.e. higher number of fragments, was associated with lower velocity and cadence. Maximal articular depression and maximal gap between fragments did not correlate with gait parameters and may represent a less important predictor of adverse gait outcomes. This is reasonable, as the primary challenge of TPF treatment is reconstruction of intact and even articular surface. High maximal gap and high maximal articular depression may exist, for example, in a case of a large bone fragment that was depressed or displaced but which reduction and repair is relatively simple. The opposite example is a highly comminuted fracture which fragments did not displace or depress, but may not be immobilized in an anatomical alignment, resulting in joint incongruity and arthritis. The study results are in agreement with previous research. Elsoe and Larsen reported a shorter step length and shorter single limb support time of the affected extremity compared to unaffected extremity ( It appears that STGA parameters correlate better and more consistently with fracture radiographic appearance than traditionally used radiographic measures and functional scores. For example, two TPF patient cohorts reported that initial fracture pattern did not correlate well with functional clinical outcomes ( A major advantage of STGA over functional scores is the ability of gait parameters to reflect osteoarthritis, which develops in up to 31% of TPF patients ( Functional scores did not correlate with most STGA parameters in this study ( Some limitations should be acknowledged. First, this was a retrospective analysis of secondarySTGA data. As such, not all TPF cases were evaluated, but rather only those with good operative results. This may have potentially biased the results. Future studies should prospectively evaluate gait patterns of patients following TPF. Second, patients were invited to follow-up at variable times postoperatively, ranging from 1 to almost 6 years. This has contributed to inhomogeneity of the study group. However, the fact that only subjects with a certain fracture type were included in the study at least partially compensates for difference in follow-up times. Third, study sample was relatively small, and more significant correlations could be found between study variables with a larger sample. Moreover, a larger sample could enable multivariate regression analysis or subgroup analysis, with adjustment for subject variables that can affect gait (e.g. height). Finally, further research is needed to examine the long-term changes in gait patterns and their correlation with the development of secondary knee OA. Higher number of fragments was associated with a lower velocity and cadence in patients who underwent TPF. Participants presented shorter step length and lower support times on the affected leg. Given that both higher fracture comminution and deformity on the one hand and the above gait parameter alterations on the other hand are associated with knee osteoarthritis, STGA may be used for routine postoperative evaluation of patients after TPF fixation.  tibial plateau fracture osteoarthritis total knee replacement knee Society Score Short Form-12 Physical Health Score Mental Health Score standard deviation spatio-temporal gait analysis