This paper investigates how mechanical activation of olivine can increase the mineral’s surface reactivity, and illustrates how such technology can give rise to new or improved olivine products. The olivine material used in this study consisted of pure olivine crystals (Mg1.860Fe0.134Ni0.006SiO4) originating from North Cape Minerals dunite deposit at Åheim in Western Norway. Following activation in a planetary mono mill, the activated olivine products were visually inspected using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and characterised with respect to particle size, specific surface area (BET) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) signature. The surface reactivity of the activated olivine products was determined through simple acid leaching experiments in which the initial acid consumption rates were determined. The initial phase of olivine dissolution could be modelled using first order kinetics. Prolonged dry milling of pure olivine crystals resulted in highly aggregated products that were more reactive with respect to dissolution in acid than their respective BET surface areas would suggest. Relative to olivine that had been milled for 1min, 60min of milling increased the initial reaction rate by a factor of 9.0, whereas the corresponding increase in specific surface area was 1.8. The results from both the leaching experiments and the XRD analysis suggest that the observed over-proportional increase in reactivity with respect to surface area is largely due to structural disordering (i.e. mechanical activation) of the olivine surfaces.Although the use of mechanical activation in mineral processing has found its main application within the field of extractive metallurgy where the technology has been employed as a pre-treatment step prior to the subsequent extraction of metallic ores ( This paper provides an initial assessment of the potential increase of olivine surface reactivity that can be achieved through mechanical activation, and is, as far as the authors are aware, the first to investigate the properties of mechanically activated olivine. Whereas the value of olivine for traditional uses like slag conditioner, refractory materials, foundry sands and blasting sands is based on the mineral’s bulk chemistry and favourable mechanical properties ( The use of olivine for carbon dioxide sequestration represents one potential application of the mineral in which the process and products could benefit from mechanical activation. Carbonation of free magnesium ions is an exothermic process, thermodynamically favoured at low temperatures and high pressure ( The utilisation of olivine’s capacity to neutralise sulphuric acid has been described by several investigators ( The relative increase in reactivity as a function of milling/activation time will depend on the reaction in question. In other words, the possibilities of improving the adsorption kinetics with respect to heavy metals or carbon dioxide could differ from those found for the dissolution of olivine in acid. It is the latter reaction that is the focus of this study. This is due to its obvious potential, as well as the relative ease with which it can be investigated by measuring acid consumption rates in simple leaching experiments. In contrast to most studies of mineral dissolution promoted by mechanical activation, this study focuses on the initial dissolution rates as a measure of surface reactivity rather than the time required to achieve a given degree of dissolution. The olivine crystals used in this study were kindly supplied by the Norwegian mining company North Cape Minerals (NCM) and originate from the dunite deposit at Åheim in Western Norway. After a sample of pure and well defined crystals had been retrieved at Åheim, the material was gently crushed and sieved to obtain the 1–2 The chemical composition of the olivine crystals was obtained from X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis performed on a sample from the 1–2 Size distributions of the activated olivine material were obtained from Frauenhofer diffraction analysis using a The activated olivine products were also characterised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The SEM images were obtained with the secondary electron detector using a Hitachi S-4300SE field emission SEM, whereas the XRD analysis was performed using a Mechanical activation of the olivine crystals was achieved using a The materials produced by milling in the planetary mill are referred to as Leaching experiments were performed in a glass container (chemical reactor) at 25 A parallel set of experiments were conducted in which the leachate was sampled at various times during the leaching process by extracting and filtering a volume of 5 In addition to the primary or initial comminution effects, the size distribution and the specific surface of the activated products will also depend on secondary processes like aggregation and agglomeration (  The results from the XRD analysis show a large reduction in peak height and signal to noise ratio with increasing activation time ( The dissolution of olivine in acid has been studied by a number of investigators ( Following olivine dissolution, the concentrations of iron and silica in solution will increase and oxidation and precipitation reactions will inevitably occur. This will interfere with the acid budget and add to the complexity of the system. However, at the initial phase of the experiment these factors are negligible. This is illustrated in Preliminary experiments as well as the results shown in Basing the regression line on three points and the origin is a compromise between data support and the validity of the fundamental assumptions regarding the overall reaction. As can be seen from the examples in Fundamental kinetics implies that the initial reaction rate should be proportional to the initial total surface area, i.e. the same specific rate constant The results from the leaching experiments demonstrate how the observed variation in reactivity between the activated olivine products can not be accounted for by the corresponding variation in specific surface area values as obtained from the BET analysis. The absence of a simple proportionality between the Alternatively, if we assume that the surfaces have been modified only to a minor extent, the specific surface areas obtained from the BET analysis performed on dry powders can not be representative for the effective surface areas in solution during the olivine dissolution reaction. Such a situation could be caused by rapid breakdown of the aggregates observed in the SEM images when the products are exposed to acid, thereby creating a larger effective surface area. However, the amount of acid required to achieve de-agglomeration must be relatively low and the process must occur more or less instantaneously. If this was not the case, the total effective surface area of the system would display significant variation throughout the course of acid consumption. As illustrated by the linear regression in The results from both the leaching experiments and the XRD analysis suggest that the observed over-proportional increase in reactivity is largely due to structural disordering (i.e. mechanical activation) of the olivine surfaces, although the presence of large agglomerates partly consisting of angular submicron particles as shown by the SEM analysis raises questions regarding the effective surface area of the systems and how well this parameter is represented by the BET measurements. Further work is required in order to quantify the relative importance of structural disordering and the potential difference between BET surface area and effective surface area. Regardless of the mechanisms at play, prolonged milling of olivine can cause a substantial increase in the surface reactivity of the mineral when evaluated on a weight or volume basis. The experimental procedures presented in this paper are capable of revealing clear differences between the various olivine products with respect to their overall structure and their reactivity at the initial phase of the dissolution reaction. The results show that it is impossible to predict the relative reactivity of the activated olivine materials based on the BET surface areas alone. Further development of these procedures could represent a cost-efficient strategy for initial screening and characterising the effect of mechanical activation on surface reactivity, as well as yielding a basis for comparison of the different equipment used for activating minerals. Further research and development of the various concepts based on mechanically activated olivine will proceed along two main paths. Firstly, in order to facilitate more specific studies of the individual concepts, it is necessary to develop tests designed to determine the reactivity of the activated products with respect to a range of potentially interesting surface reactions rather than just dissolution alone. The structural modifications responsible for increasing the reaction rates with respect to leaching could affect the reaction rates of heavy metal adsorption or carbon dioxide sequestration very differently. Consequently, the reactivity should be tested with respect to the specific reactions in question. Secondly, if the technology is to be employed at an industrial scale, it is necessary to evaluate the performance of scalable grinding equipment such as attritors, ball mills and nutating mills in order to assess the overall feasibility of the proposed concepts. Prolonged dry milling of pure olivine crystals in a The specific surface area as obtained by BET measurements displayed an initial rapid increase as a function of milling time before it peaked at 3.88 Prolonged dry milling of pure olivine crystals resulted in products that were more reactive with respect to dissolution in acid than their respective BET surface areas would suggest. The initial phase of olivine dissolution could be modelled using first order kinetics. Relative to olivine that had been milled for 1 The results from both the leaching experiments and the XRD analysis suggest that the observed over-proportional increase in reactivity is largely due to structural disordering (i.e. mechanical activation) of the olivine surfaces, although part of the over-proportionality could be explained as differences between the true effective surface area of the systems and the values estimated by the BET measurements.