Copper-oxide raw ore has a complex composition and cannot be processed effectively by conventional, single-stage sorting methods. Based on the characteristics of copper-oxide ore, a new combined grinding–flotation–high-gradient magnetic separation–secondary grinding–leaching process has been proposed to recover copper. Test results show that the new process is very effective. Sodium sulfide was used as a vulcanizing agent in the flotation process, and butyl xanthate was used as a collector to obtain a qualified copper concentrate with a copper grade of 29.37% and a recovery rate of 32.22%. The flotation tailings were subjected to high-gradient magnetic separation to obtain magnetic concentrates and magnetic tailings, and copper was recovered by leaching from the magnetic concentrates and tailings. After secondary grinding of the magnetic concentrates, the leaching rates of copper from the magnetic concentrates and magnetic tailings were 26.85% and 26.95%, respectively. The total copper recovery was 86.02%. The new process introduces high-gradient magnetic separation, enriches refractory chrysocolla, leaches chrysocolla at 65 °C, leaches malachite from the magnetic tailings at 40 °C, and saves heating costs. Secondary grinding can reduce the leaching temperature, shorten the leaching time, and achieve a low energy consumption and effective extraction of refractory copper-oxide ore.Copper is a widely distributed metal in nature and possesses a series of excellent properties. It has been used widely in defense, aerospace, transportation, energy and other fields. Rapid developments in the world economy have led to a sharp increase in demand for copper, and there is a serious shortage of easily recoverable and high-quality copper resources ( Copper-oxide raw ore has a high oxidation rate, and the proportion of refractory combined copper-oxide ore is high, which makes copper extraction difficult. Test results show that copper-mineral recycling by flotation, high-gradient magnetic separation or leaching is difficult. To utilize copper resources efficiently, a new sorting process needs to be developed. Based on a combined chrysocolla and limonite composition in the raw ore, a grinding–flotation–high-gradient magnetic separation–secondary grinding–leaching process has been proposed to recover complex and refractory copper-oxide ore. High-gradient magnetic separation was used to separate the flotation tailings, and the magnetic concentrates and tailings that were obtained by magnetic separation were leached at 65 °C and 40 °C, respectively. Secondary grinding can reduce the leaching temperature and shorten the leaching time, which results in an efficient utilization of copper resources, energy conservation and a reduction in consumption. The proposed process is flexible and can be adjusted according to the characteristics of the complex and refractory copper-oxide ore. Our studies can be used as a reference for other ores with similar characteristics. The copper oxide ore used was from Africa. Grinding (raw ore): 500 g of raw ore were ground using rod grinding to 58.72% at a particle size of −0.044 mm ( Flotation: Polished ore (500 g) was used with a slurry concentration of 65%. The slurry was stirred in a 1.5-L flotation machine (XFD, Changchun, China). Flotation process was used sodium sulfide (400 g/t) as a vulcanizing agent and butyl xanthate (500 g/t) as a collector ( High-gradient magnetic separation: The flotation tailings were sorted by high-gradient magnetic separation (Slon-100, Ganzhou, China). The strength and pulse frequency of the magnetic field were 1.2 T and 200 cpm, respectively. Secondary grinding (magnetic separation concentrates): The slurry concentration was 65%, and a magnetic concentrates particle size of −0.044 mm was achieved with grinding from 58.72% to 84.22%. Leaching: Magnetic concentrates after secondary grinding and magnetic tailings without secondary grinding were leached at 65 °C and 40 °C, respectively ( The main recoverable element in the raw ore was Cu with a content of 1.46% and the main gangue components were Fe, SiO Copper phase analysis shows that the copper in the raw ore was mainly copper oxide, with the proportion reaching a maximum value of 76.92%. The free copper-oxide proportion was 37.76%, the combined copper-oxide proportion was 39.16%, and sulfide and other proportion was 23.08%. Copper-sulfide and copper-oxide minerals were recoverable. Because of the large raw ore, it was necessary to grind the raw ore to disassociate the target and gangue minerals, and to meet subsequent test requirements. When 58.72% of the ore was −0.044 mm, the proportion of complete dissociation of the main minerals in the raw ore were 74.70% chalcopyrite, 66.05% malachite, 44.88% chrysocolla, 76.08% biotite and 53.14% limonite. The dissociation degree of chalcopyrite was good, which satisfies the particle-size requirement for flotation. However, ore that is too finely ground is not conducive to chalcopyrite flotation. The grinding cost was high, and therefore, flotation was more suited to raw ore ground to 58.72% −0.044 mm. The copper grades of flotation concentrates and tailings were 29.37% and 1.04%, and the recovery rates were 32.22% and 67.78%, respectively. The flotation-tailings grade were separated by a high-gradient magnetic separator to obtain a magnetic concentrate yield of 22.03% (for raw ore). The copper grade was 2.06%, and the recovery rate was 31.10%. The yield of magnetic tailings was 76.32%, the copper grade was 0.64%, and the recovery rate was 32.8%. When 58.72% of the raw ore was −0.044 mm, the dissociation of chrysocolla and limonite was low, which indicates that most of the chrysocolla and the limonite coexisted. Based on the properties, a high-gradient magnetic-separation process was introduced. After magnetic separation, chrysocolla was enriched into the magnetic concentrates with the weak magnetic limonite; this chrysocolla portion was more difficult to recycle, its proportion was higher, and it was encapsulated by limonite and biotite. The main copper-oxide minerals in the magnetic concentrates are chrysocolla and malachite, and the chrysocolla coexists or is intertwined with limonite and biotite. After primary grinding of the raw ore, when 58.72% of the ore particle size was −0.044 mm, the copper-sulfide mineral (chalcopyrite) and some free copper-oxide minerals were dissociated from the gangue minerals and were recycled by flotation. However, the dissociation of chrysocolla and limonite was poor at 44.88% and 53.14%, respectively, which indicates that the chrysocolla and some malachite and gangue minerals are not dissociated completely, and are still encapsulated by limonite and biotite. After secondary grinding of the magnetic concentrates, the chrysocolla and malachite were dissociated. Secondary grinding can destroy the imonite and biotite that surrounds the malachite and malachite, dissociates them completely, and facilitates the contact between malachite and malachite and sulfuric acid, which makes the chemical reaction easier, releases the copper ions and improves the leaching rate. Secondary grinding is necessary to destroy the gangue structure. Although secondary grinding will increase the cost, the magnetic-concentrate yield is 22.03% (for raw ore) with a recovery rate of 31.10%. The magnetic concentrates have a high recovery rate, and less mass, so the grinding consumption is lower. If the gangue is destroyed by long-term high temperature, it will consume more energy and accelerate equipment damage, which is not conducive to environmental protection. Therefore, secondary grinding of the magnetic concentrates reduces costs, and has the advantage of environmental protection. Leaching conditions: concentrated sulfuric-acid dosage of 90 kg/t, liquid–solid ratio of 2:1, variable grinding fineness and leaching temperature, and a change in leaching rate with time as shown in In tests 1 and 2, after secondary grinding, when the percentage of −0.044-mm ore increased from 58.72% to 84.22%, the leaching temperature decreased from 80 °C to 65 °C, and the leaching rate increased slightly. Therefore, secondary grinding and high temperature destroy the limonite and biotite that encapsulates the chrysocolla and malachite and dissociates them completely, which favors contact between the chrysocolla and malachite and sulfuric acid, making chemical reaction easier, releases copper ions, and increases the leaching rate. When the leaching temperature is reduced, the leaching time is shortened and the leaching rate is similar. At an 84.22% grind size of −0.044 mm, a leaching temperature of 65 °C and a leaching time of 2 h, the leaching rate was 85.03%. Tests 1 and 3 show that at 80 °C, the amount of ore at a particle size of −0.044 mm increased from 58.72% to 84.22%, and the leaching rate increased. After secondary grinding, for a leaching time of 2 h, the leaching rate was 85.21% (for magnetic concentrates). Without secondary grinding, the leaching rate was 80.06% for a leaching time of 2 h. The role of secondary grinding is to destroy the gangue limonite and biotite structure mechanically and to reduce the time required for high-temperature leaching. In tests 2 and 3, when the leaching temperature increased from 65 °C to 80 °C, and the leaching rate increased slightly. The magnetic concentrates were leached at 65 °C and the concentrated sulfuric-acid content was 90 kg/t. Ore with a mass fraction of 22.03% (for raw ore) needed to be heated to 65 °C. Incomplete leaching of the flotation tailings occurs at 65 °C, and less energy is consumed. A suitable increase in temperature can speed up the copper-oxide mineral reactivity with sulfuric acid and increase the production efficiency. Leaching conditions: leaching temperature of 40 °C, leaching time of 4 h, liquid–solid ratio of 2:1, concentrated sulfuric acid of 45 kg/t, copper leaching rate of 76.48% (for magnetic tailings), copper grade of leaching residue: 0.16%. The magnetic tailings yield was 76.32% (for raw ore). Most of the malachite and a small amount of the chrysocolla in the magnetic tailings were leached at 40 °C with 45 kg/t sulfuric acid. Good results were achieved without heating to a high temperature of 65 °C, which can save on heating and reagent costs.  The copper-oxide ore has a complex composition and a low recovery rate using a single-stage method. Because of the coexistence of chrysocolla and limonite, a new grinding-flotation–high-gradient magnetic separation–secondary grinding–leaching process was proposed. Good results were achieved and the process was characterized by energy savings and flexibility. Qualified concentrates with a grade of 29.37% can be obtained through flotation, and the recovery rate was 32.22%. The flotation tailings were separated by high-gradient magnetic separation, and the copper leaching rate from the magnetic concentrates was 26.85% of the raw ore. The copper leaching rate from the magnetic tailings was 26.95% of the raw ore, with a total recovery rate of 86.02%. The advantage of the new process is to introduce high-gradient magnetic separation to enrich the refractory chrysocolla. Secondary grinding of the magnetic concentrates can reduce the leaching temperature and shorten the leaching time. The copper minerals in the magnetic concentrates are leached at 65 °C, and the malachite is leached easily in the magnetic tailings at 40 °C. The process is characterized by energy savings and flexibility; even if the ore property changes, it can be adjusted flexibly according to changes in the raw-ore properties. The proposed process can be used as a reference for the extraction of other complex refractory ores. This research project has been supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 