Cyclical intravenous treatment with pamidronate is of clinical benefit in children with moderate to severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) types I, III and IV, but there is no information on the effects of this treatment on the newly described OI type VI. Here, we report on the results of 3 years of pamidronate treatment in 10 children and adolescents with OI type VI (age range 0.8 to 14.5 years, three girls). Treatment effects were compared to those of 10 patients with OI types I, III, and IV, who were matched for age and disease severity (based on height and lumbar spine areal bone mineral density). During pamidronate therapy, lumbar spine areal bone mineral density z scores increased and lumbar spine vertebral bodies improved in shape. Iliac bone histomorphometry showed a tendency to higher cortical thickness (+53%, P
                     =0.06) but the mineralization defect, a characteristic feature of OI type VI, did not change during pamidronate treatment. Annualized fracture incidence decreased from 3.1 per year before treatment to 1.4 fractures per year during treatment (P
                     <0.05). Regarding mobility, the Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory gross motor score increased by 42% during pamidronate treatment (P
                     <0.005). Significant improvements were also found for age-related z scores of maximal isometric grip force. In comparison to the OI control group, the fracture incidence was higher and the gross motor scores were lower in OI type VI, both before and after pamidronate treatment (P
                     <0.05 for each parameter). No differences were found between the groups for changes in densitometric measures and cortical thickness during pamidronate treatment. Our results suggest that 3 years of intravenous pamidronate therapy led to improvements in bone mineral mass, gross motor function, muscle force and fracture incidence in patients with OI type VI. However, the gains in mobility scores and reductions in fracture incidence during pamidronate treatment are less than in other OI types.Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type VI is a recently described brittle bone disease OI type VI also seems to have a distinctive genetic basis. In the large majority of patients with OI types I to IV, heritability follows an autosomal dominant pattern and the disease is caused by mutations that affect one of the two genes encoding collagen type I alpha chains (COL1A1 and COL1A2) Cyclical intravenous treatment with the bisphosphonate pamidronate has a beneficial effect in children and adolescents with moderate to severe forms of OI types I, III and IV The study group was comprised of children and adolescents with OI type VI who received cyclical intravenous pamidronate treatment at the Shriners Hospital for Children in Montreal, Canada. As described in detail previously, the diagnosis of OI type VI was made in children who had suffered fractures without adequate trauma and had characteristic findings on iliac bone histology Patients were eligible for pamidronate treatment if they had long-bone deformities or had suffered at least two fractures per year (including vertebrae) during the previous 2 years. All of the 11 patients who were diagnosed with OI type VI at our institution fulfilled these criteria for pamidronate treatment. The parents of one of these patients elected to have the treatment administered at another hospital. The remaining 10 patients were included in the present analysis. Each patient had completed at least 3 years of pamidronate therapy. Pretreatment results in 8 of these patients have been presented before Results in OI type VI patients were compared to those in a control group of 10 OI patients who were positive for mutations in either COL1A1 or COL1A2 and who had received at least 3 years of pamidronate treatment at our hospital. One control patient was matched for each patient with OI type VI, based on age and criteria reflecting disease severity at the start of pamidronate therapy (height Pamidronate was administered intravenously on 3 consecutive days in all patients. As described in detail elsewhere, the timing and dosage of these 3-day cycles varied with age, but the yearly dose of pamidronate remained at 9 mg per kg body weight throughout the study period Serum total calcium, phosphate and alkaline phosphatase activity were measured using colorimetric methods (Monarch®; Instrumentation Laboratories Inc., Lexington, MA, USA). Serum parathyroid hormone concentration (fragment 39–84) was determined by radioimmunoassay Vertebral morphometry was performed on lumbar vertebra L1 to L4 using lateral spine radiographs that were obtained at baseline and after 2 to 4 years of treatment Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry was performed in the anterior–posterior direction at the lumbar spine (L1–L4) using a Hologic QDR 2000W or 4500 device (Hologic Inc., Waltham, MA, USA). Areal BMD results were transformed to age-specific All OI patients were seen several times per year when they received pamidronate treatment. Clinical examination and biochemical measurements were performed at each visit and bone densitometry was performed at least once per year. Information about fractures was retrieved from medical charts. Only fractures confirmed on radiographs were counted. The annualized fracture incidence was determined separately for the 2 years before the start of pamidronate treatment and the first 3 years thereafter. Height was measured using a Harpenden stadiometer (Holtain, Crymych, UK). Weight was determined using digital electronic scales for infants and mechanical scales for older children (Healthometer, Bridgeview, IL, USA). Height and weight measurements were converted to age- and sex-specific Grip force of the non-dominant hand was determined using a standard adjustable-handle Jamar dynamometer (Preston, Jackson, MI) in patients who were older than 4 years. The maximal value of three trials was noted. Grip force results were transformed to age- and sex-specific The level of ambulation was scored for each child by physiotherapists experienced in the care of children with bone diseases according to the modified criteria of Bleck Occupational therapists assessed patients before the start of pamidronate therapy and at each subsequent treatment cycle. The Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory (PEDI) was used to evaluate gross motor abilities Transiliac bone biopsy specimens were obtained at baseline and after 2 to 4 years of pamidronate treatment. Whenever possible, labeling was performed before biopsy using demeclocyclin (15–20 mg/kg per day taken orally for two 2-day periods separated by a 10-day free interval). Transiliac bone samples were collected 4 to 5 days after the labeling using a Bordier trephine from a site located 2 cm below and behind the anterior superior iliac spine. In 8 patients of each patient group, paired biopsy samples were available for histomorphometric analysis. Biopsy preparation and histomorphometric analyses were performed as previously described Differences between the OI type VI and the control group were tested for significance using unpaired Baseline height and lumbar spine areal BMD At baseline, serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, creatinine, 25 OH vitamin D, 1,25 OH When OI type VI patients received their first 3-day infusion cycle, average serum calcium dropped by 15% ( The long-term effects of pamidronate on biochemical results were evaluated in samples that were obtained immediately prior to each treatment cycle. During 3 years of pamidronate treatment, serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone and 1,25 OH None of the OI type VI patients had radiological signs of rickets at any time before or during pamidronate treatment. Lumbar spine areal BMD increased considerably during the 3-year treatment period ( Iliac bone specimen obtained at baseline documented the mineralization defect in OI type VI patients, with increased osteoid parameters and prolonged mineralization lag time ( During pamidronate treatment, the longitudinal growth of OI type VI patients lagged behind that of healthy children, as shown by a trend towards lower height With respect of safety, no major side effects were noted during the 3 years of follow-up. The majority of patients showed an influenza-like reaction accompanied by fever and skeletal pain after their first pamidronate infusion. These symptoms typically arose 12 to 36 h after initiation of the infusion and were controlled with standard antipyretic therapy in all cases. Prior to the start of pamidronate treatment, fracture rates were higher in patients with OI type VI than in the control group ( This study provides evidence that young patients with OI type VI benefit from treatment with cyclic intravenous pamidronate. The density and shape of lumbar spine vertebral bodies improved, fractures rates decreased and ambulation levels increased during 3 years of pamidronate treatment. Nevertheless, OI type VI patients experienced more fractures and were less mobile than OI patients in whom the disease was due to mutations affecting collagen type I. The present results do not directly explain why OI type VI patients had a somewhat less favorable clinical response to pamidronate treatment than control patients. However, it is plausible that differences in treatment response reflect differences in the pathogenetic mechanisms that underlie these disorders. For example, OI type VI seems to be characterized by extreme bone brittleness. This was highlighted by the difficulty to obtain adequately preserved biopsy specimen for histomorphometric analysis. More objective observations also point to fundamental differences between OI type VI and OI types I, III, and IV. Baseline lumbar spine areal BMD was similarly low in OI type VI and the control group, but OI type VI patients had clearly higher cancellous bone volume in iliac bone samples. This discrepancy between the amount of bone matrix and the amount of mineral is probably explained by the mineralization defect in OI type VI. Thus, a given volume of bone matrix in OI type VI probably contains an abnormally small amount of mineral. The opposite is true in OI types I, III and IV, where the amount of mineral in the organic matrix is elevated It is unclear whether pamidronate treatment affected the mineralization of the organic matrix, as material bone density was not measured in the present study. However, standard histomorphometric parameters reflecting the mineralization process (osteoid thickness, mineralization lag time) did not suggest a major treatment effect on mineralization, even though the number of informative samples was rather small. Pamidronate may not have influenced the mineralization defect in OI type VI patients, but lumbar spine areal BMD nevertheless increased markedly. Iliac bone histomorphometry does not satisfactorily explain these densitometric changes, as pamidronate treatment had no effect on cancellous bone volume, and a rather mild (and not statistically significant) effect on cortical bone width. However, areal BMD is also influenced by factors that are not captured by histomorphometry. The density of vertebral bodies increases most at locations that are close to the vertebral end plates The observed densitometric changes during pamidronate treatment apparently were associated with clinically relevant improvements in bone strength. This is at least suggested by the vertebral morphometry measurements, which revealed significant reshaping of lumbar vertebral bodies. We also noted improvements in fracture rates and mobility, even though the gains were less in OI type VI patients than in the control group. Regarding safety, observable adverse events in OI type VI patients were largely limited to the acute phase reaction that also occurs in the majority of patients with other OI types upon first exposure to pamidronate In conclusion, cyclic pamidronate therapy in children and adolescents with OI type VI increases lumbar spine bone density and vertebral shape and appears to improve fracture rates and mobility. The overall treatment effect, however, seems to be somewhat smaller than in OI patients who harbor collagen type I mutations. There clearly is a need for more effective treatment modalities in OI type VI. We thank Mark Lepik for the preparation of the figures. This study was supported by the Shriners of North America. F.R. is a Chercheur-Boursier Clinicien of the Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec.