This work is devoted to a kinetics study of cadmium electrochemical cementation on zinc powder under ultrasonic low-frequency field (20 kHz). Compared to mechanical stirring with a Rushton turbine and for the same suspension quality, ultrasound lead to a lower kinetics during the major part of the reaction but to final conversion rate near 100%. Pointing out a thermal modification in the deposit morphology due to acoustic cavitation, gives explanation to these processes changes. Besides several acting parameter effects, such as temperature, metallic ion concentrations or ultrasonic power have been observed and analysed.Electrochemical cementation is known from a long time to remove noble or toxic metallic ions from solutions and is still used in hydrometallurgy, surface and industrial waste treatments or electrolyte purification. It consists in the spontaneous heterogeneous reduction of a metallic ion present in solution by a more electropositive sacrificial metal. Most of the industrial cementation processes use metal powder within stirred-tank reactors. Their major interests are a low-energy requirement, an easy control and a frequent removal of the metallic species under its metal form. The present study concerns the cadmium–zinc system, selected because of the great interest of cadmium, toxic and heavy metal largely used for industrial applications. The corresponding global cementation reaction: Nevertheless an improvement of cementation on powders with ultrasound can be still expected at this stage, first because of a lower impact on the surface renewal, and secondly due to a new US effect: the reduction of the agglomeration phenomenon for the zinc powder that occurs in a reactor stirred by a mechanical way as observed by Blaser and O’Keefe The reactor was equipped with a water-jacket ensuring the temperature control. It offered a 0.350 L reaction volume for a 0.075 m internal diameter. The ultrasonic field was applied to the solution by a titanium horn (0.035 m diameter) introduced by the top of the reactor and located at 0.015 m from the bottom to respect the criteria of a complete and homogeneous particles suspension. It was connected to a 20 kHz generator (Branson type 450). The global calorimetric method The solutions were prepared from cadmium and zinc sulfate salts and their initial ionic force was adjusted to unity by adding a suitable mass of sodium sulfate The concentrations of metallic ions were measured vs. time on 0.001 L samples by spectrophotometry of atomic absorption (SAA). The powder surface was observed by scanning electronic microscopy (SEM), most often coupled to energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) to analyze the corresponding solid composition The classical description of cementation kinetics uses the logarithmic evolution of the concentration for the cementing species with time, that is only pertinent if admitting a constant apparent rate constant Besides standard conditions were defined for this study as: Two trails were performed ensuring the same conditions of particles suspension according to the criteria by Zwietering Cementation without US appears to be faster for durations lower than 20 min: as an example, the value of Moreover important differences are observed concerning the morphology of both the deposit and the zinc particles with or without US as shown by The complementary information provided by the SEM observations and the kinetics curves allow explaining the behavior differences between cementation without and with US. In the presence of mechanical stirring, zinc particles fragmentation leads to a continuous increase of the reaction surface vs. time, so increasing the kinetics rate. However the zinc fragments are progressively covered by a rather dense cadmium deposit, able to finally block the reaction. In fact a mass transfer limitation by the Zn(II) transport from anodic sites towards solution could then occur  A temperature increase from 15 to 60 °C lead to an expected increase of the reaction rate ( Increasing the initial Zn(II) concentration within the range 0–76.5 mol On the other hand, increasing the initial Cd(II) concentration [Cd(II)] The size and the morphology of final particles ( Studying the cadmium cementation on zinc powder in a stirred-tank reactor under the action of a low-frequency ultrasonic field (20 kHz) allowed to point out the following main results which have been interpreted through the physical action of acoustic cavitation and the morphological modification of cadmium deposit: compared to a Rushton turbine, using ultrasound in the same other conditions leads to a kinetics rate which is lower at the reaction beginning but higher at the end; such phenomena are correlated to both existence or not of particles fragmentation and of a probable limiting mass transfer step by oxidized zinc species. SEM photos supplied with EDS analysis suggest a local thermal effect due to US, inducing a partial melting of the deposit and therefore changes in its morphology. temperature increase has a positive effect between 15 and 45 °C and in a lower extent up to 60 °C; a higher initial Cd(II) concentration also enhances kinetics while Zn(II) concentration is of no effect; increasing ultrasonic power in the range 50–120 W is favorable but from 80 W it remains a secondary effect. This work has been possible with the loan of ultrasonic materials by Pr. C. Pétrier, Univ. de Savoie-ESIGEC––Lab. de Chimie Moléculaire and Env.––Le bourget du Lac––France.