Bias is an important variable in column flotation operation: negative values will deteriorate the concentrate grade due to mechanical entrainment of gangue, whereas excessive bias will reduce the particle residence-time in the collection zone as well as dilute the tails stream. Its estimation is usually made, at a high instrumentation cost, through a water mass-balance in the collection zone, nonetheless providing unreliable estimates. This paper presents a new method based on the measurement of the volumetric fraction of wash-water underneath the pulp–froth interface, using electrical-conductivity sensors. The method has been evaluated in a pilot flotation column, with a two-phase system. The results obtained indicate that it can be directly used for supervision and control of flotation column operation.Perhaps the most characteristic feature of flotation columns is the addition of a fine spray of water, called wash water, at the top of the device or a few inches underneath the froth surface. Besides helping the stabilization of the froth and facilitating the removal of the bubble–particle aggregates to the concentrate launder, this stream washes back to the pulp zone the hydrophilic particles that might have been entrained with these aggregates. This washing action can only take place if a proper water mass-balance is assured in the lower part of the column, below the feed port, namely in the collection zone, so that part of this wash water can make its way down through the froth zone. This downward water stream, also called bias rate, is said to be positive if it goes down the column, and negative otherwise. When this latter case occurs, the concentrate could become contaminated with entrained hydrophilic particles and grade would decrease; a non desirable situation. While some authors claim that a slight, but positive, bias value ensures an adequate cleaning action ( During column operation, bias can become negative as a result of an excessive gas flow rate, entraining most of the wash-water over the top of the column, diminishing the cleaning action of the froth zone. On the other hand, increasing bias would affect the residence-time of ascending bubbles and that of settling particles in the collection zone, thus altering the recovery. Its action may also reflect on the froth zone recovery. Unfortunately, all these observations are mostly qualitative since bias measurements, particularly in three-phase systems, are not very reliable. Bias rate evaluation, as a difference between the rate of water going out in the tailing stream ( Two different approaches have been proposed so far for estimating bias rate. The first one considers some sort of water mass-balance on either zone of the column, above or below the interface, and makes use of measurements of external flow rates to estimate an internal variable, the bias rate. The second approach uses column internal variables, measured near the interface, for estimating the bias rate. The focus of this method is a change in some internal variable within the variation of the water content in the upper part of the column (above the interface), resulting from a change in the bias rate. In the following paragraphs, these two approaches are detailed and their advantages and problems are discussed. Assuming a steady-state column operation, bias rate can be estimated by a water mass-balance in a column section below the feed port as To implement this measurement method, four relatively expensive instruments are required: two magnetic flow meters and two The variance of the estimate To improve the accuracy of the bias estimation through the mass-balance approach, Uribe-Salas proposed to include the liquid-phase conductivity of the tails, concentrate, feed and wash-water streams ( The extensive instrumentation required, the need for the conductivity of the liquid component of some streams and above all, the requirement of a steady-state operation limit the practical application of this method to laboratory set-up mostly working with two-phase systems in well controlled steady-state operation. While conducting experiments to validate the use of temperature or conductivity profiles in the upper part of the column for froth-depth evaluation, Moys observed that the shape of this profile changed with wash-water rate variations ( Based on these observations, Pérez-Garibay managed to successfully relate the conductivity-profile change to the prevailing bias rate using an artificial neural network (ANN) ( Reported experimental results (laboratory scale) are very good for two-phase and three-phase systems. The conductivity profile is obtained using the same sensor designed for froth-depth sensing ( The drawbacks of the method are as follows: Extensive experimentation to create the robust data-base required for both learning and validation steps of the ANN. An independent and reliable method of measuring bias rate is necessary for the ANN training data-base; this can easily be done at the laboratory scale by a steady-state water balance, but has not yet been implemented in an industrial scale. As a result of the above mentioned procedure, i.e. ANN training using steady-state bias values (see More recently, In order to eliminate the remaining concerns, the following method combines the positive features of each: process phenomenology and some empirical correlations. The proposed method has been developed for a water-air mixture only. Work is underway for its extension to three-phase systems. It is based on the estimation of the volumetric fraction of wash-water ( Using the “additivity rule”, the volumetric fraction of wash-water below the interface is given by An empirical linear relation between bias rate and the volumetric wash-water fraction underneath the interface is proposed for the final bias rate estimation: The pilot column flotation used for the validation of this method is located at the COREM (Mineral Processing Research Consortium) pilot plant in Québec City. The column is made of 5.1 To measure the froth-depth, the uppermost section of the pilot flotation column is implemented with stainless-steel conductivity electrodes, 5.1 Local control loops are implemented to regulate all flow rates (feed, tails, wash-water and air). Slurry and water pumping is done via variable-speed Masterflex The tests described in this paper were performed with a two-phase system (air-water). The conductivity of the feed and wash-water were carefully set at 1500 and 500 Data acquisition was performed by a SCADA software (iFIX™) working under Windows™ operating system.    One important advantage of this method is the fact that it can dynamically estimate the bias rate independently of the existence of steady-state conditions. Despite the fact that bias rate estimation is based on a steady-state water mass-balance in the collection zone, it is intentionally plotted as a dynamic variable to emphasize the effect of the froth-depth control-loop on the estimation. This bias estimation has been successfully implemented in different control applications at the pilot scale ( This work has presented a new method for the dynamic estimation of bias rate based on conductivity measurements. In contrast to those methods based on external (water- component) flow rate balances, this one obtains information directly below the interface, where the bias rate is defined. More precisely, it uses a linear relationship between the bias rate and the volumetric fraction of wash-water below the interface, estimated from conductivity measurements. The proposed method is particularly interesting for control and optimization purposes because it is not constrained to steady-state conditions as was the case of most algorithms reported so far. In addition, the estimation reduces the system coupling as compared to those estimations based on flow mass-balances. Evaluation of this method in an industrial flotation column is an ongoing project. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Algosys Inc. and Société Minière Raglan du Québec for providing the necessary funding for this project.