Leaching in the grinding circuit is currently practiced in plants that process gold ores with low content of cyanide consuming minerals. The high gold recovery observed in the grinding–classification section of the plant is commonly explained by the inherent high initial dissolution rate of gold observed in gold ore cyanidation, or by the intense agitation prevailing in grinding mills. For understanding this leaching behavior of gold ores, the grinding, classification and leaching sections of a gold processing plant are analyzed through reconciliation of operating data. It is found that gold circulation in the grinding circuit is quite different from the flow behavior of other species due to the strong gold separation effect in the hydrocyclones, which produces quite large residence time for gold-rich particles. The results presented in this study demonstrate that the residence time of these particles in the grinding circuit can be as long as in the leaching tanks and might be the dominant factor in explaining the high dissolution of gold in this section.Leaching by cyanide solutions in aerated alkaline pulp is the main process for gold extraction from ores. In a large number of plants the reactant addition is made in the grinding section, but the effect of this procedure on the plant performance has not been systematically analyzed. The understanding of the gold leaching in the grinding section of conventional gold extraction plants might help to significantly improve the process profitability. Gold cyanidation is an electrochemical process, where gold is oxidized and then complexed to the stable complex ion [Au(CN)  Mineral processing circuit audit is a classical approach to assess metallurgical performances, but, most studies mainly focused on classifiers and flotation networks ( This paper is organized as follows. Two sampling campaigns were performed in December 1998 at the grinding, classification, solid–liquid separation, and primary leaching sections of Doyon Mine plant (Cambior Inc.) ( The objective of the first sampling campaign was to produce an overview of the gold leaching profile through the plant, and point at the sections that should be more deeply analyzed. The second campaign objective was to provide data for a better understanding of the material circulation in the grinding–classification section of the plant. The collected data was filtered and the unmeasured values estimated by data reconciliation. The results of the sampling campaigns are presented and discussed in In both sampling campaigns the pulp samples were taken manually throughout the circuit, with at least two increments, and the leaching reaction was stopped by oxidizing the cyanide ion with potassium permanganate. The samples were filtered under pressure and the liquid phases analyzed for gold by atomic absorption spectroscopy. The solid phases were rinsed and analyzed for gold by fire assays. The ore feed rate in the plant, the solid concentrations in the slurry, and the free cyanide concentrations during the period of the sampling campaign were provided by the plant operators. In the second sampling campaign, dissolved oxygen concentrations and temperatures were measured manually throughout the circuit using the ORION 820 oxymeter, and the slurry pH was determined by a COLE pH-meter. In addition, niobium and zirconium ore contents were analyzed by induced coupled plasma, and silver ore content was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy. Also, the samples were used to perform particle size analysis by screening, and to determine the gold size distribution by analyzing the gold content by fire assay. The results of the first sampling campaign are summarized in the flow sheet presented in These preliminary results indicate that there is a strong gold dissolution in the grinding–classification section, compared to the recovery at the solid–liquid separation and primary leaching sections. Kinetic studies performed on the Doyon mine ore (see The second sampling campaign aimed understanding the material circulation in the grinding circuit, two inert elements, which have minerals with intermediate density, namely niobium and zirconium, are analyzed in the ore. Silver is also taken into account, because it has a high-density ( The ore gold and silver contents indicate that these elements are concentrated in the hydrocyclone underflows, in contrast with the lighter elements, zirconium and niobium, which have an opposite behavior, higher concentrations being obtained in the hydrocyclone overflows.    The data of the sampling campaigns are quite noisy and subject to mass balance inconsistencies. In addition, some points of the plant could not be sampled. To perform the plant performance assessment using more reliable data, the measured variables are previously reconciled. The details of the reconciliation procedure are given in The reconciled data used for calculating the gold recovery around various nodes (see The objective of this section is to look at the assumption that gold recycling in the grinding circuit is a possible cause of the apparent high cyanidation rate in the grinding circuit. For that purpose a rough estimate of the gain and residence time in the whole grinding circuit will be proposed through the use of transfer functions. In chemical and petrochemical plants, the effect of the recycles on the steady-state and dynamic properties, such as process yield, control response, and stability, have received a lot of attention in the past four decades, and is today in the core of the efforts made for plant-wide control applications ( In the present study, to model the behavior of the whole plant, simple linear models, represented by transfer functions, • The pipes and sumps are assumed to have a zero residence time, so that there is no gold leaching, and consequently their transfer functions are simply • The slurry dividers and hydrocyclones are assumed to have also zero residence time and thus are simply described by transfer functions • At constant ore and water flow rates, the hydrodynamics of the ball mills can be described by three perfect mixers in series, two identical small ones and a large one ( • The dynamic mass balance equation for gold dissolution in a perfectly mixed reactor is: If one assumes that the gold dissolution reaction is first order, which is a reasonable assumption for gold dissolution in the first stage of dissolution, Eq. • The gain To analyze the effect of the recycling ratios, various cases are considered. First of all, the ball milling section is assumed to be operated in open circuit configuration. To take advantage of the secondary ball mill, it is arranged in series with the primary one. The transfer function of the ball milling circuit becomes: The calculations are performed with individual values of rate constants for the two mills and for a common average value. In both cases the gold recovery strongly decreases when there is no recirculation, respectively from 30% to 18% for the experimental rate constants, and from 55% to 6% for the averaged rate constants (see A second kind of simulation is performed to show the effect of the circulating load. Here it is assumed that the slurry is recycled as in the nominal operating conditions, but that the hydrocyclone does not act as a gold concentrator. In other words  The results of an analogous calculation using the same average value of the leaching rate constants in both mills show comparable behavior at that presented in The dynamics of the grinding–classification section are evaluated through the simulation of the plant impulse responses. The unit impulse responses of the grinding–classification section of the plant are calculated for solid gold, using transfer functions with averaged rate constants. The calculation is performed for the closed circuit in nominal operating conditions using Eq.  The circuit impulse responses for untransformed species can also be viewed as the residence time distribution (RTD), Moreover, the true residence time of gold in the ball mills might be longer than that of the pulp, due to possible segregation related to the high specific gravity of the particles containing gold. Previous studies with radioactive tracers for the grinding section of Doyon mine plant demonstrated the presence of traps for gold particle ( In summary, the results show that the recycle loops are responsible for increasing the residence time of the gold particles in the grinding–classification section of the plant. The gold residence time in the grinding circuit can be as long as the residence time in a leaching tank, and this effect is most probably responsible for the strong dissolution of gold in the comminution–classification circuit studied. This effect coupled to the fact that gold dissolution rate is higher at the beginning of gold dissolution most probably explains the high recovery obtained in grinding circuits. The results presented here also indicate that an appropriate use of classifiers and recycles in the grinding section of gold leaching plants can be a useful strategy to reduce downstream plant size. The intriguing and paradoxical effect of high recovery in an apparently small residence time in the grinding–classification circuit of a gold ore processing plants is addressed. A plant is sampled and the reconciled and estimated data used to analyze the gold leaching profile through the plant. The reconciled results showed a strong gold recycle in the hydrocyclones, and the simulation of the behavior of the gold in the grinding–classification section of the plant, using transfer functions to describe the model of the main units, demonstrates that the residence time of the dense components of the ore is much higher that the one of the ore and water, due to the effect of the recycles. In summary these recycles are responsible for increasing by five to ten times the gold residence time in the plant and consequently for enhancing its dissolution. The authors wish to thank the