A new control concept for hydrocyclones being operated in grinding circuits is presented. Such a system is required with increased hardness of the mill feed resulting in coarser mill discharge, increased circulating load and higher solids content in the hydrocyclone feed. Applying volume split control enables stabilizing the reduced efficiency curve of separation. A grinding circuit can be operated in a wide range between ≈150% and 620% of circulating load with this advanced control system. The high solids content in the hydrocyclone underflow results in a minimum of circulating load with less overgrinding.In mineral processing, fluctuating hardness of the feed material requires using a control mechanism. With harder material, the mill discharge becomes coarser. Consequently, the recirculated load and the solids mass flow having to be treated by the hydrocyclones are increasing. As known, the separation effect achieved by the hydrocyclone depends on feed conditions. That means, changing feed properties must be compensated by a hydrocyclone control system, ensuring that the following conditions be achieved: Stabilizing the properties of the hydrocyclone overflow at a constant mill feed rate and fluctuating material hardness. The maximum particle size in the hydrocyclone overflow must not increase. Ensuring both a minimum amount of fines in the hydrocyclone underflow and maximum solids recovery. This condition can be achieved with a hydrocyclone underflow that operates in the transition stage between rope and spray discharge. The variations of the hydrocyclone throughput should be compensated by pressure drop regulation. If possible, with hydrocyclones being connected in parallel, any manipulation of the single cyclone has to be avoided. A state-of-the-art hydrocyclone control system in grinding circuits functions as follows: a coarser mill discharge at higher solids content results in the feed suspension of the hydrocyclones being diluted. Subsequently, the higher hydrocyclone throughput is controlled by regulating the pump speed. Using this control mechanism, not all of the above conditions can be fulfilled. A hydrocyclone control mechanism being based on volume split regulation will be presented in this paper. Fluctuating feed conditions regarding solids content and particle size distribution result in varying operating conditions, being characterized by sediment mass stored in the hydrocyclone, formation of an air core in the hydrocyclone center and shape of the underflow discharge. In dilute flow separation ( In dense flow separation ( The transition state ( The new control concept by  A closed grinding circuit operating calcite of different hardness levels has been simulated. The calculations are based on pilot plant experiments with a ball mill and 150 The simulation of the comminution ( When feeding the mill with harder material (right side of With increasing solids content in the hydrocyclone feed the cut size is decreased by overflow throttling from 23 to 10 The particle size distributions of mill feed, mill discharge and the hydrocyclone products are presented in When using a hydrocyclone control concept being based on volume split regulation, a grinding circuit can be operated in a wide range between ≈150% and 620% of circulating load. The high solids content of 1200