Background
                  Several studies reported high failures rates after internal fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Loss of reduction and screw cut-out are the most common reasons for revision surgery. Several risk factors for failure have been described in the literature. The aim of the present study was to assess risk factors for failure after surgical fixation of unstable proximal humerus fractures in a multivariate setup.
               
                  Methods
                  Two different surgical techniques (PHILOS locking plate and Humerusblock) were used. In the PHILOS group, every kind of postoperative relative movement between the implant and the humeral head or shaft was defined as failure. In the Humerusblock group, postoperative movement between the humeral head and the shaft in terms of angulation or translational displacement was defined as failure. The following parameters were assessed: age, gender, cancellous bone mineral density (BMD) of the humeral head, fracture type, medial metaphyseal comminution, medial metaphyseal head extension, initial angulation of the humeral head in the frontal plane, initial anteversion of the humeral head, medial hinge displacement, maximum displacement of the tuberosities with respect to the head, surgical technique, anatomic reconstruction and restoration of the medial cortical support.
               
                  Results
                  The following parameters were found to have a significant influence on the failure rate: age, local BMD, anatomic reduction, and restoration of the medial cortical support. The failure rate significantly increased with the number of risk factors.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Preoperative assessment of the local BMD and the patients’ biological age as well as intraoperative anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support are the essentials for successful surgical fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Multifragmentary fracture patterns in old patients with low local BMD are prone for fixation failure. If the surgeon is not able to achieve anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support intraoperatively in this situation, adjustments such as augmentation or primary arthroplasty should be considered.Fractures of the proximal humerus account for approximately 5% of all fractures. Recent studies, however, show high failures rates after fixation of proximal humerus fractures with a range from 8.6% to 22.0%. The aim of the present study was therefore to assess risk factors for failure after surgical fixation of unstable proximal humerus fractures in a multivariate setup. A consecutive series of 67 patients was included in this prospective observational study. Inclusion criteria were (1) acute unilateral displaced proximal humerus fracture, (2) age >18 years, (3) indication for surgery according to the modified Neer criteria (displacement of the tuberosities of >5 All surgical procedures were performed by experienced surgeons within one week after trauma at a single university-based trauma surgery department. Two different surgical techniques were used. If closed or percutaneous reduction was feasible due to ligamentotaxis, a minimally invasive fixation using a Humerusblock (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) was used ( The postoperative rehabilitation protocol of the Humerusblock group included immobilization in a shoulder sling for three weeks followed by passive and active-assisted motion for another three weeks. Active exercises were started after six weeks, whilst loadbearing was not recommended for twelve weeks. In the PHILOS group, passive and active-assisted motion was started immediately postoperatively. Active exercises and loadbearing started at six and twelve weeks, respectively. The preoperative radiological assessment included X-rays (anterior–posterior in the scapular plane, outlet view and axillary view) and a bilateral CT scan. Postoperative X-rays included anterior–posterior, outlet and Velpeau views and were performed immediately postoperatively and at three, six, twelve and 24 weeks after surgery. If the fracture lines were still visible after 24 weeks, additional X-rays were made after nine months and after one year. In the PHILOS group, every kind of postoperative relative movement between the implant and the humeral head or shaft was defined as failure. In the Humerusblock group, postoperative movement between the humeral head and the shaft in terms of angulation or translational displacement was defined as failure. Axial fracture subsidence with penetration of the K-wires was not defined as failure, as this is desirable in order to facilitate fracture healing. The following parameters were assessed: Age. Gender. Cancellous bone mineral density (BMD) of the humeral head (mg/cm Fracture type (2-part surgical neck fractures, 3- and 4-part fractures). Medial metaphyseal comminution (yes/no). Medial metaphyseal head extension (mm). Initial angulation of the humeral head in the frontal plane (varus/valgus). Initial anteversion of the humeral head (yes/no). Medial hinge displacement (mm). Maximum displacement of the tuberosities with respect to the head (mm). Surgical technique (Humerusblock/PHILOS). Anatomic reconstruction (yes/no). Restoration of the medial cortical support (yes/no). The cancellous BMD of the humeral head was assessed on the contralateral uninjured side using CT data. PASW 18.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) was used for the statistical analysis. Metric scaled data are reported as arithmetic mean Between January 2006 and December 2007, 67 patients were included in the study. The results are summarized in Failure after surgical fixation occurred in 13 patients (19.4%, Revision surgery was performed in four patients (6.0%). Open reduction and plate fixation was performed in two patients from the Humerusblock group. Two patients from the PHILOS group underwent prostetic replacement. All other fractures healed within nine months. Our data show that: Anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support are crucial in order to prevent failure after surgical fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Local BMD and age, but not surgical technique and initial displacement or angulation, have a significant influence on the failure rate. The risk of failure highly increases in the presence of two or more risk factors. A recent systematic literature review showed that postoperative loss of fixation and screw cut-out are the most frequent complications and most common reasons for revision surgery after fixation of proximal humerus fractures. A medial cortical buttress additionally counteracts these forces. Accordingly, lack of a medial cortical support was found to be another significant predictor for failure in our study. The restoration of the medial cortical support can be done either by anatomic reduction in the presence of a simple fracture pattern of the medial calcar or by impaction of the shaft into the head fragment in the presence of medial metaphyseal comminution. We found no differences in failure rate, if it was restored by the one mean or the other. However, restoration of the medial cortical support was achieved more often in patients with a simple fracture pattern of the medial calcar (82% vs. 43%). According to our data and our interpretation of these data, medial metaphyseal comminution was not defined as a risk factor for failure. However, the surgeon should be aware that it might be more difficult to restore the medial cortical support in the presence of medial metaphyseal comminution. There is plenty of biomechanical evidence that local osteoporosis affects the strength of implant anchorage. Age was found to be another predictor for failure in our study. With a mean age of 63.9 years, the age distribution of our patients collective is comparable to other studies assessing proximal humerus fractures. The optimal rigidity of implants for the fixation of proximal humerus fractures is discussed controversially in the literature. One interest finding of our study is the high positive correlation between the number of risk factors and the failure rate ( Some limitations of our study have to be noted. First, this is a prospective observational study, but it is not a randomized controlled study. Although the option for either using a Humerusblock or a PHILOS plate followed institutional guidelines, the surgeon made the ultimate decision. Second, nondichotomous parameters were dichotomized in order to calculate the accuracy. We used the median value of our sample as a threshold, since there are no validated values given in the literature. Third, the objective of the present study was the assessment of parameters influencing the radiological failure defined as insufficiency of the bone-metal interface. This is definitely an undesirable situation, even if some of these fractures may progress to union without revision surgery. The clinical sequelae of failure, however, were not topic of the present study. Fourth, there were 67 patients included in the study. Including more patients would have increased the power of the statistical analysis and reduce the risk of false negative results. Lastly, although having multiple interacting parameters we did not perform multivariate regression analysis. Multivariate regression assumes that there is little or no autocorrelation in the data. Autocorrelation occurs when the variables are not independent from each other. This is obviously true for our parameters. For example, age influences BMD, BMD influences fracture patterns, multifragmentary fracture patterns influence the restoration of the medial cortical support and so on. Additionally, with 67 patients included in the study we consider multivariate analysis not to be statistically sound due to the relatively small number of patients. Accordingly, we simply assessed the number of risk factors for each patient. In conclusion, preoperative assessment of the local BMD and the patients’ biological age as well as intraoperative anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support are the essentials for successful surgical fixation of proximal humerus fractures. The surgeon should be aware of the high risk of fixation failure in the presence of low local BMD and multifragmentary fracture patterns in an old patient. A fracture configuration like this might prompt a more experienced surgeon to be involved in the operation. If the surgeon is not able to achieve anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial cortical support intraoperatively in this situation, adjustments such as augmentation or primary arthroplasty should be considered. No author has a conflict of interest that relates to the content discussed in this manuscript.