The effect of particle-bed breakage mechanisms on the liberation properties of ores remains unclear. Surprisingly few studies have been published in this area and limitations in liberation measurement techniques previously used have prevented definitive conclusions from being reached regarding whether particle-bed breakage enhances the liberation properties of mineral ores relative to conventional grinding mechanisms. In this study, two sulphide ores of differing textures were comminuted to various size distributions using impact and particle-bed breakage mechanisms in a hammer mill and a piston–die compression unit respectively. The liberation properties of the various discharge samples were then characterised using a mineral liberation analyser – a mineralogical characterisation system based on automated scanning electron microscopy. It was found that the size-by-size liberation properties of both valuable and gangue mineral phases were independent of both the method used to comminute the samples, as well as the particle size distribution of the final products. These effects are discussed in terms of how they may be exploited in liberation modelling and characterising comminution circuit performance.The ability to selectively liberate minerals from surrounding phases would be a significant advance in minerals processing technology. Comminution typically represents 30–50% of the energy consumption within a given mining operation ( Particle-bed breakage, via the use of high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR), has often been suggested as a possible route by which mineral liberation properties can be enhanced relative to conventional breakage methods. While there have been preliminary reports of benefits to diamond liberation using HPGR, due in part to the large working gap between rollers in typical HPGR units ( Hence, the body of evidence surrounding these observations is still uncertain and conflicting, and apart from the aforementioned reports, only a few investigations in this area have otherwise been published. Furthermore, observed improvements in liberation following particle-bed breakage relative to conventional breakage methods have typically been very small (ca. 2–5% per size fraction) and it is possible that these differences lie within the errors associated with the liberation measurements of the previous studies. Thus, there remains much scope to conduct more detailed investigations into the relationship between breakage method and resultant liberation properties of both valuable and gangue mineral phases, particularly using the modern scanning electron microscope (SEM) based technologies that are currently employed for accurate and reliable liberation analysis. In this study we report a detailed investigation into the mineral liberation properties of two sulphide ores as a function of the breakage method employed. A hammer mill and a piston–die unit were used to comminute the samples to various size distributions using impact and particle-bed compression mechanisms respectively. Mineralogical properties of the progeny particles were then measured on a size-by-size basis using a mineral liberation analyser (MLA). Two sulphide ores were selected for this study: Ore 1 – a low grade iron–oxide hosted copper gold ore located in north–west Queensland, Australia; and Ore 2 – a high-grade strataform zinc deposit also located in north–west Queensland, Australia. Both samples were received as coarse, dry belt-cut rocks. These were crushed to a passing size of 3 The piston–die compression unit, shown in The hammer mill (Retsch) is also shown in Following breakage in either device, samples were wet screened at 38 The MLA is a mineralogical characterisation software package that is interfaced with a highly automated FEI quanta scanning electron microscope (SEM). Upon bombardment by an electron beam in the SEM, a mineral phase will backscatter electrons at an intensity defined by its average atomic number, as well as release X-rays characteristic of elements that are present. Measurement of backscattered electron intensities allows for the segmentation of mineral phases within each particle section, while X-ray analysis of a given phase allows for phase identification. The process is highly automated, typically allowing for 5000–10,000 sections per size fraction to be analysed, and in more detail than conventional optical microscopic methods. Parameters such as liberation, mineral grain sizes, mineral locking and mineral associations, amongst others, are then measured by the system. A detailed review of the MLA and its capabilities is given by A summary of the Ore 1 and Ore 2 mineralogies, as determined by MLA, are provided in The proportion of each phase that is 90–100% liberated in each size fraction following both methods of size reduction is shown for the Ore 1 gangue phases in Liberation distributions for the Ore 1 chalcopyrite are shown in At sizes below 150  Similar results were obtained for Ore 2, whereby size-by-size liberation properties were found to be independent of both the breakage mechanism used as well as the particle size distribution to which the samples were comminuted. Liberation plots for Ore 2 mineral phases are shown below in An interesting feature of the siderite distribution is the decrease in the proportion of liberated material with a decrease in particle size from 300 The results of this study indicate that, contrary to many previous reports, particle-bed breakage mechanisms did not enhance the size-by-size liberation properties of the tested ores relative to conventional breakage methods. The criterion for improving mineral liberation instead seems to be the application of excessively slow strain rates to samples. However, the results of this investigation have wider implications for comminution modelling. The independence of size-by-size liberation properties from both the devices used to grind a sample, and the particle size distribution to which a sample is comminuted, has been reported for sulphides and silicates ( This study has extended the observations made by previous workers, and has shown that the hypothesis of a constant liberation distribution for a given phase within each size fraction is well supported for open circuit devices. This seems to be valid for ores of varying textures, as well as for the different mineral classes that comprise a given ore including sulphides, silicates, oxides, carbonates and quartz. It is also demonstrated that the patterns observed in this study, as well as in the aforementioned past studies, are evident over a wide size range – from cyclosizer fractions up to particle sizes approaching 1 The results imply that when conducting liberation surveys of a grinding circuit, only a limited number of streams need to be sampled. Where particle statistics permit (i.e. where mineral phases are present in large quantities, such as gangue), liberation values for each mineral in each size fraction potentially could be inferred from one particle size distribution, or from select streams within a grinding circuit. This would limit the number of samples that would need to be analysed, reducing the time and cost for mineralogical analysis. In turn this will help facilitate the use of mineral liberation analysis and enable it to become a routine characterisation method of grinding circuit performance. The focus of this study was on ores comminuted using either impact or particle-bed breakage mechanisms. For the future, similar studies would be warranted on ores processed with mills that utilise novel modes of breakage (such as the IsaMill), providing a better understanding of how to best incorporate such devices into comminution circuits. Finally, it should be noted that the causes of the shape of the magnetite liberation distribution in Liberation analysis was performed on two sulphide ores of differing textures and mineralogies, following breakage to various size distributions using impact and particle-bed breakage mechanisms. It was found that the size-by-size liberation properties of both valuable and gangue mineral phases were independent of both the breakage mechanism used to process the samples, and the particle size distribution to which samples were comminuted. The results suggest that breakage devices utilising particle-bed breakage mechanisms (such as HPGR) do not enhance the liberation properties of metalliferous ores as many previous investigations have reported. However, the independence of liberation properties from comminution route and degree of size reduction have significant implications for liberation modelling and the use of liberation analysis in grinding circuit characterisation. The authors thank Jessica Gray for her assistance with performing the MLA measurements in this study. Dr. Rob Morrison and Prof. Tim Napier-Munn are also thanked for helpful discussions during the course of this work. The financial support of the