The main purpose of this study was to extract indium from the Irankoh zinc plant residue. The Irankoh zinc plant residue contained 145ppm indium. The optimum conditions for leaching of indium and reduction of ferric ion in reductive leaching were obtained at temperature of 90°C for a leaching duration of 3h with sulfuric acid concentration of 100g/L and the amount of required sodium sulfide for reduction of ferric was 1.5 times of stoichiometric quantity of iron. Then, to prepare concentrated indium solution, indium was selectively precipitated from the leach solution. The pH of leach solution was adjusted to 6 with ammonia solution in 90°C for selective indium precipitation, and reaction time was considered to be 10min. Then the resulting precipitation was dissolved using hot sulfuric acid solution, and the solution was subject to solvent extraction and cementation using zinc powder to recover indium.Indium is an important metal used in electrical industries extensively ( The zinc plant residue used in the experiments was provided from Irankoh plant of Esfahan located in central of Iran ( Indium, zinc and overall iron in the experimental samples were analyzed by Varian AA240 atomic absorption spectrometer. Titration with potassium dichromate was used to determine Fe Solid concentration in solution was kept constant in all leaching experiments (100 The initial sulfuric acid concentrations studied were at the operation conditions of The temperatures studied were 60, 70, 80, 90 and 100 The times studied were 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 The Effect of the reductive agent amount on the reductive leaching is shown in The effects of pH and type of alkaline reactants on the precipitation process are shown in The temperatures studied were 60, 70, 80 and 90 The times studied were 5, 10, 15, 30 and 60 The precipitate was leached with sulfuric acid solution and sodium sulfide (similar to optimum conditions of reductive leaching). The leached solution was analyzed for indium and iron to be 252 According to Organic phase: 30% ( Volume phase ratio (A/O): 3. Temperature: 25 Time for vibration and setting: 5 and 10 C The extraction percentage of indium and iron from solution are 93% and 6.9% respectively. The experiments on stripping indium are carried out under the general stripping conditions as follows. The ratio of organic phase to solution is equal to 4, time for vibration and setting is 5 Cementation of indium from the striping solution was performed in following conditions: pH Time Amount of zinc powder consumed: 1.5 times of stoichiometric quantity of indium. Temperature: 25 Recovery ratio of indium in cementation process and purity of the resulting product were more than 95%. The zinc plant residue was leached by sulfuric acid solution as leaching reactant and sodium sulfide for reduction of ferric ion. For preparation a more concentrated indium solution, indium was selectively precipitated from leach solution. Finally the resulting precipitation was dissolved using hot sulfuric acid solution, and the solution was subject to solvent extraction and cementation process using zinc powder to recover indium. Total recovery ration of indium from Irankoh zinc plant residue was obtained more than 92%.