Spouted beds provide a means of good hydrodynamic conditions and circulation of solid particles. The spouting technique has been applied in many industrial processes, such as drying of granular materials, blending of polymer chips, coating of tablets, pyrolysis, gasification, and granulation of fertilizers. The aim of the present study is to examine the performance of a batch conical air spouting vessel for conducting ion exchange reactions involving heavy metal removal. The rate of ion exchange reaction was expressed in terms of volumetric mass transfer coefficient (K). The effect of various parameters such as type of heavy metal ion (Ni2+, Pb2+), superficial air velocity, and initial heavy metal concentration has been investigated. It has been found that volumetric mass transfer coefficient increases as air superficial velocity increases. Mass transfer correlations were obtained using dimensional analysis of the present mass transfer data. The importance of these mass transfer correlations in the design and operation of air spouting vessels used for conducting diffusion-controlled reactions was highlighted.surface area of resin (cm constant (–) concentration of heavy metal at time ( initial concentration of heavy metal (ppm) diffusion coefficient (cm Bubble diameter (cm) acceleration gravity time (cm/s first order reaction rate (cm/s) volumetric mass transfer coefficient mass transfer factor (cm time (s) temperature (°C) superficial air velocity (cm/s) volume of solution (L) constant (–) solution Density (g/cm solution viscosity (g/cm/s) Froude number (–) mass transfer factor (–) Reynolds number (–) Schmidt number (–) Fluidization was been widely accepted as a solid–fluid contacting technique. Relatively fine particles are desirable for good quality fluidization operations Under conditions of spouting, the bed consists of two distinct zones: the very dilute phase central core called the spout, and the surrounding dense phase annular solids called the annulus Analogous to conventional fluidized beds, spouted beds are well known for their good mixing of the solid phase and also for their intensive heat and mass transfer characteristics between the fluid phase (gas) and the solid phase yielding nearly isothermal conditions The spouted bed has proved to be of interest for a variety of processes, such as drying Fresh strong cation exchange resins, macro-porous AMBERJET 1200 Na, a product of ROHM&HAAS were used for each run. Solutions of nickel and lead ions of different concentrations were prepared to be used throughout all experiments. Fresh resins were prepared before runs by immersion in 6% HCl, stirring for 15 Two liters of freshly prepared solution of heavy metal ion (Ni  It seems that the high affinity of the resin toward lead ions overcome the effect of small diffusivity of lead ions. This effect of selectivity is higher than the effect of diffusivity coefficient, since the latter has an effect in the diffusion step, but the former affects the exchange of ions, which affects the whole process. The pseudo-first order kinetic equation for solid–liquid ion exchange system is based on the following equation with respect to the ion to be removed For Ni For Pb To explain the increase of The increase in The lower power of As As  In view of the complex hydrodynamic conditions of the present work, dimensional analysis was used to correlate the present data. For gas spouting the mass transfer coefficient can be related to the other variables by the dimensionless equation:  For Ni With the average deviation For Pb With the average deviation The ( The performance of a batch conical air spouted bed for the removal of heavy metal ions by ion exchange has been investigated. The kinetics of ion exchange has been studied under different conditions such as heavy metal type, initial concentration of heavy metal and air superficial velocities. The rate of ion exchange was expressed by the volumetric mass transfer coefficient The following conclusions have been withdrawn: As the air velocity increases the volumetric mass transfer coefficient increases for both types of heavy metals ions. The initial concentration of nickel ions (expressed as The present mass transfer data have been correlated in terms of Further studies should be conducted in future to study the effect of column geometry such as cone angle, gas inlet diameter and operating parameters such as particle diameter and stagnant bed height on the ion exchange kinetics.