Re-mineralization of desalinated water with magnesium ions is currently under consideration. A simple easily controlled technique for adding magnesium ions to desalinated water consists of dissolution of magnesia pellets in a packed bed by feed water slightly acidified with either carbon dioxide or sulfuric acid. A design model is presented describing magnesia pellets dissolution in a fixed bed as a mass transfer controlled process. The model is confirmed by experimental data covering a range of acid concentrations and contact times. A striking difference was observed between dissolution with the weak carbonic acid and with the strong sulfuric acid. Dissolution of magnesia with dilute sulfuric acid of 1 to 5mM at very short contact times around 2min provided virtual equilibrium concentration of magnesium ions whereas the magnesium ion concentrations obtained with CO2 at the same acid concentrations and contact times were far from equilibrium. Mass transfer coefficients extracted from the dissolution data of the weak carbonic acid were in substantial agreement with literature data whereas coefficients derived from the strong sulfuric acid dissolution data were about 5–6 times higher, probably due to an increased pellet surface generated by a strong acid attack.Desalinated water is poor in minerals, making it corrosive and unpalatable. A certain degree of re-mineralization is necessary in order to overcome these drawbacks and to comply with human health concerns The Israel Ministry of Health is considering extending the existing re-mineralization regulations, which specify addition of 32 to 48 Most magnesia (MgO) dissolution literature studies agree that, depending on reaction conditions, the overall dissolution rate is controlled either by diffusion of reactants and products or by surface reaction. Vermilyea Several studies examined MgO acid dissolution by the rotating disk technique at pH Macdonald and Owen Guśpiel and Riesenkampf Raschman and Fedorocková In summary, available magnesia dissolution studies examine powders or single crystals. No practical design model is available for engineering design of MgO dissolution in a packed bed system suitable for desalination post treatment. The design model used in this work adopts the mass transfer control approach which enabled successful correlation of experimental data of dissolution in fixed bed systems of benzoic acid pellets by water The system investigated is a packed bed column containing magnesia pellets over which desalinated water acidified with either CO The dissolution driving force is the concentration difference between the equilibrium magnesium ions concentration [ The equilibrium concentration [ The model predicts that the dissolved magnesium concentration expression The total equilibrium Mg species at the particle–solution interface is given by: Values of equilibria constants at room temperatures of the various species involved in the magnesia dissolution system were obtained from the Visual MINTEQ software (v. 3.0). At the high pH values prevailing at the particles–solution interface, the [ Using values of the equilibria constants of the various Mg species, Eq. The hydroxyl ion concentration is determined by the charge balance at the particle–solution interface: For a given [ The total equilibrium Mg species at the particle–solution interface is given by: The inlet H Values of the sulfuric acid equilibrium constant show that at the pH conditions prevailing in this study (pH Using the equilibria constants of the various Mg species, Eq. The hydroxyl ion concentration is determined by the solution charge balance at the interface: The experimental system ( The MgO dissolution path along the packed bed was followed by monitoring the composition of water extracted from 8 sampling points located along the length of the column as shown in Magnesia particles denoted as Akdolit® HYDROLIT-MG were obtained from the Akdolit Co., Germany. The particles were substantially spherical in shape and their size range was from 2.0 to 5.0  The kinetic model developed in Magnesia dissolution with the strong sulfuric acid provides much higher magnesium exit concentrations, closely approaching equilibrium concentration levels as shown by the data in The MTC in the H Similar agreement was obtained in analysis of all H  It is seen that the MTC results of the CO Segall et al. Suárez and Compton As anticipated, magnesia dissolution with the strong acidity H This paper presents a design model for magnesium ion re-mineralization of desalinated water by magnesia pellets dissolution with CO Mass transfer coefficients measured in dissolution with the weak acidity CO Thanks are due to the