The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) all issue codes and specifications relevant to welding activities and material testing.Specifications are documents legally prescribing certain requirements regarding composition, mode of manufacture, and physical and mechanical properties. Standards are documents representing a voluntary consensus. However, when these specifications are adopted by a regulatory authority they become a code, such as the Boiler and Pressure vessel code (ASME), National building code etc.The history and scope of these organizations are discussed, together with the activities of other relevant bodies, such as the American Petroleum Institute (API).American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Background and History Present Day ASME List of all Twelve ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessels Codes ASME Section VIII, Division 1 (Pressure Vessels) ASME Code for Pressure Piping ASME Section V The National Board The National Board Inspection Code (NBIC) American Petroleum Institute API 653 (Above-Ground Storage Tanks) API 510 (Pressure Vessels) API 570 (Pressure Piping) API RP 579 (Fitness for Service) API RP 580 (Risk Based Inspection) American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) all issue codes and specifications relevant to welding activities and material testing. Specifications are documents legally prescribing certain requirements regarding composition, mode of manufacture, and physical and mechanical properties. Standards are documents representing a voluntary consensus. However, when these specifications are adopted by a regulatory authority they become a code, such as the Boiler and Pressure vessel code (ASME), National building code etc. The history and scope of these organizations are discussed, together with the activities of other relevant bodies, such as the American Petroleum Institute (API).  The specifications issued by various institutions, including both ASME and ASTM, are adopted as part of the American National Specification Institute (ANSI). Specifications are documents legally prescribing certain requirements regarding composition, mode of manufacture and physical and mechanical properties. Standards are documents representing a voluntary consensus. The National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE) In the following paragraphs, we will try to give an introductory perspective on some of the key institutions through their historical development. Located at Three Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990, (   The Institution of Chartered Mechanical Engineers had been successfully established in England 33 years earlier in 1847. In the United States, the American Society of Civil Engineers had been active since 1852, and the American Institute of Mining Engineers had been organized in 1871. Holley had been vice-president of one and president of the other. Mechanical engineers practiced in industries such as railroad transportation, machine tools, steel making, and pumping. In 1880 there were 85 engineering colleges throughout the United States, most of them offering a full mechanical engineering curriculum, with students gaining a degree in mechanical engineering. The first annual meeting of ASME was held in early November 1880. Robert H. Thurston, professor of mechanical engineering at Stevens Institute and later Cornell, was the first president. Thurston is credited with establishing the first model mechanical engineering curriculum and laboratory. This was an era of steel power that drove the technology of the day: locomotives, ships, factory machinery, and mine equipment. The Corliss engine and the Babcock & Wilcox water-tube boiler were in their prime. The first real US central power plant – Thomas Edison’s Pearl Street Station in New York City – ushered in the era of great electric utilities in 1882. The internal combustion engine was not far from application. Conglomerates such as US Steel were formed. Industrial research laboratories, such as those at General Electric, du Pont, and Eastman Kodak, proliferated.  Since its inception, ASME has led in the development of technical standards, beginning with the screw thread and now numbering more than 600 specifications. The society is best known, however, for improving the safety of equipment, especially boilers. This is for good reason. If we review the archives of engineering we find that between 1870 and 1910, at least 10,000 boiler explosions in North America were recorded. By 1910 the rate jumped to 1,300 to 1,400 a year. Some were spectacular accidents that aroused public outcries for remedial action. A Boiler Code Committee was formed in 1911 that led to the Boiler Code being published in 1914–15 and later incorporated into the laws of most US states and territories, and those of Canadian provinces. By 1930, fifty years after ASME was founded, the Society had grown to 20,000 members, though its influence on American workers is far greater. Just as the nineteenth-century railroad created towns and cities along its paths, and its interlocking schedules led to establishment of present time zones, twentieth-century ASME leaders, such as Henry Robinson Towne, Fredrick W. Taylor, Frederick Halsey, Henry L. Gantt, James M. Dodge, and Frank and Lillian Gilbreth have pioneered management practices that have brought The diversity of mechanical engineering can be seen in ASME's 36 technical divisions (plus one subdivision) and 3 institutes. Today's structure of technical divisions was established in 1920, when eight divisions were created. The primary divisions were: Aerospace Fuels Management Materials Materials Handling Engineering Power Production Engineering, and Rail Transportation. Two more were added the next year: Internal Combustion Engine and Textile Industries. The most recent addition, in June 1996, is the division called: Information Storage and Processing Systems Division. Currently, ASME is a worldwide engineering society focused on technical, educational and research issues. It has 125,000 members and conducts one of the world’s largest technical publishing operations. It holds some 30 technical conferences and 200 professional development courses each year, and sets many industrial and manufacturing standards. Under the sponsorship of the ASME, the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Committee establishes rules of safety governing the design, fabrication, and inspection during construction of boilers and pressure vessels. ASME is made up of various committees. There are several codes developed by sub-committees. The fabrication codes include:  Section I, Power Boilers Section III, Nuclear Codes Section IV, Heating Boilers Section VIII, Division 1 and 2, Pressure Vessels Section X, Fiberglass Reinforced Vessels. There are also reference codes issued to support the construction codes. These include: Section II, Materials Part A, Ferrous Materials Part B, Non Ferrous Materials Part C, Welding Materials Part D, Materials Properties Section V, NDE Section IX, Welding Qualifications The following is a brief discussion of some key ASME specifications and their role in the design and construction of pressure vessels. The key differences between ASME section VIII division 1, division 2, and division 3 are given in The organization of Section VIII, Division 1 is as follows: Subsection A Part UG Subsection B Part UW Part UF Part UB Subsection C Part UNC Part UNF Part UHA Part UCI Part UCL Part UCD Part UHT Part ULW Part ULT Mandatory Appendices Non-mandatory Appendices ASME Code committee B31 has developed codes for pressure piping. They include B31.1 for power piping and B31.3 for chemical piping. In addition, the B31 committee publishes a supplement on corrosion, B31G, entitled Manual for Determining the Remaining Strength of Corroded Pipelines. Some of the other pipeline related design and construction specifications are given in ASME Code Section V is the reference code that contains the requirements for non-destructive examinations that are code requirements, and are referenced and required by other codes. It totals 30 articles, some of which are not titled, as listed in This section has two subsections. Subsection A describes the methods of non-destructive examinations to be used if referenced by other code sections, and subsection B lists the standards covering non-destructive examination methods that have been accepted as standards. The National Board (NB) is an organization made up of law enforcement officials in the United States and Canada. They administer and enforce boiler and pressure vessel laws within their jurisdiction. The NB also standardizes inspector’s qualifications, and issues commissions to authorized inspectors who successfully pass the examinations. Authorized Inspection Agencies are the organizations that employ Authorized Inspectors. The Agency may be either the jurisdiction charged with the enforcement of the boiler or pressure vessel laws, or an insurance company authorized to write boiler and pressure vessel insurance within a jurisdiction. The National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors is an organization comprised of Chief Inspectors for the states, cities and territories of the United States, the provinces and territories of Canada, and Mexico. It is organized for the purpose of promoting greater safety for life and property, by securing The purpose of the National Board Inspection Code (NBIC) The NBIC intends to provide guidance to jurisdictional authorities, inspectors, users and organizations performing repairs and alterations. This encourages the uniform administration of the rules pertaining to pressure-retaining items. The American Petroleum Institute (API) The following is just a small sample of API specifications and codes, which tries to reflect the variety of issues addressed by the institution. API 2Y API 5L API RP 5L 1 API RP 5L W API 1104 API 6D API 6A API RP 5L3 API 650 API also has several maintenance and inspection specifications that are common in use in the petrochemical, oil, and gas industries, some of which are described below. API 653 “Tank Inspection, Repair, Alteration and Reconstruction” is the inspection code for welded or riveted, non-refrigerated, atmospheric pressure, aboveground storage tanks for the petroleum and chemical process industries. API 510 “Pressure Vessel Inspection Code: Maintenance Inspection, Rating, Repair, and Alteration” is the pressure vessel inspection code for the petroleum and chemical process industries. API 570 “Inspection, Repair, Alteration, and Rerating of In-Service Piping Systems” is the piping inspection code for the petroleum and chemical process industries. API RP 579 “Fitness for Service” is a recommended practice (RP). The purpose of the recommended practice is to provide guidance to the methods applicable to assessments that are specific to the type of flaw or damage encountered in refinery and chemical process plant equipment. API RP 580 “Risk Based Inspection” is a recommended practice (RP). The purpose of the recommended practice is to provide guidance regarding the development of a risk-based inspection program with the methodology presented in a step-by-step manner for users in refinery and chemical process plants. ASTM specifications complement most of the construction specifications. These specifications and codes address several material and testing procedures requirements and guidance. The specifications issued by the American Society of Testing Material ( The following is the short list of some of these groups. The list is only intended to be a general explanation of what is described above. ASTM A 6 ASTM A 20 ASTM A 36 ASTM A 176 ASTM A 181 ASTM A 351 ASTM A 370 Similarly the non-ferrous materials list is exhaustive, and a few of them are listed below as examples. ASTM B ASTM B 80 ASTM B 159 ASTM B 418 ASTM B 457 ASTM B 491 ASTM B 546 A sample list of cemetitious, ceramic, concrete and masonry materials is included below. ASTM C 4 ASTM C 42 ASTM C 144 ASTM C 150 ASTM C 155 ASTM C 173 A sample of miscellaneous materials is given below. ASTM D 20 ASTM D 75 ASTM D 98 ASTM D 143 ASTM D 185 ASTM D 388 ASTM D 1621 ASTM D 1640 A sample list of miscellaneous subjects is given below. ASTM E 4 ASTM E 6 ASTM E 55 ASTM E 83 ASTM E 94 ASTM E 73 A sample list of materials for specific applications is given below. ASTM F 1 ASTM F 22 ASTM F 78 A sample list of corrosion, deterioration, and degradation of materials is given below. ASTM G 1 ASTM G 5 ASTM G 6 ASTM G 11 ASTM G 36 The above lists are just examples of the subjects addressed by each group; in fact the actual list is exhaustive in each case. These specifications are amended, merged, removed or changed from time to time, so the latest up-to-date version must be referenced.