We evaluated the results of open reduction and internal fixation of displaced posterior wall and posterior column fractures of the acetabulum. This was a prospective clinical evaluation of such cases where the main surgical strategy was open reduction and internal fixation with interfragmentary screws and reconstruction plates. Data on 11 patients treated by open reduction (all via Kocher–Langenbech approach)/internal fixation with interfragmentary screws and reconstruction plates were collected. The follow-up period was 61 (18–102) months. Reduction with a fracture gap of less than 2mm without articular stepping was achieved in all 11 cases. Postoperative complications developed in five patients, including subcutaneous haematoma in one, avascular necrosis of the femoral head (AVNFH) in one and heterotopic ossification (HO) in three. All but the patient with AVNFH, had anatomic radiological reduction, and good to excellent functional results. Open reduction and internal fixation with interfragmentary screws and reconstruction plates is the treatment of choice in displaced posterior wall and posterior column fractures of the acetabulum.The surgical treatment of displaced acetabular fractures is increasingly common. Between 1992 and 2001, 11 consecutive cases patients with displaced posterior wall and column fractures of the acetabulum were managed with open reduction and internal fixation in our institution. All the patients had initial posterior dislocation. Six dislocations were reduced within 6 The indication for surgical intervention was a non-congruent joint, without secondary congruity (displacement of more than 3 Perioperative management was similar to that described by Tile. All 11 patients achieved congruent reduction and sound union within 3 months. No loss of reduction, no non-union and no residual instability were noted at final follow-up. All the patients, except the one with avascular necrosis of the femoral head (AVNFH), had anatomic radiological reduction, and good to excellent functional results with an overall Harris hip score of 88 (82–97) at the final follow-up. The final radiographic (anatomic) evaluation showed congruent reduction (<2 Postoperative complications developed in five patients (45%), which are shown in No iatrogenic neural injury or thromboembolic complication developed in this series. One of the patients with initial sciatic nerve palsy made a complete recovery and the other recovered partially. Our experience and present results show that open reduction and internal fixation with interfragmental screws and buttress plates is very effective and useful in the treatment of posterior column and posterior wall fractures. Thus, far, all patients we have treated achieved a congruent reduction and rigid fracture fixation. We do not believe screws alone or plates alone could be used to achieve rigid fixation for these fractures. The number of patients in this series is too small to reach any conclusion about the relationship of development of AVNFH and the timing of reduction of dislocation and definite treatment of the fracture. However, we believe the principle of treatment of this fracture dislocation should be early reduction and fixation with anatomic reduction of all fracture fragments (including the impacted fragments) with rigid fixation using both screws and plates. In patients with fractures involving the superior wall, trochanteric osteomy is necessary to achieve good exposure and anatomic reduction. In the preoperative evaluation, plain films with anteroposterior view, obturator oblique view and iliac oblique view might be enough for surgical planning as shown in this series. However, CT scan of the pelvis might be helpful in preoperatively assessing the presence of loose bodies or intra-articular bony fragments at the time of dislocation and in postoperative assessment of the reduction. Low dose irradiation and indomethacin have been reported to be effective in preventing heterotopic ossification, but, in this series, we did not use any preventive procedure with less severe HO than that reported in other series. Although we did not use intraoperative nerve monitoring, we had no iatrogenic nerve injury. Even with nerve monitoring, iatrogenic nerve injury could not be avoided completely in some series. Although the follow-up in this series is relatively short, our results show that early anatomic reduction and internal fixation with both screws and plates should be the treatment of choice for displaced posterior column and posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum without secondary congruity. Congruent reduction and rigid fixation correlated well with good functional results.