Background
                  Acetabular fractures in the elderly frequently involve segmental quadrilateral plate injury, yet no consensus exists on how to best control the femoral head medial displacement. Quadrilateral surface plates (QSP) were developed to help buttress these challenging fractures. The study aims to 1) Determine the prevalence of segmental quadrilateral plate fractures (SQPF) in elderly patients; and 2) Assess if utilization of a QSP is associated with improved acetabulum fracture reduction and outcome.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a retrospective study conducted at a level-1 trauma centre. . All patients over 60-years that sustained an acetabular fracture between 2007 and 2019 were reviewed. Pre-operative pelvic radiographs and CT imaging were reviewed for 96 patients, to assess for SQPF. From the 96 patients reviewed, over one third of patients (n = 40, 41.6%) sustained a SQPF. Patients that had an acute-THA (n = 7) were excluded as were patients that underwent an ORIF but did not have a QSP or an anterior column buttress plate (n = 3). The remaining 30 formed the study’s cohort. We assessed the ability to achieve and maintain reduction in this elderly population, and compared outcomes using traditional anterior column buttress plates (ilioingual or intra-pelvic approach) versus an intra-pelvic pre-contoured buttress suprapectineal plate (QSP). Outcome measures included: fracture reduction using the Matta classification (desirable: anatomical/imperfect and poor), re-operations, conversion to THA and Oxford Hip Score (OHS) (for the preserved hips).
               
                  Results
                  Ten patients had an ORIF with utilization of a QSP (QSP-group), and 20 had an ORIF but did not have the QSP (non-QSP-group). There was no difference in patient demographics between groups. Fracture patterns were also similar (p = 0.6). Postoperative fracture reduction was desirable (anatomical/imperfect) in 17 patients and poor in 13. Improved ability to achieve a desirable reduction was seen in the QSP-group (p = 0.02). Conversion to THA was significantly lower in patients that had a desirable fracture reduction (appropriate: 3/17; poor: 7/13). No patients in the QSP-group have required a THA to-date, compared to 10/20 patients in the non-QSP-group (p = 0.01). The mean time to THA was 1.6 ± 2.1 year. There was no difference in OHS between the two groups (34.4 ± 10.3).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Elderly acetabulum fractures have a high incidence (approaching 40%) of segmental QPF. Desirable (anatomical/imperfect) fracture reduction was associated with improved outcome. The use of a QSP was associated with improved ability to achieve an appropriate reduction. A QSP should be considered as they are both reliable and reproducible with a significantly improved fracture reduction and lower conversion to THA.Acetabular fractures in the elderly population are the fastest growing cohort of acetabular fractures, SQPF are associated with many fracture patterns described by Letournel; most commonly both column, anterior column posterior hemi-transverse (ACPHT), anterior column, transverse, and T-shaped fractures, but do not as an entity contribute to the main fracture classification systems. Elderly patients often have an array of confounding factors that can make control of the medial femoral head displacement more challenging, such as poor bone quality and limited tolerance for periods of non-weightbearing. Anterior intrapelvic surgical approaches such as the modified Stoppa have been popularized to aid with SQPF visualization and the application of a QSP. Fracture characteristics and bone quality in the elderly are dissimilar to the younger population, and plates used in buttress mode have demonstrated superior outcomes in most articular fracture patterns. It remains unknown whether the use of a QSP to buttress and stabilize these challenging fractures in this population. The aims of this study were to 1. Determine the prevalence of segmental quadrilateral plate fractures (SQPF) in elderly patients; and 2. Assess if utilization of a QSP is associated with improved acetabulum fracture reduction and outcome when compared to isolated suprapectineal pelvic reconstruction plates. This is an IRB-approved, multi-surgeon, retrospective, consecutive case series between 2007 and 2019 from a level 1 trauma centre. Inquiring into the institutional database, 120 patients that had sustained an acetabular fracture who were over the age of 60 at the time of the injury were identified. Strict inclusion criteria were applied and patients that underwent a two-stage ORIF, conservative management, those with inaccessible medical records, associated femoral injury or acetabular fracture following hemi-arthroplasty were excluded. The decision to proceed with acetabular ORIF was made by the on-call pelvic trauma surgeon taking into consideration, age, comorbidities, bone quality, pre-existing osteoarthritis and fracture characteristics. Ninety-six patients satisfied potential inclusion criteria and their pre-operative pelvic radiographs and CT imaging were reviewed by an Arthroplasty fellow (GN) who has completed a pelvic and acetabulum trauma fellowship and two senior P&A trauma surgeons (AL & SP). The review was performed in a blinded manner with the reviewer not knowing the fracture management undertaken or the patient outcome. Patients were selected if there was an acetabulum fracture with a segmental SQPF, and it was felt a QSP would have benefited fracture reduction and fixation. Deciding if the QSP would benefit reduction and maintenance was a critically step in the process ( Review of the radiological imaging identified that over one third (n = 40, 41.6%) of the elderly patients had sustained a SQPF that was felt would benefit from a QSP. Seven of the patients underwent concomitant THA at the time of the ORIF and three patients had fixation using a Kocher Langenbeck approach without plate fixation of the anterior column and were hence excluded from further analysis. The remaining (n = 30) patients formed the study’s cohort. The hospital’s medical records were used to collect data on the (n = 30) cohort; including patient demographics, mechanism of injury, Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) Grade, operative records including surgical approach, post-operative complications and reoperations including conversion to THA. The integrated suprapectineal and QSP was introduced to our centre in 2015, surgeons have been able to decide since then if it is the best management option for their patients’ fracture pattern. Prior to this the stoppa approach with separate medial and anterior column buttress plates were being utilised as a surgical approach in this centre for the management of similar fractures. Pre-operative radiograph and CT scans were also used to identify fracture pattern and characteristics. Post-operative antero-posterior pelvic, and Judet radiographs of the acetabulum were used to assess the postoperative quality of reduction according to the Matta grade Outcome measures of interest included quality of fracture reduction according to Matta, post-operative complications, reoperations, conversion to THA and patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) at follow-up, using the Oxford Hip Score (OHS) (range 0–48, worst-best) were recorded amongst the non-replaced hips. An anatomical or imperfect reduction as per Matta classification was considered desirable. Analysis was performed using SPSS. Intergroup comparisons were made using Mann-Whitney U for continuous variables, cross-tabulation and Chi-Square for categorical variables. Significance was set at p < 0.05. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Of those 30 patients, ten had an ORIF with utilization of a QSP and formed the (QSP-group) and 20 had an ORIF but did not have the QSP, forming the (non-QSP-group). Patients in the non-QSP-group had fixation in the form of a combination of Supra/infrapectineal reconstruction plates and column lag screw fixation. No patients received braided cables, heavy wires, percutaneous screw fixation alone or buttress screw fixation. The QSP-group and the non-QSP-group had no difference in patient demographics ( Operative time, Surgical Approach and length of hospital stay: The mean operative time was 251 ± 112 min, there was no difference in operative time in the QSP-group compared to non-QSP group (222 ± 59 Vs. 261 ± 91): (p = 0.3). There was no difference in the surgical approach or use of dual approach between groups (p = 0.7) The mean length of stay was 18 ± 9 days; no difference was seen between the QSP-group and non-QSP group (17 ± 8 Vs. 19 ± 11): (p = 0.9). Fracture reduction according to Matta was desirable (anatomical/imperfect) in 17/30 patients and poor in 13/30. Improved ability to achieve desirable fracture reduction was seen in the QSP-group compared to the non-QSP-group (p = 0.03) ( The mean follow-up for the QSP-group was 1.9 ± 1.2 years and for the non-QSP-group was 5.6 ± 4.0 years. Patients who had an appropriate fracture reduction (n = 17) had a significantly lower conversion rate to THA with three patients requiring a THA, in comparison to the (n = 13) patients with a poor reduction, in which 7 required a THA (p = 0.04). No patients in the QSP-group have gone on to require conversion to THA compared to 10/20 patients in the non-QSP-group (p = 0.01), the mean time to THA was 1.6 ± 2.1 years. Comparing only the appropriate reductions in QSP and the non-QSP groups, there was no significant difference in the conversion to THA. In the non-QSP group, 3 out of 8 patients required conversion to THA in comparison to 0 out of 9 in the QSP group (p = 0.08). Two patients in the QSP-group required a re-operation due to infection. There was no statistical difference in patient reported outcomes comparing the patients that had not gone onto have a THA the QSP-group recorded an OHS of 35+/10 Vs. 34 ± 11 in the non-QSP-group (p = 0.7). Failure to reduce the central displacement of the femoral head results in hip incongruity and a poor outcome despite reduction of acetabular columns and other wall fragments. Elderly osteoporotic acetabulum fractures are the most rapidly growing subgroup of acetabular fractures and present a unique set of medical and surgical challenges. The study cohort consisted of 30 patients; (n = 10) formed the QSP-group and (n = 20) the non-QSP-group. No difference was seen in patient demographics between groups. They were matched with age, sex, mechanism of injury, Charlson comorbidity index, as well as ASA grade. The fracture patterns were also similar between groups; (p = 0.6) as was the length of hospital stay (p = 0.09).The surgical approach (p = 0.7) was similar as was the operative time (p = 0.3). In the future, once the learning curve associated with the novel technology, we anticipate the operative time to be shorter in the QSP group. This is a result of the time used to contour the pelvic reconstruction plate being eliminated by the pre-contoured QSP. Comparing the fracture reduction and patient outcome following surgical fixation. In the 30-patient cohort the postoperative fracture reduction was desirable (anatomical or imperfect) in 17 patients and poor in 13. The quality of the reduction had a direct impact on the conversion to THA, as conversion to THA was significantly lower in patients that had an improved reduction 3 Vs. 7 (p = 0.04). Reviewing only the appropriate reductions in the QSP and non-QSP groups, there was no significant difference in the conversion to THA (p = 0.08). If a desirable fracture reduction is achieved, there is a reduced conversion rate to THA regardless which of these two fixation methods are used. In patients who have not been converted to a THA, there is no difference in OHS 35+/10 Vs. 34 ± 11 in the non-QSP-group (p = 0.7). However, in the non-QSP group, 3 out of 8 patients required conversion to THA, in comparison to no patients in the QSP group. However, this study was not powered to test the ability of the fixation method used to maintain the degree of reduction achieved in surgery; further study is thus needed to test for this. However, the ability to achieve an improved fracture reduction in elderly patients with a SQPF was found to be significantly improved (p = 0.02) with the use of a suprapectineal QSP. As a result of the improved reduction in the QSP-group there is a significant reduction in conversion to THA (p = 0.01) compared to the non-QSP group. It is our impression that the pre-contoured shape of a suprapectineal anatomical QSP can be used in some instances as a reduction tool, allowing the surgeon to utilize the medial buttress effect of the surgical plate when applying it, spreading the force over the quadrilateral surface and indirectly correcting the femoral head position. The use of an intrapelvic approach may also give a more direct visualization and a mechanical advantage when addressing fractures of the quadrilateral plate and fractures with medial dome impaction. This study has several limitations as a result of its retrospective design and small cohort number, related to the recent introduction of the QSP at our centre. Selection biases exist as the treating surgeon decided on the type of treatment offered to the patients at the time of the injury (ORIF Vs. acute THA) and the surgical approach. This study includes the first elderly patients in this centre beginning from July 2015 that were selected for a QSP. As a result, the fracture reduction and patient outcome may have been affected by the development of the surgical intrapelvic approach together with the learning curve of the technique of applying the plate and the equipment available to aid in plate placement. However, we would suggest any improvement in fracture reduction and decrease in conversion to THA would only have been improved with further experience. There was a shorter follow up time of the QSP group (1.9 ± 1.2 years) compared to the non-QSP group (5.6 ± 4.0 years), due to the fact this technique was more recently introduced. However, the mean conversion to THA after ORIF in the non-QSP group was on average less than the follow up time that has been observed in the QSP group at 1.6 ± 2.1 years. Another limitation is the possible lack of study power as there appears to be reduced conversion to a THA in the QSP-group when comparing patients with a desirable fracture reduction in the non-QSP group, a larger study may have shown a significance difference. Elderly acetabulum fractures have a high incidence (approaching 40%) of SQPF. Anatomic or imperfect fracture reduction is associated with a reduction in conversion to THA. If an appropriate reduction is achieved there appears to be no difference in conversion to THA regardless of the fixation method used. However, all conversions to THA in cases with appropriate reductions occurred in cases that had not used the QSP and thus the lack of statistical significance may be secondary to the study’s lack of power. A suprapectineal QSP should be considered in patients with a SQPF as they are both reliable and reproducible with a significantly improved chance of obtaining a desirable fracture reduction and hence a lower conversion to THA. None. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. No authors have any conflicts of interest to declare relevant to this study.