An investigation was conducted on a magnesium AZ31 alloy to determine whether the deformation process is homogeneous or heterogeneous during high-pressure torsion (HPT). Disks were processed by HPT at a temperature of 463K for up to 5 turns and then sectioned vertically across the diameters in order to examine the grain size distributions and the microhardness values on the cross-sectional planes. The results show that deformation is not homogeneous in the through-thickness direction during processing by HPT. The variations in grain size, and therefore in hardness, are due in part to the different grain refinement mechanism that occurs in hcp magnesium alloy by comparison with fcc aluminum. Shear bands were also observed in these samples and they confirm the heterogeneity of the deformation. The heterogeneous nature of flow in HPT processing is probably associated with local variations in the flow stress of the samples during processing.High-pressure torsion (HPT) is a processing technique involving the application of severe plastic deformation (SPD) to metallic samples. Specifically, the samples are generally in the form of thin disks or small cylinders, they are placed between massive anvils under a high applied pressure and they are subjected to concurrent torsional straining There has been considerable recent interest in examining the structure and properties of materials processed by HPT. There are now numerous reports describing the exceptional grain refinement and the enhanced properties that are achieved in different metallic materials after processing by HPT to very large strains. In these experiments, the equivalent von Mises strain in HPT, It is usual in HPT processing to assume the distribution of strain is constant throughout the thickness of the sample and in practice this assumption is reasonable if the straining process is homogeneous with no flow localization and without the occurrence of any slippage between the disk and the anvil. An earlier study showed that disk slippage was not significant when processing relatively soft materials at high imposed pressures There are only three reports to date describing observations recorded on the cross-sectional planes of samples processed by HPT. First, in experiments on an Al–Mg–Sc alloy, small cylinders with heights of 8.6 No investigations have been conducted to date to investigate the ability to achieve homogeneity through disks of any hcp metals processed by HPT. This omission is important because it is well known that there are significant difficulties in the processing of magnesium alloys using the alternative SPD processing procedure of equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP) The material used in this study was a commercial AZ31 (Mg–3% Al–1% Zn) alloy supplied by Timminco Co. (Aurora, CO) as extruded rods having a diameter of 10 After processing the disks were sectioned vertically along a diameter and mounted in resin. The cross-sectional areas of the disks were ground with abrasive paper, polished with diamond paste and a final polishing was conducted using a colloidal silica solution. The polished surfaces were etched to reveal the grain boundaries and examined using a JSM 6500F scanning electron microscope (SEM) and an optical microscope (OM). Following observations of the grain structure, the surfaces were re-polished and microhardness measurements were recorded at pre-determined locations using a Matsuzawa Seiki MHT-1 microhardness tester equipped with a Vickers indenter. A rectangular grid of indentations was recorded using 5 indentations parallel to the top and bottom surfaces and 5 indentations perpendicular to these surfaces, with the measurements conducted at positions designated 0.1 One-half cross-sections of the three disks processed by HPT are shown in Microhardness testing was used to determine whether there was any difference in mechanical properties in the through-thickness direction. It is important to note that the grain structure of the magnesium alloy was significantly refined by HPT processing. It was a general observation that areas with combinations of ultrafine and coarser grains were present at similar distances from the disk center but at different distances from the top and bottom surfaces. Thus, the microstructures shown in In order to show clearly the variations in grain size on the cross-sectional plane, An important characteristic of the HPT processing of magnesium alloys is the development of shear bands within the materials. In these experiments, shear bands were observed at various locations in the three processed disks. The present results demonstrate a very clear difference with the experimental data reported earlier for high-purity aluminum In fcc metals, SPD processing by ECAP introduces a uniform array of subgrains within each coarse grain and the low angle boundaries of this subgrain structure gradually evolve with increasing strain into an ultrafine-grained microstructure consisting of very small grains separated by boundaries having high angles of misorientation In the present experiments, HPT processing was conducted at a temperature of 463 The concentration of deformation in volumes of smaller thickness than the thickness of the sample is confirmed by the images showing duplex grain structures parallel to the disk surfaces. An example is shown in Finally, the presence of shear bands as in  A magnesium AZ31 alloy was processed by high-pressure torsion (HPT) at a temperature of 463 By sectioning the HPT disks vertically across a diameter, it is shown that there are variations in the grain size distributions and in the microhardness values on the cross-sectional planes and these observations demonstrate that the deformation is not homogeneous in the through-thickness direction during HPT. Shear bands were also observed in the cross-sections and they were not parallel to the direction of the highest theoretical shear stress. The variations in grain size, and therefore in hardness, are due in part to the different grain refinement mechanism occurring in an hcp magnesium alloy by comparison with fcc aluminum. The heterogeneous nature of flow during HPT is probably due to local variations in the flow stress of the sample during processing. This work was supported by