All aspects of proximal humeral fractures produce much debate. From classsification systems to modes of treatment and rehabilitation, the influence of patient age and management of complications all may lead to confusion. Here we aim to give a balanced, contemporary overview of the subject and provide suggestions as to how to approach these injuries.Proximal humeral fractures are common (approximately 4–5% of all fractures) and increasing in frequency, probably due to their association with osteoporosis in our increasingly aged population. Management decisions for the majority of these injuries are straightforward, though some cases lead to vigorous debate regarding classification and treatment decisions can range from the most conservative to the most aggressive operative intervention. The availability of new, specific implants spurs some on toward operative intervention, whilst some texts still recommend treatment techniques of questionable value, making diagnosis and treatment confusing. In this article we will consider the common classification systems, investigations, relevant anatomy and the more commonly proposed treatment regimes—together with the preferred management options of the senior author (ATW). Fracture classification systems are most useful when they allow accurate anatomical description, guide treatment and allow an estimation of prognosis. The first classification that seemed to meet these requirements was the Neer classification of 1970 Codman described the proximal humerus divided into 4 fragments, along the lines of physeal union ( Additionally there are a group of humeral head fractures that are described as impression fractures, usually occurring with a dislocation, in which the articular surface and subchondral bone becomes indented by the glenoid rim. Impression fractures are divided according to the percentage of the articular surface affected, generally less than 20%, 20–45% and greater than 45%. Head splitting fractures are a further development of this mode of injury, as the humeral head is cleaved into at least 2 separate fragments. Jakob and the AO group developed a classification system that describes the degree of vascular isolation of the articular fragment. Despite the reservations expressed, it is still important to use a classification system. Otherwise it becomes impossible to compare different papers on the subject and reach any conclusions regarding the validity, effectiveness and success rates of the various treatment modalities described. The authors prefer to use the Neer system. Critical to the prognosis in proximal humeral fracture is the blood supply to the humeral head articular fragment. This receives its main blood supply from the ascending branch (also known as the anterolateral branch) of the anterior circumflex humeral artery (itself a branch of the third part of the axillary artery). This artery enters the bone at the intertubercular groove and supplies the tuberosities and the humeral head via the intraosseous arcuate artery, which lies within the head. To a lesser extent blood supply also arrives via the soft tissue attachments of the rotator cuff, mainly through the posterior circumflex humeral artery, which supplies a small part of the greater tuberosity and posteroinferior head. Gerber et al. defined the territories of these arteries in a series of cadaveric radiopaque injection experiments, proving that the vascularisation of the Injuries that disrupt the blood supply to the articular fragment tend to be those that detach both the tuberosities and damage the arcuate artery, i.e. Neer 4 part or AO C-type fractures and fracture dislocations. Head splitting fractures also tend to critically disrupt the blood supply to the articular fragment. Impaired vascularity increases the risk of Avascular Necrosis (AVN) and collapse of the humeral head. Following standard history taking and examination of the patient with a possible shoulder injury, including neurovascular assessment, full radiological examination is required. The complete shoulder trauma radiological series consists of an anteroposterior view, scapula lateral view and an axillary view ( Computed tomography (CT) is useful to further visualise complex fractures and to assess the humeral and glenoid articular surfaces in impression, head splitting and glenoid rim fractures. It is also useful in assessing bone stock in cases of nonunion and anatomy in malunion ( Treatment methods will be described by fracture pattern. Debate becomes fierce as the complexity and number of parts increase; there is also patient age, physiological state and comorbidities to take into account along with expected demands to be put on the limb. There is general agreement that fractures that are not sufficiently displaced or angulated to represent a The exception to this situation arises when there is over 5 The approach for fixation of greater tuberosity fragments utilises a deltoid split. With the arm draped free the humeral head may be rotated to visualise the fragment and its bed. If there is a single, large fragment then 3.5 This is the commonest fracture pattern seen. Two-part fractures of the proximal humerus may be impacted, angulated or displaced. Where there is impaction the fracture will usually unite promptly, but with associated angulation into varus, valgus or posterior bow deformity. Significant functional impairment may result because of impingement or malposition of the articular surface. Displaced or ‘off-ended’ fractures, where the action of opposing muscle groups pull the distal fragment medially and anteriorly, may be slow to unite and in some cases may progress to nonunion. There are several schools of thought regarding the management of these injuries, ranging from ‘almost always conservative’ to ‘almost always operate’. Manipulative reduction under anaesthetic on its own has been described in the past but due to the high incidence of redisplacement has been largely discredited. Similarly ‘traction reduction’ using a hanging plaster-of-Paris cast has also been discredited for failure to achieve reduction and for the discomfort that it causes. The authors believe that neither of these treatment options should be offered. Minimal fixation techniques following manipulative reduction are well described. Open reduction and internal fixation allows visualisation and accurate reduction of the fracture fragments. Many methods of maintaining the reduction have been described, including the use of sutures, sutures with eyeletted nails, tension band wiring, intramedullary nails and various types of plates and screws. More recently custom-designed proximal humeral systems have been introduced, of which the authors have experience of the Plant Tan (Medizentechnic, Germany) and AO Philos (Synthes, Switzerland) systems with fixed angle interlocking screws ( Court-Brown et al. have reported the results of treatment of a large series of patients, average age 72 years, and concluded that the functional results of operative management in this older group are statistically no better than those treated conservatively. Reports in the literature looking at the PlantTan proximal humeral fixator plate in 2 and 3 part fractures have shown good functional results in the younger age group, though the results in the older age group remain poor. It is the senior author's current practice to advocate open reduction and internal fixation using the Philos system In this injury one tuberosity usually remains attached to the articular fragment and the rotator cuff then acts as a displacement force on this fragment. In all cases reduction and fixation are advocated, allowing early mobilisation and rehabilitation ( Resch (Austria) is perhaps the best known exponent of the percutaneous reduction of 3 and 4 part fractures, using elevators introduced through appropriately placed stab holes and subsequent fixation with cannulated screws. In very osteoporotic bone and in cases of fracture dislocation in the elderly, with complete loss of soft tissue attachments, a primary shoulder hemiarthroplasty allows early mobilisation and produces a confortable shoulder. This pattern of injury is not amenable to closed reduction. There is also a high failure rate with open reduction and internal fixation due to avascular necrosis and nonunion. Four part fracture dislocation is associated with an even higher risk, the head fragment is usually found to be completely free and devoid of soft tissue at operation ( In the series from Austria alluded to above, The treatment of choice in the elderly population is generally accepted to be primary hemiarthroplasty. Although hemiarthroplasty had been attempted before the 1950s, it was Charles Neer who revolutionised the procedure for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. The decision to perform hemiarthroplasty in young, active patients is very difficult as it will almost inevitably lead, with the passage of time, to a requirement for revision surgery. The levels of discomfort and function from a If humeral head replacement is performed the deltopectoral approach is preferred. The key to the deranged anatomy is identification of the bicipital groove and the long head of biceps tendon, lying between the two tuberosities. It is usually unnecessary to divide the subscapularis tendon as the split that commonly occurs between the two tuberosities allows entry into the shoulder joint and retrieval of the humeral head fragment. Care must be taken when retrieving the humeral head in cases of fracture dislocation, particularly if there has been delay between injury and presentation, as it may lie very close to the brachial plexus and axillary sheath. A number of humeral head replacements are available and are broadly grouped into modular or monobloc. The original Neer implant of the 1950s was modified in the 1970s and has remained in its monobloc form ever since. The senior author currently uses the Bigliani-Flatow (Zimmer, USA) modular implant, which comes with interchangeable head sizes (both diameter and depth) and a range of lengths and diameters. Other implants have increased modularity (separate neck for example) and all vary in the number and distribution of holes in fins for reattachment of soft tissues. With increasing modularity comes increasing risk of dissociation The key to a successful hemiarthroplasty for trauma is the avoidance of injury to the deltoid muscle, correct retroversion of the prosthesis (usually about 30°) and secure reattachment of the tuberosities to each other, the humeral shaft and the prosthesis itself to ensure healing in the correct position. The long head of biceps tendon should be replaced in the bicipital groove at the end of the procedure or tenodesed to the floor of the bicipital groove if it has become detached from the glenoid. The functional results of hemiarthroplasty are variable and the patient must be counselled that some stiffness and loss of range of movement are inevitable, although a comfortable shoulder is the primary goal. Functional result is influenced by age of the patient, correct positioning of the implant and the anatomical reduction of the tuberosities.   Pathological fractures involving the proximal humerus may be treated by intramedullary fixation if the prognosis for the malignant disease warrants stabilisation. The Polarus nail (Acumed, USA) range allows numerous possibilities for locking in the proximal fragment and may be augmented with PMMA cement for greater stability. Where there is extensive replacement of the humeral head by tumour then a long stem humeral hemiarthroplasty with proximal and distal locking options may be used. In many cases nonoperative treatment is most appropriate ( The rehabilitation of proximal humeral fractures is critical to optimise outcome. The sooner that rehabilitation can commence, the better. This is usually more successful under the supervision of a physiotherapist. The classical Neer regime involves 3 phases.  Exercises are repeated 4 times per day after initial warm-up using a warm pack on the shoulder. These exercises are ideally commenced immediately after stable fixation of fractures, though they may be deferred 2–3 weeks if there is concern regarding the strength of fixation or in the case of potentially unstable fractures that are to be treated conservatively (greater tuberosity fractures for example).   The neurovascular injury rate has been reported to be as high as 4–6% in some series of displaced proximal humeral fractures. Any part of the brachial plexus may be injured. More commonly an axillary nerve palsy is seen following anterior fracture dislocation, due to the position of the nerve on the anterior capsule. After careful documentation of the deficit, progress may be monitored with electromyography. Discussion with a centre managing brachial plexus injury is advised at an early stage, as some surgeons prefer early exploration of the brachial plexus rather than an expectant policy. Pneumothorax and haemothorax are both possible association with proximal humeral fracture, usually in high-energy trauma. Intrathoracic dislocation of the humeral head fragment is an interesting though rare complication ! Post-traumatic frozen shoulder is largely preventable with adequate rehabilitation and physiotherapy starting as early as possible post injury. Failure to progress with range of movement (including passive range), with the cardinal loss of external rotation, suggests frozen shoulder. Impingement of fracture fragments and metalwork causing a mechanical block to movement must be ruled out before embarking upon arthroscopic or open capsular release, in the event of failed physiotherapy and stretches for this condition. Closed manipulation is hazardous and may lead to refracture. Avascular necrosis may occur very occasionally in 2 part fractures of the proximal humerus, however it is following closed treatment (3–14%) of 3 part fractures and open treatment of 3 and 4 part fractures (13–34%) that it is more common. This is an uncommon complication caused by excessive movement at the fracture site (over aggressive physiotherapy for example), extensive periosteal stripping in high-energy trauma, wide separation of fragments and soft tissue interposition. The humeral shaft fragment may form a pseudarthrosis with the undersurface of the head fragment, complete with synovial membrane formation, as a result of excessive movement of the fracture site that is bathed in synovial fluid from the shoulder joint above. Where possible, treatment is with open debridement, reduction and fixation with bone grafting. This is only possible when the humeral head fragment has sufficient bone stock to allow fixation and the articular surface is in good condition. A CT scan may be useful in planning. Humeral head replacement is the procedure of choice where the criteria above are not met, although Greater tuberosity migration into a superior position produces subacromial impingement, whilst posterior migration produces impingement with the glenoid. Where there is gross malunion an osteotomy may be performed, through a superior approach. This also allows correction of the position of the rotator cuff, although this may have become shortened with time, making reduction difficult. This procedure is often associated with unrewarding results and is best prevented by early recognition of greater tuberosity migration and managed in the acute situation. This can only be achieved with correct trauma series radiographs to identify the lesion. Angular malunion of the surgical neck may be associated with a surprisingly good range of movement, providing there is no frozen shoulder and tuberosity impingement. It may be better to perform capsular release and institute intensive physiotherapy before embarking on an angular osteotomy of the proximal humerus. There are some deformities that warrant corrective osteotomy, these are usually gross and are more commonly due to anterior angulation at the fracture site leading to reduced forward flexion. The authors’ thanks go to Jessica Henning, radiographer at Bradford Royal Infirmary, for the line drawings.