This book concentrates on properly treating drilling fluid in the surface systems including a detailed discussion of the three required sections: suction, addition, and removal. The single, most important function of a drilling fluid is to prevent a blowout and to be able to control a kick if one does occur. For this reason, the first subject addressed in this book is the fluid processing required to handle a kick. For safety, in anticipation of a kick, the drilling fluid within the drill pipe should have the same density avoiding sag, settling, and uneven density in the annulus that could lead to a kick. To achieve these conditions, the surface system must be able to blend a sufficient quantity of homogeneous fluid. The agitation and blending of this fluid is discussed and proper calculations related to ensuring the proper properties. In addition to safety, drilling fluid has many other functions to fulfill, including providing the optimal rheology to assist drilling operations. This book presents a basic understanding of how the drilling fluid processing operation affects the drilling process. Pertinent rheology facts are reviewed to avoid misunderstanding of the flow properties of the drilling fluid. Agitation and blending of new additions to the surface system is explained. The mud hopper and mud gun plumbing and arrangements are discussed to assist in proper blending of the drilling fluid additives. A method of calculating slug volumes and densities for tripping is discussed in the suction section discussion. The next section of the book involves the removal of drilled solids. The process of removing drilled solids actually starts at the bottom of the borehole. Cuttings need to be removed from the bottom of the hole before the next row of cutters arrive. This requires maximizing the hydraulic impact or hydraulic power of the fluid flowing through the nozzles. This will require adjusting the flow rate to the optimum value as will be presented in the IADC Drillers Knowledge Book on hydraulics and rheology. After removal from beneath the bit, cuttings should be transported out of the hole without tumbling and grinding into smaller pieces. Since the flow rate is established by drilling optimization conditions, the rheology of the drilling fluid must be adjusted to transport the cuttings. The rheology required is discussed in depth in Once the cuttings arrive at the surface, the removal section needs to be structured so that these drilled solids are removed before the fluid reaches the suction section. Each piece of drilled solids removal equipment is discussed and explained in detail. The proper equation for calculation of drilled solids concentration depends upon the density of the drilled solids. A field method of determining the drilled solids density is presented, along with a method to evaluate the plumbing for proper fluid processing. A method of calculating the fraction of dirty drilling fluid processed is explained. Plumbing arrangements are frequently incorrect and, sometimes, can be corrected with relatively minor changes. Several tank arrangements that have been observed on drilling rigs are presented and calculations made for evaluation of these real-life examples. The calculation of drilled solids concentration depends upon the density of the drilled solids. These densities change significantly from one geological formation to another. A field method to determine the drilled solids density is discussed in  Provide sufficient mud tank volume and proper agitation to keep the fluid in the drill pipe homogeneous. Arrange the tank plumbing so that all of the drilling fluid is processed by the surface equipment. Strive to have a low plastic viscosity. Provide a thin, slick, compressible filter cake and reduce incidents of stuck pipe. Determine the flow rate and nozzle sizes which will cause the drilling fluid to strike the bottom of the hole with the most force or most power. (This must be done on the rig floor just prior to pulling a dull bit). After dressing the new bit with the proper nozzles, find the founder point of the new bit after circulating bottoms-up. (Use MSE). The annular velocity in the largest part of the hole is determined by the hydraulics optimization, and the rheological properties of the drilling fluid need to be adjusted to bring cuttings to the surface without tumbling. Cuttings should have sharp edges. Screen the fluid through API 140, API 170, or API 200 screens. Look for holes in the screens during connections. Unplug hydrocyclones and determine how those large solids remained in the drilling fluid. When using a centrifuge on weighted drilling fluids, do not return any of the light (or overflow) from the centrifuge back to the active pits, and replace the chemicals (filtration additives and rheology adjusters). When using a centrifuge on weighted drilling fluids, replace the chemicals (filtration additives and rheology adjusters). The actual money saved by using correct drilling fluids processing is difficult to document. Most operators regard cost of drilling wells as proprietary information. However, the economics of having the correct homogeneous fluid in the drill pipe in case of a kick is almost self-evident. The inability to determine the underbalanced pressure could be disastrous or could just require much extra rig time to handle. The benefit of having good solids control practice is more difficult to quantify. Very few drilling programs schedule stuck pipes or other problems caused by drilled solids in the drilling fluid. How can you prove something didn't happen because of some action taken? Case histories are difficult to find when related to poor solids control. One event stands out in the past experience of one of the authors. A platform was scheduled to drill twelve wells. While drilling the sixth well, the operator was unhappy with the ability to control drilling fluid properties, especially the low gravity solids concentration. An evaluation of the plumbing revealed many problems. The contractor (who will remain anonymous) thought every pump should be able to pump from and to any compartment. The needed plumbing changes were so daunting that the recommendation from the rig was that it would cost too much. Operator management made the decision to modify the drilling fluid processing system. At the end of the sixth well, six welders were sent to the rig and spent several days modifying the system at a cost of 10% of the AFE of well number six. The savings on well number seven, because of the elimination of visible and invisible NPT, was much greater than the funds spent changing the system. That savings accrued on all of the rest of the wells. Drilled solids management has evolved over the years as drilling becomes more challenging and environmental concerns are paramount. Equipment changes and improvements have responded to the necessity of treating more and more expensive drilling fluids. Probably the largest impact was the recognition that polymers could make much better drilling fluids despite the cost. Polymer drilling fluids required lower drilled solids concentration so superior solids removal systems were developed to meet those demands. A historical perspective, including drilling fluid management, specifications, solids control, and auxiliary processes, provides a clear and complete picture of the evolution of current equipment and practices. The negative impact of drilled solids on drilling costs, performance, and non-productive time has been well documented in recent years. However, there have been many skeptics because the effects are not always immediately observed. Drilling fluid was used in the mid 1800s in cable tool (percussion) drilling to suspend the cuttings until bailed from the drilled hole. (For a discussion of cable tool drilling, see History of Oil Well Drilling by J. E. Brantley.) With the advent of rotary drilling in the At the time Spindle top was discovered in 1901, suspended solids (clay) in the drilling fluid were considered necessary to support the walls of the borehole. With the advent of rotary drilling at Spindle top, cuttings needed to be brought to the surface by the circulating fluid. Water was insufficient so mud from mud puddles, spiked with some hay, was circulated downhole to bring rock cuttings to the surface. If the formations penetrated failed to yield sufficient clay in the drilling process, clay was mined on the surface from a nearby source and added to the drilling fluid. These were native muds, created either by “mud making formations”, or as mentioned, by adding specific materials from a surface source. Drilling fluid was recirculated and water was added to maintain the best fluid density and viscosity for the specific drilling conditions. Cuttings, or pieces of formation, “small rocks” that were not dispersed by water, required removal from the drilling fluid in order to continue the drilling operation. Based on the sole judgment of the driller or tool pusher, a system of pits and ditches were traditionally dug on-site to separate cuttings from the drilling fluid by gravity settling. This system included a ditch from the well, settling pits, and a suction pit from which the “clean” drilling fluid was picked up by the mud pump and recirculated ( Drilling fluid was circulated through these pits, and sometimes a partition was used to accelerate settling of the unwanted sand and cuttings. Frequently, two or three pits would be dug and interconnected with a ditch or channel. Drilling fluid would slowly flow through these earthen pits. Larger drilled solids would settle and the cleaner fluid would In the late 1920s drillers started looking at other industries to determine how similar problems were solved. Ore dressing plants and coal tipples were using: Fixed Bar Screens Placed on an Incline Revolving Drum Screens Vibrating Screens The fixed bar screens are currently used as “gumbo” busters, to remove very sticky clay from the drilling fluid. The latter two methods were selected for cleaning cuttings from drilling fluids. The revolving drum, or barrel-type, screens were widely used with the early, low height substructures. These units could be placed in a ditch or incorporated into the flow line from the well bore. The drilling fluid flowing into the machine turned a paddle wheel which rotated the drum screen through which the drilling fluid flowed. These units were quite popular because no electricity was required and the settling pits did not fill so quickly. Currently, revolving drum units have just about disappeared from the scene. The screens were very coarse, API 4 to API 10, and sometimes with a fine screen (an API 12). The number after the “API” designation refers to the mesh size. The vibrating screen, or shaker, became the first line of defense in the solids removal chain, and for a long time was the only machine used. Early shakers were generally used in dry sizing applications and went through several modifications to arrive at a basic type and size for drilling. The first modification was to reduce the size and weight of the unit for transporting between locations. The name “shale shaker” was adopted to distinguish the difference between shakers used in mining and the shale shakers used in oil well drilling. This nomenclature was necessary since both shakers were obtained from the same suppliers. The first publication about using a shale shaker in drilling operations described a “vibrating screen to clean mud” was in These shale shakers had 4 The smaller cuttings, or drilled solids, left in the drilling fluid were discovered to be detrimental to the drilling process. Another ore dressing machine was introduced from the mining industry—the cone classifier. This machine, combined with the concept of a centrifugal separator taken from the dairy industry, became the hydrocyclone “desander”, and was introduced to the industry around the late 1950s. The basic principle of the separation of heavier (and coarser) materials from the drilling fluid is the centrifugal action of rotating the volume of solids-laden drilling fluid to the outer limit or periphery of the cone. Application of this centripetal acceleration caused heavier particles to move outward against the walls of the cones. These heavier particles exit the bottom of the cone and the cleaner drilling fluid exits the top of the cone. The desander, ranges in size from 6 to 12 inches in diameter, removes most solids larger than 30–60 μm. During After the oilfield desander development, it became apparent that side wall sticking of the drill string on the bore hole wall was generally associated with soft, thick filter cakes. Using the already existing desander design, a 4-inch hydrocyclone was introduced in 1962. Results were better than anticipated. Unexpected beneficial results were longer bit life, reduced pump repair costs, increased penetration rates, less lost circulation problems, and lower drilling fluid costs. These smaller hydrocyclones became known as “desilters” since they remove solids called “silt” down to 15–30 μm. George Ormsby, then with Pioneer Centrifuge Company, related a story about the first desilter that they installed on a drilling rig. The bank of 4-inch desilters was mounted on the berm of the duck's nest. (The duck's nest was an earthen pit used for storing excess drilling fluid and was usually an area of the reserve pit). The equipment was removing large quantities of drilled solids from an unweighted drilling fluid. After two days, however, the rig personnel called to have the equipment picked up “because it was no longer working”. When George arrived at the location, the equipment was completely buried in drilled solids so there was no way more solids could be removed by the hydrocyclones. During this period, research recognized the problems associated created with ultra fines (colloidal) in sizes less than 10 μm. These ultra-fines “tie up” or trap large amounts of liquid and create viscosity problems that was traditionally solved only by water additions (dilution). As large cuttings are ground into smaller particles, the surface area increases greatly even though the total volume of cuttings do not change. Centrifuges, which had been used in many industries for years, were adapted to drilling operations in the early 1950s to remove and discard colloidal solids from weighted drilling fluids. The heavy slurry containing drilled solids and barite larger than about 10 μm is returned to the drilling fluid system. In recent years, centrifuges have been used in unweighted drilling fluids to remove drilled solids. In these fluids, the heavy slurry containing drilled solids down to around 7 to 10 μm is discarded and the light slurry with solids and chemicals (less than 7 to 10 μm) is returned to the drilling fluid. This application saves expensive liquid phases of drilling fluid. Dilution is minimized, thereby, reducing drilling fluid cost. These hydrocyclones were usually loaded with solids because of the coarse screens on the shale shakers. Removing more of the intermediate-size particles led to the development of the circular motion shale shakers. These “tandem shakers” utilizing two screening surfaces were introduced in the mid-1960s. Development was slow for these “fine screen-high speed” shakers for two reasons:  Screen technology was not sufficiently developed for screen strength, so screen life was short. There was not sufficient mass in the screen wires to properly secure the screens without tearing. The screen basket required greater development expertise than that required for earlier modifications in drilling fluid handling equipment. Tandem shakers have a top screen with larger openings for removal of larger particles and a bottom screen with smaller openings (finer screen) for removal of the smaller particles. Various methods of screen openings were developed including oblong, or rectangular, openings. These screens removed fine particles and had a high fluid capacity. The screens can be made of larger wires so they had greater strength. Layered screens (fine mesh screen for good solids removal over a coarse mesh screen for strength) were developed in the 1960s. These layered screens were easier to build and had adequate strength for proper tensioning for increased screen life. This development made it possible for the shale shaker to remove particles greater in size than API 80 In the 1970s the mud cleaner was developed. At that time, no shale shaker could handle the full rig flow on an API 200 screen. Desanders and desilters were normally used after the shale shaker in unweighted drilling fluid; however, they discard large quantities of barite when used on a weighted drilling fluid. This meant that the drilled solids larger than an API 80 and API 200 (the upper limit of the barite size) could not be removed from the drilling fluid. API specifications currently allow three weight percent of barite larger than 74 μm, which is an API 200 screen. To solve this problem, the underflow from desanders and desilters reported to a pre-tensioned API 200 screen on a shaker. Much of the liquid from the underflow of the hydrocyclones and most of the barite passes through an API 200 screen. This was also the first successful oilfield application of a pre-tensioned fine screen bonded to a rigid frame. Some mud cleaners had screen cleaners, or sliders, beneath the screen to prevent screen blinding. Mud cleaners have also been used with API 250 screens in unweighted drilling fluids that have expensive liquid phases. The history of the development of the mud cleaner is discussed in the appendix of In the 1980s the linear motion shale shaker was developed. The first commercial unit, called a Shimmy Shaker, used hydraulic pistons to move screens in a straight line. This entry went out of business in a short time. This version had screens which sloped downward from the back tank instead of creating a pool of liquid and transporting solids up an incline. Two electric vibrators were introduced that caused the screen to vibrate with a linear motion. Linear motion is the best conveying motion to move solids off the screen. When the linear motion shale shakers were introduced, several were frequently arranged in parallel to receive drilling fluid from scalping shakers. Since API 200 screens could be used on these primary shale shakers, mud cleaners were widely considered superfluous. Mud cleaner use diminished significantly. However, installation of mud cleaners, even with API 150 screens down-stream from these linear motion shale shakers, revealed that some removable drilled solids were still in the drilling fluid. In real situations sufficient drilling fluid bypasses linear motion shale shakers to make mud cleaner installation economical. In retrospect, since the lower apex discharge of desilters frequently plug down stream from linear motion shale shakers. This provides proof that all of the large solids are not removed by linear motion shakers. These systems, or combinations of the various items discussed above, meet most environmental requirements and conserve expensive liquid phases. The desirable effect is to reduce the liquid content of the discarded drilled solids so that they can be removed from a location with a dump truck instead of a vacuum truck. Prior to the current API RP13C (which is also an ISO standard), screens were identified by mesh size. The English unit of “inches” does not translate well into the ISO metric nomenclature. In addition to the change in units, a more compelling change was required because of the complexities of the new shaker screens. Screens ceased to be easily described with a simple measurement of openings in either direction. Screens are layered to form complex opening patterns. Screens are now described with the equivalent opening size in microns and an API number (which was formerly the mesh designation). The next step was to cause the screen to move in a balanced elliptical motion. The motion is similar to an unbalanced elliptical motion shaker (from the 1940s) except that all axes of vibration are pointed toward the discharge end. The movement of the screen is similar to a linear motion shaker except the motion, however, makes an elliptical path. Solids are transported from a pool of liquid at the feed end of the shaker screen just as they are on a linear motion screen. Unfortunately, many drillers continued to believe that drilled solids were not responsible for poor drilling performance. Consequently, drilling fluid systems were not properly arranged to take advantage of the benefits of good solids control. Mud tanks were frequently plumbed incorrectly because of indifference concerning the detrimental effects of drilled solids. Benefits were not really generally accepted until the mid 1980s. Inspection of drilling rig drilling fluid processing systems currently still reveal that proper plumbing was not well understood nor was it a priority. With the advent of the concept of well-bore strengthening, triple deck shakers were developed. The drilled solids are removed from the top and lower decks and the solids (containing wellbore strengthening material and lost circulation additives) are recovered from the middle deck. These solids are sized to pack fractures created by lost circulation problems. The latest commercial entry is a continuous belt of a fine mesh screen. A similar design was introduced about 30–40 years ago and did not become commercial. The new design uses a vacuum beneath the screen to cause the fluid to move through the screen. The solids are air-blasted from the screen after the liquid flows through the screen. Emphasis on minimization of liquid discharges for environmental considerations has created techniques to remove liquid from the drilled solids discard. Since the decanting centrifuge is a very low shear-rate device for the drilling fluid (even though the drilling fluid is rotating over 15,000 A recent innovation for environmental purposes and minimization of liquid discharge is the dryer shaker. The discharge from linear motion shale shakers, desanders, and desilters flow onto another linear motion shaker which has even finer screens than the main shale shakers (screens as fine as API 450 or 32 μm) and usually has a larger screening surface. The dryer has a closed sump under the screen with a pump installed. Any liquid in the sump is returned to the active system through a centrifuge. Another innovation introduced in the Gulf of Mexico in the 1990s is the gumbo conveyer. Before these were introduced, some drilling rigs would mount stainless steel rods about two to three inches apart on a downward slope. Gumbo would slide down these rods and be removed from the system. Drilling fluid would easily flow through the openings between the steel rods. At least two versions are currently marketed. One is a chain and the other is a continuous permeable belt. These special conveyors drag gumbo or large pliable sticky cuttings out of the drilling fluid before the drilling fluid encounters a shale shaker. This operation reduces the severe screen loading problems caused by gumbo. Innovations of drilled solids removal equipment will probably continue. However, new, novel, spectacular equipment is useless if it is installed improperly and subjected to poor maintenance and operating procedures. This book concentrates on providing guidelines for practical operations of the surface drilling fluid system. The authors would like to acknowledge the help, participation, and counsel provided by the professionals who reviewed the material and made many constructive suggestions about the text and graphics. They are, in alphabetical order: Mary Dimataris Juan Garcia, PhD Fred Growcock, PhD Bob Line Nace Peard Mark Ramsey, PE Les Skinner, PE Larry Waters The authors would also like to thank Leah Hubenak for her expertise in editing, organizing, and formatting the book. She also provided excellent assistance in creating the excellent graphics which met the publisher's standards and elucidated the text material.  Define viscosity: With Viscometer readings R600 = 60 R300 = 45; calculate PV and YP. Calculate the viscosity at each reading in Question 2: Why would you want Plastic Viscosity to have a high value? Plastic Viscosity depends upon four things. They are: A centrifugal pump is connected directly to a joint of 7 inch casing standing next to the derrick. The casing is open at the top. When the pump takes suction from a tank filled with water, the water stands to a height of 20 Not as high as the water did Same height as the water Higher than the water did In problem 6, would the 16.6 In problem 6, if another identical pump was connected to bottom of the casing (install a tee), would the fluid in the casing go almost twice as high? What is NPSH [Net Positive Suction Head]? What is a flounder point? What drilling fluid parameters control the flounder point? What are the Bingham Plastic model and the Power Law model for drilling fluid? How do you select the flow rate to use while drilling a well? How should you select a flow rate to use while drilling a well? What is “energy” (definition)? What is energy per unit volume? How do you make the drilling fluid have a low viscosity when it strikes the bottom of the hole to remove the cuttings and a high viscosity in the annulus to bring cuttings to the surface? A surface casing is set at 3000 A barite recovery centrifuge will separate barite from low gravity solids. A 3000 Mud guns can be used to stir all mud tanks if the fluid is clean drilling fluid in the suction compartment. The shale shaker back tank should be dumped into the sand trap before each trip to prevent fluid from drying on the shaker screens. The desilter overflow should be returned to a compartment upstream from its suction so that the desilter can “look at the mud twice”. Fluid loss gives a good indicator for the quality of filter cake. An API 200 (75 μm) screen has a cut-point of 75 μm. Drill strings will not experience differentially stuck pipe in an oil-base drilling fluid. Centrifuges and desilters separate drilled solids in the same size ranges in a weighted drilling fluid. Since drilled solids have much less effect on Yield Point in an oil-based drilling fluid than they do in a water-based drilling fluid, good solids control is not necessary in an oil-based drilling fluid system. A centrifugal pump produces a constant pressure. The flow rate from a centrifugal pump should be controlled with a valve on its suction. Closing the valve on the discharge pipe of a centrifugal pump for a few minutes will damage the pump. The head at a surface casing seat at 3000 ft. in 9.0 ppg drilling fluid is 1404