Ankle injuries are the most common sports-related injuries in athletes, the most of which are sprains or partial ligament tears. They most often occur in basketball and soccer, but essentially no sports are immune to ankle injuries. Ankle fractures occur less commonly than sprains, and are typically because of higher energy mechanisms. When dealing specifically with fractures of the posterior malleolus, these occur most often from a rotational injury, and are typically associated with fractures of one or both the other malleoli. The anatomy of the posterior ligaments, their osseous attachments, the weight bearing surface, and buttress effect of the posterior malleolus, make this a critical area of the ankle. There has been considerable debate as to the appropriate treatment of posterior malleolar fractures in the literature. In general, treatment has evolved from simple closed reduction and casting, to open reduction and internal fixation in most cases for reliable healing, restoration of anatomy, and expeditious return to play.Injuries to the ankle are common in sports, and occur in up to 10%-15% of all sports-related injuries. Ankle injuries with fractures and ruptured ligaments typically result from higher energy mechanisms than simple sprains, and cause greater morbidity and longer times to return to play. Treatment algorithms for ankle fractures in athletes in general have not been well-defined, but most practitioners caring for those involved with elite athletics typically treat ankle fractures aggressively to restore anatomy and quicker return to play. Posterior malleolar fractures are common, and are present in up to 44% of all ankle fractures. The dictum in ankle fracture surgery is that any fracture that does not compromise ankle stability may be considered for conservative management. A caveat to this is a fracture that involves the weight bearing surface in the presence of articular incongruity. Historical treatment of posterior malleolus fractures was determined by the size of the fragment and amount of articular cartilage attached. In general, this meant any fracture greater than 25%-33% of the articular surface, those with step-off >3 The ankle is a complex ginglymoid joint, that like other joints is made stable by both osseous and ligamentous structures. The articular surface of the distal tibia is concave in shape, and the posterior lip extends more distally than the anterior lip. This posterior lip is the posterior malleolus, otherwise known as Volkmann’s fragment or tubercle. The distal tibiofibular syndesmosis ligament complex is made up of several separate ligaments. The posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (PITFL) originates from the posterior malleolus and runs obliquely and distally to the posterior fibula. The PITFL is made up of both a superficial and deep component. An unstable ankle fracture is one in which there is loss of the normal constraints and the talus is able to move in a nonphysiological manner. The extreme end of the spectrum results in a frank dislocation of the tibiotalar joint. It has been shown in a cadaver study that the PITFL confers approximately 42% of the stability of the syndesmosis. As this ligament originates from the posterior malleolus, a fracture often times results in instability of the joint. We know that anatomic reduction of the syndesmosis is important for a good clinical result and longevity of the ankle joint. Weening and Bhandari Fractures of the posterior malleolus result from avulsion of the Volkmann’s fragment by the PITFL, or by direct effect of the talus during a posterior dislocation. It has been shown that the PTIFL is almost always intact in the presence of a posterior malleolar fracture. The typical injury mechanism leading to a fracture of the posterior malleolus is a rotational injury in the athlete. In the Lauge-Hansen classification system the injury is described in a staged fashion with a progression of injury around the ankle joint. In the supination-external rotation injury pattern there is first injury to the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (stage I) then the fibula (stage II), then PITFL or fracture of the posterior malleolus (stage III), and finally the medial ankle (stage IV). Posterior malleolar fractures are also seen in the pronation-abduction mechanism. In this variant, the abduction force results in avulsion of the syndesmosis then failure of the lateral malleolus, and may result in a fracture of the posterior malleolus as well. There are also combined injury mechanisms where an axial load and shear fracture off the posterior malleolus, but these are rare in sports, and more commonly occur in falls from a height or motor vehicle collisions. As discussed earlier, posterior malleolar fractures are also seen in the setting of a torsional injury that results in a spiral distal tibia fracture. These are commonly seen with an associated high fibula fracture. Standard ankle plain radiographs (ie, anteroposterior, lateral, and mortise views) are commonly obtained following a significant injury to the ankle in the athlete. As cited earlier, isolated posterior malleolar fractures are very rare. In the setting of an apparently isolated posterior malleolar fracture it is recommended to get radiographs of the entire fibula to ensure that it is not a Masonneuve fracture pattern. It has been shown that plain radiographs are not very sensitive for detecting fractures of the posterior malleolus. Based on CT evaluation of a cohort of ankle fractures with involvement of the PM Haraguchi proposed a classification system. Posterolateral oblique (type I) fractures have a wedge-shaped fragment involving the posterolateral tibial plafond. Transverse medial-extension (type II) fractures contain a fracture line extending from the fibular notch to the medial malleolus. Small-shell (type III) fractures are small shell-shaped avulsion fragments at the posterior lip of the tibial Historically, fractures of the posterior malleolus were treated nonoperatively. Reduction was attempted with dorsiflexion of the ankle and a cast applied. The consequence of the reduction maneuver was often malreduction of the medial and lateral malleolus. There are some studies that show reasonable results of closed management. Donken et al Since the 1950s surgical recommendations of the posterior malleolus have varied. The main issue with guidelines has been the lack of poor quality studies, inaccurate evaluation of fragment size, and not all surgical cases fixed anatomically. Based on older retrospective studies it has been recommended to surgically fix posterior malleolar fractures that are >25% of the articular surface of the plafond. Previous studies have, therefore, focused on the size of the articular fragment, and not on restoring anatomy and rotational stability. Based on biomechanical and clinical studies cited earlier, open reduction and internal fixation of the PM better restores stability and anatomy of the syndesmotic complex, and obviates the need for syndesmotic implant removal when metal screws are used. We typically use an open posterolateral approach with the patient positioned prone to address PM fractures requiring surgical fixation. An incision is made along the posterior border of the distal fibula and the interval between the peroneals and flexor hallucis longis used. Flexor hallucis longis is swept medially and the posterior distal tibia is exposed. The fragment should be mobilized from medial to lateral and proximal to distal to help ensure preservation of the PITFL attachment. We typically fix the PM fragment with antiglide plating, and by under contouring the plate and placing a screw at the apex, compression and indirect reduction can be achieved. Further stability and compression can be obtained by placing lag screws as well. An associated fibula fracture is fixed through the same incision. This implant can be placed on the lateral side or directly posterior. Following surgery, the patient is immobilized in a well-padded splint until suture removal, at which time range of motion exercises are begun. When not doing exercises, the athlete is to wear a fracture boot and remains nonweight bearing until signs of fracture healing. Activity and weight bearing is progressively increased at this point ( There are no studies published specifically looking at outcomes of PM fractures in athletes, and the literature in general is limited because of lack of standardization in examining functional outcomes, relatively small retrospective studies, and no real standardized protocol for the management of PM fractures. Systemic reviews of the topic have, therefore, come to the conclusion that “no consensus exists in the literature as to which fragment size should be surgically fixed.” In a recent, retrospective review, Porter et al looked specifically at outcomes for operative treatment of ankle fractures in 27 athletes. There were 19 males and the average age was 18 years, and the most injuries were from American football. All fractures healed and all patients returned to their sport other than one athlete with a bimalleolar fracture. Those with an isolated lateral malleolus fracture returned to competitive play the fastest. The authors promoted an aggressive rehabilitation protocol, even allowing weight bearing as early as 7 days after surgery. They had 2 presumed infections that resolved with oral antibiotics and hardware removal, both cases involved a lateral 1/3 tubular plate and two 4.5 Contrary to the study by Porter et al, Colvin et al looked at 243 patients with operatively treated unstable ankle fractures who reported engaging in “rigorous” physical activity. The posterior malleolus was surgically stabilized if the fragment was greater than 33% of the articular surface, or if it remained displaced after fixation of the lateral and medial malleoli. Only 3% of patients returned to full sports, and only 24% by 1-year postoperatively. Patients were more likely to return to sports if they participated recreationally rather than competitively. Patients without a syndesmotic injury were more likely to return to preinjury status ( Posterior malleolar fractures are not uncommon in athletes, and should be treated aggressively. Historical recommendations of operating based on size of the fragment should not be the sole factor involved in deciding on treatment. Anatomical reduction and rigid stabilization of the posterior malleolus better restores anatomy to the ankle complex, allows osseous healing rather than ligamentous, and likely allows early aggressive rehabilitation and return to play.