The advantages of using wall friction instead of hardness to indicate likely relative wear rates are given consideration and discussed. The results of sliding abrasive wear tests on a variety of commercially available steels using two particulate solids are presented, together with the results of wall friction tests between the same steels and one of the particulate solids. Correlations found between the wear rates and wall friction data are presented, and are shown to hold for both particulate solids.It is well known that steels of different grades will give different degrees of resistance to wear when used in applications where abrasive particulate solids slide against them. Indeed there is, in industry, a large market for steels that are designed specifically to reduce the rate of wear. These have special significance in applications such as: crushing machines, conveyors, screening machines, hoppers and silos, chutes and so forth. This problem is common to many industry sectors including: mineral extraction and processing, ceramics manufacture, construction, grain handling, and indeed any sector where abrasive bulk solids, or bulk solids with an abrasive contaminant, are handled. However, predicting the difference in rate of wear from one steel to another is not always easy. The use of hardness measurements is one approach that has been used from time to time, but it is known that this approach is not always reliable. The work by Archard and Hirst Khruschov Khruschov advised that the same dependence existed for annealed steels. However, with pearlitic type steels (martensitic, hardened and tempered to various degrees) this dependence was not observed because heat treatment does not affect the modulus of elasticity while the wear resistance rises considerably. This effectively prevents the use of Khruschov's correlation for industrial purposes, where most wear resistant steels are heat-treated. A more reliable means of predicting wear rate in a plant is to undertake a wear rate test by taking a sample of both the steel and the particulate solid to be used. This is achieved by sliding the solid over the steel at a controlled speed and contact stress, and observing the rate at which metal is removed from the surface, normally by weighing. There are many different forms of wear testers Many such wear tests have been undertaken at The Wolfson Centre using a simple rotational wear tester, which will be described in Some thought, over a period of time, together with work previously reported It can, of course, be argued that the measurement of steel hardness by indentation methods, such as the Vickers pyramid indenter, is also a function of an analogous “digging in” process occurring between particles and steel. Although hardness measurements can give some indication of wear resistance of the steels, it is known that it is not always reliable The hardness measurement merely measures the width of the remaining indentation after the penetrator is removed. On the other hand, the wear test occurs under the dynamic conditions of indenters (the hard particles) being dragged along the surface and cutting or ploughing a furrow — properties of interfacial sliding enter this process, which they do not in a straightforward indentation test. It was thereby felt that the friction test may offer advantages over the static indentation test. The programme of work devised to investigate this proposition was as follows. To carry out the investigation it would be necessary to use a range of different steels with different compositions and hardnesses. These would be subjected to both wall friction and wear tests with the same hard bulk solid, and the results compared. However, in order to test the proposition over a wide range of conditions, it was decided to incorporate a second bulk solid in the wear testing. This was to test whether any correlation, for the different steels, between friction and wear against one bulk solid, could be used as an indicator of relative wear rates for the same steels against another bulk solid. First it was decided to utilise a range of steels that are commercially used in applications where wear is an issue. Not all of these are wear-resistant steels; however, in some cases it is found to be cheaper in terms of overall plant operation to use a low-cost soft steel and replace components regularly. The hardnesses of the steels are shown in In order to eliminate, as far as possible, any differences arising from surface finish effects, all steel samples used for friction testing were subjected to an identical process of finishing. That was: sanding by hand with a 240 grit abrasive until all marks previously visible were removed. Although this would not necessarily yield an identical surface finish, it was about the best that could be achieved in practical terms. It was also believed that the differences in surface finish achieved by the same sanding process, would be representative of the differences in surface finish which would arise in a wear situation against the same hard bulk solid. Differences in surface roughness arising between the different steels are illustrated in One bulk solid was used for testing friction and wear, namely crushed magnesite, which is produced by the crushing of a sintered magnesium mineral. It is a hard, angular material that was known, from previous experience of plant design and wear testing, to give high rates of wear against steel surfaces. This was chosen in order to give the best chance of discerning any differences in wear rates, simply by virtue of the high values of wear it was expected to yield. Particle size was from 4.2 mm down to dust. Hardness of this material was estimated at 450 HVPN, i.e. considerably harder than any of the steels tested The second bulk solid chosen, for the purposes of testing any correlation, was crushed soda lime glass. This is again hard and angular, with a significantly smaller median particle size than the magnesite. Again this was very much harder than any of the steels tested, at approx. 550 HVPN The equipment used for the wall friction testing was of the form of a standard Jenike direct shear tester, as described in This device consists essentially of a circular steel ring (“shear cell”) 100 mm inside diameter by 20 mm high, placed on top of a sample of the wall material to be tested and filled with bulk solid. The essence of operation is that a normal force is applied to the bulk solid by means of dead weights placed on a lid of diameter slightly smaller than the bore of the shear cell; then the shear force needed to push the bulk solid, constrained by the cell, across the surface is measured. The relationship between the normal and shear forces determines the coefficient or angle of wall friction. Each wall friction test consisted of a locus of points across a range of test normal stresses (achieved by using different dead weights on the lid). The value of effective angle of wall friction for each steel was picked off the locus at the stress to be used in the wear test. All steels were tested for wall friction in combination with the crushed magnesite only. For the wear testing, a simple rotational wear tester was used. This consisted of a rotating spindle subject to vertical loading via a dead load and a gearing system, carrying a test disc of steel approximately 100 mm diameter. The spindle loading system pressed the disc against the top surface, of a sample of bulk solid, in a vertical tube. The disc was rotated at 100 rpm, and run against the bulk solid at a predetermined stress for a predetermined period. This period was interrupted at 20-s intervals for the disc to be lifted and the bulk solid to be thoroughly stirred up manually. This was to remove worn abrasive and the products of abrasion from the contact layer of bulk solid. After each whole minute of running, the bulk solid in the top layer was removed and replaced with new, unused material. The steel discs were weighed after each whole minute of running, to determine the amount of material removed. The wear rate tests were undertaken first with the crushed glass against each steel in turn, then with the crushed magnesite against each steel. For each sequence of tests, the loss of weight from the steel disc from one weighing to the next was plotted, to ensure that a steady state rate of loss had been reached. Each combination of abrasive and steel was ultimately run for a total time of approximately 5 min and the mean rate of loss of weight calculated. This technique has been used before, for wear testing at The Wolfson Centre, and studied for effects of adjustment of the time periods mentioned. It has been found to give reliable, repeatable results for the relative wear rates between different materials. The results of the testing are shown in the following graphs. All results are referred to the weight loss rate of the steel that wore least. This is to obtain a meaningful comparison between the results from the magnesite and the results from the glass. It was found that the glass caused a substantially lower rate of wear than the magnesite. This effect was expected, owing to the smaller particle size of the crushed glass, and is an effect that has been observed before during tests at The Wolfson Centre. “Normalisation” of the results, therefore, was required to enable direct comparison between the trends within each group. It was decided to plot both relative rate of wear, and relative wear resistance, in order to maximise the scope to search for correlations. The basic results were as shown in the two graphs below The most obvious outcome of the two graphs above is to observe that the results for magnesite and glass tests did not appear to fall in the same order. For example, whereas the mild steel gave most wear (lowest wear resistance) against the glass, it appeared to give a low rate of wear (the second best wear resistance) when tested with the magnesite. However, a word of caution needs to be introduced when interpreting these results. It was observed during the tests with magnesite against mild steel and 3CR12 that a “lapping” action occurred. The abrasive appeared to be embedding in the surface of the disc, and the particles in contact with the steel were rotating with it. It was clear that there was not a simple sliding of the steel against the bulk solid, as appeared to be happening in the other tests. It was observed that under such “lapping” conditions, the bulk solid in the test sample was very quickly ground to a fine powder by this action, and clear deep static penetration marks were produced in the surface of the steel. This phenomenon has been referred to here as “lapping”, for the simple reason that it is the same mechanism used in the lapping of metal components. This process makes use of a soft metal disc (“lap”), into which hard abrasive particles have been pressed. It was clear that these two tests were not representative of the processes of wear involved with the other steels. Hence, it is not surprising that the wear test results for these two did not fit the trends that were found with the others, as will be described below. It should of course be noted that the “lapping” process, which occurred in the wear tests, did not occur in the wall friction test. This is because the particles in the shear cell are much more firmly constrained to move as an assembly against the wall. It should be noted that the wall friction test is effectively a two-body process whereas the wear test approaches an open three-body process. The graphs below show both wear rates and wear resistance for all tests with both bulk solids. There appears to be a clear correlation between relative wear rate and wall friction in Note that the wall friction angle, The reason for using angle of wall friction rather than coefficient of friction is a matter of convention; in design of bulk handling equipment, friction is usually expressed in angle terms. For the reasons mentioned previously, the test results for 3CR12 and mild steel for magnesite (circled in Once those unrepresentative test points are eliminated, the correlation is quite good; there is some scatter amongst the points, but given the crudeness of the wear testing apparatus used this was not unexpected. It should be observed that the range of wall friction values measured, from just over 16° to nearly 24°, is in practical terms quite a wide range of values. This is sufficient to have serious implications for the choice of geometry and steel type, for the promotion of reliable flow, in hoppers and chutes that handle abrasive media. However, the discussion of that phenomenon would be out of place here. With the data plotted in the way presented above, the correlations appeared clearer. It will be seen that the correlation in Perhaps the most important point, though, is that the wear resistance of the steel against the glass correlates well with the wall friction of the magnesite against the steel. This indicates that wall friction testing with one abrasive bulk solid against different steels may be useful to predict relative wear rates of the same steels in contact with other hard bulk solids. The “lapping” effect described, that is, particle embedment in the steel surface, led to some unexpectedly low wear rates with some soft steels. This effect was not reproduced in wall friction tests owing to constraining of the particle motion. Where this “lapping” effect did not occur, the correlation of wear resistance (or wear rate) against friction was approximately as good as the correlation against hardness. Perhaps the most important result was that the correlation held against different bulk solids, indicating that friction testing with one bulk solid may be useful as an indicator of wear with other bulk solids. Khruschov has suggested Additionally, when In the realm between these two ranges the governing factor of abrasive wear remains the hardness of the abrasive material, but the relationship is very dependent on the physical properties of the materials under test. Given the hardness values of soda lime glass (550 HVPN) and magnesite (450 HVPN) From Three points emerged. 1. The correlation of wear against friction was quite good, at least as good as against hardness. 2. It was not clear what advantage (if any) wall friction offers over the use of hardness to predict wear rate. However, the results are promising; it suggests further investigations using steels wherein there is not good correlation between wear and hardness. Two examples of this phenomenon which would be worth exploring include: (a) steels which have been hardened by cold working, which increases the hardness substantially yet does not increase the abrasion resistance (the surface layer is in any case heavily cold worked during the abrasion process) 3. More work is needed to explore the possible wider applicability of this result. However, a consideration of the effects of hardness ratio in the light of Kruschov's work suggest that applicability should be wide.