LKAB has started a new pelletizing plant at Malmberget, where the raw material will be a mix of ores from Kiruna and Malmberget. The new plant necessitated an investment in a new grinding section in the concentrator. As usual, the new section has larger mills. It also lacks the wet cobbing stage present in the old sections.
                  Comparing the analysis data from the new grinding section with the old grinding sections it shows that they give similar results. There are slight variations; the older mills produce a steeper final particle size distribution. Also, it appears that the new mills are more efficient, since they have higher calculated grindability indices.
                  To better understand the differences between the sections, and the process implications of the new grinding section, a combination of Particle Texture Analysis (PTA) and the statistical method multivariate data analysis (MVDA) is used. It shows that it is possible to identify and follow systematic changes in the particle morphology of the mill products. Also, that there are differences in process mineralogical aspect between the old and new grinding sections.LKAB has since the beginning of the 1900s produced iron ore from mines in Kiruna and Malmberget and is today one of the world’s leading producers of highly refined iron ore products. The main product is pellets, for blast furnaces and direct reduction furnaces. Today there is a higher demand from the customers and to obtain a good quality it is important to have good control over the process and the raw material used. LKAB started the new pelletization plant at Malmberget (MK3) in November 2006. The raw material will be a mix from Kiruna and Malmberget, i.e., different ores having different Fe-content and levels of contaminants ( That is why the traceability of the continuous process is one of the crucial factors for future development of granular product(s). Traceability gives the advantage to have a better control over the material through the process and there can be adjustments taken, if needed. It can show “the current” values of different parameters and how much we have to adjust to achieve the goals. In food and pharmacy industries it is very common to use different traceability tools but in the mining industry, which is mostly a continuous process, traceability is an untouched area. As mentioned earlier, traceability is common in part or batch production and often relatively easy to achieve, since different kinds of identification markers can be attached to a unit or different parameter can be measured at different process stages. In continuous processes on the other hand the main part of the collected data relate to process variables that are frequently measured, while product data are limited and infrequently measured ( The literature dealing with traceability is dominated by applications from parts production. However, creating traceability in continuous processes implies vast challenges: process flows can be parallel, serial and circular; sub-processes can be continuous as well as batch-wise; have large buffers or no interruptions in product handling. The purpose of this paper is to compile and describe how process mineralogy might be used for achieving traceability in continuous processes. In this case the grinding sections are in focus, and multivariate data analysis is used to interpret the mineralogy and textures of the minerals in this section. Most iron ores contain significant amounts of gangue minerals that need to be eliminated to produce iron concentrates. At Malmberget, the dominant iron mineral is magnetite but also hematite occurs. Gangue minerals are mostly quartz, pyroxene, apatite, and feldspar ( Material from the mine is sent to the concentrator plant which separates the minerals into two parts, tail and product ( The samples that are used in these studies are from the concentrator’s, old Section 5 and the new Section 6.  The flowsheet for the new grinding Section 6 resemble the one for Section 5, the only difference is that there is no wet cobbing stage before the primary mill. Here, ball mill grinding is used in three consecutive steps with wet low intensity magnetic separators in between. It is important to grind to, approximate 68% Feed samples were taken manually when the material was in motion at a point of free fall, by making a cut at right angle through the falling stream. The other samples were taken as manual pulp samples with pear shaped scoop throughout the circuit before and after each grinding stage. The samples were weighted and then filtrated at Malmberget. In the laboratory at LTU the samples were dried and then cut by a Jones splitter into suitable proportions. The dry material was sieved with a Rot-Tap shaker down to 75 It is important that the liberation data for minerals in a sample come from a sieve fraction. Tests and comparisons have shown that measured liberation of specific size particles in unsieved samples are not the same as the sieved sample. For unsieved samples, the result is not correct ( To have a good view over the different samples, Particle Texture Analysis (PTA) was done at NTNU, Trondheim, Norway. The PTA data system is based on the Oxford Inca Feature software and an existing scanning electron microscope ( For achieving good control and having better overview of the process data it is necessary to collect data with many variables and many properties from the process. By using multivariate data analysis (MVDA) these variables will be explained and expressed and condensed into a few latent variables or principal components so it will be easier to understand the importance and contribution of each variable. A general description of MVDA and its methods applied to chemistry was first done by Multivariate data analysis is based on projection methods. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a projection method of the original variables onto new ones, orthogonal and arranged according to their eigenvalue. This is done on all the data in a matrix Other MVDA techniques are PLS (projection to latent structures), SIMCA (soft independent modelling of class analogies), and MSPC (multivariate statistical process control) are not used here, since this contribution is centred on pattern recognition. The MVDA is run with the software program SIMCA-P+, version 11.5 ( The size distributions of particles in the material for both sections (Sections 5 and 6) are shown in The particle size analyses of the feed and the products in the grinding process show the reduction of particle size ( By comparing Sections 5 and 6 there are slight variations in the results, the finer feed to Section 5 is due to the wet cobbing preceding the primary mill. The older mills in this section produce a steeper final particle size distribution. It is, however, to early to say if this is linked to mill size, or if it is the result of a better, worn in, graded charge. The particle size analysis from Section 6 gives similar results compared with the results of Section 5. The grinding ratio in the primary mill is dramatically higher than the secondary and tertiary mills, which is due to the well known fact that the larger particles grind easily. Size distribution analyses from the output of the primary mill and the input to the secondary mill indicate that the LIMS mainly eliminates smaller gangue minerals fractions. This may explain why the feed to the secondary mill is coarser than the discharge from the primary mill. There are two major ways to easily compare operating mills: grindability and apparent work index ( The apparent-Work index ( The result gives that all mills in the new Section 6 has a better grindability compared to the old section (cf. The PTA gives information on how different minerals are distributed in different fractions. The analysis shows that the magnetite content decreases with fraction size, cf. The PTA also shows how minerals are liberated in different fractions. In this case magnetite is overall well liberated in the fractions examined, but there is also some other minerals that are associated with magnetite. In the largest fraction, associated minerals are plagioclase and ilmenite. With PTA it is also possible to have a good overview over the mineral liberation. It is calculated by the area method, an area of mineral in interest is measured and also the host particle in the polished section, and calculating the percent of mineral in the particle. However, the liberation result shows that the liberation was 90% or better in all cases. All the data from the PTA were collected and arranged in different Excel files, and then imported into the software SIMCA. Each particle was an observation in a data file with variables according to The first analysis is run to get an overview in two dimensions (principal components) based on all identifications and parameters in Here in The score plot shows the relationship among the observations (minerals). This plot can be seen as window into the X space, where the objects (particles) are projected on a two-dimensional hyperplane in the 65 variable spaces. In In the first PCA overview the material is clearly spread out in the first direction.  As it show in The first analysis aimed to compare the feed and discharge for each mill. By excluding all variables except the morphology ones (those in upper right The loading plot in With the same model and the score plot instead coloured according to mineral classification it is possible to see how the minerals differentiate, cf. However if the same plot is reduced to leave only magnetite information, sub-populations of magnetite emerges, cf. To this moment it is not entirely clear what causes the split on sub-populations. The lower value of Mean grey and shorter length indicates that the two minor groups may constitute of mixed particles. The loading plot for the primary mill Section 6 is very similar to the loading plot from Section 5, and therefore not shown. In To understand the beneficiation process, it is necessary to investigate the gangue minerals more carefully. Usually iron ores occur in formations with siliceous rocks, and in particular minerals such as apatite and feldspar. The results of a PCA for the whole Section 5 are shown in Most of the particles are distributed along the first direction; it is the morphology parameters that are found in the first direction in the same way as in  It is obvious that there is more apatite in Section 6 even after the last mill compared to Section 5. This may be a attributed to the absence of a cobbing stage before Section 6. The plot for feldspar in Section 6 once again shows similarity with the one for feldspar in Section 5, and is not shown here. During the run of the investigation, it was a consistent experience that the principal components in the statistical analysis did not change with product and/or grinding section. The combination of PTA and MVDA seems to be a promising development. Further refinements would be to use MVDA models to discriminate between “good” and “bad” feed materials using SIMCA classification techniques. By comparing the MVDA for the sections and different minerals it can be shown how the cobbing stage affect the circuit. By comparing the feldspar and apatite results it is obvious that the apatite continue to exist during the whole circuit, while most of the feldspar is gone after the first separation stage. It seems that the free particles disappear while mixed particles continue to exist in the circuit. For Sections 5 and 6, a direct similarity is found between the two sections but also some divergences, which may depend on the cobbing stage or that the grinding mill differs from each section. It would be interesting to further investigate the material from both sections by using optical microscopy. Optical analysis will better identify the intergrown minerals. The main benefit of multivariate analysis on particle texture data is that it simultaneously compares several thousand particles. This type of investigation is state of the art in this area and it can provide unambiguous information about how each process step influences the material. Financial support from LKAB Research and Development is gratefully acknowledged. We would also like to thank Johan Bucht for valuable ideas regarding the multivariate analysis.