The significant coagulation delay and poor strength performance of cemented paste backfill (CPB) are two of the biggest challenges faced by the backfilling system in Chihong mine. These factors significantly affect the mining and backfill cycle. Hence, CPB property tests (e.g., slump, coagulation, and strength) were conducted to investigate the influence of different cement types and mixing water qualities (tailings pore water and distilled water). Results of the tests for slump, initial coagulation time (ICT), and unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of the CPB samples are as follows: (i) slump variation of different CPB samples is insignificant. (ii) The ICT changing trends of the CPB samples are in line with the ICT of their mixing cement slurry. In addition, zinc ions in the tailings pore water are detrimental to CPB coagulation. (iii) Cement has an obvious influence on the UCS of CPB, and water quality barely affects the UCS of CPB. These results indicate that cement choice and water chemical components are important factors in CPB design and mine operations.During the last few decades, cemented paste backfill (CPB) has become increasingly popular in underground mining operations worldwide ( Despite the tremendous progress that has been achieved in understanding CPB properties and its affecting factors, major technological challenges remain. One challenge is understanding the coupled effects of cement type and water quality on CPB performance. Only a few studies have examined the effect of binder type (cement and slag) on the mechanical properties and microstructure of CPB ( Thus, substantially increasing knowledge on the effects of cement type and water quality on CPB properties is urgent. The main objectives of this research are to experimentally study the following: the effect of cement type and water quality on paste slump performance, coagulation performance, and UCS performance. The tailings sample (called LZT) used to prepare CPB is total tailings obtained from the Chihong lead/zinc mine. Granulated slag was added into the CPB as a coarse aggregate to increase solid weight percentage, which decreased porosity and increased saturation degree ( where The bulk densities of the tailing and slag were determined as per standard GB/T 14684-2001 (6.14.2.3). A measuring cylinder was filled with a known mass of dry tailing or slag and covered with a rubber flat surface. The cylinder was tapped until there is no volume change of the tailing or slag. The bulk densities of the tailing and slag were referred to the ratio of the mass of the tailing or slag to the volume that it occupied in the cylinder ( where Three tailing or slag samples were analyzed for the true solid density and bulk density determination to ensure the repeatability of the results. The data given in A mineralogical analysis was performed on the micronized tailings or slag via X-ray diffraction. The tailings and slag specimens for XRD analysis were ground to the powders that all particle size were finer than 80  Three types of ordinary Portland cement were used in the research. These cements were from the Zheba, Dianbei, and Zhaotong cement companies, which were located near Chihong mine. The three cements were labeled as Cem-A, Cem-B, and Cem-C, respectively. Cem-C is the cement that is currently used for CPB operations in Chihong mine. The PSD of the three cements are shown in Tailings pore water (Por-W) and distilled water (Dis-W) were used as the mixing water for the experiment. Por-W was derived from Chihong tailings slurry by using a deep cone thickener. Por-W was used to make a paste with Cem-A, Cem-B, and Cem-C1. Dis-W was used to make a paste with only Cem-C2, since the Cem-C is the currently used binder in Chihong mine. The chemical analysis of Por-W via inductively coupled plasma–atomic emission spectroscopy is presented in Four CPB samples with a constant cement content of 8.89%, a water–cement (w/c) ratio of 2.25, a slag–cement (s/c) ratio of 1, and the same tailings type were prepared, as illustrated in The standard slump test (typically used in concrete experiments) is widely used to determine CPB fluidity because of its simplicity. Therefore, a slump cone was employed for the paste mixtures' slump test as per the standard of ASTM C143. The top radius of the slump cone is 5 This study observes the effect of coagulation property according to cement type and water quality. Hence, the initial coagulation time (ICT) of both CPB and cement slurry (CP) were measured. Given that the ICT of CP is significantly lower than that of paste, the ICT measurement methods of CP and CPB are entirely different. Four iron cylindrical containers (14 ICT measurement for CP was performed after CP was cured in the curing box for 30 The UCS is frequently tested to evaluate the mechanical quality of CPB ( The microstructure of the studied CPB samples was investigated by conducting scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive spectroscopy analyses (SEM–EDS), thermal analyses (TGA/DTG), as well as X-ray analyses. The microstructure of CPB-C1 at the curing time of 7 The CPB C-1 and CPB C-2 specimens were cut into small pieces at the curing age of 1, 3 and 7 The slump test of each sample is performed for twice, and the deviation of the two test results should be less than 5%. Notably, the slump used in this study is between 20.1  The ICTs of the CPs (CP-A, CP-B, and CP-C) were tested to investigate the effect of cement type on cement coagulation. The results show that the ICTs of the CPs are significantly different (e.g., 294 The mechanical performance of CPB mainly relies on cement hydration ( The CPB samples that used the same cement but with different water qualities vary in ICT as a result of the different chemical compositions of water. The water used in CPB-C1 contains various ions, as shown in  In addition, tailings pore water contains active zinc ions (2.85 This delay is mainly caused by the amorphous layer of Zn(OH) To validate the aforementioned Ca[Zn(OH) Furthermore, differential scanning calorimetry–thermogravimetry analysis was also performed on CPB-C1 with a curing time of 7 Therefore, the analysis results can be explained as follows: (i) the first peak at 115.2 In addition to the SEM-EDS and TG/DSC analysis, the XRD was also performed on the CPB-C1 and CPB-C2 shown in As shown in The UCS of all samples cured at 3 To observe the relationship between CPB strength and mixed cement, the UCS values of three kinds of cement with a curing time of 28 As shown in This paper reports the results of a study that aims to evaluate the coupled effects of cement type and water quality on CPB properties. Several CPB samples with various cements (Cem-A, Cem-B, and Cem-C) and mixing water (tailings pore water and distilled water) were cured under the same conditions and curing times (3, 7, 14, and 28 The effect of cement type and water quality on CPB slump is slight because CPB slump is mainly affected by its aggregate size and water content. The variation of the ICT of CPB corresponds with that of their CP. The effect of water quality on CPB coagulation is mainly manifested by the chemical reaction of Zn This work was financially supported by the