Dense medium separation (DMS) is a technique used to separate particles based on specific gravity. Conventional DMS is, however, limited to coarse particle sizes and is not practical when processing fines. To improve the separation efficiency when processing fine particles, centrifugal separators have been employed. This work investigates DMS in a lab centrifuge and a modified Falcon Concentrator, in order to process the slimes of a rare earth ore. It has been shown that centrifugal concentration using a dense medium is possible when recovering values from a slimes fraction. Both the lab centrifuge and modified Falcon Concentrator result in a similar performance.Dense medium separation (DMS) is a process by which particles are separated based on differences in specific gravity (SG). The process can be controlled with a high degree of precision over a wide range of separating densities and is commonly applied as a pre-concentration step for minerals (such as cassiterite) and in the separation of coal from contaminants ( The use of a centrifuge to separate material on the basis of density is not only limited to DMS. A similar process to centrifugal DMS, known as density gradient centrifugation, is widely used in molecular biology for separating particles such as viruses, ribosomes or molecules (such as DNA) ( This work investigates using a modified laboratory scale Falcon Concentrator as a DMS centrifuge to process fines from the Nechalacho deposit in Canada, which is being investigated for its rare earth potential ( The raw material used in this work was obtained from the Nechalacho Deposit (Avalon Advanced Materials Inc., Canada) located in the Northwest Territories of Canada. Prior to DMS experiments, the ore was subject to a series of gravity and magnetic separation experiments detailed in Centrifugal DMS was performed using an IEC Centra CL2 centrifuge (Thermo Electron Corporation, USA). Samples were added to 35 The Falcon Concentrator (model SB-6A manufactured by Sepro Mineral Systems, Canada) used in this work was equipped with an ultrafine (U/F) bowl. The unit was modified with a lid to seal the bowl, allowing for the sample and heavy liquid to be contained throughout the experiment. The bottom of the bowl was filled with a mouldable plastic to create a flat base for ease of emptying. A schematic of the modified Falcon U/F bowl can be seen in The elemental grades and recovery of the heavy and light fractions produced from DMS performed in a lab centrifuge are shown in While The elemental grades and recoveries of the heavy and light fractions produced from DMS performed in a modified Falcon Concentrator are shown in It has been shown that centrifugal concentration using a dense medium is possible when recovering values from a slimes fraction. The use of a modified Falcon Concentrator U/F bowl resulted in a similar performance to that of the standard centrifuge used. Further work is required to optimize this process, and to remove all entrained heavy liquid. This technique has potential for processing high value slimes, where any loss of value may have a significant impact on the profitability of a mineral processing plant. The authors would like to acknowledge the