Al and Al alloy cold spray coatings were deposited on Mg substrates using two different cold spray systems – a Kinetic Metallization system (convergent barrel, sonic nozzle) and a CGT system (convergent-divergent barrel, supersonic nozzle). The residual stress profiles in the coatings were measured using neutron diffraction with high spatial resolution. In the first part of the study, the residual stress profile in pure Al coatings was compared when sprayed using the Kinetic Metallization system (using both helium and nitrogen as the driving gas), and with the CGT system using nitrogen gas. In this way the effect of impact velocity and process temperature was studied. In the second part of the study, the residual stress profile was compared in coatings of pure Al, 7075 Al and 6061 Al sprayed using the same process conditions in the CGT system. The residual stress profiles depend more on the alloy content, i.e. intrinsic resistance to plastic deformation, than on the processing conditions, and this is interpreted using a simple model that incorporates the effect of peening stresses in the cold spray process.The cold spray coating process is an emerging technique for depositing coatings in the solid state. In this process the feedstock powder, which usually comprises a metal powder as its main component, is injected into a gas stream and accelerated to a speed of ~ Previous work comparing the measured residual stresses in Cu and Al coatings showed that the magnitude of the residual stress depends on the degree of plastic deformation, in addition to the strength level and elastic modulus of the coating and substrate materials The present work addresses these questions as follows. The residual stress profiles were measured in a variety of Al and Al alloy coatings sprayed on an Mg substrate, using two different cold spray processes: sonic and supersonic cold spray. This enabled the same material to be sprayed with significantly different process conditions. In addition, different alloys were sprayed using the same process conditions using supersonic cold spray. The residual stress profiles in each case were measured using high-resolution neutron diffraction. Other properties such as the density and elastic modulus of the deposited coatings were measured, to further understand the deformation process that leads to coating build-up. The residual stress accumulation in Al cold spray coatings is of interest since it can be difficult to form dense Al coatings, due to the low density of Al and the resultant low impact pressure. The case of Al coatings on an Mg substrate is studied since this a system considered for commercial application of cold spray, both for coatings and for repair The first cold spray process used was a Kinetic Metallization (KM) system, a commercial cold spray variant that uses a convergent barrel nozzle, manufactured by Inovati in the USA. Operated under choked flow conditions, the gas speed through the nozzle barrel is The second cold spray system used was a CGT Kinetiks 4000, another commercially-available cold spray variant manufactured by Cold Gas Technologies in Germany. This system uses a convergent-divergent nozzle to produce supersonic conditions beyond the nozzle throat. Only nitrogen gas was used with this system, though the high gas driving pressure and Mach number of ~ The substrate used was a ZE41A Mg alloy, with a grain size close to 30 The temperature given in Specimens were cut from the coatings in the shape of a parallelepiped with flat and parallel sides, using spark cutting. These were used to measure density with an Archimedes balance, and to measure the Young's modulus of the coatings using both the impulse excitation technique The average plastic strain of the particles in the coating was estimated by examining metallographic sections parallel and transverse to the spray traverse direction, chemically etched to reveal the particle boundaries; the impact direction is vertical in all sections. The spherical particles were assumed to deform into an oblate spheroid on impact, The neutron diffraction residual stresses measurements were performed on the KOWARI strain scanner at the ANSTO OPAL research reactor. In order to optimise localisation of the gauge volume, a 90° geometry (2θ The measurements were done in several different through-thickness locations to cover the entire sample thickness, forming a line profile with 0.3 To separate stresses originating from the cold spray process from pre-existing stresses ( The residual stress profiles were interpreted by fitting them using Tsui and Clyne's progressive coating deposition model The first fitting parameter arises from the coating deposition process being considered as the formation of a new layer on the top of the system comprising all of the previously sprayed layers, plus the substrate. This new layer is formed with a characteristic deposition stress σ In most cases the spray is performed above room temperature. After coating deposition the coating and substrate will cool to room temperature, and a thermal misfit term Δε Analysis of the experimentally measured stress profiles in terms of the model allows separation of σ The microstructure of the different pure Al coatings is shown in The two alloy coatings sprayed using the CGT process are shown in A better measure of the coating compaction is the density and Young's modulus of the coatings reported as a percentage of their equivalent bulk values, as given in The KM coatings sprayed using He at the two different temperatures have the same porosity and Young's modulus. The KM coating sprayed using N All of the CGT coatings have a higher density and Young's modulus than the KM coatings The through-thickness residual stress profiles for the coatings and Mg substrates are shown in The Al alloy coatings sprayed using the CGT system have similar residual stress profiles, as shown The absolute values of residual shown in The fitting results of Tsui and Clyne's progressive deposition model The residual stress profile in the pure Al CGT coating appears to be an outlier, since it has the lowest σ In contrast to the experimental approach of studying residual stress accumulation on a macroscopic level, to describe the cold spray process on the microscopic level a numerical estimate was used. The maximum impact pressure gives a rough estimate of whether or not deformation propagates through the sample in the form of a plastic shock wave. As the values in When looking at different Al coatings, the CGT samples all have a higher impact pressure and impact velocity than the KM samples. This correlates well with the density and Young's modulus data, which are the quantitative measure of compaction. Although the magnitude of the average strain is similar in all cases, it is apparent that the impact pressure is more important for the compaction process, and that is why the density and Young's modulus of the Al sprayed using the CGT system are much closer to their bulk equivalents. The higher values of the Young's modulus for the CGT samples also suggest that the higher impact pressure in the CGT spraying process promotes better bonding, To make a connection between the macroscopic residual stress profiles and particle deformation on a microscopic scale, we employ an approach used earlier, making an analogy to the shot peening process Where σ Two parameters, α and β, are coupled into a product that describes in simple terms the elasto-plastic state of the deformed material: α is the ratio of the strain hardening rate (tangent modulus) to the Young's modulus, and β is the ratio of the true plastic strain to the true elastic strain. As can be seen from (1) and (2), the impact stress is the result of several competing factors: spray kinetic conditions ( Here, the most important prediction is a strong dependence of the residual stress on the yield stress, while dependence on other parameters such as αβ is comparatively weak – especially since the Young's modulus is similar in all cases. Even more precisely, for the conditions of cold spray when αβ is small, Eq. The values in  The density and Young's modulus of the coatings correlate well with the impact pressure and velocity of the samples. In the CGT samples the density and Young's modulus are closer to their bulk equivalents than in the KM samples. With the exception of the pure Al CGT coating, the residual stress profile is dominated by the peening process. The contribution of thermal mismatch is not significant. The stress profile in the pure Al CGT coating is likely due to the higher spray temperature used, leading to a greater contribution of thermal mismatch to the residual stress profile. The effective yield stress backed out of the model based on shot peening scales with the process temperature in the case of the pure Al samples, and with the plastic properties of the material, when comparing the alloys. Funding for this project through the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Design in Light Metals is gratefully acknowledged. Travel and accommodation support for the neutron diffraction stress measurements was generously provided by The Australian Institute of Nuclear Science and Engineering (AINSE).