This book is one in a well-known series which in this case contains a set of review chapters said to be mainly on topics in which there are new applications of solvent extraction. There are four chapters out of the eight which have relevance to hydrometallurgical activities. Chapter 1 by Grinbaum is a discourse on the development and scale-up of processes. Chapter 2 by Vogelpohl and Haverland concerns the use of data on single solvent drops to design pulsed sieve plate and pulsed packed columns. Chapter 3 by Sole and Cole reviews nickel solvent extraction and Chapter 8 by Pabby and Sastre discusses the literature on non-dispersive membrane systems. Chapter 1 is somewhat laboured in detailing all the steps in a process development and offers much very practical advice, biased rather towards the novice. It summarizes the successful approach of IMI and it may offer lessons to many similar institutions. However, the chapter also reveals a gap between recent academic work and industrial practice and appears to lack an appreciation or judgement of innovative developments in gathering data for liquid–liquid extraction equipment design. In contrast the method of generating chemical data under limiting conditions deserves more consideration in the literature. There is some misleading comment (e.g. about solvent loading and stripping and in the discussion of column design) and outdated or confused notions (theoretical stages and transfer units) and one can take issue with some of the statements made. Some of the references are incorrectly quoted. The work is perhaps subconsciously too much influenced by experience with mixer-settlers. This commentator therefore feels that a wholehearted recommendation cannot be given to this first chapter for new recruits to the subject to read. Chapter 2 is a statement on the generation of fundamental data for pulsed column design using single drop and swarm devices. It illustrates clearly the direction of work taken in many research centres done with the objective of reducing or avoiding the need for expensive pilot plant operation. The genesis of the concept is not well-placed in an international context. This work was undertaken with three standard test systems with diffusional mass transfer, single solute, clean conditions. The authors show that the results validate the approach in this case but the results are not placed in a wider context and any claim that the method is generally reliable is open to question. The conclusions are uncritical of the limitations and assumptions made. Nevertheless, the approach is worth continuing to study and the application to more complex systems such as found in hydrometallurgy needs to be taken seriously as a means of cost reduction. Chapter 3 thoroughly reviews the purification of nickel by hydrometallurgical techniques and places it in the industrial context. Solvent extraction now allows the treatment of intractable or very low grade ores, both sulphides and oxides, by virtue of the development of selective extractants. A very wide variety of nickel processing routes has been used to suit different materials. There is a discussion of ‘traditional’ and very new promising process routes with much practical detail being addressed. Pressure acid leaching technology has come of age after a long period of consideration and problem resolution. A move away from mixer-settlers towards pulsed columns is anticipated. There is as yet no ideal process and many process flow sheets based on bacterial leaching, pressure oxidation and leaching at moderate temperature are still being researched. It is concluded that solvent extraction will be increasingly used in base metal hydrometallurgy. This a very helpful and educational review for all concerned with the topic. Jumping to Chapter 5 on the design of solvents by computer-aided molecular design, there is no mention of the problem of reagent design for metals recovery and the thermodynamics of ionic systems currently are insufficiently advanced to allow the approach discussed. However, maybe there is a challenge here for someone. The last Chapter 8 on dispersion-free membranes is of interest to hydrometallurgists. The treatment of metal-bearing solutions is very well documented and the account is well-balanced in terms of advantages and disadvantages. Many case studies are discussed in depth (perhaps with a chemistry bias), together with analytical applications and mass transfer models. There is perhaps not enough comment on the slowness of many processes which might preclude them from industrial use. The discussion of mass transfer shows that acceptable performance can be obtained in some systems; the mass transfer seems to occur with very low rate coefficients coupled with very large interfacial area of contact between the phases. The mechanical problems of by-passing of shell-side solution and the header design and hollow fibre conditions at inlet are discussed. However, the overall engineering implications of poor mass transfer rates and constructional methods still need to be focussed on if industrial use of membranes is to make much progress in the field of hydrometallurgy. The trade suppliers of membranes are listed. The decision to purchase this book will therefore depend on specific interests of the reader; it is not recommended to all and sundry since the content is so varied. Most people will only probably find only one of the chapters of great interest. The reviewer is somewhat conditioned by his own interests and expertise and readers of this review perhaps need to bear this in mind.