Electrical conductivity of soil can be considered as a proxy of soil physical properties. Due to its non-destructive nature, electrical resistivity method is serving as an attractive tool in geotechnical engineering practice. In this study, the electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings was measured by laboratory tests using two-phase electrode method. The effects of moisture content, dry density, temperature and other factors on the electric resistivity of phosphate tailings were examined in detail. The electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings was found to decrease with increase in water content, dry density and temperature. A triaxial apparatus was modified to study the relationship between electric resistivity and shear strength characteristics of phosphate tailings. Triaxial shear tests were conducted on the phosphate tailings specimens to determine the stress-strain response, variation in the shear strength parameters (c and φ) and the corresponding changes in electric resistivity. The initial electric resistivity of phosphate tailings specimens correlated negatively with shear strength, cohesion and internal friction angle. During the course of triaxial shear tests, electric resistivity of phosphate tailings decreased continuously with the increase in strain. However the rate of decrease became larger with yielding of the specimen. Consolidation tests were conducted by a modified oedometer to correlate electrical resistivity with consolidation pressure, compression coefficient and compression modulus. The electrical resistivity was found to decrease at a decreasing rate with consolidating pressure. Further, it increased with compression coefficient, but decreased with the increase of compression modulus of soil specimen. The work done in this study can be beneficial for robust estimation of in-situ properties, as well as for the evaluation of shear strength characteristics of phosphate tailings by means of electrical resistivity measurement.The physical characteristics and mechanical properties of soil such as density, water content, compaction, strength or load bearing capacity, stability of earth works and foundations, and settlements, etc., are the key parameters for civil engineering design and construction. There are various indirect and direct methods such as laboratory tests, in-situ tests and geophysical methods which are used for the determination of these parameters. Electrical resistivity of the soil can be considered as a proxy for the spatial and temporal variability of many of the physical properties of soil e.g., soil structure, water content, or fluid composition, etc., and it offers a very attractive tool for describing the subsurface properties without digging Several scholars have tried to explore the phenomenon of electrical resistivity in soils and its relationship with other soil properties. Yoon and Park Concerning the geotechnical evaluation through electrical resistivity, an investigation on the relationship between electrical resistivity and soil parameters (such as cohesion, friction angle, unit weight, effective size (D Tailings are finely ground rock and mineral waste products of mineral processing operations. With the increase in reliance on energy and mineral resources, the volume of extracted minerals is increasing on year on year. Consequently, there are hundreds of millions of tonnes of tailings generated in the world each year. Most of them are usually deposited in the form of water-based slurry into surface tailing ponds (sedimentation lagoons enclosed by tailings dams built to capture and store the tailings). In China currently there are more than 12,000 tailings ponds As previously discussed, the electrical resistivity method of soil characterization, because of being non-destructive, rapid and cost-effective, has become increasingly practiced in the geotechnical engineering applications. However, the same has rarely been used for sub-soil characterization of tailings. The studies on the electrical resistivity of tailings and the relationship of electrical resistivity with the corresponding geotechnical properties are rarely reported in the literature. In general, the electrical resistivity of soils depends on both external conditions, such as temperature, as well as stress state, and the internal parameters of soils, such as soil composition, microstructure, dry density and moisture content. Soil type, microstructure, mineral composition, moisture content, and dry density are identified as the most important internal parameters. They may have significant impacts on the electrical resistivity of soils. The tailings, as solid residues, are different from natural soils in terms of formation, particle geometry, and particle size distribution. To expand on this knowledge and to investigate the behavior of electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings a comprehensive laboratory examination was performed in this study. The electrical resistivity was measured in different situations through laboratory tests. The effects of dry density, water content, degree of saturation, testing temperature, and consolidation characteristics, on electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings were discussed in detail. A modified triaxial apparatus and an oedometer fitted with measurement of electrical resistivity were used to investigate the relationship between electrical resistivity and geotechnical properties of phosphate tailings in this study. The findings of this study are not only helpful to better understand the behavior of electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings, but are also of practical significance for mineral processing and the enhancement of the safety management of tailings impoundments. The samples of phosphate tailings used in this study were collected from the Kunyang phosphate mine of Yunnan Phosphate Chemical Group Co., Ltd. The Kunyang Phosphate Mine is located in the southern edge of Lake Dianchi, 50 km to the south of Kunming city, Yunnan province, China ( The basic physical indexes of the phosphate tailings used in this study are summarized in Electrical resistivity (ER) is an indicative of electrical conductivity of a substance. Currently two methods, two-electrode method and four-electrode method, are mainly in practice for the measurement of soil electrical resistivity in laboratory In a typical two-electrode test, the soil sample is encapsulated in a glass box. Electrical current is passed through the soil sample by means of metal electrodes fixed at each end of the soil box. By determining the potential difference at both ends of the test sample and the current passing through them, the electrical resistivity, In this study, a VICTOR-86E digital multimeter, shown in A conventional triaxial apparatus was modified to enable measurement of electrical resistivity during the course of triaxial experiments. This modified triaxial apparatus was then used to investigate the relationship of electrical resistivity and mechanical properties of phosphate tailings. In the modified triaxial apparatus, illustrated in A conventional one-dimensional consolidation testing apparatus (Model: WG-1B) was modified in this study to enable the measurement of electrical resistivity during the course of experiment. For this purpose, two electrodes were attached at both ends of the specimen (top and bottom). Electrodes in the form of stainless steel mesh, similar to the ones used for the triaxial apparatus, were used in the modified oedometer. This ensured free flow of water, in and out of the specimen. The electrodes were connected to an external multimeter through enameled copper wires. A schematic illustration of the modified oedometer used in this study is shown in In this study, the two-electrode method was used to measure electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings, and a self-modified triaxial apparatus and oedometer were used to investigate the relationship of electrical resistivity and mechanical properties of phosphate tailings. Electrical resistivity is affected by many factors, including mineral components, particle size distribution, density, structure, water content and temperature Soil samples for the triaxial test were prepared by moist tamping technique. For this, the tailings were oven-dried at 105 °C for 24 h and the mass of tailings required to achieve target dry density was computed. The tailings were then mixed with water to achieve the required gravimetric water content. The required amount of tailings were placed in a cylindrical mold and compacted to the target density. A 310 g hammer was used to tamp the tailings in equal 4 layers inside the cylindrical mold. The drop height of hammer was kept fixed at 25 cm. This way, a constant energy was applied to each layer and a uniform initial target density was achieved throughout the length of the sample. The specimen was 3.91 cm in diameter and 8.0 cm in initial height, prepared under different water contents or dry densities or temperatures. For each factor, four samples were tested and then the final result value was obtained by averaging each result. The unconsolidated-undrained (UU) triaxial test method was adopted for this study. Compression tests were carried out on standard oedometer specimens having 61.8 mm diameter, and 20 mm height. The specimens were prepared at an initial gravimetric moisture content of 18%. Consolidation pressure was increased in steps from 25 kPa to 1600 kPa. Each loading increment was maintained for 24 h. Electrical resistivity was measured after the completion of consolidation under each pressure increment. The effects of soil moisture, density and temperature on the electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings were explored in this study. The soil moisture, dry density and temperature were varied from 5% to 20%, 1.5 g/cm The variation of electrical resistivity with water content is summarized in Electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings is also found to decrease with density, with the largest difference being observed for low moisture conditions. This observation is highlighted in The determination of electrical resistivity depends on both of dry density and water content.  The degree of saturation is a function of dry density and water content and is calculated from the data presented in In order to further the analysis of effects of dry density on electrical resistivity, the concepts of void ratio ( Electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings is dependent upon the activity of conductive ions in the soil-water system and the activity of ions is strongly influenced by temperature. Shear strength is an important engineering mechanical index of tailings and a key element in the stability analysis of tailing dams. The shear strength of tailings is related to its particle size, index properties, density and water content, etc. In order to examine the relationship between electrical resistivity and shear strength of phosphate tailings cylindrical specimens prepared at 10% gravimetric moisture content were sheared in a triaxial apparatus. Unconsolidated-undrained tests were conducted at room temperature of 15 °C. The relationship between initial dry density, initial electrical resistivity, confining pressure, and shear strength of phosphate tailings samples is summarized in Shear strength of unsaturated specimens subjected to field stress is a multivariate function of dry density, matric suction, water content and stress state. The relationship between water content and matric suction of a soil is termed as the soil-water characteristic curve. An increase in dry density of the soil results in an increase in matric suction This phenomenon can be of significant importance in actual field conditions where electrical resistivity of the phosphate tailings can be used as an indicative of its shear strength. At an already measured earth stress, for a given dry density and water content, the shear strength of phosphate tailings samples could be estimated by measuring its electrical resistivity. Soil derives its shear strength from cohesion ( The reason for the variation of electrical resistivity with cohesion and friction angle can be attributed to dry density of the specimens. The higher dry density meant more particles in unit volume, causing closer and stronger contact between tailings particles. Additionally, as the space between particles became smaller, the adsorbed water layer tended to be thinner and the same volume of water could now connect more particles, producing larger electrostatic attraction force. Therefore, the cohesion increased with the increase in dry density. Similarly, with the increase in dry density, surface friction and interlocking force increased due to closer and stronger contact between the particles. This resulted in an increase in the internal friction angle. And as noted previously, a larger dry density corresponds to a smaller electrical resistivity. In contrast, water content has a negative impact on its strength. It significantly influences strength through its role in cohesion. As water content increases, cohesion decreases. This is because increasing water content causes greater separation of soil or tailings particles (and thus easier slippage) and further, causes softening of cements. The dry soil has much greater resistance to structural change because it has a higher strength. The decrease in soil matric suction with increasing water content also causes a reduction in shear strength. Soils are a multiphase system that includes solid particles, pore water and air. The compositions of these three phases determine the mechanical properties of soil. The strength of soils is influenced both by internal factors like soil type, moisture content, and dry density as well as by external factors like strain rate and confining pressure. The influences of these factors are not independent, rather their action is coupled with each other. In this study, the relationship among strength parameter ∼ degree of saturation ∼ electrical resistivity for phosphate tailings was presented in The variation of electrical resistivity during the course of triaxial experiment was studied by measuring electrical resistivity at regular intervals upon the application of deviator stress. The number and continuity of contact points of particles are not expected to make much difference in electrical resistivity. Alternatively, the degree of saturation is the dominating factor affecting electrical resistivity. In unconsolidated-undrained test, pore water is not allowed to be drained out. Therefore, water content is constant during the whole course of the experiments.  A sample of unsaturated tailings forms a three-phase system; comprising of a solid phase (soil particles), fluid phase (water), and air. Its consolidation consisted of two stages: compression stage and consolidation stage. During compression stage, either no, or very small amount of water was drained out, and the decrease in volume was mainly from the expulsion/compression of pore air. Air, a very good insulator, had very high electrical resistivity compared to water. The reduction in volume of air (either by expulsion or due to compression) increased the degree of saturation significantly. This ensured better connectivity of pore water and subsequently, the electrical resistivity of tailings specimen was reduced. Once sufficient compression had occurred, the tailings specimen started to consolidate. In the consolidation stage, the majority of air had already been expelled from the pores, and the effect of consolidation was mainly to drain pore water out. At this stage volume of air voids became extremely small and consequently, the specimen became nearly saturated having very good connectivity of pore water. Further expulsion of water from the specimen due to consolidation did not put significant affect to the connectivity of pore water. The rate of decrease of electrical resistivity therefore diminished with consolidation pressure. In the consolidation stage, the sample becomes nearly fully-saturated. As consolidation pressure increases from 800 kPa to 1600 kPa, void ratio decreases from 0.5718 to 0.4515. Correspondingly, dry density increases from 1.6859 g/cm The compression curve reflected the compressibility characteristics of a soil. The change of void ratio over a unit pressure increment, i.e., the slope of the compression curve was defined as compression coefficient to estimate the soil compressibility, expressed as: Compression modulus, Both the compression coefficient and compression modulus were indicators of the compression characteristics of soil. A high value of compression coefficient, Compression coefficient and compression modulus are calculated from Eqs. During the one-dimensional consolidation test, soil in its stiff state (low compression coefficient and high compression modulus), was observed to have low electrical resistivity ( The following conclusions can be drawn from this research. The increase in water content, dry density or temperature causes a decrease in the electrical resistivity of phosphate tailings. However with the increase in water content, the rate of decrease in electrical resistivity diminishes. The overall shearing strength, as well as the shear strength parameters i.e., cohesion The stress–strain curve had three deformation stages, including initial compaction, elastic deformation and yield deformation. The electrical resistivity of tailings sample decreased in the elastic deformation stage and continued to decrease at a rapid rate in the yield deformation stage. The electrical resistivity was found to be correlated to consolidation characteristics of soil with the stiffness of soil and connectivity of pore water mainly governing its magnitude. Electrical resistivity decreased with consolidation pressure at a decreasing rate. It was found to have a direct relationship with compression coefficient, whereas it was found to decrease with an increase in compression modulus. The authors are very grateful to Dr. Shen Jiayi and anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. This research has been funded by the