 Displaced fractures that are irreducible by closed reduction Fractures that displace after successful reduction (unstable fractures) Fractures with residual articular step-off or gap in the articular surface (>1 mm) Fractures that cannot be successfully managed with Kirschner wire fixation  Intraarticular fractures typically cause swelling, tenderness, and difficulty with range of motion ( Even in cases where range of motion is preserved, examine closely for angular or rotational deformity due to fracture displacement.  Standard posteroanterior and lateral radiographic views should be obtained ( One or more oblique views can provide additional information.  The proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint is a ginglymoid (hinge) joint. The concentric condyles of the proximal phalanx and the concave surface of the middle phalanx are congruent with each other and provide some innate stability, which is further reinforced by strong collateral ligaments as well as the volar plate (see The extensor mechanism incorporates both longitudinal and transverse components, covering most of the dorsal and lateral sides of the digit. Incisions and exposures must be planned carefully to avoid damage to important structure(s) (see In PIP joint fractures where the volar lip of the middle phalanx is involved, the percent of intact joint surface determines joint stability. Fractures involving 30% or less of the joint surface are typically stable. If more than 50% of the joint surface is involved, the fracture is typically unstable. Fractures involving 30% to 50% of the joint surface are less predictable (  This approach can be used to repair dorsal fracture fragments, and also allows access to one or both sides of the joint for condylar fractures ( A linear or curvilinear incision is made over the PIP joint. This can be designed as a middorsal line, a lazy “S,” or a zig-zag incision. Most condylar fractures can be visualized by incising the interval between the lateral band and the central slip; this can be done on one or both sides of the joint to help with visualization of the joint surface ( For better visualization of the proximal extension of condylar fractures, division of the transverse retinacular ligament may provide better visualization of the shaft of the proximal phalanx. In rare cases, to visualize the center of the PIP joint, the central tendon can be split down its midline. To avoid an increased risk of avascular necrosis, be sure to maintain the attachments of collateral ligament, volar plate, and other tissues to small fracture fragments. When working on the dorsal aspect of the PIP joint, be careful to preserve the attachment of the central slip to the dorsal base of middle phalanx.  The volar approach can be used for cases that have a volar fragment, such as a large avulsion fragment associated with the volar plate of the PIP joint ( A palmar V-shaped incision is created over the center of the PIP joint ( A flap of skin and subcutaneous tissue is elevated; the radial and ulnar neurovascular bundles should be identified and protected. The flexor sheath—including the A3 pulley—is opened between the A2 and A4 pulleys ( The flexor tendons are retracted, and the volar plate is exposed ( The volar plate may be detached at its distal or proximal aspects, depending on the configuration of the fracture and the exposure required. To fully expose both joint surfaces, the collateral ligaments are released from the volar plate and from the base of middle phalanx. This allows the joint to be hyperextended 180 degrees, exposing both joint surfaces. This is sometimes referred to as the “shotgun” exposure ( Although the neurovascular bundles should be identified and protected, they do not need to be fully mobilized from the surrounding soft tissues, which could risk unwanted injury to these structures.  If the volar plate is to be detached from the middle phalanx, leave a small remnant behind to reattach at the end of the procedure. Otherwise, it may be necessary to reattach with bone tunnels or anchors, which is technically challenging. Be mindful of protecting the neurovascular bundles when the collateral ligaments are released; they are quite vulnerable during this step. Additional mobilization of the neurovascular bundles is often needed to avoid a stretch injury to these structures when the “shotgun” exposure is used.   In particular, anatomic reduction must be achieved at the articular surface. A pointed reduction clamp may be used to maintain the reduced position, or a small-gauge temporary K-wire could also be used for this purpose. Minimize stripping the periosteum and other soft tissue attachment from small fracture fragments to preserve blood supply.  The condylar (metaphyseal) bone is fragile, so be gentle when using clamps to avoid creating additional comminution. Be cautious with K-wire placement for provisional fixation so they do not interfere with the planned internal fixation ( If planning to exchange a K-wire for a screw, be mindful that the hole made by the K-wire may be less precise and contain more thermal damage than a regular drill hole.  Small articular fragments are typically fixed with lag screws or bicortical screws. Lag screw technique is presented in Bicondylar fractures, or other articular fractures with complete transverse disruption of the neck or shaft of the phalanx, may require plate fixation in addition to—or in place of—lag screw fixation. Proximal phalangeal condyle fractures are typically fixed with 1.3- to 1.5-mm diameter screws. For smaller fragments, 1.0-mm screws may be used. The screw is typically advanced from the mobile fracture fragment to the more stable (larger) fragment of bone ( Fragments should be fixated with two screws to prevent loosening or rotation. However, tiny bone fragments may not have enough space to insert two screws ( The reduction and the position and length of the screws are confirmed under radiologic assistance ( Range of motion of the finger is checked for smooth motion and stability.  Countersinking is not required for these screws, and may lead to loss of screw purchase if the bone is too thin or too soft at the metaphysis. Screws placed directly through the collateral ligament(s) may cause impingement of the ligament function and unwanted joint stiffness. To avoid this problem, either split the ligament in the direction of its fibers and allow the screw head to advance to the bone surface, or elevate a portion of the ligament off the bone to permit screw placement.  If the central slip was split for exposure, it should be repaired. However, splitting the extensor mechanism between central slip and lateral band should not require repair, nor does the transverse retinacular ligament require repair at closure. In the volar approach, reattach the volar plate distally if necessary. Proximal detachment of the volar plate does not typically require repair, and the collateral ligaments do not require reattachment. These structures reattach and become stable in the normal course of healing. The skin is closed with nonabsorbable sutures. Postoperative dressing and splint are applied; the finger is positioned with the interphalangeal joints in extension and metacarpophalangeal joints in moderate flexion.  Excessive suturing of structures that do not require repair (collateral ligaments, for example) may lead to unwanted inflammation and stiffness. Check the finger position in the splint carefully. In particular, hyperextension needs to be avoided at the PIP joint, or instability may result due to improper healing of the volar plate after a volar approach.  In reliable patients with rigid fixation, gentle active motion exercises can be started within a week. Protective splinting of the digit is continued until fracture union (about 6 weeks). (The splint is removed for range-of-motion exercises.) After confirming union, the splint can be weaned and strengthening exercises started. The restored joint usually recovers near-full range of motion and strength ( 