Graphene oxide is a two-dimensional carbon nanomaterial that has risen to prominence over the last decade as graphenes water-dispersible counterpart. This key feature offers tremendous potential in the formation of waterborne hybrid materials, coatings, membranes and adsorbents that make use of its diverse surface chemistry and extraordinary surface area. However, the fundamental colloidal properties of graphene oxide remain incompletely understood, with conflicting reports on how the material's amphiphilic nature and adsorption at interfaces render it surfactant-like or particle-like in nature. In the present work, recent developments in understanding the bulk and interfacial colloidal properties of graphene oxide are explored in the context of its chemistry and system thermodynamics, giving insight into the fundamental question of whether its aqueous behaviour is most accurately described as particle-like, surfactant-like or indeed something entirely different.Graphene oxide (GO) can be obtained from the oxidation and exfoliation of graphite, generally in an aqueous solution, yielding hydrophilic carbon-based sheets that are decorated with various oxygenated functional groups ( The most commonly accepted structure of GO sheets is a continuous and atomically thin, two-dimensional (2D) array of carbon atoms that is functionalised with epoxy and hydroxy groups on the carbon basal plane and carboxy groups around the edges ( There are several well-known synthetic procedures for producing GO, with most involving the oxidation of bulk graphite The synthesis of GO is a complex process with many factors having significant impacts on the properties of the resultant material: initial oxidation conditions This great variability highlights that the previous trend in the literature of simply mentioning the synthesis method used and doing some topographical characterisation of GO sheets is inadequate, especially as variations occur even between batches of the same synthesis method. Although efforts have been made to characterise this variability through analysis of the bulk material using spectroscopic techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), NMR and Raman spectroscopy, the inconvenient truth is that the produced GO sheets are not homogenous, with variations occurring even within submicrometre domains of a single nanoplatelet The dispersibility of GO in water has mostly been attributed to its strongly charged nature, which arises from deprotonation of the peripheral carboxylic acid groups Reducing GO with high-temperature treatments or chemical agents such as hydrazine to form reduced graphene oxide (rGO) Ionic strength also modulates colloidal stability, with studies showing that GO and rGO tend to aggregate in the presence of salt in accordance with classical Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) theory and the Schulze–Hardy rule An alternate perspective on the dispersion of GO in water is the influence of so-called oxidative debris. This term is used to describe small fragments of highly oxidised carbon material (chemically similar to GO) that noncovalently adsorb to the GO surfaces and facilitate their dispersion by rendering the sheets hydrophilic ( Oxidative debris is not the only impurity that may influence the dispersion behaviour of GO. Residual acids and oxidising agents also present as ions are seen to dramatically impact the stability of aqueous GO dispersions. To obtain a pure and reproducible product, it is essential to ensure that spectator ions or additional products such as oxidative debris are removed as completely and consistently as possible. We suggest that this can be achieved through dialysis in ultrapure water ( With the focus of this article being to explore whether GO acts as a particle or surfactant at interfaces given its amphiphilic nature, it is important to note that it has been comprehensively established that GO acts as a particle when in a bulk aqueous dispersion. Because of its size and 2D, sheet-like structure, this behaviour can deviate from classical spherical particles, making a comprehensive assessment of its behaviour more complex. Evidence of the particle-like nature of GO includes its behaviour at high concentrations ( Although the 2D structure of GO suggests that it is present in aqueous dispersions as sheets, we argue that this is still an active point of contention, with some conditions causing GO to crumple into pseudospherical geometries, a process analogous to taking a flat piece of paper and scrunching it into a ball. Recent work has argued that the formation of liquid crystals suggests that GO is present as fully extended, sheet-like particles When answering the question of whether GO acts as a particle or surfactant, it is important to consider the behaviour of GO at interfaces. As the presence of particles and surfactants can influence this interfacial behaviour, it is relevant to also interrogate the extent and nature of how GO interacts with surfactants in bulk solution to better understand how interfacial activity may be modulated by surface-active impurities (or additives) in the system. Recent evidence from neutron scattering experiments showed that anionic surfactants do not adsorb to GO; however, cationic, nonionic and zwitterionic surfactants all strongly adsorb to GO sheets The ability of GO to locate at interfaces is now well known, with much of the pioneering work coming from the group of Huang et al. Owing to its large size, the adsorption of GO at interfaces is not easily reversible, unlike typical molecular surfactants. This is because the energy input required to detach or desorb large particles from interfaces is significantly higher than for small-molecule surfactants, which constantly exchange between the bulk solution and surface in a dynamic equilibrium The vast literature on Pickering emulsions indicates that solid particles do not have to be amphiphilic to adsorb at interfaces but rather lower the overall energy of the system by locating at the oil–water interface Kim et al. Furthermore, Kim et al. Deposition of rGO thin films has also been reported at the air–water interface by incorporating background salt to screen charge repulsions, indicating that affinity of these materials at the interface may be tied with their dispersion stability and charge repulsions with the interface It is notable that surfactants, by definition, lower the interfacial tension between phases when the interface is uncompressed. However, it has been difficult to conclusively ascertain the impact of GO on air–water interfacial tension GO has been shown to effectively adsorb at liquid–liquid interfaces to stabilise oil-in-water emulsions. This phenomenon was also first noted by Kim et al., It is notable also here that such emulsions form only with the input of significant energy, usually in the form of high shear from mechanical mixing or ultrasonication. This means that the observation of stable emulsions formed by GO is not at odds with the lack of spontaneous adsorption to oil–water (and indeed air–water) interfaces in stagnant (unmixed) systems. The adsorption of pure GO to air–water and oil–water interfaces is nonspontaneous, and energy in the form of shear or adulterants in the form of surface-active species are required to induce adsorption. A large number of additional studies have been conducted on GO-stabilised Pickering emulsions, exploring factors such as pH The mechanism behind this phenomenon has been explained as rendering the GO sheets more amphiphilic, increasing their affinity for the oil–water interface Conversely, the stabilisation of emulsions by (pseudo) two-dimensional particles is familiar from the extensive literature on emulsions stabilised by clay platelets such as montmorillonite The synergistic interactions of GO and surfactants at interfaces is highly dependent on the charge of the surfactant. As in bulk solution, anionic surfactants have no effect on the surface activity of GO due to the electrostatic repulsion between sodium dodecyl sulfate molecules and GO sheets, whereas cationic surfactants such as cetyltrimethylammonium bromide and nonionic surfactants such as octylphenol polyoxyethylene-10 have allowed for GO adsorption at the oil–water interface due to electrostatic and Using surface-active polymers can also enable the spontaneous enrichment of GO sheets at oil–water interfaces by rendering the sheets more interfacially active The path towards understanding the colloidal and interfacial behaviour of aqueous GO dispersions has seen tremendous progress over the past decade, with numerous breakthrough systems and methods for exploiting GO in the stabilisation of interfaces. A fundamental description of GO that properly categorises and explains the true behaviour of the material is still, we believe, elusive. Differences in GO chemistry and particle size due to variability in starting materials, synthesis route and purification procedures result in complex and sometimes irreproducible behaviour. This arises not only from differences in the edge-to-plane ratio that influences the sheets’ amphiphilicity but also from the potential for strongly adsorbed oxidative debris, along with residual acids or metal ions. Thorough purification including dialysis results in a material that has reproducible colloidal properties but does not show spontaneous surface activity. This points to the native behaviour of GO being particle-like, albeit a highly shape-anisotropic particle with complex dispersion morphology. In aqueous dispersion, the flexible nature of GO sheets enables them to crumple due to interactions between hydrophobic regions of the sheets, although adsorption at interfaces results in flattening of the sheets to maximise their area at the interface and minimise the overall system energy. GO can be driven to air–water and oil–water interfaces by shear energy or adsorption of surface-active species to the sheets but is nonspontaneous in other conditions. Thus, the emulsions and foams produced by GO are best described as Pickering or Ramsden type (i.e. particle-stabilised) in their characteristics, explaining their exceptional long-term kinetic stability. The effects of particle size on GO adsorption and behaviour at interfaces have not yet been explored in detail, not least due to the difficulty in preparing samples with sufficiently controlled or quantised sizes. Smarter syntheses or separation processes to address this would be hugely valuable and remain an exciting but unmet challenge. In a similar vein, further research into the synergism of GO with surfactants and polymers will help to best utilise the material at interfaces. In addition to rarefied experiments using techniques such as microscopy, tensiometry and reflectometry, it is clear that molecular modelling and theoretical approaches will be of considerable value in understanding this behaviour and designing systems with optimised properties. However, owing to the variability in GO as a material, we suggest that the development of a reproducible, standardised protocol for synthesis and purification will be of benefit to end users. This will enable comparison on a level playing field and ensure reproducibility of testing and experimentation. Along with this, measurement standards and a controlled specification range will help industry in ensuring the quality and properties of GO used in materials, formulations and coatings. Then, GO can be used with confidence that its characteristics are not only well understood but also reproducible and robust. Such characterisation and standardisation methods exist for (inherently polydisperse) polymers, and so similar approaches may have value in standardising GO and its characterisation. Nothing declared. The authors thank the