In this study alkaline wet air oxidation (WAO), alkaline peroxide assisted wet air oxidation (APAWAO), and enzymatic hydrolysis methods were evaluated for conversion of wood residue (sawdust) to reducing sugars. Cellulose content, hemicellulose solubilization, and lignin removal for WAO pretreatment conditions were optimized by statistical analysis using a 23-full factorial design with reaction temperature, air pressure, and reaction time as the process parameters. An optimum WAO condition of 170 °C, 1.0 MPa, 10 min was predicted and experimentally validated to give 518 g kg-1 cellulose content, 580 g kg-1 hemicellulose solubilization, and 171 g kg-1 lignin removal in the solid fraction. About 7 g L-1 reducing sugars was detected in the pretreated liquid fraction. Presoaking the dry raw biomass for 24 h in H2O2 followed by wet air oxidation (APAWAO) at the optimized conditions resulted in enrichment up to 683 g kg-1 cellulose content in the solid fraction along with solubilization of 789 g kg-1 hemicellulose and 280 g kg-1 lignin removal. The yield of reducing sugars from WAO optimized conditions by two enzyme preparations (cellulase and β-glucosidase) was 131 mg g-1 of dry substrate, while the APAWAO yielded 274 mg g-1. Pretreatments used in this study showed to have a disrupting effect on the lignocellulosic biomass, making the treated materials accessible for enzymatic hydrolysis. The combination of presoaking in H2O2 before WAO pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis was found to give the highest sugar yield.Bioenergy is a promising sustainable alternative for fossil fuels. It is a renewable resource and the use of biomass leads to less net CO The largest potential feedstock for fuel ethanol is lignocellulosic biomass Woody raw materials are generally recognized as most difficult to be hydrolysed Processes for bioconversion of lignocellulosic materials have been studied extensively. Examples include comminution, irradiation, steam explosion, hydrothermolysis, dilute acid, alkali, solvents, ammonia, SO Wet Air Oxidation (WAO) is the process of treating material with water and air or oxygen at temperatures above 120 °C and at elevated pressure Alkaline wet oxidation pretreatment has been studied extensively for mostly agricultural residues such as; sugar cane bagasse, rice hulls, wheat straw, corn stover, rye grass, reed The aim of this study was to optimize the effect of different alkaline wet air oxidation conditions (reaction temperatures, reaction time and air pressures) on pretreatment of wood residue (Shea tree sawdust), and to evaluate enzymatic convertibility of the pretreated solids at the optimized conditions. Also examined was the difference between enzymatic convertibility of WAO and alkaline peroxide assisted wet air oxidation (APAWAO) treated solids. The Shea tree, Upon arrival in the laboratory, the samples were air dried and sieved to pass through mesh 14 and retained by mesh 80 sieve sizes (BSS specification). Seventy three percent by weight of the initial sawdust was retained after the sieving process. Samples were dried in a convectional oven at 105 °C for 3 h to a dry matter content of 880 g kg The pretreatment was carried out in a 1.8 L volume wet air oxidation reactor (Model The compositional analysis of the raw and pretreated biomass (sawdust) is shown in Extractives were determined by means of the Soxhlet extractor. Acetone (300 mL) was used as the solvent for extractives (5 g of dry biomass) with residence times for the boiling and rising stages equal to 70 °C and 25 min respectively for a 4 h run period. The sample was air dried for few minutes at room temperature. It was then dried at 105 °C in a convectional oven until a constant weight was obtained. The extractives content was expressed as g kg Mineral components were determined by ashing at 575 °C for 6 h. 1 g of dried biomass from the extractive analysis was transferred into a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask and then 150 mL NaOH solution (500 mol m 300 mg of dry biomass was weighed in glass test tubes and 3 mL of 72% H The cellulose content (g kg The content of sugars in the liquid fraction was measured after 4% weak acid hydrolysis and autoclaving at 121 °C for 1 h. The samples were filtered and neutralized with calcium carbonate after the weak acid hydrolysis. Reducing sugars in the liquid fraction were estimated with DNS assay The pretreated solid fractions were hydrolysed by enzymes to determine the efficiency of substrate conversion for both WAO and APAWAO. The initial dry substrate: liquid ratio was maintained at 20 g L Reducing sugar yield from enzymatic hydrolysis (mg g A statistical 2 The model generated as a function of these variables on the predicted responses of cellulose content, hemicelluloses solubilization, and lignin removal is a second-order polynomial and is represented as follows: The predicted responses are designated as The WAO pretreatment was aimed at fractionating the wood biomass residue (sawdust) into a solid fraction containing as much cellulose and as less lignin as possible; and a liquid fraction containing solubilized hemicellulose the best preserved as possible It has been well recognized that woody raw materials especially softwoods are generally more recalcitrant to enzymatic hydrolysis than other lignocellulosic substrates such as agricultural residues. Similar results were also observed in this study. However, subjecting the substrate to some pretreatment variations could increase its suitability for efficient enzymatic hydrolysis. The percentage of dry biomass recovered in the solid fraction after WAO pretreatment ranged from 737 g kg Higher temperature (195 °C), when combined with high pressure and/or reaction time were found to result in excessive biomass charring which was apparent from the black colour of the solid material in pretreatments (VI), (VII) and (VIII) ( The second-order polynomials obtained were as follows: The statistical treatment combinations of the test variables along with the measured response values, corresponding to all combinations are summarized in The ANOVA is required to test the significance and adequacy of the models. The Fisher's variance ratio ( Two-dimensional contour plots and three-dimensional response surface curves were plotted to study the interactions between the various parameters in WAO pretreatment of the sawdust material and were used to determine the optimum levels of each factor required to obtain maximum responses. Effects of individual factors on cellulose content, lignin removal, and hemicellulose solubilization of the solid fraction are shown in  Sugars in the liquid fraction as reducing sugars (RS) increased at high temperature pretreatments. This was as a result of cellulose degradation/solubilization from the solid fraction at the high temperature (195 °C). Pretreatment (VII) gave the highest reducing sugars value of 25 g L Multiple regression analysis was performed on the experimentally obtained data for the concentration of reducing sugar, and pH of the liquid fraction. The regression coefficients. Obtained were used to build the model equations to predict the response The closeness of the predicted and experimental values of reducing sugars and pH ( Contour and surface plots of the responses were plotted to investigate the main and interaction effects of the process variables and to optimize the WAO process ( The model equations for the various responses (Eqs. In this study, the optimized conditions revealed a low lignin removal. The pretreatments examined after the WAO optimized conditions (Pretreatments B to E) ( The enzymatic digestibility of biomass is affected by the pretreated methods used and the structural modification of the biomass (e.g. lignin content, acetyl group content, and crystallinity) It can be noted that under the experimental conditions used maximum TRS yield obtained was 274 mg g These investigations revealed that WAO could be used to pretreat sawdust high in lignin content to an appreciable level amenable to enzymatic hydrolysis. Validated optimized conditions of 170 °C, 1.0 MPa, 1 g lime loading and 10 min gave a result of 518 g kg The author (AOA) is grateful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, India and the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World (TWAS), Italy, for the award of CSIR-TWAS fellowship for Research and Advanced Training tenable at NEERI, Nagpur, India. The Nigerian Conservation Foundation and Chevron Nigeria Limited are appreciated for the Chief S.L. Edu research grant award. Also appreciated is the management of Covenant University, Ota, Nigeria for granting a one-year leave for this study. The inspiration and advice of Prof (Dr.) V. V. Mahajani, ICT, Mumbai is gratefully acknowledged.