The addition of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) to a 1 M H2O2 leaching solution with low concentrations of sulfuric acid (0.007 M) and ethylene glycol (EG) (0.1 M) promotes significant increases of copper and iron leached from chalcopyrite. However, copper purification by solvent extraction is not possible due to the elevated stability of copper-EDTA and iron-EDTA complexes in the resulting leach liquor. Therefore, a two-stage process is presented that enables copper and iron dissolution at ambient temperature and pressure (26 °C and 101.325 kPa, respectively), without the necessity of solvent extraction. The proposed process uses the H2SO4-H2O2-ethylene glycol leaching solution in combination with organic ligands (oxalic acid (OxA) or EDTA). The first stage, using the leaching solution with oxalic acid, dissolved 29.5% of iron and transformed 49% of the copper to an oxalate salt; while in the second stage, the H2SO4-H2O2-ethylene glycol-EDTA leaching solution favored both the rapid dissolution of the copper oxalate salt and the chalcopyrite that did not react in the first stage. In this manner, the pregnant leach solution (PLS) from the second stage contained 90% and 35% of the total copper and iron, respectively, which may be electrowon directly. These results showed that the use of organic ligands promotes the formation of copper and iron complexes which help to delay, but not to avoid the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide due to a Fenton reaction and therefore, this results in an increase of the percentages of copper and iron leached, which permits processing at higher pulp density (50 g/L).The addition of organic polar solvents in the aqueous solution of hydrogen peroxide and sulfuric acid increases the percentages of copper and iron leaching from chalcopyrite ( To optimize the copper leaching process and increase the efficiency in the solvent extraction process, leaching studies with low concentrations of sulfuric acid (0.007 M) and ethylene glycol (0.1 M) with 1 M H Despite the significant increases in the percentages of copper and iron reported by To achieve the aforementioned goal, a copper leaching process from a chalcopyrite concentrate is presented which obtains a copper-rich PLS and with a low iron content. The proposed process consists of two consecutive stages, the first of which uses a H The sample of copper concentrate used in this work originated from the state of Sonora, Mexico. A kilogram of copper concentrate was sieved to determine its particle size distribution. The different fractions obtained, as well as the original copper concentrate were digested with aqua regia and analyzed by atomic absortion spectrometry (AAS, The copper concentrate was ground in an agate mortar to obtain a particle size less than 38 μm (−400 mesh). The sample was firmly compacted onto a sample holder to avoid preferential orientations. The analysis was carried out on a A one-gram sample of copper concentrate was supported on a cylindrical specimen of low-density epoxy resin. The specimen was polished with silicon carbide sandpaper with different grain sizes (200, 800 and 1200), until a mirror-finish surface was obtained, which was then coated with graphite to increase its conductive properties. The original copper concentrate or leach residue was analyzed on a The mineralogy involved identification of mineralogical phases by a modal analysis according to the methodology described by The leaching tests were performed in a 2 L cylindrical stainless-steel reactor with vertical baffles. The reactor was temperature-controlled system using a recirculating bath ( The following reagents were used for the development of leaching experiments: hydrogen peroxide (34%/v, J.T Baker), ethylene glycol (17.88 M, J.T Baker), sulfuric acid (98%/w, J.T Baker), acid ethylenediaminetetraacetic disodium salt dihydrate (99.9%, JT Baker), oxalic acid dihydrate (99.5%/w, JT Baker) and deionized water prepared in a Millipore Milli-Q system (with a resistivity of 18 MΩ.cm at 25 °C). These leaching tests employed the 0.007 M H The leaching tests were carried out using the leaching system described in 2.2.1, replacing the EDTA ligand with oxalic acid at a molar ratio R The solid residues corresponding to each of the stages were characterized by X-Ray Diffraction, and, additionally, the solid residue of the second stage was analyzed by SEM. The percentages of copper and leached iron were calculated at each stage as 100 times the ratio of copper or iron dissolved at fixed time of leaching with respect the total copper or iron present in the initial pulp density.  Due to the variation of the elementary composition with the particle size ( From the average metal composition ( On the other hand, the mineralogical analysis (  Based on the results of   The ORP profiles ( The initial pH ( The results shown in It is important to mention that, in the absence of EDTA, hydrogen peroxide decomposition occurs as a result of the Fenton reaction between leached iron and hydrogen peroxide, catalyzed by dissolved copper ( However, the decrease in the H In The calculations indicate that the concentration of hydrogen peroxide after 24 h should be 0.98 M, 0.94 M and 0.91 M, for 3.75 g/L, 11.25 g/L and 22.5 g/L, respectively. In addition, under the assumption that all elemental sulfur is oxidized to sulfate through Eq. On the other hand, it is interesting that the ORP ( The results of Citrate ion leaching tests resulted in a complete decomposition of hydrogen peroxide after 15 h, and only 20% and 10% copper and leached iron, respectively. On the other hand, with the oxalate ion, it was not only possible to decrease the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, but also a selective dissolution for iron was achieved and the transformation of the chalcopyritic copper to solid copper oxalate. Therefore, oxalic acid was chosen as a pretreatment (which in this work is denominated as the first stage) to selectively leach iron.  The low percentage of dissolved copper (<2%, In order to identify the species of soluble iron oxalate that is formed in the first stage, the Uv/vis spectra were obtained ( Line 1 shows two well-defined absorption peaks (A and B) at λ The solubility of the CuOx This figure also shows that 0.007 M H Based on the results shown in  On the other hand, the iron leached in both stages (stage 1–29.5% and stage 2–34.5%) adds up to 64%, approximately equal to the total iron contained in the chalcopyrite (the remaining 35% of the iron is present as pyrite). Therefore, from this result it is possible to assert that the pyrite solution does not occur in the sulfuric acid‑hydrogen peroxide-EG-EDTA leach solution. Due to the greater stability of the Cu(II)-EDTA complex compared to the Cu(II)-Oxalate complex ( The slow growth in the copper and iron extractions, initiating after 18 h, observed in The results for the entire concentrate and the largest size fraction are compared in The diffractogram of The major presence of the gangue and the pyrite was also confirmed from the SEM micrographs corresponding to the solid residue of the second stage ( Finally, in The results discussed in  An increase in pulp density (from 3.75 to 22.5 g/L) for the sulfuric acid‑hydrogen peroxide-EG-EDTA leaching solution confirmed a rapid and quantitative decomposition of hydrogen peroxide as a consequence of the Fenton reaction between Fe(II, III)-EDTA complexes and H The use of oxalic acid decreases the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and favors the selective leaching of iron and the transformation of copper to solid copper oxalate; However, in the presence of this ligand, it was not possible to leach more than 30% iron due to chalcopyrite passivation. Copper dissolution behavior in stage 2 showed at least two well-defined zones: the first, in the range 0–6 h, represents the rapid leaching of copper from the copper oxalate precipitate formed in stage 1 and from the small particle size unreacted chalcopyrite; while the second zone, in the 6–24 h interval, displayed a slow growth in the percentage of leached copper due to the presence of larger particles. In stage 2, the EDTA dosage (R The two-stage process proposed is potentially an alternative to decrease the iron content in the PLS, preventing hydrogen peroxide decomposition and permitting the processing at higher pulp densities (50 g/L). Thus, obtaining in stage 2 a PLS with 90% of the copper with only 35% of the iron. Pyrite is not susceptible to oxidation in the proposed leaching systems. The mineralogical associations and free pyrite in the copper concentrate did not modify the copper leaching process through galvanic interactions. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Ángel Ruiz Sánchez is grateful for the financial support of the To evaluate the effect of free pyrite and mineralogical associations (present in the copper concentrate) in the copper leaching process, leaching tests were carried out at the same experimental conditions used in this work by replacing the copper concentrate with pure chalcopyrite. In addition, due to the wide distribution of particle size ( For this study two different experiments were proposed, the first with a constant pulp density equal to 3.75 g/L (of copper concentrate or pure chalcopyrite), and the second experiment was carried out with 3.9 g/L of copper concentrate or 2.5 g/L of pure chalcopyrite, such that the initial copper content in the mineral sample was approximately 0.84 g/L.   On the other hand, the similarity in the iron concentration profiles (