Objective
                  To compare clinical and radiological outcome between acetabular fractures with marginal impaction that were treated with either cancellous bone graft (CBG) or tricalcium phosphate cement (TPC) as bone void filler.
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective study.
               
                  Patients
                  Forty-three patients with acetabular fractures with marginal impaction.
               
                  Intervention
                  Eighteen patients received cancellous bone graft and 25 patients received tricalcium phosphate cement as bone void filler.
               
                  Main outcome measurement
                  Clinical outcome was assessed using the Merle d’Aubigne score and Short-form-36. Radiographs were evaluated for postoperative reduction, arthritis grade and development of heterotopic ossification.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-three patients met the inclusion criteria. There was no significant difference in the demographics, laterality, fracture type, associated injuries, surgical approach and postoperative quality of reduction between the groups. At final follow-up, a significantly higher number of patients in the cancellous bone graft group exhibited signs of moderate to severe post-traumatic arthritis (CBG: 6 (33%) vs. TPC: 4 (20%), p
                     =0.007) and required a total hip arthroplasty (CBG: 4 (22.2%) vs. TPC: 1 (5%), p
                     =0.08). There was no significant difference between the two groups in the SF-36 score and the modified Merle d’Aubigne score.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Patients with acetabular fractures with marginal impaction treated with tricalcium phosphate cement exhibit a significantly lower incidence of post-traumatic arthritis when compared to patients treated with cancellous bone graft.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III.Fifty years after Emile Letournel and Robert Judet published their groundbreaking work on acetabular fractures, surgical treatment of these fractures still imposes a great challenge on orthopaedic surgeons. Marginal impaction was first described by Letournel as an articular (marginal) fragment that was driven into the surrounding spongiosa by the displaced femoral head. Here we describe a surgical technique for the treatment of acetabular fractures with marginal impaction and present the early results of a comparison of patients treated with either cancellous bone autograft (CBG) or tricalcium phosphate cement (TPC). After institutional review board approval (#18315), a retrospective review of a prospectively maintained trauma database revealed 224 patients treated operatively for an acetabular fracture between 2002 and 2009 by the senior author. Patient charts and radiographs were reviewed to assess for the presence of marginal impaction. Operative reports were then screened for the use of cancellous autograft or tricalcium phosphate cement as bone void filler. Forty-three patients (19.2%) were identified and were further evaluated for mechanism of injury, laterality, associated injuries, smoking status, fracture classification, surgical approach, bone void filler, operative time, blood loss and postoperative complications. Postoperative fracture reduction was judged on the first postoperative radiograph. If a post-operative CT scan was available, then measurements were performed on the appropriate coronal, sagittal or axial cut. Radiographs at the last follow-up visit were evaluated for the presence of heterotopic ossifications using the modified Brooker classification, The study population consisted of 43 patients, which sustained an acetabular fracture with marginal impaction that was treated with open reduction internal fixation and either cancellous bone graft or calcium phosphate cement (Callos, Acumed All patients were treated through either a Kocher-Langenbeck approach or an ilioinguinal approach, or a combination of both. Patients with posterior wall fractures that extended further proximal received a trochanteric flip osteotomy, which allowed greater visualization of the posterosuperior acetabulum. Prior to surgery, plain radiographs and computer tomography scans in the axial, coronal and sagittal plane were evaluated for articular comminution and marginal impaction as part of the pre-operative planning protocol. The surgical approach was chosen after the fractures were classified according to the Letournel classification. Posterior wall fractures with marginal impaction were approached through the Kocher-Langenbeck approach. Once the fracture site was completely exposed, the fracture fragment was elevated away from its bed. Great care was taken not to strip off any capsular attachment of the fragment in order to maintain the blood supply to the fragment. Next, the joint was inspected for any lose fragments by flexing the hip and distracting the joint. After copious irrigation the traction was taken off and the hip was extended back into neutral. The convexity of the femoral head was used as a template for the reduction of the impacted osteochondral fragment. A series of straight and curved osteotomes was used to detach the fragment from the underlying cancellous bone. The osteotomes were placed into the area of compacted cancellous bone, which allowed us to leave a thick layer of cancellous bone attached to the subchondral surface of the fragment. Once the impacted fragment was aligned with the curvature of the femoral head it was stabilized with a Kirschner wire. For this study, the defect was either filled with calcium phosphate cement or cancellous autograft as per surgeon's preference. After removal of the K-wires, the posterior wall fragment was reduced and stabilized with a combination of lag screws and a buttress plate. Fractures with marginal impaction of the acetabular dome or anterior wall were usually approached through an ilioinguinal approach. After exposure of all fracture lines and removal of the fracture haematoma, the fractures were reduced and provisionally held with reduction forceps. A K-wire was placed through the cortex of the inner table of the ilium aiming at the impacted fragment. The position was verified and optimized under radiographic guidance in the anterior-posterior, iliac-oblique and obturator oblique projection. A cortical window was then created with 1 Five radiographic views (anterior-posterior, iliac oblique, obturator oblique, inlet and outlet projection) and a CT scan were utilized for fracture classification and pre-operative planning. Fractures were classified according to the ten types described by Letournel. Functional outcome was assessed with a 36-item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36) and the Merle d’Aubigne score. All patients were contacted by one of the authors and asked for permission to participate in the study, as required per IRB protocol. The patients that agreed to participate then received an SF-36 form by mail. Failure to return the questionnaire by 4 weeks was followed by at least two more attempts of contact via telephone and email. The Merle d’Aubigne Score was calculated from examination findings and patient history that was obtained during the last follow-up visit. The SF36 score was treated as a continuous variable. A linear regression model was used to determine effects of treatment type (Callos vs. CBG), age and BMI on the SF36 score. Interaction effects were included. Continuous predicative data (age and BMI) were checked for normality using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov Goodness-of-Fit test. BMI data were transformed using a log( The mean postoperative fracture gap/step off was 1.5 Two post-operative complications were noted in this study population. One patient in the CBG group sustained an early superficial postoperative infection, which was successfully treated with irrigation and debridement and IV antibiotics. A second patient in the TCP group sustained a peroneal palsy, which showed good improvement over 1.5 years with almost no resulting disability. Radiographic signs of arthritis were graded according to the Kellgren and Lawrence classification. Of the 36 hips, 22 (61%) did not show any signs of osteoarthritis, 6 (16%) hips exhibited doubtful narrowing of the joint space and possible osteophyte development. Two hips (5%) had definite osteophytes with questionable joint space narrowing, 4 (11%) patients demonstrated moderate osteophytes, definite narrowing and some subchondral sclerosis. Four (11%) hips had large osteophytes, marked narrowing, severe sclerosis and definite joint deformity. There was a significant difference between the two groups (calcium phosphate cement versus cancellous bone graft) in the osteoarthritis grade ( Heterotopic ossification (HO) was classified according to the modified Brooker classification. The patients who agreed to participate in this study received a Short Form-36 questionnaire. Twenty-three patients (64%, 10/16 (62.5%) in the CBG group and 13/20 (65%) in the TCP group) returned the questionnaire and were therefore included in this analysis. The Merle d’Aubigne score was calculated at their last follow-up appointment. The mean SF-36 score for all patients was 73 (range, 28–95) ( The average Merle d’Aubigne score was 17 (range, 12–18), with no difference between the two treatment arms. Open reduction internal fixation of acetabular fractures remains a challenging operation, oftentimes with unpredictable outcomes. Recent studies have identified factors that negatively affect the postoperative success of surgical treatment of these fractures. An altered joint contact area and loading distribution has been postulated as a major risk factor for post-traumatic arthritis. Only one clinical study has evaluated the use of synthetic bone void fillers in acetabular fractures thus far. Moed at al. studied the natural history of calcium sulfate pellets implanted during acetabular fracture surgery. The primary complication after acetabular fracture treatment is the development of post-traumatic arthritis, which may necessitate a total hip arthroplasty. In our study, five out of 42 patients required a total hip arthroplasty within the study period. This conversion rate to an arthroplasty is slightly higher than reported in other comparable study populations. Limitations of this current study include its retrospective nature and a 64% follow-up rate for the SF-36 forms. Postoperative articular fragment subsidence was not measured in this current study, because computer tomographic images were not routinely obtained in the early and late postoperative course. A future randomized-controlled study will incorporate CT imaging at follow-up in order to allow for a better assessment of articular subsidence. Tricalcium phosphate cement as a bone void filler in acetabular fractures with marginal impaction reduces the incidence of post-traumatic arthritis and the subsequent need for total hip arthroplasty. Further investigations will aim at identifying the mechanism of action. Most likely, tricalcium phosphate prevents post-operative articular subsidence and thereby maintains joint congruity. None. None.