At the Kipoi copper/cobalt operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the coarse fraction of the floating product from a heavy media separation (HMS) plant is being heap leached. The macro-scale performance observed in laboratory columns is compared to that of the first three commercial heaps to ascertain the efficiency of the commercial operation, and to present a case study in heap leaching scale-up.
                  This paper draws on a method published in part 1 of the series for deriving batch curves for copper extraction and for gangue acid consumption (GAC) from the commercial heap Production Graphs, for the case where irrigation commences while stacking is still in progress, so that the commercial Production Graph does not represent a batch leach curve. This facilitates quantitative comparisons of the performance of the commercial heaps against the laboratory column batch curves, based on the parameters describing the fitted batch curve expression Xi
                     (t). It further provides an early indication of the ultimate extent of extraction towards which the operation is tending, while such information cannot be gauged directly from the commercial Production Graph in the case where irrigation commenced while stacking was still in progress. The function Xi
                     (t) is based on a previously published form and the fitting of batch curves to it relies on adjustment of the parameters of Xi
                     (t) such as to minimise the sum of squared residuals between the commercial production data and the theoretical rate of production calculated from an integration of Xi
                     (t).
                  The parameter group κxκw
                      occurring in Xi
                     (t) represents the product of (a) mass fraction of liberated non-refractory mineral and (b) mass fraction of mineral effectively in contact with leach solution. The values of this parameter group that fitted the commercial production data of Kipoi indicated that the very wide dripper spacing applied to the first part of heap 3-1 (which was also the tallest of the three heaps) did not merely lead to slower leaching, but actually increased the proportion of the ore that remained inaccessible to leach solution. The trends observed in parameter κ
                     0 suggest that the rate of copper extraction could still be accelerated in both columns and commercial heaps through increased supply of acid. A comparison of the κ
                     1 values of the columns with that of the heaps indicate that there exists notably greater diffusional restriction in the heaps than in the columns.
                  By analysing a number of case studies in this way, a history can be built of how key parameters fitting laboratory column leaching data correlate to the parameters fitting commercial heap leaching data, thereby providing a more fundamental basis for the extrapolation of laboratory column leaching kinetic data to commercial heap leaching design.fitted batch curve gangue acid consumption, calculated as the difference between TAC and acid consumed by oxide-copper leaching. hypothetical gangue mineral to which all GAC is attributed for the purpose of producing the FBC of GAC. heavy media separation irrigation ratio, m laboratory batch curve not applicable not determined cumulative production during continuous stacking, tonne cumulative production after discontinued stacking, tonne cumulative production in batch total acid consumption total content in the fresh ore of species height, m molar mass of species irrigation rate, m time, hours or days macro-scale extent of conversion of species pre-exponential constant in the expression for the FBC exponent of the unextracted fraction in the expression for the FBC mass fraction (of either copper mineral or gangue) that is extractable mass fraction of ore accessible to leach solution bulk density, t/m The Kipoi copper/cobalt deposit, owned by Australian-based Tiger Resources, is located 75 Between 2011 and 2014, the Kipoi Central oxide ore was concentrated in a heavy media separation (HMS) plant as illustrated in As shown in The commissioning of the Kipoi heap leaching project was preceded by extensive laboratory testing at Mintek (South Africa) on the deslimed HMS-Floats material to obtain design parameters for the process. Since its large-scale commissioning up to the present date the performance data of three heaps has become available for this study. This provides a rare opportunity for the direct comparison of the heap leaching performance of an ore under laboratory and commercial conditions. The three commercial heaps dealt with in this study (numbered 1-1; 2-1 and 3-1) operated under different conditions of irrigation rate, with variable dripper spacing and at three different stacking heights. Together with the 6 The plant performance (of rate and extent of copper extraction as well as acid consumption) observed at the macro-scale is to be compared to the laboratory column leaching data which represents an idealised benchmark against which the relative level of performance of the operation can be gauged. The performance observed on these first few heaps also sets benchmarks as to how the heaps should be treated in future. For the purposes of this paper ‘macro-scale kinetics’ refers to the rate of copper dissolution and the acid consumption observed from a mass balance between the points of irrigation onto, and drainage from, a heap. It is common practice during the analysis of oxidised copper ores to determine the “acid-soluble copper”, which is typically determined during an acid digestion test on a milled sample of the ore under conditions of constant temperature and acidity over a predetermined period of time. That is used as the benchmark of the maximum extent of copper extraction possible during non-oxidative acid leaching of the ore. In this paper the related but subtly different concept of ‘extractable copper’ (or extractable mineral, whereby the concept can be extended to acid-consuming gangue minerals) is also used, and it is applied to the crushed aggregate stacked on a heap, as opposed to milled ore. It is used to refer to the mineral mass in a heap that is all of (i) acid-soluble (i.e. mineralogically non-refractory), (ii) accessible by leach solution (by physically presenting exposed mineral surface amongst the host rock) and (iii) effectively being wetted by leach solution (by not being by-passed by channelling, or being situated at the end of such a long diffusional path that it is effectively isolated from the supply of leach reagent). The extractable mass fraction of a mineral is represented by the product The most convenient form of representing and visualising the kinetics of heap leaching is a batch curve. Laboratory column tests produce the extraction data directly in the form of a Laboratory Batch Curve (LBC). However, it is common to find on commercial heap leaching plants (and the Kipoi plant addressed here is such an example) that the ore on a heap is not leached as a single batch, instead irrigation starts to be applied as soon as a sufficient amount of ore has been stacked to provide surface area for the installation of irrigation lines. The irrigation network is expanded as the heap surface expands over time, resulting in the most recently stacked ore having been leached for a short duration compared to the first ore to be stacked. At the same time, the drainage solutions from By drawing on the method developed during the first of this series of two papers ( The mineralogical analysis based on phase identification by X-ray diffraction followed by Quantitative Evaluation of Materials by Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEMSCAN) shown in This evaluation of the content of oxide plus silicate-copper minerals was within 6 percent of the acid-soluble copper content determined on the head sample by a laboratory test using a standardized analytical acid digestion procedure. It can be expected that initially the shape of the batch curve would be dominated by the rate of copper extraction from the most abundant and most acid-reactive mineral, namely malachite. This would be followed by a period where the rate of extraction is dominated by the reaction of the next most abundant copper mineral (chrysocolla, being a silicate mineral), which leaches more slowly ( The gangue minerals of interest are those that react with dilute sulphuric acid at a rate that competes with the kinetics of copper dissolution, which in this ore were identified to be amphibole, chlorite and feldspar, in the quantities shown in Based on principles established by Since one mole of acid is consumed per mole of oxide-copper leached as per Eq. The calculations discussed in 5.3 require the TAC potential as an input, and was for this study calculated as shown in the last row of The conditions applied during the 6 For the two laboratory tests (labelled C5 and C6) the ore was loaded manually into the columns in uniformly prepared batches to ensure uniformity of composition and size distribution throughout each column. Each commercial heap was divided into 10 cells of roughly equal tonnage, with irrigation being commenced cell by cell. However the drainage solutions of all cells were allowed to mix on the pad and reported to a single drainage collection point per heap. There was some variability in the manner in which the commercial heaps were prepared, partly determined by resource availability and partly as part of ongoing optimisation. During the stacking of commercial heaps 1-1 and 2-1, the first ≈66,500 On heap 1-1 curing acid addition to the agglomerator started on day 50, while for the preparation of heaps 2-1 and 3-1 curing acid addition was practiced from day 5. On heap 1-1 the first 3 of 10 cells were ripped with a bulldozer after a short initial phase of irrigation (with the drippers being removed before, and replaced after ripping), but the balance of cells were not ripped. Pad 2-1 was not ripped at all. For Pad 3-1, cells 1 and 2 as well as cells 7–10 were ripped with an excavator after stacking and prior to the placement of irrigation equipment. While determining the bulk density of ore loaded into the laboratory columns is based simply on daily measurement of the height of the ore in the column, determining the same for the commercial heaps 1-1; 2-1 and 3-1 required the measurement of their volumes by land survey which was done on 7 January 2015, by which time their leaching cycles had been completed. The degree of compaction shown for the laboratory columns indicates the extent of reduction in height in the columns from freshly loaded until completely leached. This number is not available for the commercial heaps since their volumes were surveyed only towards the end of their leaching cycles. The commercial heaps were drip-irrigated, with some variability occurring in dripper spacing as a result of commercial optimisation and available resources. On heap 1-1 the first 4 cells (80,665 On heap 3-1 the first 6 cells (206,000 Other parameters subject to some variability were the rate of irrigation and acid concentration in the irrigated solutions of the commercial heaps, with the 90% confidence ranges indicated in While conditions of dripper spacing, stacking means and the use (or not) of ripping was not consistent, these variations occurred only during the first few cells of the three heaps. Therefore most conditions applied to the commercial heaps can, as a good approximation, be regarded as having been maintained consistent, namely that mostly a dripper spacing of 0.5 An exception is the dripper spacing of heap 3-1. In that case the major part of the ore was irrigated with a dripper spacing of 1 The copper head values reported in For the production heaps a similar reconciliation was done based on 26 residue samples obtained from each of the leached heaps. The recalculated total-copper head grade of Heap 1-1 was 6 percent higher, that of 2-1 was 15 percent higher and 3-1 was 7 percent lower than the estimated head grade from grab-samples from the conveyor feeding the agglomerator. In this case the recalculated head sample is also regarded as the more accurate compared to the assay of the solids sampled from the conveyor due to the opportunity for segregation occurring on the agglomerator feed belt. Of course in the case of the commercial heaps the entire heap is not crushed fine before sub-sampling for residue assay, hence the residue assay cannot be obtained with the same level of confidence as in the case of the residues from the laboratory columns. In the worst case, if equal confidence is attributed to the head sample sub-sampled from the feed conveyor and to the re-calculated head sample, the relative magnitude of the differences observed can be regarded as indicating the range of accuracy with which the head assays of the commercial heaps can be determined. Quantitative comment on the effect of head assay error is provided in the discussion of the results in Section The laboratory tests were conducted under in-door ambient conditions of temperature in Johannesburg (at an elevation of 1750 An average rainfall of 84 The overall data fitting sequence was introduced in Part 1 of this series of papers ( The method used for deriving the batch leaching kinetics inherent to the commercial-scale Production Graphs involves selecting the following kinetic expression to represent the shape of the presumed batch curve: The solution for function By inspection it can be verified that the extent of extraction asymptotes (as time By multiplying The method provides for three possible terms that can contribute to the calculated Production Graph, namely Production in Batch Production during Continuous Stacking Production after Discontinued Stacking The The total acid consumption (TAC) is determined from: The relation between TAC and GAC is conventionally calculated as follows: For the purpose of applying the same method to determine the batch GAC kinetics at macro scale, the GAC is attributed to the ‘extraction’ of hypothetical mineral GO with molar mass equal to that of H The extent of reaction of It is common in acid leaching to represent batch leach curves against the irrigation ratio (IR) with units of m The observed and calculated Production Graphs for the three commercial heaps appear in In heaps 2-1 and 3-1 copper started reporting to the drainage solutions within 2–5 The data of Heap 1-1 posed a particular challenge as a result of the long time delay that occurred between the initiation of stacking and start of curing (as quantified in Because the drainage from all ore on the heap was mixed, there was not sufficient data to tell how much of the copper production observed from day 91 onward could be attributed to the (uncured) ore stacked up to day 46 that had presumably eventually become acidified by irrigation, and how much could be attributed to the (cured) ore stacked thereafter. Two possible approaches were therefore evaluated; firstly all ore stacked up to day 91 was regarded as ore to be leached as a batch (with copper production being calculated from the A second approach was to calculate the copper production from all ore stacked up to day 80 by a The two approaches yielded The term If the term A roughly linear relationship seems to exist between parameter Parameter The power of the unreacted fraction, Sample calculations indicated that, depending on the curvature of the batch curve, a 10 percent error in the head assay can lead to a 3–10 percent error in the value of A general comment to be made is that even after having only fitted the production graphs, before fitting the batch curves, some insight can already be gained from the parameters being fitted to the operational data. The LBCs for copper extraction in the laboratory columns and the FBCs for copper extraction from the commercial heaps appear in The x-axes of the curves in The acid consumption data of economic significance is the GAC, since that represents a net consumption of acid which cannot be recovered, opposed to the acid associated with the leaching of oxide-copper. However GAC curves often exhibit a turning point at a minimum which does not lend it to fitting by the monotonically rising form of Eq. The explanation for the turning point is that when oxide-copper ore is acid-cured, a portion of the acid will dissolve copper (which can be expected to be re-precipitated as water-soluble copper sulphate), some portion will react with gangue minerals and a portion of it may remain captured in the ore, unreacted. It is normal convention to initially regard the total curing acid addition as GAC, although, as said, not all of the curing acid reacts with gangue, but the fate of the curing acid is not known prior to the start of irrigation. The GAC curve therefore shows the total curing acid addition at time zero. When irrigation commences, the first drainage solution is usually found to contain a high copper content as a result of the pre-leached copper rapidly entering the solution phase upon wetting of the ore. The calculation of the GAC from Eq. In practice the GAC curve is sometimes observed to have a turning point somewhat below zero, meaning that more acid and/or copper sulphate has reported to the drainage than can be accounted for by the curing- and irrigation-acid added up to that point in time. This could be caused by such factors as acid being formed in the ore (by bacterial action) during stockpiling. The presence of ferric sulphate which hydrolyses, or of a water-soluble mineral such as copper sulphate which leaches without consuming acid, would have the same effect. The solution in such a case is to employ Eq. The correlations between observed and fitted GAC curves (appearing in The approach for dealing with the time delay between initiation of irrigation and initiation of GAC observed on heap 1-1 was the same as that for the delay in copper extraction discussed in Section It can be noted from The LBCs for TAC and GAC in the laboratory columns, and FBCs for TAC and GAC on the commercial heaps appear in The two laboratory columns received the same curing acid dosage (as per For the commercial heaps the The decreasing trend in GAC from 1-1 to 2-1 to 3-1 could also be reflecting a gradual improvement in mining methods to avoid the inclusion of acid consumers in the ore fed to the plant. The significantly more aggressive curing acid dosage used on the plant (compared to the laboratory columns) could also be serving to form inhibiting sulphate-product layers on the gangue surfaces in the ore more effectively. However there is currently insufficient detailed information available to confidently attribute these differences to one or a combination of these factors, and hence attempts at providing explanations remain speculative. The data presented here for heap 1-1, and which was fitted to its FBC, represents its full period of operation over 288 The data presented for heaps 2-1 and 3-1 extend over only the first 151 and the first 100 The availability of this method, for expressing the heap leaching performance in the form of batch curves, has made it possible to discover quantitatively during the earlier stage of leaching that heaps 2-1 and 3-1 were tending towards relatively low ultimate extractions and hence required remedial action. The utility of the method presented in Part 1 has been demonstrated to derive the kinetics of operating commercial heaps in the form of batch curves. Such batch curves can be compared to the laboratory column leaching results and the design leach curve upon which the pad specification was based, to assess the relative heap leaching performance long before steady state operation is achieved. The parameters of Eq. The fitted GAC batch curves revealed a gradual decrease in GAC from heap 1-1 to 2-1 to 3-1, but more data would be required to verify whether that could be ascribed to changes in the gangue mineralogy of the areas being mined, or to improved separation of acid consuming gangue during mining, or to the acid curing practice. The term Parameter The significantly lower irrigation rate applied to heap 1-1 (refer to A dripper spacing beyond 0.5 The parameters with which the batch curves are fitted to the production graphs can therefore be seen to provide quantitative information on the leaching performance of both columns and commercial heaps. From the manner in which the respective parameters compare between laboratory columns and commercial heaps, insight can be gained in the fundamental differences between the phenomena governing the process at column and at commercial heap scale. A database of such comparisons performed on a number of case studies can facilitate a more fundamental basis for extrapolating commercial scale design specifications from laboratory generated data. This paper is published with the permission of Mintek and Société d’Exploitation de Kipoi of Tiger Resources Limited, and the support of the