This paper presents the results of the adsorption of heavy rare earth ions (Gd(III), Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III), Tm(III), Yb(III), Lu(III) and Y(III)) from hydrochloric acid solutions at 30 °C by the extraction resin containing 1-hexyl-4-ethyloctyl isopropylphosphonic acid (HEOPPA), which has higher steric hindrance, higher selectivities and lower extraction and stripping acidity than di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (DEHPA) or 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (HEH/EHP). The dependence of acid concentration, flow rate and amounts of rare earth ions sorbed on the separation of Er–Tm, Tm–Yb and Er–Tm–Yb mixtures has been studied. The baseline chromatographic separation of Er–Tm–Yb mixture has been observed. Satisfactory results with purity and yield of Tm2O3>99.71% and >71.25%, Er2O3>99.81% and >94.17%, and Yb2O3>99.74% and >89.83%, respectively, have been obtained. The parameters such as resolution, separation factors and efficiencies have been determined as a function of acidity, loading of rare earth elements and flow rates. The stoichiometry of the extraction of rare earth ions has been suggested as well.As a result of the advantages of high selectivities typical of solvent extraction and high efficiencies typical of chromatographic separation, extraction resins have been developed since the mid-1970s for the recovery and chromatographic separation of metal ions Our work shows that extraction resin containing Cyanex 272 is more effective for the separation of rare earth elements with high purity compared to those containing DEHPA and HEH/EHP extractants A recently developed extractant, 1-hexyl-4-ethyloctyl isopropylphosphonic acid (HEOPPA, molecular formula: HEOPPA with greater than 99% purity was supplied by Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Extraction resin containing HEOPPA, obtained from The Beijing Institute of Chemical Engineering and Metallurgy, Ministry of Nuclear Industry, with resin bead size 0.07–0.15 mm, was used. The resin was washed with 3 mol/l HCl and water in order to eliminate inorganic impurities as well as monomeric material. Columns (bed size: Stock solutions of rare earth ions were prepared by dissolving the corresponding rare earth oxide (>99.9%) with hydrochloric acid. The concentrations of rare earth ions were determined either by EDTA titration or by spectrophotometry using Arsenazo III as an indicator. The pH values in the aqueous phase were measured by a pHS-3 model meter. All other reagents used were of analytical grade. The extraction of rare earth ions was carried out at 303 K. Resin (0.05 g) containing HEOPPA and an aqueous solution (5 ml rare earth ion solution) were placed in special glass stoppered tubes and shaken for 1 h to reach equilibrium. The amount of metal sorbed by the resin was determined by the difference. The distribution ratios of rare earth ions were obtained as described The distribution behavior of rare earth ions between resin phase and hydrochloric acid solutions are described in our former work The amounts ( At different elution acidities, the data of the separation of Er–Tm and Tm–Yb mixtures are shown in Generally, the resolution ( As seen from In this paper, it has been shown that an extraction resin containing HEOPPA is suitable for the separation of heavy rare earth ions from hydrochloric acid solution. The sorption of rare earth ions increases as a function of pH in the order Gd(III)<Tb(III)<Dy(III)<Ho(III)<Y(III)<Er(III)<Tm(III)<Yb(III)<Lu(III). The stoichiometry of rare earth ion sorption by the resin phase has been suggested as RE The authors gratefully acknowledge the support provided by State Key Project of Fundamental Research and National Natural Science Foundation.