The Hall-Petch relationship was used to investigate the role of martensite lath on fracture toughness (K
                     IC) during ductile fracture in a low-carbon EA4T axle steel. The hierarchical structures of lath martensite was clarified by means of optical microscope (OM), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron backscattering diffraction (EBSD). Firstly, in such hierarchical structures, packet size (d
                     
                        p
                     ) and block size (d
                     b) increase significantly with the size of prior austenite (d
                     r), while the martensite lath width (d
                     l) decreases. Subsequently, K
                     IC was measured and follows the Hall-Petch relationship with d
                     l. It depends on the rotation, bending and direct shear during crack propagation of laths, confirmed by EBSD. Besides, fracture toughness (K
                     IC) is proportional to a parameter ε
                     
                        v
                     , the matrix strain, which is related to the plastic deformation of laths. Therefore, the martensite lath in hierarchical structures is the effective control unit of K
                     IC during ductile fracture controlled by the strain.High strength and ductile structural material are always the purpose to increase the massive savings and fulfill safety for scientists. And it is worth noting to reduce the weight and enhance the loaded capacity in usage. The strength and toughness for most steels can be simultaneously improved by grain refinement. However, the capacity of grain refinement is limited with the grain size of about 5 Low-carbon martensite steel belongs to an important family of advanced high strength or ultra-high strength steels due to an excellent combination of strength, plasticity and toughness. Previous works Extensive researches have attempted to build the relationship between the hierarchical microstructures and mechanical properties. In particular, the effective grain of strength in lath martensite was obtained by the classic formula of Hall–Petch and EBSD analysis. For example, Grange EA4T axle steel through the different heat treatment process is used in the presented work to obtain hierarchical microstructures. Observations from OM, SEM, EBSD and TEM were all applied to characterize the microstructures such as grains, packets, blocks and laths. As a result, the effective control unit of fracture toughness ( A low-carbon axle steel specified as EA4T was used in the investigation (chemical compositions, wt%: C 0.28, Mn 0.72, Cr 1.16, Si 0.34, Mo 0.22, Cu 0.13, V 0.04, P 0.012, S 0.006). The steel was hot-forged from a 280 The plane strain fracture toughness ( Only when specific validity criteria are satisfied, the provisional fracture toughness, Meanwhile, the fractographs of the fracture surface were captured by SEM (SUPPRA40), and the micro zone (smaller than plastic zone) ahead of crack tip was observed to determine the dimple parameters, the void (special dimples containing a inclusion) radius ( The specimens at different quenching temperature were polished and etched in a super-saturation picric acid for OM observations of prior austenite grain size ( The plane perpendicular to the longitudinal direction was polished and etched in nitric acid alcohol solution to determine the martensite packet size (   A Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIN (200 Besides, the cross-section of the crack propagation from the 3-point bending specimen was observed during crack propagation by EBSD, and performed to further identify the role of microstructures. The martensite hierarchical microstructure was observed by OM, SEM, EBSD and TEM in EA4T steel, as shown in Provisional From the results shown in  In the work, the classical formula of Hall-Petch is applied to identify which kind of martensite microstructure parameters is the effective control unit for The EBSD observations in According to the EBSD analysis, the model of martensite laths The results illustrate that the strain model According to the distribution of misorientation angle from From the results in During the crack propagation from the fracture toughness, the whole energy ( The number fraction of block boundaries ( EBSD maps are used to show lath martensite, and the size of packet is considered as the length of lath from From above results, it is well known that the micro-crack is easy to bypass the laths for the lower RO Ritchie et al. According to the statistical results in In the section, the matrix strain is investigated by the void growth factor The void growth factor (  In fully dimple surface, Eq. From the Eq.  Then, the relationship between the void growth factor ( From Eq. According to the deduced results from Eq. However, why does the matrix strain ( Altogether, in the ductile fracture controlled by the strain, the martensite laths play an important role in the crack propagation from the rotating, bending and shear. As well, the martensite lath is the effective control unit for In this paper, the EA4T axle steel was used to study the effect of martensite lathson the fracture toughness ( The martensite hierarchical microstructure for EA4T axle steel was obtained from different heat treatment conditions. It is found that the size of packet and block ( The determination of the plane strain fracture toughness ( In the ductile fracture controlled by the strain, the controlling role of martensite lath to With the coarsening of prior austenite grain from E1 to E3, the length to width ratio ( The research documented in this work was financially supported by the