In this work, the effect of chamber pressure on the morphology of hot wire chemical vapor processed silicon nanowires (SiNWs) using Sn as catalyst has been studied. It is observed that their geometrical orientation can be controlled as per requirement by adjusting the growth pressure. SiNWs synthesized at low pressure of 0.67Pa grow preferentially perpendicular to the substrate. If the pressure is increased to 2.7Pa, SiNWs become tilted to the substrate and have bending type structure with random distribution. Further increase in the chamber pressure to 4Pa very few wires are seen to grow and at 5.3Pa no-growth of SiNWs is observed. Transmission electron microscopy study shows that the straight SiNWs have crystalline structure whereas the bent ones show polycrystalline structure.Fabrication of SiNWs with well-controlled dimensions has been the focus of intensive research for their usage in nano-electronic and nano-photonic systems, including metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor, energy storage, biochemical sensors and solar cells There are two approaches being observed for the SiNWs fabrication i.e. top-down and bottom up. In the top-down approach the bulk silicon wafer etched by the etchant solution results in long vertical SiNWs SiNWs were synthesized on stainless steel substrate (SS 304) at temperatures of 400  At low chamber pressure growth rate is limited by the lower Si flux generation. The larger supply of Si by increasing the chamber pressure (due to the increased residence time of the SiH In a previous report of SiNWs grown by thermal CVD, the decomposition of SiH At a high pressure of 5.3 It can be seen that the NWs grown at 4 The most important effect of the chamber pressure which is seen here is on the geometrical orientation of the SiNWs. At high pressure they are not perpendicular to the substrate and have bending type structure. The kinking mechanism in SiNWs has been explained in the literature In SiNWs grown by vapor liquid solid mechanism, the presence of kinks could be due to instability at the liquid/solid interface As seen in HR-TEM image It is now clear that employing intermediate chamber pressure can lead to dense and long SiNWs. However, they are slanted and polycrystalline in structure. The growth of SiNWs is proportional to the amount of Si flux reaching to the catalyst. Therefore, in next experiment, we have increased the flow of SiH We studied the effect of chamber pressure on the growth characteristics and morphology of SiNWs synthesized by HWCVP using Sn nano-template as catalyst. A proper control of SiNWs orientation is possible by tuning the growth pressure. Our results indicate that the change in growth rate may be responsible for the change in orientation of SiNWs. This proposed mechanism remains under active debate and needs further understanding of the various aspects observed. At high pressure, tilting and bending patterns of SiNWs are observed which could be due to the formation of defects in SiNWs. The defects are mostly generated by the high growth rate which is also responsible for the polycrystalline structure of SiNWs synthesized with such high chamber pressure. Whereas growth at low pressure produces single crystalline SiNWs which are straight perpendicular to the substrate and free from defects. It is also noted that the growth rate is not limited by a single step; it is the interplay between Si generation rate over the hot filament, incorporation rate and the crystallization rate. Crompton Greaves, Mumbai is gratefully acknowledged to its provided financial support to Ankur Soam. The authors also thank SAIF, IIT Bombay for providing TEM and SEM facilities. FIST facility (Dual beam FIB, Carl Zeiss Microscope) in ME & MS was also used for this work.