Background
                  Fractures to the anterior process of the calcaneus (APC) have long been considered rare injuries. Although recent studies have reported a higher incidence, these injuries have yet received little attention in clinical research. Only few case reports/series, all suffering multiple methodical shortcomings, exist. The aim of this study was to objectively evaluate the outcome after fractures to the APC treated by full weight bearing and to investigate the influence of fracture characteristics.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective register study with prospective follow-up. Adults with acute unilateral fractures to the APC and concomitant injuries limited to the Chopart joint line, treated by full weight-bearing, with a follow-up of ≥ 12 months were included. Fracture characteristics (Degan classification, displacement, intra-articular involvement, comminution) were assessed in CT scans. Return to work (RTW) / sports (RTS), Visual Analogue Scale Foot and Ankle (VAS-FA), Karlsson Score and the 12-Item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-12) were assessed. The influence of age, sex, fracture type/characteristics, and concomitant injuries on the outcome parameters was analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  27 patients (38 years, IQR 29-58), 74% female with a median follow up of 24 months (IQR 16-41) were included. 56% of the fractures were non-displaced and 82% comminuted. 48% were type I, 33% type II and 19% type III according to Degan. 78% of the patients suffered concomitant injuries of the Chopart joint line. Median RTW was 14 days (IQR 10-42), and RTS 90 days (IQR 30-180). The clinical outcome resulted in a median overall VAS-FA of 95 (IQR 89-98), Karlsson Score of 90 (IQR 82-100) and SF-12 PCS of 56 (IQR 53-58) / SF-12 MCS 55 (48-58).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Functional treatment of fractures to the anterior process of the calcaneus yielded good to excellent results and a fast return to work in the vast majority of patients. Yet, a prolonged return to sports was noted. No significant differences regarding the outcome were observed when comparing the different fracture types or any other fracture characteristic assessed.The anterior process of the calcaneus (APC) is a saddle-shaped promontory at the anterior aspect of the calcaneus with varying length, breadth and shape. It forms the anterior part of the subtalar joint, the superior-posterior part of the calcaneal-cuboid joint (CC joint) and acts as point of insertion for the extensor digitorum et hallucis brevis muscles, the dorsal calcaneocuboid ligament (laterally), and the bifurcate ligament (medio-centrally). The bifurcate ligament originates from the centro-medial aspect of the APC and reaches to the navicular as well as to the cuboid bone and is suspected to be an important stabilizer of the Chopart joint line [ Fractures to the anterior process of the calcaneus (APC) have been considered rare injuries, as up to 88% are missed on plane radiographs [ Depending on the size and location of the fracture to the APC, it can affect the CC joint and might even affect the stability of the Chopart joint. Since the first descriptions in literature in 1931 by Dachtler and Christopher [ The primary aim of this study was to evaluate the patient subjective outcome of APC fractures treated by full weight-bearing. The secondary aim was to identify factors affecting the outcome of nonoperative treated APC fractures. The study is a retrospective registry study with a prospective follow-up. It was approved by the local ethical committee of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (# 660-16). The study was conducted at a level 1 trauma center. Patient suffering an APC fracture between 03/2011 and 03/2016 were identified through the clinical and radiological databases. The radiological database was searched using the following terms: “Proc* AND ant* AND fracture”. The clinical database was searched for the ICD-10 S92.0 (International Classification of Diseases, Version 2013). The results of this database search were independently reviewed by two investigators (FKM, SFB). Only non-operatively treated patients suffering an acute, isolated, unilateral fracture to the APC without Chopart joint dislocation and a follow-up of at least 12 months were included in the final analysis. The detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria are presented in All patients included in this study were treated non-operatively. Patients were instructed to conduct full weight-bearing as tolerated. In case of severe swelling and / or pain, patients were immobilized in a walker or cast with partial weight-bearing on crutches for a maximum of two weeks. Once full weight-bearing was possible additional physiotherapeutic treatment was initiated. Radiological follow-up was conducted only in case of pain or functional limitations in everyday activities for more than six weeks. Demographics, smoking, and return to work / sports were collected retrospectively from the patients’ records. Fracture classification and -characteristics were assessed on the CT scans, independently by two investigators (FKM, SFB). Possible disagreement was resolved by discussion. All fractures were classified according to Degan et al. [ Two validated foot and ankle specific patient reported outcome measures (VAS-FA, Karlsson Score) and a quality of life score (SF-12) were assessed prospectively based on a postal questionnaire. The VAS-FA [ The primary aim was the assessment of the patient subjective outcome after functionally treated APC fractures. The primary outcome parameter was return to work (RTW). Return to sports (RTS), VAS-FA [ The D’Agostino & Pearson normality test on RTW revealed no normal distribution (p = 0.007). The non-parametric statistical analysis included standard descriptive statistics (median and interquartile range (IQR)), Mann-Whitney-U-Test, Spearman's correlation, and Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA. The level of significance for the primary outcome parameter was set at p ≤ 0.05. Due to multiple testing, an alpha-level correction (Bonferroni) was conducted for the secondary outcome parameters, setting the level of significance to p ≤ 0.007. Statistics were computed using SPSS (Version 22, IBM, Armonk, United States). The patient selection is outlined in 52% of the APC fractures occurred on the left foot. According to Degan [ Concomitant injuries within the Chopart joint line occured in 78% of the patients. These included avulsion fractures to the talo-navicular joint (TN) in 52%, to the calcaneo-cuboidal joint (CC) in 59%, as well as fractures of the navicular bone (7%), and the cuboid bone (4%). Of all patients, 30% suffered one, 33% two, and two patients (7%) each three or four concomitant injuries. The fracture characteristics and concomitant injuries per the fracture type are displayed in Return to work (RTW) occurred after a median time of 14 days (IQR 10–42 days), return to sports (RTS, preinjury level) after 90 days (IQR 30–180 days). The median follow up was 24 months (IQR 16–41 months). At final-follow-up, the patients reached a median VAS-FA overall score of 95 points (IQR 89–98 points), 96 points (IQR 89–100 points) for pain, 97 points for function (IQR 91–98 points) and 97 points (IQR 88–100 points) for other complaints. 85% of the patients had a VAS-FA overall score equivalent to a healthy population [ Neither sex, nor age, or the individual risk factor smoking had a significant (p-value > 005) influence on any subjective outcome measure. All primary and secondary outcome parameters (RTW, RTS, VAS-FA, Karlsson Score, SF-12) were analyzed in regard to the influence of the fracture type (Degan Type I, Type II, Type III; Fractures to the anterior process of the calcaneus (APC) have been considered rare injuries and have received little attention in clinical research until today [ Therefore, the aim of this study was first to evaluate the subjective patient outcome of fractures to the APC when treated functionally by full weight bearing. The second aim was to identify, whether certain fracture characteristics feature a different prognosis with this treatment regime. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first study providing a detailed CT based fracture analysis and classification including a homogeneous patient collective with acute fractures only, applying a standardized treatment regime and analyzing the outcome using validated PROMs. Overall, the herein presented study found functional treatment to result in a fast return to work (Median 14 days, IQR 10–42) and good to excellent clinical results in the vast majority of all patients for the VAS-FA (Overall median score 95 points, IQR 89–98), the Karlsson score (Median of 90 points, IQR 82–100) and both, the PCS (Median 56, IQR 53–58) and the MCS (Median 55, IQR 48–58) of the SF-12. Still, return to sports with a median of 90 days (IQR 30–180) might be considered prolonged. Seven patients reported an unsatisfactory result in at least one of the PROMs, but only one patient in all three PROMs (Patient #10). Three patients demonstrated inferior results only in the Karlsson Score but reached excellent results for the VAS-FA, the SF-12, and a quick RTW and RTS. One patient achieved an inferior result for the SF-12 but excellent results for the VAS-FA and the Karlsson score. Twelve patients reported a RTS greater than 100 days, but only one patient showed an inferior result for the Karlsson Score. All of the other eleven patients featured excellent outcome parameters despite the prolonged time to RTS. For example, patient #3 reported the longest RTS (730 days) but demonstrated excellent results for all PROMs (Karlsson Score, VAS-FA, SF-12). Despite of the use of well validated PROMs, some incongruency between these was observed in a subset of patients. In this study a remarkably high proportion of the patients were female (74%). Interestingly, this is in line with previous studies [ The results of this study are difficult to be compared to previous studies, as it is the only one to assess validated PROMs. Ochman et al. [ Although most of the studies available did not specify the exact fracture types included, almost all authors appear to favor non-operative treatment for Degan type I and II fractures [ Due to a lack of objectified biomechanical analyses, the exact mechanism of fractures to the APC is elusive. It has been hypothesized that these fractures reflect an avulsion presumably of the bifurcate ligament. This mechanism would also explain the concomitant injuries to other parts of the Chopart complex. Concomitant injuries within the Chopart-joint line have been reported in previous studies. A MRI study analyzing fractures to the APC reported accompanying injuries to the talo-navicular joint in 76% and to the calcaneo-cuboidal joint in 100% [ The herein presented study has several strengths and limitations which should be discussed. To the authors’ knowledge, this study is among the largest case series reporting on the outcome of APC fractures. No other study has presented a comparably detailed analysis and description of the actual fracture types and characteristics based on CT scans. Furthermore, only acute fractures to the APC were included. Previous studies usually comprised of an inhomogeneous collective of acute fractures and symptomatic non-unions [ A major limitation is the retrospective patient selection despite the prospective follow-up. This also contributes to the limited follow-up rate of 47% of all eligible patients. The fate of the remaining 53% of the patients remains unknown. In the worst case, they did not respond because of inferior results. Nevertheless, this is a common limitation of retrospective studies. While Carey et al. [ Based on the subjective outcome of 27 patients suffering a APC fracture, functional treatment of these fractures yielded good to excellent results and a fast return to work in the majority of patients. Neither the fracture type and characteristics, nor concomitant injuries within the Chopart joint had a significant influence on the outcome. Yet, several patients required more than three months to return to their preinjury level of activity. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. This study is conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (Version 9, 10/08, Seoul) and in accordance with the Medical Research Involving Human Subjects Act. The Ethical Committee of the Medical Faculty of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich approved the study at the Department of General, Reconstructive and Trauma Surgery (# 660-16). All patients included in our study provided written informed consent to participate. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: