The effect of specific inhibitors on the growth and activity of chemolithotrophic cells has been studied by a number of workers using a comparative batch culture technique. In this study, the comparison method has been quantified and the test period extended to provide information about the ability of mixed cultures to adapt or become habituated to elevated concentrations of sodium sulphate and sodium chloride.
                  A bio-oxidation culture showed the ability to rapidly adapt to concentrations of sodium sulphate up to 20 g L−
                     
                     1 within 20–30 generations. Higher concentrations of 40 g L−
                     
                     1 imposed a permanent inhibitive effect that reduced the maximum cell reproduction rate by ca. 50%. Since sulphate is rarely present in process water at these concentrations, this electrolyte does not present significant problems to operational processes.
                  The bio-oxidation culture proved capable of adapting only to low concentrations of sodium chloride. Concentrations of 7 g L−
                     
                     1 or greater provoked an inhibitive effect that reduced the cell replication rate by more than 50%. Prolonged exposure to sodium chloride at these concentrations demonstrated that no significant culture adaptation or habituation occurred.The bacteria responsible for the catalytic dissolution of base-metal sulphide minerals are exposed to process water that typically contains a variety of dissolved inorganic and organic species detrimental to culture's activity. Within this aqueous phase, the culture must oxidise a soluble ferrous species and replicate rapidly if the process is to be optimised ( The sensitivity of bio-oxidation cultures to process water quality has been examined by many researchers. In particular, the deleterious effects of chloride, organic acids, solvent extraction agents and flotation aids have been reported (  This study is focused on short- and longer-term effects on cell activity or doubling time, of sodium sulphate (Na All chemicals used in this study were analytical grade reagents (AR) unless otherwise stated and all solutions were prepared with deionised water. The shake flask batch culture experiments were conducted in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100–104 mL of media and incubated in a Ratek orbital incubator at 35 Three component solutions were prepared in bulk and used to produce a minimal growth media as required. Solution A, a sulphuric acid solution was prepared by adding concentrated H Minimal media for batch cultures was prepared by dissolving LR grade ferrous sulphate heptahydrate (20.00 g) in the sulphuric acid solution A. Macro-nutrient solution B (100 mL) and micro-nutrient solution C (1.00 mL) were added and the solution diluted to ca. 990 mL with sulphuric acid solution A. The pH of this solution was adjusted with concentrated H The concentration of ferrous ion ( The source of bacteria used for this study was a mixed culture obtained from a culture system based on a pyrite substrate. The system serves as a means for long term, low maintenance culture preservation. The substrate sulphide mineral and solution are partially replenished at regular intervals of approximately 6 months. The system was aerated and maintained at pH < An aliquot of the supernatant from the preservation system was inoculated into minimal media. Iron oxidation was initially slow but after three successive transfers the batch culture cycle time of a 1% v/v inoculum was consistently between 42 and 48 h. Over a sequence of more than 200 successive transfers into minimal media the culture line maintained its vigour. The data for this study was obtained by a comparison of the doubling times of this culture when inoculated into minimal media, or minimal media with varying amounts of sodium sulphate or sodium chloride included. Re-inoculation of the culture line into fresh media, with or without added electrolyte, was performed after the batch culture cycle was complete, as indicated by a red-coloured solution and an All glassware and apparatus were washed in stock sulphuric acid solution A followed by deionised water and then air-dried. Growth flasks were rinsed with a dilute solution of sodium dithionite (Na The pyrite slurry provided the inoculum of a mixed or non-homogeneous bio-oxidation culture. This inoculum adapted rapidly to the Fe Data generated from the measuring electrodes during batch culture was interpreted using a published model ( The activity of bacteria under a particular set of conditions can be expressed as a rate constant As can be seen from After 800 h, the culture exposed continuously to sulphate was examined by microscopy and were found to exhibit features similar to those of the minimal media culture. At the highest sulphate concentration of 40 g L The addition of various concentrations of sodium chloride to minimal media produced a significant reduction the With 11 g L Testing a solution matrix that included NaCl and Na The results ( The activity response of a mixed culture of iron oxidising bacteria to a change in environmental conditions can be expressed by the average period the bacteria require to produce a daughter cell. Although average Increasing concentrations of sodium sulphate imposed some stress on the culture that responded by lowering the average rate of cell reproduction. The Where sodium sulphate was included at 20 g L An explanation for these observations and those made by other workers is that cells are affected by the colligative properties of their medium and that inhibition due to sodium sulphate arises from its contribution to ionic strength. The results of The inhibitive affect of ionic strength could arise from at least two causes, the ionic gradient across each cell membrane ( Culture activity was significantly inhibited by sudden exposure to sodium chloride confirming the findings of Cells exposed to 7 g L The cultures adapted to 40 g L Elevated concentrations of sodium chloride and sodium sulphate exert short- and long-term effects on the activity of iron oxidising bacteria. At sodium sulphate concentrations < Chloride ions exert a much greater affect on culture activity than sulphate. Prolonged detrimental changes in replication rates were observed if the sodium chloride concentration was greater than 7 g L To conclude, it seems pertinent to point out that high chloride concentration in the available water resource may not exclude a bio-oxidation pre-treatment. Chloride appears to limit iron oxidation significantly but the effects it exerts on the mechanisms of sulphur oxidation that many of these cells possess is still unclear. However, where a bio-oxidation process is limited by the rate of iron oxidation, modest chloride concentrations in the water supply are expected to have a very significant inhibitive effect of the process rate. The authors wish to thank the AJ Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy for the funding and support provided for Dr. K. Blight. Thanks are also due to Murdoch University and the AJ Parker Centre for the support provided to Mr. Denis Shiers.