Modeling of flotation has been the subject of many investigations aiming at better understanding the process behavior per se, and as well for process design, control and optimization purposes. With this regard, the importance of hydrodynamic characteristics, either as manipulated or measured variables, are paramount. The interfacial area of bubbles (Ib
                     ) is introduced in Part 1 of this paper as a hydrodynamic variable providing more information about the size distribution than the commonly used bubble surface area flux (Sb
                     ). Experimental evidence shows that the bubble size distribution can exhibit normal, lognormal, and even multi-modal shape. Unlike the Sauter mean diameter (d
                     32) and Sb
                     , the interfacial area of bubbles is derived from the complete bubble size distribution, and takes into account these specific characteristics. Fundamental expressions are proposed to allow characterising Ib
                      using the population mean and standard deviation. Experimental results indicate that for lognormal bubble size distributions, Ib
                      correlates well with the gas hold-up and d
                     32. Part 2 of the paper analyzes the correlation of gas dispersion characteristics with flotation rate constant.bubble size distribution bubble size maximum bubble size minimum bubble size bubble size at mean diameter of the BSD Sauter mean diameter of the error function gas hold-up size distribution function interfacial area of bubbles calculated predicted superficial gas rate flotation rate constant mean of the bubble surface area flux variance of the Hydrophobic particles present in a mineral pulp are collected in a flotation column by injecting fine air bubbles through a sparger located at the bottom of the reactor. The resulting bubble-particle aggregates rise through the collection zone of the column, i.e. the collection zone, allowing separation from the hydrophilic particles, which flow through the tailings valve. The bubble particle agglomerates rise into the froth zone, where typically a counter current water wash helps to remove entrained fine, hydrophyllic gangue particles. Bubble coalescence occurs in the froth zone leading to the loss of some hydrophyllic particles but providing improved mineral selectivity. The overall flotation process can then be considered composed of a reaction process (collection) followed by a separation process (froth selectivity). Hydrodynamic variables have a significant role on the performance of flotation cells since they affect the reaction rate and the mass transport (water and particles) by increasing the specific area of the dispersed phase. For instance, it has been experimentally proven that the rate constant decreases for coarse particles at high superficial gas rates and that fine particles require much higher superficial gas rates for effective flotation ( Many studies have been conducted to determine the effect of the bubble surface area flux ( The existence of a linear relationship between the flotation rate constant and the froth depth was also confirmed by The bubble surface area flux is defined as the surface of a given number of rising bubbles per unit time and unit of cell cross-sectional area. Assuming same-size spherical bubbles, a relation for Since bubbles do not have the same size, it is customary to replace The For uniform bubbles, an empirical relationship was presented by   Cape Town University (CTU) presented the first attempts to measure bubble size using an optical system. The experimental set-up sampled bubbles using a belled tube, wherefrom they were driven to an inclined viewing chamber. The system combined high intensity lighting and a camera placed at either sides of the viewing chamber to allow taking pictures ( The HUT bubble size sampler developed at Helsinki University of Technology has also been applied by The McGill bubble size analyzer is another visual technique which was introduced by McGill University researchers ( Until now, the use of the bubble viewer has been reported basically in offline process audits (gas dispersion conditions in cells or columns). The only known application for bubble size control (i.e. continuous For process control purposes, Although many bubble size distribution measurements have been reported lately in the literature ( Experimental data for typical operating conditions in mechanical cells suggests that the bubble sizes follow a log normal distribution (  Considering the abovementioned results, observations and analysis, it seems clear that the whole bubble size distribution should be considered for modeling the flotation rate constant. Ideally, the distribution would be narrow, but this is not always the case in industrial practice ( Bubble populations in flotation devices are characterized by the total number of individuals per unit of volume The interfacial area of bubbles refers to the overall surface area of bubble inside the device. While The bubble interfacial area and hold-up of a given set of bubbles are respectively defined as Depending on the type of distribution used, these equations can be further developed as presented hereafter. If the Combining Eqs. Solving for In a normal distribution, 95% of the bubbles are in the domain Eq. Finally, If the BSD is represented by a log-normal distribution, then Eqs. Combining again the expressions for Solving for Since Eq. As result of the complexity of manipulating bubble size distribution functions, However, Similarly, Various data sets corresponding to different flotation devices were analyzed and the correlation seems appropriate for According to Eqs. Experimental data were generated using a fully automated laboratory column flotation set-up. The column was made of 5.6 The frit-and-sleeve sparger consisted of a porous stainless steel ring concentrically installed within a cylindrical sleeve ( Quartz was used as a hydrophilic gangue and talc as a naturally hydrophobic mineral, ground and classified into four size classes. The synthetic pulp fed to the column contained 4% solids (i.e. 40% talc and 60% quartz), which is a relatively low percent solids, but exhibiting high proportion of hydrophobic (talc) mineral. For its constant efficiency over a rather long period of time, a polyglycol frother (F150) was selected. The gas rate and feed rate were set at 1 Bubble detection was performed with the CHT-based algorithm ( In the current study, bubble size distributions have been generated through manipulating the shear water rate and frother concentration. The first type (T1) is obtained using low frother concentration and low shear rate (low water flow), i.e. 5 Increasing the shear water flow rate, and maintaining the frother concentrate at the minimum value changed the bubble size distribution shape and generated the second type (T2) of bubble size distribution, exhibiting a multi-modal bubble size density function. Mixing two or more PDFs allows fitting multi-shape bubble size density function. In this study, four normal PDFs have been applied to cover the second type of bubble size histograms using the maximum likelihood concept. Eq.  The third category (T3) of distribution was obtained using operating conditions ensuring the generation of small bubbles and little coalescence, i.e. with both water flow and frother concentration higher. In this case, the bubble size histogram can be represented by a lognormal density function, thus allowing  The calculated interfacial area of bubbles using Eq. The other possibility could be that the PDF model does not fit the bubble size histogram well. However, in the current study, the PDF completely lies down on the histogram, therefore the distribution compaction on a single value must be the cause. This is consistent with the observation for T3 distributions (lognormal), and According to  In addition, based on the good correlation of  Obviously, the very good correlation between On the other hand, Finding the correlation between the known hydrodynamic variables in flotation, i.e. The interfacial area of bubbles can be considered as a solution to address the issue of compacting the entire bubble size distribution into a single value ( In Part 1 of this paper, the fundamental equations of gas dispersion have been first presented as a possible solution for some cases, where multi-shape bubble size density function and lognormal density function have been well fitted to histograms. Three main classes of bubble size histograms have been distinguished. The first class (T1) could not be represented by a single or multi PDF’s and has been only determined through Bordel et al.’s model. The second type (T2) of histogram has been fitted to multi-shape density function and the third one (T3) follows a lognormal density function. For the two last classes, histogram of the inter-correlations between gas dispersion properties has been studied. A strong correlation between gas dispersion properties – namely the gas hold-up and bubble surface area flux – has been detected for bubble size distributions represented by lognormal density functions. Results were not as convincing for distributions modeled using multi-shape density function. Part 2 of the paper will analyze the correlation of gas dispersion characteristics and the rate constant of flotation. We would like to thank the See