Fluid inclusions in Be–Ta–Li–Sn-bearing pegmatites have been reported in the literature as hypersaline aqueous brines or low-salinity aqueous or aqueous–carbonic fluids. The evolution paths of volatile fluids in equilibrium with the different crystallizing phases of rare-element pegmatites do not seem to be unique. The aim of this work is to contribute to this discussion, on the basis of fluid inclusion information from the Borborema Pegmatite Province (BPP) in Northeast Brazil. Some well-known heterogeneous Be–Ta–(Li–Sn) mineralized pegmatites of this province were systematically sampled along cross sections with the purpose of studying the fluid inclusions in the different pegmatite zones (I, muscovite-rich contact zone; II, homogeneous or graphic pegmatite; III, blocky feldspar zone; and IV, quartz core). The observed fluid inclusions (mainly in quartz) were almost always secondary or pseudosecondary, grouped along healed fractures with random orientation. Even some trails paralleling quartz grain limits were not undoubtedly primary. Almost all these fluid inclusions were filled with low-salinity aqueous or aqueous–carbonic fluids. Primary inclusions were recognized only in some well-formed crystals from druses with erratic distribution in the pegmatites. Microthermometric data from these samples confirm that the various crystallizing phases of the pegmatites were in equilibrium with low-salinity aqueous or aqueous–carbonic fluids (with insignificant N2 or CH4 contents) with frequent accidentally trapped solids. The various types of primary inclusions found in these crystals compare well with the types of secondary inclusions of the samples from the systematic cross sections. The relative age of the crystals hosting primary fluid inclusions, the relative age of primary inclusion types in successive crystal-growth zones, the relative age of secondary fluid inclusion trails and the corresponding microthermometric data allowed to establish the most probable evolution of the fluid characteristics during pegmatite crystallization. An early low-salinity aqueous–carbonic fluid with CO2 contents of 20 mol% was present during the crystallization of early minerals, such as garnet and tourmaline of the border zone and graphic quartz, beryl, manganotantalite, and blue tourmaline of zones II and III. The end of zone III crystallization occurred in the presence of a low-salinity, aqueous fluid with very low CO2 contents, as indicated by inclusions in the smoky core of quartz crystals at the limit between zones III and IV. Later aqueous fluids barren in CO2 and with salinities increasing from 5% to 20% coexisted with the formation of the pegmatite nucleus and replacement bodies, as indicated by inclusions in the border of these crystals and in euclase. The estimated trapping conditions of 3.5 kbar and 580°C for the earliest inclusion types agree with the regional metamorphic conditions and with the known liquidus conditions of rare-element-bearing pegmatite crystallization. The trapping conditions of inclusions in euclase and coexisting quartz crystal rims in the pegmatitic core, at 3.5 kbar and 400°C are slightly below the conditions admitted for the solidus of rare-element pegmatites and indicate an isobaric cooling during pegmatite crystallization.The enrichment of incompatible rare elements (e.g. Be, Ta, Li, Sn, Bi, W, Mo, Cu) and volatiles in late residual silicic melts, and the eventual enrichment of some of these elements in volatile phases during the final stages of magmatic crystallization have been classically considered to be responsible for the mineralization processes associated with granites, pegmatites and related hydrothermal veins. However, the details of the processes involved during the formation of pegmatites and the differences between fertile and sterile granites and pegmatites are still poorly understood. According to While the importance of an immiscible hypersaline fluid or metal-enriched saline hydrated melt is generally accepted in the evolution of the porphyry copper deposits, the question is still very polemic in the case of pegmatites.  In contrast with the evidence pointed out by Only a few papers on fluid inclusions in pegmatites present complete data about the fluid evolution during the different stages of pegmatite crystallization Few authors in the recent literature agree with the idea that pegmatites are formed in an open system as a rule, but a continuous or periodically replenished melt supply may be sometimes called upon Thus, the Delphos Oracle is still using ambiguous language and a complete understanding has still not been achieved. The aim of this paper is to contribute to the elucidation of some of the questions discussed above, based on fluid inclusion data in pegmatites of the BPP, in Northeastern Brazil, where similar approaches had not yet been attempted. The BPP A regional zonal distribution of over 1500 registered mineralized pegmatites was observed by  Most of the mineralized pegmatites exhibit a heterogeneous mineral distribution. According to The BPP was known since the last century. It was exploited for mica during the First World War and for beryl and tantalite during the Second World War and the Korean War. Roughly estimated bulk production data are of the order of 3000 t of tantalite, 20,000 t of beryl and 1000 t of cassiterite. Today rare-element mineral concentrates are exploited only sporadically as a by-product of kaolin, feldspar and gem quality tourmaline in a few pegmatite bodies. At first, the pegmatites at Ubaieiras (Li–Be bearing), Umbuzeiro (Li), Salgadinho (Li), Boqueirão (Be–Ta–Li), Mamões (Be–Ta–Li) and Capoeiras (gem–Be–Sn), were sampled systematically along cross sections from the walls to the core of the pegmatites, passing through the graphic zone and the blocky feldspar zone to the massive nucleus. Double polished wafers, 200- to 500-μm thick, were prepared from these samples for fluid inclusion petrography and microthermometry. It was expected that primary inclusions in samples of the different pegmatite zones would establish the evolving characteristics of the fluid in equilibrium with the progressively crystallizing pegmatites. Petrographic examination showed that only quartz hosted fluid inclusions were large enough for microthermometric measurements. Feldspars and spodumene were always intensively argillized and inclusions in unweathered transparent spots were too small for microthermometric measurements (less than 5μm) and also mostly aligned along trails of doubtful origin. The fluid inclusions in quartz in these samples were almost always grouped along healed fractures of random orientation and seemed to be mostly of secondary or, sometimes, of pseudosecondary origin. Four major types of fluid inclusions were distinguished. ⋅ Type A are aqueous–carbonic inclusions (two liquids+vapor), up to 20 μm in size, with frequent negative crystal shape, sometimes with birefringent insoluble solids. They occur as isolated inclusions, in clusters or, more frequently, in secondary trails in quartz from zones I and II. In two samples of graphic quartz they were observed in possibly pseudosecondary arrays paralleling the boundaries with the intergrown K-spar ⋅ Type B and Ca are two-phase inclusions (liquid+vapor), which display negative crystal or oval shapes up to 15 μm in size. They occur in healed intragranular microfractures crosscutting type A arrays. Some of these two-phase inclusion trails exhibit clathrate formation during freezing–heating runs, indicating the presence of CO ⋅ Type Cb and Cc are also aqueous two-phase inclusions, which occur in secondary trails in samples from all zones of the pegmatites. They are smaller (usually in the range of 3 to 10 μm) and present tabular or irregular shape, always elongated within the trail direction. These characteristics suggest their formation after the types B and Ca, but clear crosscutting relations were not observed. Type Cb inclusions are of moderate salinity, whereas Type Cc inclusions are of low salinity. The supposed relative age and the distinction between Cb and Cc will be discussed later. ⋅ Type D are aqueous and aqueous–carbonic inclusions with very irregular shape in secondary trails in samples from all zones of the pegmatites. A large variation in size (from less than 3 to 50 μm) and CO Because the inclusions described above did not allow a satisfactory reconstruction of the fluid evolution owing to the lack of primary inclusions, a second set of samples was examined, consisting of perfectly idiomorphic crystals, several of which were collected in open vugs. It was expected that primary inclusions in these samples could be correlated in some way with the inclusion types found in the first sample set. In all of these crystals it was possible to distinguish inclusions with sets of characteristics that, taken together, indicate a primary origin (negative crystal shape, plus isolated or grouped along growth zones and/or crystallographic directions, plus consistent phase ratios, and accidentally trapped solids; With these uncertainties in mind, the most representative groups of observed fluid inclusions are listed in The frequent presence of solid inclusions is observed in all types of inclusions. However, the solid-bearing fluid inclusions are always observed in trails or groups together with inclusions with the same shape, size and liquid/vapor ratio, but without solids. The number and relative volume of solids also vary in the inclusions of a particular crystal growth zone. Up to six different solid phases were observed in some cases. The total volume of solids is always less than 30% of the total inclusion volume, even in these cases. Usually the solid volume is below 10%. Necking down may be ruled out as an explanation for the varying fluid/solid ratios, because large isolated negative crystal shaped inclusions with very different solid contents occur in the same crystal growth zone, all with the same total homogenization temperatures. The origin of the solid-bearing fluid inclusions from hydrous melts can be discarded by the same reasons. Muscovite seems to be the most common solid and the only one where a petrographic identification seemed unequivocal, at least, in some cases. Another strongly anisotropic phase in the form of flexible fibers or radial acicular aggregates is also very frequent. The flexibility is observable during homogenization runs, during which the fibers are sometimes bent by the bubble movement. Both of these solid phases frequently occur as crystals, in part enclosed in the quartz of the inclusion walls and in part growing into the fluid phase of the inclusion itself. All these features suggest that the solids are accidentally trapped solids rather than true daughter minerals. Nevertheless, they indicate that the fluids were saturated in these phases. This supposition is further corroborated by the similarity between the microthermometric data of the solid-bearing inclusions and of those in the same group or growth zone, but without solids. In addition, there are no signs of dissolution or melting of the solid phases during heating runs up to 400°C. Fluid inclusions with petrographic characteristics of primary inclusions were observed in: Double-coloured tourmaline collected by “garimpeiros” in zone II (graphic pegmatite) of the Alto do Boqueirão pegmatite Garnet grains intergrown with the graphic pegmatite (zone II) in the Capoeiras and Boqueirão pegmatites and tourmaline and garnet at the limit between the border zone and zone II, at Capoeiras Quartz crystals collected by the authors in a vug at the limit between zone III (blocky perthite) and zone IV (quartz core) at Boqueirão A morganite crystal collected by “garimpeiros” at the limit of zones II and III of the Mamões pegmatite A manganotantalite crystal collected by “garimpeiros” in zone III at Mamões. The enclosing feldspar is intensively kaolinized; A quartz crystal collected by the authors in a vug of the zone IV at Mamões. This crystal has idiomorphic small euclase inclusions and larger idiomorphic euclase crystal overgrowths; Apatite crystals from replacement pockets at the Alto Feio pegmatite, collected by the authors; Aquamarine crystals at the limit of zones III and IV from the Alto do Papagaio pegmatite The primary inclusions in morganite The two quartz crystals, respectively from Boqueirão and Mamões, euclase and apatite have negative crystal-shaped inclusions with liquid water and vapor and accidentally trapped solids (lw+V±S). In the quartz and apatite crystals they are very clearly arranged along different crystal growth zones. Secondary (or pseudosecondary) lw+V±S inclusions, grouped along conchoidal healed fractures, may also show negative crystal shapes but they are smaller than the primary ones and frequently have etched walls. Microthermometric runs were made on a USGS type Fluid stage, with a precision of ±0.2°C for the CO The final CO The final ice melting temperatures may be grouped into three populations. (a) A range from −5.0 to −2.5 (indicating a low salinity of 4 to 8 wt.% NaCl eq.) is observed in primary inclusions of the Ca type, which occur in the smoky core and a first overgrowing hyaline quartz zone of quartz crystals from the Boqueirão Pegmatite at the limit between zones III and IV and in zone IV of the Mamões Pegmatite. The same range was observed in secondary inclusions in graphic quartz and beryl. The eutectic temperatures for the inclusions of this population range between −20°C and −30°C, indicating a dominance of Na(±K)Cl as the main solutes. (b) The second population of aqueous inclusions (type Cb) displays final ice melting temperatures, within the range of −6.0°C to −20.0°C (maxima around −11.0°C), which corresponds to salinity values between 10 and 22 wt.% NaCl eq. These are primary inclusions in the hyaline growth zone immediately surrounding the quartz cores of the first (Ca type) population and in euclase crystals of replacement bodies or overgrowing the same quartz crystals. The eutectic temperatures for inclusions of this population range between −30°C and −55°C, now indicating the presence of bivalent cations (most probably CaCl and MgCl) together with NaCl and KCl. Considering the low precision of eutectic measurements, the presence of other cations such as Fe and Li can not be completely discarded. Third-stage secondary inclusions in graphic quartz, milky quartz of zone IV and replacement bodies also belong to this population (type Cb). (c) The third population of primary aqueous inclusions (type Cc) with final ice melting temperatures above −3.5°C (salinities below 6 wt.% NaCl) is observed in the outermost growth zone of the quartz crystals. Some secondary inclusion trails with these characteristics are also observed in fractures of these quartz crystals and in graphic quartz. A good correlation of the salinities (first increasing from Ca to Cb and than decreasing again, from Cb to Cc) with the continuously decreasing homogenization temperatures of the three populations gives additional support to this subdivision and is also in accordance to the observed petrographic zonation Final clathrate melting temperatures in all primary and secondary aqueous–carbonic inclusions occur in the interval between 2.0°C and 9.9°C corroborating the low to moderate salinities indicated by the ice melting points The homogenization of CO Total homogenization temperatures of primary aqueous–carbonic, type A inclusions were observed in morganite (to liquid, 321±17°C), in garnet (to liquid, 293±15°C), in manganotantalite (near critical, 276°C to 289°C) and in aquamarine (to liquid, 297±15°C). The primary aqueous–carbonic inclusions in the tourmaline from the Boqueirão pegmatite decrepitated during the first heating run, already below 100°C (this is an additional support for the supposition that natural strain related leakage may have occurred in this sample, responsible for the CO The total homogenization temperatures, always to liquid, of primary inclusions of the quartz crystals from Boqueirão and Mamões pegmatites, range between 140°C and 310°C. The clear zonal distribution of the homogenization temperatures and salinities in these quartz crystals The primary inclusions in apatite The relative timing of the types of fluid inclusions in relation to the stages of pegmatite crystallization may be established by taking into account the petrographic and microthermometric data, the samples from systematic cross sections and the samples of well-formed crystals from the Boqueirão, Mamões and Capoeiras pegmatites. As the type A fluids occur in primary inclusions in small garnet and tourmaline crystals from the boundary between zones I and II at Capoeiras, these are certainly the earliest identified fluids, coexisting with the pegmatite magma since the beginning of zone II crystallization. The same type of fluid must have been present during the complete formation of zone II and, at least, until the beginning of zone III crystallization, as indicated by the primary inclusions of this type in morganite, aquamarine and manganotantalite and by pseudosecondary inclusions of the same type in graphic quartz. At the end of zone III crystallization, the presence of aqueous type B fluids with very low amounts of CO The isochores of the inclusion types A to D were calculated utilizing the equations of It can be easily observed 1. Type A and type B fluids (in this order) followed each other during the pegmatite crystallization. Large trapping pressure differences between them are thus, unlikely. As a temperature increase from type A to type B inclusions is also improbable to have occurred, the crosscutting pressure conditions are to be considered as minimum values. 2. The presence of large idiomorphic spodumene crystals formed at the limits between zones III and IV of the Boqueirão and Capoeiras pegmatites, instead of petalite, imposes a minimum trapping pressure between 2.5 and 3.5 kbar (respectively at 400°C and 600°C). 3. The pressure of 3.5 kbar is also indicated by the isochores 3 and 8 4. These values (580°C/3.5 kbar) are in agreement with the most typical emplacement conditions of rare-element pegmatites suggested by 5. These values are also very close to the liquidus conditions established by The likeliest interpretation thus, is to suppose that the crystallization of the major part of the studied pegmatites (zone II and part of zone III) occurred at 3.5 kbar and slowly cooling conditions, first in the presence of type A and later in the presence of type B fluids. A faster cooling is supposed to have occurred during the formation of the inner part of zone III, the quartz nucleus and the replacement bodies, still under nearly isobaric conditions. This faster cooling, from 580°C to 400°C, is indicated by the isochores 1, 2 and 3, corresponding to primary inclusions in successive growth zones in the same quartz crystal. The range of H The increasing salinites from low (type A and B fluids) to moderate (Type Cb fluids) and decreasing eutectics may be explained by residual concentration of bi- and trivalent cations in the fluids after the crystallization of K-spar (zones II and III) of the pegmatites. Alternatively, they could also result by selective leaching of these cations by late fluids from the earlier crystallized zones I to III of the pegmatite or even from the wall rocks. The late Cc and D type fluid inclusions could represent either residual hydrothermal fluids or have been introduced at subsolidus conditions, related or not to the same magmatic source. These questions about changes in salinity and water/carbon dioxide ratio variations, and the question of the origin of the aqueous–carbonic type A fluid (juvenile or metamorphic) however, need more detailed research (more samples and Raman, stable isotope and chemical analyses of the different fluid inclusion types) to be answered with some confidence. All fluid inclusion data at the three studied pegmatites strongly suggest that the crystallization of the intermediate zone, the blocky K-spar zone and the quartz nucleus occurred under volatile (CO This work was supported by Grants 523401/94 and 520053/96 of the CNPq (Brazilian Research Council). The authors are also grateful to Ignez do P. Guimarães, David A. Vanko, Roberto P. Xavier, Robert L. Linnen and one anonymous reviewer for a critical review and suggestions that meaningfully improved the text.