Complex refractory hematite with abundant reserves plays an significant role in the development of global iron and steel industry. In this study, the thermodynamics, phase transformation and microstructure evolution mechanism of complex refractory hematite in coal-based reduction process were systematically investigated using HSC software, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive spectrometry (EDS). The results show the products with total iron grade, iron recovery and metallization rate of 85.67%, 87.82% and 85.82% were obtained respectively under the optimum conditions. The phases were selectively transformed in this order of Fe2O3 → Fe3O4 → FeO (Fe2SiO4, FeAl2O4) → Fe. Iron particles precipitated from gangue matrix in irregular shape and grew up in the form of small particles aggregating into large particles with the prolongation of reaction time. Metallic iron with smooth surface and high purity that gradually diffused on the matrix could be formed by increasing reduction temperature.With the rapid development of iron and steel industry, the reserves of high-quality iron ore resources are gradually decreasing, resulting in an increase in the proportion of complex refractory iron ore reserves [ Since the 1950s, scholars at home and abroad had made many explorations on the beneficiation of fine refractory iron ore. The united process of positive flotation, gravity separation and magnetic separation was used to treat this kind of iron ore in the United States, but there was no major breakthrough in the separation results. Although high-grade concentrate could be obtained by reverse flotation and flocculation desliming-reverse flotation, there were many shortcomings such as many reagents, difficult dehydration of products and high cost of sewage treatment [ Due to the unsatisfactory treatment effect of conventional beneficiation methods for complex refractory hematite, scientific researchers break through the traditional beneficiation-sintering-smelting process and innovatively adopt coal-based reduction technology to treat complex refractory hematite [ In this study, on the basis of systematically studying the process mineralogy of complex refractory iron ore, the optimum process conditions of coal-based reduction were determined by single factor test. The thermodynamic mechanism, phase transformation and microstructure evolution of complex refractory iron ore in coal-based reduction process were investigated by XRD, HSC software thermodynamic calculation and SEM-EDS. The complex refractory hematite ore used in the experiment was from FMG Company of Australia. In order to investigate the chemical composition of the iron ore, the chemical multielement analysis of the main chemical elements in the ore sample was carried out. The analysis results were given in The results of multielement analysis indicate that the total iron grade of the ore was 52.03%. The iron in the iron ore mainly existed in the form of trivalent iron, and the content of FeO was 0.20%. The content of aluminium and silicon in the ore was high, which indicated that the ore contained a certain amount of aluminosilicate gangue minerals. In order to further analyze the mineral composition of the ore, the XRD analysis and mineral content analysis of the ore sample were carried out, and the analysis results were shown in The structural characteristics and symbiotic relationship of useful minerals in ores were analyzed by optical microscopy. The results were given in In order to meet the requirement of feed size for grinding equipment and the requirement of particle size for coal-based reduction test, ore samples and coal samples of reducing agent were crushed to −2 mm using jaw crusher (SKK-PE100 × 150) and roller crusher (XPSF-Φ400 × 250). The reduction equipment for coal-based reduction test was a self-designed one-way heating furnace. The constant temperature zone of the one-way heating furnace was 900 mm in length, the heating rate was 20 k/min, and the working maximum temperature was 1873 K. The temperature control system adopted PID programmable control cabinet. The schematic diagram of the one-way heating furnace was shown in Where PW3040 X-ray diffractometer manufactured by PANALYTICAL B. V Company of the Netherlands was used in this experiment. Its working parameters were as follows: Cutarget radiation, nickel filter, solid detector, tube voltage 40 kV, tube current 40 mA, scanning range 2Theta = 5° ~90°, step scanning, step-by-step scanning, 0.033°, residence time 20.68 s per step, incident line wavelength 1.541 Å, scanning speed 12 min Complex refractory hematite contains iron ore, quartz, aluminosilicate gangue and other gangue minerals. In the process of coal-based reduction, there were not only reduction of iron oxides, but also reduction reaction between other components. Reaction equation module in HSC Chemistry 6.0 was used to calculate the standard Gibbs free energy changes of possible reactions in coal-based reduction. The results were provided in The standard Gibbs free energy diagram and the equilibrium diagram of iron oxide reduction calculated by the software were shown in The quality of coal-based reduction products is very important affected by reduction temperature. Low temperature leads to incomplete reduction and high temperature leads to iron melting and high energy consumption. Under the conditions of reduction time 50 min, carbon-containing coefficient 2.0 and ore size −2.0 mm, the effects of reduction temperature on coal-based reduction products and magnetic separation products were demonstrated in As given in Similarly, reduction time greatly affects the reduction effect of coal-based products. Under the conditions of reduction temperature 1250 °C, carbon-containing coefficient 2.0 and ore size −2.0 mm, the effects of reduction time on coal-based reduction products and magnetic separation products were shown in As given in When coal powder is used as reductant to reduce iron ore, the amount of reductant is determined according to the oxygen content of iron oxide in the ore. Previous studies have shown that the reduction rate and metallization rate of reducing materials were significantly increased with the increase of reductant dosage in a certain range. In this study, the amount of reductant was expressed by C/O molar ratio, which was the molar ratio of fixed carbon in pulverized coal to oxygen in iron oxide (carbon-containing coefficient). Under the conditions of reduction time 50 min, reduction temperature 1250 °C and ore size −2.0 mm, the effects of carbon-containing coefficient on coal-based reduction products and magnetic separation products were shown in  The ore particle size will directly affect the coal-based reduction efficiency. Under the conditions of reduction time 50 min, reduction temperature 1250 °C and carbon-containing coefficient 2.0, the effects of ore particle size on coal-based reduction products and magnetic separation products were shown in  XRD diffraction analyzer was used to analyze the phase transformation of reduction products under different coal-based reduction conditions. The XRD spectra of coal-based reduction products at different reduction temperatures were displayed in The XRD spectra of coal-based reduction products at different reduction time were given in The SEM-EDS of the reduced products at different reduction temperatures were shown in The SEM-EDS of the reduced products at different reduction time was shown in Based on the analysis of phase transformation and microstructural evolution of complex refractory hematite in coal-based reduction, the transformation process from hematite into iron particles could be summarized, as shown in Selective enrichment of iron particles by coal-based reduction-magnetic separation process was proposed for complex refractory hematite ores. The optimum conditions for coal-based reduction were determined as reduction temperature 1250 °C, reduction time 50 min, carbon-containing coefficient 2.0 and ore particle size −2.0 mm. Under the optimum conditions, the total iron grade, iron recovery and metallization rate of the products were 85.67%, 87.82% and 85.82%, respectively. The phases were selectively transformed in this order of Fe None. This research work was supported by the