A dispersive liquid–liquid extraction technique was applied for evaluation of optimal conditions of uranium (VI) separation from aqueous solution (It is actual leach liquor, containing uranium (VI), thorium (IV), iron (III), Cl−, 
                        
                           S
                           
                              O
                              4
                              
                                 2
                                 −
                              
                           
                        
                     , etc). In this procedure, an appropriate mixture of the disperser and extraction solvents was added rapidly to the aqueous sample containing uranium ion; as a result, a cloudy solution was formed which consisted of fine droplets of extraction solvent dispersed entirely throughout the aqueous phase. The cloudy solution was centrifuged and the fine droplets of the extraction solvent were settled at the bottom of the conical test tube. The analytes were extracted from the source solution into the receiving phase and were concentrated to a small volume of the settled phase and finally, the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry was used to determine the analyte concentration in the settled phase. The conditions for the batch extraction performance were optimized; Furthermore, the continuous packed tower with 5 cm of diameter and 30 cm of height was applied to examine the batch results of continuous condition on an industrial-scale. The results showed that for 41.2% and 90% recovery factors of uranium (VI) from the leach liquor solution, one equilibrium stage and five equilibrium stages are needed, respectively.Uranium is a relatively rare metal element often found in association with other elements in the earth's crust. It plays an important role in daily life because of its use in nuclear power plants. Different processes are available for uranium extraction and separation from the associated elements in natural resources as well as from nuclear wastes. Conventional methods such as liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) ( This technique, in principle, is similar to the dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction (DLLME) introduced by Assadi et al., in 2006 ( The recovery of the small amount of the extractant solvent after the phase separation is troublesome, particularly when the solvents with lighter molecular weights than water are used. Moreover, the handling of the minute amounts of an extractant solvent influences the reproducibility of the technique, albeit unsuitable for the routine analysis due to the low analysis throughputs, a laborious and time-consuming procedure. In addition, it requires manual glassware cleaning or disposal, implying an increase in costs and waste generation. In order to overcome these limitations, different approaches have been developed for the automation of the DLLME technique using flow-analysis techniques ( In this research, DLLE technique was investigated for the first time to remove uranium from the leach liquor. Therefore, this work has been done in two stages: The first section deals with the batch processing through which the optimum parameters can be specified by DLLE technique for uranium separation. The second section is the industrial scale and continuous status of the first section in a packed tower which has a porosity of 60%. The number of equilibrium stages and packed tower height for uranium separation can be determined at this step by McCabe-Thiele technique. Several extractants have been used for uranium extraction using DLLE technique. These extractants are categorized into four types: Nitrogen-based extractants ( Phosphorous-based extractants ( Sulfur-based extractants ( Other extractants ( All chemicals used in the present experiment such as tri-octylamine (TOA), di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA), amines, methanol, ethanol, acetone, and so on, were of analytical grade reagents produced by Merck Co. (Darmstadt, Germany). Vessels used for the trace analysis were kept in a 1.0 mol L An inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was used for the uranium (VI) ion determination. The stock solution of uranium (VI) was prepared from the standard solutions of 1000 ppm. The phase separation was assisted by a centrifuge (Mistral 1000, MSB 100/CE 1.4). The pH values were measured with a Schot pH-meter (CG 841) equipped with a glass-combined electrode. The pH measurements were done in the wake of the compensation of deviations caused by the ionic strength by following these steps: Prepare 100 mL each of 2.0, 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0.1 and 0.001 M of aqueous NaCl solutions. Start with the 1 L of the 2.0 M solutions and make more dilute samples by dilution. Provide a buffer solution from Sigma 79 tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane (TRIS') by adding 0.124 g to 100 mL of distilled water. Adjust the pH meter using appropriate calibration buffer solutions. If the value shown is different from that of the standard solution, continue this adjustment procedure until the indicated value is within ±0.02 of the pH of the standard solution. Measure the pH of each of the NaCl solutions. Plot the measured pH versus the ionic strength of the solution. Under the optimal conditions, 10 mL of a solution containing uranium (VI) at a concentration of 45.71 mg L Accordingly, the dispersed fine droplets of uranium oxide (VI) were precipitated at the bottom of the conical sample holder. After separating the upper phase including aqueous phase, the receiving phase (r.p.: the sum of dispersive solvent and organic extractant solvents), was dried in a furnace at 160 (±5 °C), near the boiling point of the extraction solvent (DEHPA), then were diluted to 5 mL by adding distillated water ( The measurements of precision and accuracy management of the matrix effects are very important. Although, among all commonly used analytical atomic spectrometry techniques, ICP-OES is probably the one with the fewest interferences, the most common interference problem in ICP-OES is the spectral interference. These interferences can be listed into four categories: Simple background shift, Sloping background shift, Direct spectral overlap, Complex background shift. There are two approaches to deal with this background problem. The first is to select a different analytical line at a wavelength with no background interference. The second is to correct the background by measuring it as close as possible, but not falling on, the profile of the analytical line of the analyte element. Two background correction points, one on each side of the profile of the analytical line, are used to correct the sloping background shift. This means that the average signal measured at the two points is subtracted from the total signal measured at the analytical line. In the worst case, a direct spectral overlap occurs. This can be corrected if the magnitude of the interference is known as a function of the concentration of the interfering element. A correction factor can be calculated and used to correct the signal measured at the analyte wavelength. This can be best achieved by making simultaneous measurements of both signals at the analyte wavelength and at a different wavelength for the interfering element. This method is referred to as the concentration ratio method or interelement correction. The basic requirement is that the concentration of the interfering element can be accurately measured at another wavelength. With the advanced detector system, all spectral lines are present, so interelement correction is possible. A complex background shift is a shift in a background intensity that varies significantly on both sides of the analytical line. This is usually caused by the occurrence of a number of intensity, closely spaced emission lines nearby, and perhaps directly overlapping the analyte wavelength. Also, in this research, for handling the matrix influences, sometimes, we can rely on different approaches such as various calibrations as matrix matching, internal standardization, and standard addition technique. Uranium (VI) equilibrium data in the two phases were necessary to obtain the number of theoretical stages by McCabe-Thiele method. Therefore, the leach liquor solution was diluted from three to ten times in separate conical test tubes and the multiple samples of the leach liquor solution were prepared in different concentrations of uranium (VI). Then, uranium (VI) was extracted from all of the samples in optimal conditions and uranium (VI) recovered by the organic phase was obtained for each sample by ICP-OES analysis method. Indeed, uranium (VI) analyzed by ICP-OES method was the sole content in the organic phase that was in equilibrium with the residual uranium (VI) ion in the aqueous phase. To measure the equilibrium time, the aqueous phases were sampled at different times. Then, the concentration of uranium per unit of time was plotted. Due to the straight line obtained, it was concluded that the extraction time was short. Therefore, the formation and disappearance of the cloudy of solution in comparison with the standard solution that appears very rapidly, is an indication of a stage equilibrium, because the colloid composed of the fine particles in the sample solution is extracted, which represents a large contact surface of the droplets of the sample solution. Characteristically, the extracted time is very short and rapid when the dispersive liquid-liquid method is concerned ( The authors optimized the conditions of uranium separation from the leach liquor by DLLE to achieve high extraction recovery (ER) and preconcentration factor (PF). The equations below can be used for calculation of ER % and PF: The parameters optimized by one-variable at-a-time method are as follows: the extraction solvent type and its volume, the disperser solvent type and its volume, pH of the source and receiving phases, the extraction time before doing centrifugation and at the final step, the centrifuging time. The most important parameters that affect the selection of the extraction solvent are distribution coefficient and selectivity. The selectivity between the 2 solutes A and B is defined as the ratio of the distribution coefficient of A to the distribution coefficient of B. For all useful extraction operations, the selectivity must exceed unity. Distribution coefficient is the ratio (at equilibrium) of the concentration of solute in the extract and raffinate phases. It gives a measure of the affinity of the solute for the two phases. In general, the extraction solvent must be able to extract the solute satisfactorily. That means the extraction solvent must have low solubility in the aqueous solution and higher density than that of it. Based on these considerations, in the present research, a variety of organic extraction solvents was investigated as the possible ones. To evaluate the effect of extraction solvent, a series of sample solutions were tested by using 0.5 mL of different kinds of extraction solvents. Because of different solubility of extraction solvents in water, after the addition of TOA a cloudy state without sediment was formed after centrifugation, but the cloudy states with small sediment and large sediment at the bottom of the conical sample holder were formed when amides and DEHPA were added respectively. The recovery factor of the formed sediment by DEHPA was more than that of the other tested extraction solvent. It was probably due to higher solubility of this solvent that causes formation of more fine droplets of DEHPA in water, and more formation of complex between DEHPA and uranium (VI) ions. The stoichiometry of the reaction is as follows: Five replicated tests were performed for each solvent under the same conditions. The results are summarized in The concentration of the target solute in the organic extraction solvent is an important factor that governs the extraction solvent volume, because the concentration of the solute and therefore enrichment factor decrease when high volumes of extraction solvent are used. Thus, an extraction solvent volume would be optimum when it increases the sediment phase after centrifuging for the relevant solute. In order to examine the influence of the extraction solvent volume, solutions containing various volumes of DEHPA were subjected to the same DLLE procedures. The experimental conditions were fixed and included 1.0 mL methanol containing different volumes of DEHPA (0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 mL). Three replicated tests were performed for the same solvent under the same conditions, the results of which are shown in The most important factor affecting the selection of the disperser solvent is relative miscibility of the disperser solvent with the extraction solvents and aqueous phase. The extraction solvents with high interfacial tension factor, form tiny droplets and the extraction efficiency would not be uniform. Therefore, the disperser solvent plays an important role in decreasing the interfacial tension between the aqueous solutions and extracting solvents and thus atomizes the extraction solvent. For the sake of acquiring these characteristics, three kinds of disperser solvents: acetone, methanol and ethanol were tested. A series of sample solutions was prepared by adding 1.0 mL of each disperser solvent containing 0.4 mL of DEHPA (as an extractant solvent) to the sample solution containing uranium (VI) ion at a concentration of 45.71 mg L The disperser solvent volume directly affects the formation of the cloudy solution, the degree of the dispersion of the extraction solvent in the aqueous phase, and subsequently, the extraction efficiency. Low volumes of the disperser solvent could not disperse the extraction solvent properly and therefore, the cloudy solution cannot be formed completely. Reversely, in high volumes of the disperser solvents, the solubility of analytes in the aqueous phase increases by increasing the volume of the disperser solvent, thus, the extraction process is incomplete. Accordingly, it was necessary to optimize the methanol volume. For this purpose, the experimental conditions were fixed and included different volumes of methanol (0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4 and 1.6 mL) containing 0.4 mL of DEHPA, respectively. The results are shown in According to the curve, at first the extraction efficiency increases and then decreases by increasing the volume of methanol. The cloudy state is not formed completely at the low volumes of methanol. Thereby, the extraction recovery decreases. In the high volume of methanol, the solubility of uranium (VI) in the aqueous phases increases, as a result, the extraction efficiency decreases. The1.20 mL of the methanol was chosen as an optimum volume. As in the LLE, the pH of the source phase and receiving phase play an important role in DLLE. Consequently, the effect of the pH is evaluated in the range of 1.0–6.0 with addition of hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide solutions to the sample solution ( According to the obtained results, higher concentrations of HCl in the source phase and NaOH in the receiving phase provided the highest separation factors for the analytes. It should also be noted that the solution formed precipitation at pH over 7 for the both aqueous and organic phases. However, as it can be seen from Extraction time is one of the most important factors in DLLE like the other extraction procedures. The total extraction time in DLLE is defined as an interval time between the addition of mixture of disperser solvent (methanol) and extraction solvent (DEHPA) to the aqueous sample and the moment to sit. In fact, the extraction time consists of whirling before 2 h sitting. When said whirling, that means just shaking the solution by hand. After the addition of the mixture of extraction solvent (DEHPA) and disperser solvent (methanol) to the aqueous sample, the resulted solution was whirled for 3 min by hand to enhance the mass transfer coefficient between the two phases before centrifugation. The effect of extraction time was studied within the time range between 3 and 40 min. The experiment was repeated three times. The average of the results is summarized in The results indicated that the extraction time has no effect on the extraction recovery percentage. Because the equilibrium state can be achieved very quickly in DLLE (about after 3 min), the required extraction time can be very short. The very short time of extraction procedure, as one of the remarkable advantages of the DLLE technique, is mostly attributed to an infinitely large surface area between the extraction solvent and the aqueous solution. To obtain the two distinguishable phases in the extraction tubes, usually, centrifugation is indispensable, therefore in DLLE, it has been done for reach to the time of appropriate sitting instead of centrifugation. After a certain centrifugation time, DEHPA phase can be separated from the aqueous phase quite satisfactorily. In order to achieve the best extraction efficiency, centrifugation time was considered in the range of 0–25 min at constant speed of 4000 rpm (the order of zero means that no centrifugation takes place and uranium (VI) separation just does by 3 min whirling as extraction time, then followed by 2 h of sitting) ( Evidently, the extraction performance reached a better level in 10 min. When the centrifugation time was shorter than 10 min, the peak area decreased and when it was longer than 10 min, the peak area was constant. Presumably, it was because of shorter centrifugation time resulted in the incomplete sedimentation of DEHPA drops and the longer centrifugation time resulted in heat generation, which led to the dissolving of parts of DEHPA phase and the loss of sensitivity. Therefore, 10 min was adopted for optimum centrifugation time. One of the major potential interferences in the present method was investigated. The interference was due to the competition of other metal ions with the extraction solvent and their subsequent co-extraction with uranium (VI). Actual leach liquor, contains uranium (VI), thorium (IV), iron (III), Cl As seen, the presence of thorium (IV) ions can lessen the extraction recovery percentage of uranium (VI) from 92.36 to 81.92. Equilibrium data for uranium (VI) concentration in the aqueous and organic phases were determined according to Sec. 2.3.1. By assuming that the organic extraction phase and aqueous phase are immiscible, McCabe-Thiele method can be applicable for specifying the equilibrium stages. According to By assuming that the temperature, pressure and molar flow rates of the organic and aqueous phases are constant along the tower, the McCabe-Thiele method can be applicable for the used packed tower in this study. The equilibrium data for uranium in the two phases and an operation line of the tower are also necessary to use McCabe-Thiele method. The equilibrium data were calculated in Sec. 2.3.1 and were plotted in In this section, a semi-continuous packed tower, having 0.3 m of height and 0.05 m of diameter and porosity of 60% was used for continuous experiments. The void space of the tower that was equal to 0.226 L was filled with aqueous solution (leach liquor solution); and according to the organic and aqueous phases ratio in batch experiments, the extractant and disperser volumes were fixed at 0.009 L and 0.027 L in the continuous experiments. Indeed, the semi-continuous tower was filled with the aqueous phase and organic phases passing throughout the aqueous phase in the tower at constant flow rate. Hence, another parameter that had to be kept constant was the flow rate of the mixture of the disperser and extractant solvents. These parameters were calculated by Eq. The experiment was performed by the residue time (t) equal to 60, 120, 180 and 240 s separately; and it was found that the highest recovery factor of uranium (VI) (41.2%) could be reached at extraction time (180 s); while the recovery factor was decreased at other time. Although the tower currents were semi-continuous, their operation was like that of the continuous state. Because the leach liquor solution had natural downward movement due to higher density than the organic phase (density about 1.15 and 0.923 mg L Thanks to the McCabe-Thiele method, a tower according to these specifications can be considered as one equilibrium stage. Hence, five equilibrium stages are required for uranium (VI) extraction from the leach liquor solution by assuming 90% recovery factor of uranium (VI). i.e, a tower 1.5 m in height, 0.05 m in diameter, albeit with 60% porosity is needed for 90% recovery of uranium (VI) ( In this research work, DLLE as an effective process with a high recovery and the separation factors within a very short time incorporated with ICP-OES was studied to extract and measure uranium (VI) ion from the leach liquor solution. The observations revealed that in the batch section, the principles of DLLME method could generally be used in DLLE method and for the first time, optimum parameters of uranium (VI) separation from the leach liquor solution were determined. It was found that DEHPA as an extractant solvent is more effective than TOA and amines. The optimal pHs determined for the aqueous and organic phases were 1 and 5 respectively. The studies also showed that the best recovery factor was achieved by using methanol as a disperser solvent and by setting time at 10 min for centrifugation and 3 min for the extraction before centrifugation. It was also found that the optimum volumes for DEHPA and methanol were 0.4 mL and 1.2 mL, respectively. In the next series of the experiments, the continuous packed tower was used after evaluation of optimum conditions of uranium (VI) separation in batch extraction procedure. According to the discussed processes and via applying McCabe-Thiele method, we came to the conclusion that 90% of the extraction recovery of uranium from the leach liquor solution could be reached by the packed tower with 150 cm of height and 5 cm of diameter and 60% of porosity. It should be noted that the height of this tower was equivalent to 5 equilibrium stages.