A novel and facile approach for the preparation of exfoliated/delamination kaolinite was reported in this study. Kaolinite was mechanochemically activated by grinding with dimethylsulfoxide in a globe mill for different periods of time, and then the activated samples were treated for several hours at 120°C to obtain the precursors of kaolinite. The resulting materials were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The experimental data indicated that the clay layers were well exfoliated/delamination under mechanochemical effect in a significantly short intercalation time. The expansion of the basal spacing (d
                     001) of raw kaolinite by 0.40nm pointed out that the hydrogen bonds between adjacent kaolinite layers were partially broken as a result of the intercalation with dimethylsulfoxide.Intercalation is a well known process applied for synthesizing organo-clay nanocomposites under mild conditions. Considerable attention has been paid to elucidate the chemical reactivity and mechanical properties of the precursors to organo-clay composites which possess large specific surface area, considerable porosity and thermal stability DMSO is an important precursor used for preparing the organo-clay intercalation complex through replacement of some indirect insertion organic molecules. However, this indirect insertion process has several disadvantages such as the high energy consumption and prolong period lasting for up to several days In this work, a simple technique which is composed of the grinding of kaolinite/DMSO mixture with a subsequent intercalation at 120 Kaolinite with a particle size of 5–10 100 Wide angle X-ray analyses were carried out on an XRD-6000 equipped with vertical goniometer and a curved graphite diffracted beam monochromator using Cu Kα radiation ( The X-ray diffraction patterns of kaolinite samples which were milled for different time and treated at 120 The intercalation ratios of other samples increased in parallel with the grinding time. The basal spacing ( The binding energy of the Al (2 The chemical exfoliation/delamination of kaolinite, induced by intercalation of molecules such as urea, ammonium acetate, hydrazine, dimethylsulfoxide, or potassium acetate, combined with “mechanical comminution”, causes the weakening of interlayer hydrogen bonds, and therefore layers like kaolinite are easily displaced with respect to one another. The morphological changes of kaolinite in association with the reduction of the particle size that occurred after grinding and intercalation at 120 A simple and facile route to prepare the exfoliated/delaminated kaolinite layers was suggested in present work. The mechanochemical activation played a crucial role in the exfoliation of the kaolinite layers as single flakes by DMSO. This technique reduces the reaction period from several days of the traditional infusion methods to hours and also gives rise to a product with a higher exfoliated/delaminated ratio. Therefore it improves the shortcoming of the traditional methods. The authors are grateful to the Committee of Natural Science Foundation in China on National Training Fund for Person with Ability of Basic Subjects (J0730425) and Key Research Program of Gansu Province (2GS064-A52-036-02).