Dry sage leaves were extracted with dense carbon dioxide under the following conditions: pressure, 9–12.8MPa; temperature, 25–50°C; sage feed, 3–4g; carbon dioxide flow rate, 0.05–0.35g/min; solvent-to-feed ratio, 16–21. The oil in finely ground particles was easily accessible to the solvent and its extraction was controlled by phase equilibrium. A part of essential oil dissolved in CO2 almost immediately, the other part was extracted gradually together with cuticular waxes and water. The difference in extraction rate was connected with essential oil fractionation due to the different solubility of oil components and solute–matrix interaction in the second extraction period. Collection efficiency of a cooled glass U-tube at ambient pressure was low for volatile substances but good for sesqui- and diterpenes. The extraction yield of oxygenated monoterpene manool was more than double its yield obtained by hydrodistillation.Genus Sage has one of the longest histories of use as a medicinal herb. It has a potential in treating cancer as it shows strong antitumorigenic activities High antioxidative activity of sage is related to phenolic compounds as carnosol, carnosic and rosmarinic acids, rosmadial, rosmanol, epirosmanol, methyl carnosate and luteolin-7- Bauman et al. The aim of this study was to measure the yield of sage oleoresin and the composition of essential oil in SC-CO Air-dried Dalmatian sage leaves of Albanian origin were cut for 15 Forty grams of sage leaves and 400 The extractor of volume 12.6 Additional extraction experiments were performed after 6 months in order to compare extract collection in empty cooled U-tube and in a cooled test tube filled with 7 Essential oil components were determined using an HP 5890A gas chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector maintained at 280 Identification of extract constituents was based on comparison of their retention times with those of the five reference standards α-pinene, 1,8-cineole, camphor, borneol and bornyl acetate and with published tables of retention times of other sage components The essential oil obtained from sage leaves by hydrodistillation in a 27 The sage extracts were of light to dark yellow color and their aroma was close to that of the botanical feed material. The global extraction yield ranged between 2.7 and 4.8 Preliminary extraction experiments were carried out at pressure 10 The extraction yields shown in If parameter The values of The data on the second extraction period in this work is comparable with the data published by Roy et al. The apparent discrepancy between the parameters controlling the extraction rate in this work (phase equilibrium) and in previous studies Differences were observed between the compositions of sage oil extracted with dense CO The recovery of individual essential oil components was calculated using relative response factors (RRFs). The RRFs were calculated for each of the five reference standards as FID response to a known amount of the reference standard relative to a known amount of   The decrease in essential oil content in sage leaves after 6 months of storage show experimental points marked (■) and (□). Only the concentration of non-volatile diterpene manool in the leaves was unchanged. Finally, the higher recovery of monoterpenes in the test tube with hexane than in the empty trap is evident from experimental points (□) and (×). It is difficult, however, to explain the observed opposite effect of hexane on the collection of less volatile substances. Further experiments comparing different collection techniques are therefore necessary. The supercritical extraction of essential oil from dry sage leaves was characterised by two periods. A part of essential oil dissolved in CO The project was supported by grants 40108601/0 from the Ministry for Education and Science of the Republic Macedonia and BEMUSAC (Contract No. G1MA-CT-2002-0419 in the 5th Framework Programme). The authors thank J. Lněničková for GC analysis and M. Koptová for technical assistance in supercritical fluid extraction.