This paper describes the use of water glass and calcium chloride as a complex base binding agent for in situ soil stabilization. Four kinds of dust samples were used as the penetration and silicification mediums. Three surfactants were used as the penetration aiding agents and individually added to the solutions of water glass and calcium chloride for increasing their penetration ability. The test results show that the suitable concentration of the penetration aiding agents is about 0.3%, if the solutions are applied to wetting dust. The penetration ability of the solutions in the dust samples increases by 24–47%. The surface tension of the solutions after individually adding the penetration aiding agents can be effectively reduced, but it has no strict relationship with the penetration ability of the solutions. To increase the penetration depth in the dust samples in a shorter time, water glass solution should penetrate first and then calcium chloride solution. The penetration aiding agents can greatly improve the penetration ability of the base binding agent solutions in the dust samples with poor wetting property. However, the penetration ability also depends on other physical and chemical properties of the dust samples. Using the penetration aiding agent, dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid sodium salt, with 0.3% concentration, the penetration time of water glass and calcium chloride solutions with 5, 15 and 25% concentrations can reduce by 29, 46 and 62%, respectively.Chemical soil stabilization technologies have been proved to be very effective in the disposal of hazardous and non-hazardous solid wastes. These technologies are also widely used in geo-technical engineering, e.g. building foundations, roadway and airport construction. Therefore, considerable research has been directed toward developing more effective soil binding agents The formed products in Chemically pure water glass and calcium chloride were used in this investigation. Three kinds of surfactants (dodecyl alcohol, dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid sodium salt, sodium dodecyl sulfonate) were selected as the penetration aiding agents. To simplify the discussion of these experimental agents, symbols are substituted for the agents and they are shown in Dust was used as the penetration medium in this investigation. Four kinds of dust samples were collected from two mines, and dried in a thermotank. The dust particles larger than 0.56 mm in diameter (+32 mesh) were screened off, and the weight distribution and the chemical compositions of the dust samples were measured (see Three low concentration levels by weight, 5, 15 and 25% of calcium chloride and water glass solutions were designed to ensure that the solutions had rather good penetration ability. The concentration levels of the three surfactants used as the penetration aiding agents were 0.2, 0.5 and 0.8%. Before preparing the solutions, the compositions and their weight ratio were calculated, according to the required quantity of the solutions. In order to increase the testing accuracy, several times of excess volume of the solutions were prepared. The chemical agents were weighed by an electronic analytical balance with±0.1mg accuracy. Depending on the required steps of the experiment, the chemical agents were put into a dry glass and then water was added to the required concentration. A device for testing the downward penetration rate was designed as shown in During the experiment, a surface tension apparatus of type JZHY-180 with± 0.1dyn/cm accuracy was used to measure the surface tension of the solutions. A thermometer with±0.2 degree accuracy was used to measure the temperature of the solutions. Atmospheric temperature and relative humidity were also measured. To investigate the performance of the three selected surfactants as the penetration aiding agents, the penetration behavior and the surface tension of these surfactant solutions with different concentration were tested. The test results are shown in To determine the suitable penetration procedure of water glass and calcium chloride solutions for increasing the penetration depth in a shorter time, the penetration behavior of these solutions with different penetration procedure was investigated. The test results are shown in To further increase the penetration depth of the base binding agent solutions  The suitable concentration of the penetration aiding agent The water surface tension after adding the penetration aiding agents can be effectively reduced. However, the numerical size of the solution surface tension cannot completely represent its penetration ability in dust. The penetration ability also depends on the dust properties. To increase the penetration depth in the dust samples in a shorter time, the suitable penetration operation procedure for the base binding agent solutions The penetration ability of the base binding agent solutions The penetration aiding agent is more effective if it is used to increase the penetration ability for the dust sample with poor wetting behavior. In this study, the penetration aiding agent A chemical binding agent with a high penetration ability, like water, will make the in situ soil stabilization operation easier and more economical. Therefore, the preliminary study of the in situ soil binding agent in this paper will be significant for solid waste disposal and soil stabilization technologies. Further testing will include a strength test of the insitu binding agent and some field test. The author is greatly indebted to Professor P. Mousset-Jones for editing this paper.