Treating open calcaneal fractures remains challenging, particularly when involving bone loss and infection.
               
                  Case
                  We present the case of a 25-year-old woman who sustained an open AO 83-C2 calcaneal fracture with subsequent necrosis and presumed infection. Superseding necrosis and bone loss complicated the plan for definitive fixation. Residual bone was stabilised with Kirshner-wires and the void filled with a calcium sulphate and hydroxyapatite spacer, facilitating delayed surgical reconstruction.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Using calcium sulphate and hydroxyapatite spacer, as part of a 2-stage process represents a strategy in the treatment of complex calcaneal fractures with possible infection, and bone and soft tissue loss.
               
                  Level of clinical evidence
                  4.Open injuries account for 10% of all calcaneal fractures. There is no published consensus on the management of open calcaneal fractures and as such, treatment protocols appear variable. We present the case of a 25-year old, previously fit and well, female patient who was admitted following a fall from a height of 30 foot. She sustained an open, comminuted AO 83-C2 calcaneal fracture ( Initial management of the calcaneal injury consisted of primary washout and debridement of the open wound. Exploration revealed extensive soft-tissue injury and significant contamination. All devitalised tissue was debrided, and the wound was approximated. The patient continued Co-amoxiclav (clavulanic acid/amoxicillin) antibiotic therapy that was commenced on admission, abiding to the hospital guidance for open fracture management. Inflammatory markers at this stage were raised with a WCC of 26.5 × 10ˆ9/L and CRP 113.4 mg/L. On return to theatre, following BOAST guidelines for definitive fixation by the senior author (RA), the inflammatory markers remained elevated with CRP 26.7 mg/L and WCC 10.43 × 10ˆ9. Devitalised tissue was found intra-operatively which necessitated the use of an extended lateral approach to remove necrotic bone (including non-viable fragmented unattached bone) and soft tissue. Over 50% of the posterior subtalar joint was excised, resulting in a large uncontainable osseous defect. The fracture was stabilised with 1.6 mm K-wires and the small medial tongue type fragment was transfixed to the inferior aspect of the talus to prevent varus heel mal-alignment using an open Essex-Lopresti manoeuvre. Medial inferior wire insertion was used to aid bony reduction of the sustentaculumn tali fragment ( Parallel K-wires were used to hold the medial body of the calcaneum and additional wires into the talus from the inferior aspect of the calcaneum to maintain longitudinal length. Intra-operative radiographs were obtained of the contralateral foot in order to assess calcaneal pitch and longitudinal length and consequently achieve adequate reduction of the remaining fragments. The superior lateral posterior facet and lateral calcaneal wall were missing, resulting in a circumferential cortical bone cavity. Calcium sulphate and hydroxyapatite vancomycin elucidating void filler (CERAMENT- V™- Vancomycin {CBVF -V} from Bonesupport Industries, Lund Sweden) was inserted into the defect. A negative pressure Vacuum Assisted Closure (VAC) device was used on the medial wound with a silicone-sheet interposed between the sponge and the skin. Intra–operative microbiology samples were sent to the laboratory. At 2 weeks post-surgery the VAC dressing was removed, and the patient proceeded to undergo frequent infection screenings - monitoring of inflammatory markers, regular dressing changes, and ongoing immobilisation in an Aircast boot until healing by secondary intention occurred. Co-amoxiclav was continued until the medial open wound had healed and inflammatory markers normalised (WCC 5.24 × 10ˆ9/L and CRP <2 mg/L). The K-wires were removed in clinic at 8 weeks post operation. Full culture results from the intra-operative samples did not reveal any growth. Once the medial wound had completely healed with scar contraction at week 6, radiographs were taken to assess bony consolidation and posterior facet integrity ( The original void filler residue was removed, the subtalar joint was prepared for fusion and the fracture mal-union debrided. The residual varus mal-union was corrected with an osteotomy of the calcaneal body and the cavity was prepared to provide a cancellous surface. Fusion was undertaken with a mixture of autologous iliac crest bone grafting (AIBG) ( The patient returned to full weight bear without pain at 10 weeks and her gait was found to be equal, with normal cadence, and healing of all scars (see Open calcaneal fractures are significant, potentially life changing injuries with historically poor outcomes. Morphology of the calcaneum can present unique challenges due to its highly cancellous structure and bone loss or comminution causing instability. In this case infection, meant early definitive surgery could not be conducted and loss of the posterior facet leaving a non-reconstructable joint and a bone void where primary fusion could not be directly undertaken. We followed British Orthopaedic Association (BOA) and British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive, and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS) guidance on the management of open fractures. One previously described technique in cases with significant bone defects is use of a cement spacer or polymethyl meth-acrylate (PMMA) as a bone filling cement spacer which are not biodegradable. We employed a synthetic, injectable, osteoconductive biomaterial which also contains vancomycin (consisting of 60% calcium sulphate (CS) and 40% hydroxyapatite (HA) - CERAMENT- V™- Vancomycin {CBVF -V} from Bonesupport Industries, Lund Sweden). Our hypothesis assumed the synthetic osteoconductive biomaterial could promote bone healing and act as a scaffold for bone remodelling. It is reported to remodel to healthy bone between 6 and 12 months and been demonstrated to be effective in the treatment of osteomyelitis and closed calcaneal fractures. GÜler et al. demonstrated PMMA augmentation to offer greater structural stability than calcium sulphate and hydroxyapatite on its own, indicating the need for rigid fixation for the latter to be successful. In this case the injectable material aided infection clearance by acting as an antibiotic sump and promoting bone healing which subsequently facilitated delayed definitive fixation. It served as a spacer to maintain the area for grafting and reconstruction by preventing fibrous tissue ingrowth, it may promt the formation of a bio-membrane In summary open calcaneal fractures with significant bone loss, tissue necrosis and possible infection are associated with a high morbidity and are difficult to treat. We believe radical debridement with implantation of antibiotic calcium sulphate and hydroxyapatite antibiotic impregnated void filler has a low rate of complication. In the presence of mechanical instability and infection, it can facilitate a 2-stage process allowing delayed definitive surgical reconstruction. Further studies are warranted to characterise the properties of this approach in the management of infected fractures with unstable or stabilised cavities. The authors have no declarations of interest and neither any conflicts of interest to report. Appropriate institutional consent was obtained.