The zwitterionic monomer, ethyl 3-(N,N-diallylammonio)propanephosphonate and sulfur dioxide were cyclocopolymerized in DMSO using azobisisobutyronitrile or ammonium persulfate as initiators to afford a pH-responsive polyphosphonobetaine/SO2 (PPB/SO2) copolymer. The polymers, on treatment with HCl and NaOH, gave the aqueous solutions of the corresponding cationic polyphosphononic acid (CPP) and anionic polyphosphonate (APP). The solution properties of the PPB having two pH-responsive functionalities were investigated in detail by potentiometric and viscometric techniques. Basicity constants of the amine and phosphonate groups in APP were found to be “apparent” and as such follow the modified Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. The incorporation of SO2 moiety has resulted in the decrease of basicity constant of the nitrogens in the copolymer by staggering ⩾2units of log K in compare to that of the corresponding homopolymer. The basicity difference is expected to have an effect on the chelating properties of the polymers. In contrast to many polycarbo- and -sulfobetaines, the PPB was all found to be soluble in salt-free water as well as in salt (including Ca2+ and Li+)-added solutions. The PPB demonstrated ‘antipolyelectrolyte’ viscosity behavior and found to have higher viscosity values in LiCl than in NaCl or NaI.The polymerization of monomeric carbo-, phospho- and sulfo-betaines (zwitterions) (M Extraordinary chelating properties of compounds containing amine and phosphonate groups in the molecule have attracted considerable attention to synthesize low molecular-weight chelating agents that should be able to form polymer-heavy metal ion complexes from waste water 2,2′-Azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) from Fluka Chemie AG (Buchs, Switzerland), was purified by crystallization from a chloroform-ethanol mixture. Ammonium persulfate (APS) from BDH Chemical Co. (Poole, UK) was used as received. Ethyl 3-( Melting points were recorded in a calibrated Electrothermal-IA9100-Digital Melting Point Apparatus. Elemental analysis was carried out on a Perkin Elmer Elemental Analyzer Series 11 Model 2400. IR spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer 16F PC FTIR spectrometer. A gentle stream of N All the polymerizations were carried out using conditions as described in the To a solution of PPB The onset of thermal decomposition (closed capillary) 240–250 For the determination of molecular weights, the polymer PPB The potentiometric titrations were carried out at 23 The protonation constant of the amine nitrogen, log The typical electrolytes having apparent basicity constants could be described by the Equation 2 ( The experimental details of the potentiometric titrations are summarized in The results of the polymerization under various conditions are given in PPB The strong absorptions at 1158 and 1026 The assignments of the Viscosity data were evaluated by the Huggins equation: The changes in reduced viscosities of a 1.0 Viscosity data for PPB In order to gain further information on the conformational transitions, we have determined the basicity constants, The basicity constants log Protonation of polymers is dictated by entropy effects associated with the release of water molecules from the hydration shell of the repeating unit that is being protonated The second basicity constants The basicity constant (log We have, for the first time, synthesized a pH-responsive phosphonobetaine/SO The authors thankfully acknowledge the financial assistance provided by