A general model is developed for moving-bed reactors where multiple non-catalytic gas–solid reactions and multiple gas-phase reactions take place. The grain model is adopted and modified as the kinetics model for multiple non-catalytic gas–solid reactions case. The proposed model covers the modified grain model and provides the local degree knowledge of the origin solid reactant along with the intermediate solids within the porous pellets. The heat transfer by convection, conduction and radiation in the gas bulk and the radial temperature distribution of the pellet are considered. The model predictions for solid conversion, gas temperature, and gas concentrations are obtained for an industrial moving-bed reactor for Fe2O3 pellets reduction. This proposed model well simulates the experimental data with an average 1.2% error.A great number of gas–solid reactions are carried out in moving-bed type apparatus. However, the literature review reveals a considerable drawback/shortage as far as the mathematical aspect is concerned. Generally, in spite of the major economic advantages of moving-bed operations, the main aspects of heat and mass transfer in these systems have received less attention in comparison with the fixed or fluidized beds. Lack of studies in this area is felt due to the absence of a general model and numerical techniques in solving the governing equations. What we have now is a complicated reactor performance system due to multiple reactions, the diversity in mechanisms of gas–solid reactions, and simultaneous heat and mass transfer which needs to be dealt with complicated mathematical models and numerical procedures. In order to reduce this complexity the researchers usually prefer to apply simpler kinetic models.  In two extended and comprehensive studies, Following our previous study (  The following multiple non-catalytic gas–solid reactions are considered for mathematical modeling: Each one of the above reactions may be reversible, non-equimolar, exothermic or endothermic. In case of consecutive reactions each intermediate solid The following assumptions are considered for mathematical modeling: Plug flow for gas and solid phases Pellet size constancy The chemical reactions occur at the surface of grains within the pellets and the heat of reactions are released (or absorbed) at the same locations A uniform temperature distribution exists in an individual grain In an individual pellet there exists a local thermal equilibrium between gas and solid species. Hence, in a radial position in the pellet, the gas trapped within pellet’s pores and the solid species have a same temperature. Based on the Eulerian approach, the mass balance equation for a gaseous component In Eq. The The mass balance equations should be written for all gaseous components within the moving-bed. A total material balance equation is achieved by summing up Eq. The energy balance for gas is expressed by the following equation: The A porous pellet which is composed of small grains is shown in A mass balance for the origin solid reactant ( For calculating the intermediate solid layer of Consequently, for any other solid component By developing Eq. A mass balance should be written for gas species The energy balance for a single spherical pellet is expressed with the following equation: For solving Eq. In the grain model (original version ( Here, the proposed kinetic model is applied for analyzing the gas–solid reaction taking place in a moving-bed reactor used for direct reduction of iron oxide pellets. By using H The gas components are By applying these coefficients in the governing equations the corresponding new equations are obtained, respectively. In Eq. In Eq. According to According to the above discussion, Eq. The above simplification is in fact the main difference between the well-known grain model and the modified grain model. In the latter, a parameter which is equal to the volume ratio of solid product to solid reactant is considered for the structural changes of the solid and is presented by ( For reaction of Fe In the conditions where the above mentioned relation between the molar densities of solid product and reactant does not exist (i.e. For solid FeO, applying Eq. Eqs. For hematite reaction, parameter The relations and correlations used for determining the required parameters are listed in In In the implicit solution, beginning from top of the reactor, the gas compositions and the temperature are assumed in each differential length Δ In case an explicit solution method is applied, an additional knowledge of reactor length is required. The attempts made reveal that for design purposes, when the length of the reactor is not known, the computing time increases significantly by applying explicit schemes while, the preciousness of the model improves slightly. It is noteworthy that the possibility of selecting a larger spatial interval in the implicit solution scheme in comparison with the explicit solution scheme reduces significantly the CPU time of calculation. Both the implicit and explicit solution schemes should be iterated across the reactor length until the desired temperature and molar flow rates of the gas entering the reactor are obtained. The developed model is applied for moving-bed reactor used in direct reduction of iron oxide pellets. This moving-bed has been previously analyzed mathematically based on the unreacted shrinking core model as the kinetic model ( The typical values for grain size are reported in the literature in the range of a few microns ( In order to calculate the accuracy of the model quantitatively, an error analysis is performed. Eq. (34) is introduced as a criterion for error analysis: The model predictions are obtained for three different operational conditions realized by variation of the blown in reducing gas ratio. Two parameters are used here as H The predictions of the model are plotted in As seen, the developed model well simulates the experimental data of The above studied operating conditions result in completion of the conversion in a short length of the reactor. In this case, the higher heat exchange between the gas and solid phases leads to the completion of the hematite reduction at the top end of the moving bed; more than 1  The volumetric flow rate of gas is further reduced to The analysis of Considering all the three cases studied above, an average 1.2% error is calculated. Therefore, error analysis confirms the good predictions of the presented model.  The mathematical modeling of moving-bed reactors is considered here and a general model that provides the possibility of applying multiple non-catalytic gas–solid reactions and multiple gaseous reactions is developed. The applied kinetics model is a new modified form of the grain model which is developed especially for multiple reactions cases. The proposed model covers the modified grain model. The governing equations are simplified for the moving-bed reactor case for direct reduction of hematite pellet. The numerical procedure shows that applying an implicit solution scheme decreases the computation time compared to that of an explicit one especially when designing the length of reactor is of concern. The possibility of selecting a larger spatial interval in the implicit solution scheme in comparison with the explicit solution scheme reduces significantly the CPU time of calculation. The model is applied for an industrial moving-bed reactor for direct reduction of hematite pellet. However, a detailed investigation is necessary for examining the influence of the proposed gas–solid kinetic model, as it is the emphasis of this study. This comprehensive work would be presented in a separate article as the complementary.  surface area of a pellet, m bed cross sectional area, m peripheral surface area of a bed ( fractional contribution of a reaction concentration of gas A and Q, respectively, mol/m mean specific heat of solid and gas, respectively, J/mol·K total gas concentration, mol/m effective diffusivity between grains inside a pellet, m Knudsen diffusivity of diffusivity of diffusivity of binary diffusivity of axial dispersion coefficient, m reactor diameter, m pellet and grain diameter, respectively, m overall degree of reaction of a pellet and a grain, respectively. heat transfer coefficient between gas and pellet, W/m convective and radiative heat transfer coefficient, respectively, W/m reaction rate constant, m/s gas conductivity, W/m.K equilibrium constant, dimensionless molecular weight of molecular weight of solid feed, kg/mol solid species mass transfer flux of gas total mass transfer, mol/m number of pellets per unit time, pellet/s Prandtl number mass flow rate of solid feed, kg/s and kg/h heat transfer flux, W/m reaction rate, mole/m universal gas constant, J/mol·K particle Reynolds number (Re radius of pellet, grain, and initial grain radius, respectively, m distance from center of a grain, m ambient temperature, K gas and solid temperature, respectively, K time, s wall heat transfer coefficient, W/m superficial velocity of gas, m/s volume fraction of solid mole fraction of gas species volume ratio of solid product to solid reactant axial coordinate in bed, m stoichiometric coefficients emissivity of gas local porosity of pellet, and bed, dimensionless initial porosity of pellet, dimensionless thermal conductivity of solid and gas, and effective conductivity of pellet, respectively, W/m·K thermal dispersion coefficient, W/m·K heat of reaction, J/mol gas viscosity, kg/m.s distance from center of a pellet, m actual density of solid, mol/m gas solid reactor initial