Groundwater is one of the main freshwater resources on the Earth, but its contamination by NO3
                     − and pesticides jeopardizes its suitability for consumption. In this work, the simultaneous electro-oxidation of insecticide imidacloprid (IMC) and electroreduction of NO3
                     − in softened groundwater containing a large amount of Cl− has been addressed. The assays were carried out in a stirred undivided tank reactor containing either a boron-doped diamond (BDD) or IrO2 anode, and Fe cathode, which showed greater electrocatalytic activity than stainless steel to reduce NO3
                     −. Comparative assays in simulated water mimicking the anionic composition of groundwater were made to assess the influence of natural organic matter (NOM) on the decontamination process. The BDD/Fe cell had much greater performance than the IrO2/Fe one, although the former produced larger amounts of ClO3
                     − and ClO4
                     −. In all cases, the NO3
                     −, Cl− and IMC decays agreed with a (pseudo)-first-order kinetics. In the BDD/Fe cell, total NO3
                     − removal was reached at j ≥ 10 mA cm−2 in softened groundwater, at similar rate in the presence and absence of IMC, but it was decelerated using the simulated matrix. The N-products formed upon NO3
                     − electroreduction contributed to IMC degradation, but its decay was inhibited by NOM because of the partial consumption of oxidants like hydroxyl radical and active chlorine. Operating at 5 mA cm−2 for 240 min, total removal of the insecticide and 61.5% total organic carbon (TOC) decay were achieved, also attaining a low NO3
                     − content that was suitable for humans. Eight heteroaromatic products were identified, allowing the proposal of a reaction sequence for IMC degradation in groundwater.Regions with high density of pig farming and agricultural land are particularly vulnerable to environmental issues linked to groundwater contamination by NO On the other hand, neonicotinoids are the most widely employed neuro-active insecticides, being applied to many crops and a large plethora of vegetables and fruits [ Recently, a wide range of electrochemical technologies is being developed for the decontamination of both, natural water and urban and industrial wastewater [ In the absence of Cl Using undivided reactors, the process is more complicated in the presence of Cl The anode material may also have influence. Lacasa et al. [ The efficient removal of several pesticides from synthetic solutions by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) like electro-oxidation (EO), electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) using BDD or DSA EO, the simplest EAOP, involves the attack of the strong oxidant hydroxyl radical (M( In this work, the simultaneous IMC electro-oxidation and NO Analytical standard imidacloprid (PESTANAL Apart from pure water, the following aqueous matrices were employed to assess the electrodenitrification and EO processes: A raw groundwater sample, preserved at 4 °C in a refrigerator once collected from a water well located in an agricultural land in the surroundings of Barcelona (Spain). Its characteristics are shown in Simulated water prepared to mimic the anions content of the softened groundwater. It was prepared with ultrapure water and contained 2.10 mM KNO The electrolytic experiments were carried out in a classical two-electrode, cylindrical, jacketed glass tank reactor, which contained 150–175 cm A Crison 2200 pH-meter was employed to measure the solution pH, and a Metrohm 644 conductometer was used for the conductance determination. Active chlorine was measured by the Reversed-phase HPLC was used to monitor the IMC concentration. A Waters 600 LC controlled by Empower The solution TOC was measured on a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer using the non-purgeable organic carbon (NPOC) method. An aliquot volume of 50 μL was injected into it, and reproducible values with ±1% accuracy were always obtained, with L.O.Q = 0.708 mg dm The concentration of Cl Average values obtained in duplicate assays are reported in this work. The corresponding error bars within a 95% confidence interval are shown for the experimental data shown in figures. Stable heteroaromatic derivatives from IMC degradation were detected by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), and their mass spectra were compared with those in the NIST05 database. Treated solutions were collected after 60 min of EO treatment of 23.7 mg dm First, experiments for the selection of the best cathode able to promote the largest NO  From the above results, the speciation of the N-containing species in the resulting electrolyzed solutions was determined, as presented in First electrolyses performed with raw groundwater in BDD/Fe and IrO The coupling of Fe cathode with a BDD or IrO  As deduced from ClO  A lower performance was found for the IrO Regarding the fate of Cl Once clarified the electrochemical behavior of NO   From these results, energy consumptions of 52.4 kWh (kg IMC) The results of  Finally, the treatment of 23.7 mg dm  The BDD/Fe cell outperformed the IrO The authors thank the financial support from project CTQ2016-78616-R (AEI/FEDER, EU). R. Oriol acknowledges the FPI grant awarded by