Concentrators treating sulphide ores present significant business opportunities by way of improved concentrate grade and paymetal recovery. In the case of the Raglan operations, it was necessary to demonstrate the metallurgical performance and flowsheet opportunities for a future ore blend which was expected to have a different processing response. The future ore was campaigned at the Raglan concentrator, and sampling of the flotation circuit was performed. In addition to mass and value balances derived from this sampling, quantitative mineral measurement by Qem∗SCAN was also conducted using polished sections on a size by size basis, and which required advanced sampling and sample preparation protocols.
                  In this paper, a modification of the statistical benchmark surveying method is presented to meet the above objectives. This modification resides in the use of drill-core data for the estimation of expected grade of ore milled in a week-long surveying campaign. Use of Krige’s lognormal models on the drill-core data on a weighted mean basis, and allowing for measured waste dilution, provides an accurate estimate of this ore grade. It is shown that this adaptation provides a mean ore grade estimate that is within 4% error of the survey ore grade estimate.Milling and flotation, sometimes accompanied by gravity separation, are well-established unit processes, which have traditionally been used to treat mined ore. These processes liberate, then separate, the valuable minerals from host gangue. This is often done by a combination of crushing and grinding processes to liberate the paymetal minerals, followed by gravity separation and/or flotation, to separate these valuable minerals into a concentrate, or several concentrates. These concentrate(s), having a lower bulk than the parent ore and containing a high percentage of the valuable minerals are more economically treated for metal extraction than the original ore. The concentration process invariably results in a variable paymetal loss to the concentrator tailing. This is disposed of in an impoundment area, and has no immediate business use. These tailings forms the largest loss of paymetal in the entire flowsheet by which refined, or saleable, metal(s) are produced ( From the foregoing, the sampling and analysis of production concentrators towards improved metallurgical performance, has logically been the object of technical effort. These exercises, sometimes called diagnostic metallurgy, or surveys, have aimed at identifying and diagnosing areas of the concentrator flowsheet, which have potential for improved metallurgical performance. Improved processing aims to reduce the paymetal loss to tailings, and increase the recovery of the paymetal(s) to concentrate(s). Also, these investigations often aim at reducing gangue dilution, to reduce downstream costs, which are often higher than milling and flotation costs on a per-tonne of metal basis. These activities, when successfully performed, enhance the business case of the production concentrator to a significant extent ( A quantitative concentrator surveying model, called In the case here a particular ore blend is to be campaigned through the concentrator during a week of operations to demonstrate the properties of that ore, and the The Raglan operation, located in the Ungava peninsula of northern Québec, which was commissioned in December 1997, is a key asset in present nickel production for the Canadian integrated nickel unit (INO) of Xstrata Nickel. It was chosen as the site where most of the present study would be conducted, because the potential economic impact at this site is the greatest within existing Xstrata Nickel operations. Earlier work had already shown that first-generation process mineralogy in Falconbridge, using the prototype surveying model, produced meaningful information that was successfully used to improve flowsheet performance ( During the five year period 2004–2009, the Raglan operations will encounter a change of ore characteristics that will potentially reduce nickel recovery. The life-of-mine grade of ore is lower than has been mined to date, and has a higher SAG power index (SPI) ( This was done by two statistical benchmark surveys at Raglan, one in June 1998, the other in February 2000 ( Two capital projects are presently active as a result. These are: A semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mill retrofit, to convert the present fully autogenous mill to give higher ore treatment capacity. This will include the installation of more grinding power to handle the increased ore hardness and improved classification by way of cyclone nests; A flotation circuit retrofit, wherein improvements to the primary and cleaner flotation sections will be installed. These improvements will include staged and finer grinding, cleaner circuit expansion, and a flash flotation step. Both of these projects are the direct result of the information obtained from the heuristic Falconbridge ‘statistical benchmark survey’ model, which was reviewed earlier in this paper. It was a requirement that, prior to confirming final designs in both projects, a campaign of specially selected ‘future’ ore was mined and milled during a seven day period in November 2003. The definition of the ‘future’ ore was extracted from medium to long-term mining plans. The life-of-mine is approximately 20 years. The first new ‘ massive sulphides: 9% net-textured sulphides: 75% disseminated sulphides: 16% Detailed co-ordination of the plans for these activities was made, involving several disciplines and teams at both the Raglan site and at the Metallurgical Technology Centre in Sudbury. These plans commenced in January 2003 in anticipation of the survey being performed in November 2003. The sourcing and tonnages/grades of the various mining (working) faces is summarised in The reader is reminded that this survey was configured to sample the flotation operations whilst treating a particular mixture of ore types, or End Members, during a campaign, in order to obtain predictive properties. The challenges include the rearrangement of the external reference distribution so as to use geological and mining grade data to benchmark the grade of ore to be milled in the campaign. This is the first documented attempt at campaigning a particular ore mix through a mill for a The actual ore mined and milled is summarised in A detailed drill-core database exists for the relevant blocks of ore to be mined. The data consist of chemical analyses on samples taken from drill-core. A total of 70 observations was identified from this database. The salient features are shown in This amounts to an uncorrected geometric mean grade of 2.78% Ni, with an arithmetic mean of 2.95% Ni. The arithmetic mean has limits of 5.30% and 0.59% Ni at the 95% level. The spacing of these confidence limits appears to be wide because the arithmetic estimation of mean and associated confidence limits are not applicable in fully spatial distributions, which are lognormal and require logarithmic estimation. The Krige (skewed) limits are different to those of the (symmetrical) arithmetic mean, and reflect the individual measurements. The inadequate arithmetic estimator in this case is the set of confidence limits, not the sample mean. Furthermore, use of the weighted mean increments is more appropriate than pooling the individual data points. See The ore mined was logged, and grade estimates from each block mined were obtained from the DataMine database, which produces Kriged estimates of grade for the official ore reserve of the mine. From these two information sources, another independent estimate of the ore actually mined, accounting for the 6.8% dilution as was the case in the drill core estimate, is obtained. the results are shown in Shift tonnage and flotation feed grade for the actual ore milled between the 16th and 20th November 2003 are given in  The arithmetic mean of the six survey units is 2.78% Ni. The associated confidence limits from the normal distribution, using the sample standard deviation, are 3.31% and 2.24% Ni at the 95% level. Use of the Sichel The various grade estimates are summarised and compared in The sample mean of these estimates is thus (2.75 In this case, no existing operations records exist for this ore mix other than the eight consecutive shifts of campaign milling, and the six survey units taken from within that time. A more limited comparison will be made on this basis. The eight consecutive shifts of milling operations produced final concentrate as shown in The final concentrate sampled during the survey is shown in Since it has been established that the final concentrate nickel values are normally distributed ( 8 (operations) 6 (surveys) 0.331 0.603 Use of Sichel’s The sample mean and associated confidence limits of the final tailings produced ( There is now close alignment of the accepted mean grades of nickel in the final tailings; the adjudicated external reference distribution was 0.44% Ni, and the adjudicated survey composite was 0.45% Ni. Reworking of the external reference distribution of final tailings grades ( Appropriate tests of significance should be developed and applied to the grade estimates produced by the mine to mill survey. In The Sichel Another independent estimate might be the Sichel An overall comparison of the concentrator feed and final products is shown in Inspection of The foregoing exercises with Raglan operations in the campaign survey have tested the idea of a different type of concentrator survey format. In such a case the specific objectives are different from those of the statistical benchmark survey, in that the campaign model describes the concentrator performance for a specific ore blend rather than ‘typical ore milled’. The following may be concluded: Lognormality is present to a measurable extent in drill-core. A weighted mean of drill intersections by core length and nickel grade leads into either the uncorrected geomean estimate of Krige or the corrected geomean estimate of Sichel. The above grade estimation is corrected again for waste dilution, this estimate being obtained by surveying after actual mining has occurred. Good agreement is obtained between the actual ore milled, the actual ore surveyed, and the above geomean estimates. This is after outlier rejection in the six survey units by Sichel’s model. The order of the differences between the various geomean estimates is +3.16% to −2.82% relative to the overall mean. The Sichel Norman Lotter would like to express his appreciation to Falconbridge management for permission to publish this paper, and to the late Associate Professor André Laplante of McGill University for his academic supervision. This paper was extracted from the Ph.D. thesis work supervised by André. His deep interest in this work, and excellent academic supervision thereof, is most appreciated. His sudden passing is deeply regretted. This paper was drafted, but not finalized, before his tragic passing in Montréal on Sunday 5th March 2006. Prof. Jim Finch, also of McGill University, has subsequently very kindly assisted in proof-reading the paper.