There is increasing interest in food use of black carrots because of the colour stability of the anthocyanins and the substantial quantity of bioactive compounds. The influence of jam and marmalade processing, storage conditions and in vitro gastrointestinal digestion on colour attributes, total and individual anthocyanin content, and antioxidant capacity of black carrots was examined. Anthocyanins (87.6–95.6%) and antioxidant capacity (79.2–89.5%) were significantly decreased as a result of jam and marmalade processing (p < 0.05). After 20 weeks of storage, the preserved anthocyanins and antioxidant capacity in samples stored at 4 °C (53.4–81.0% and 45.2–92.0%, respectively) were higher than samples stored at 25 °C (7.8–69.3% and 12.8–60.9%, respectively). Additionally percent recovery of bioaccessible anthocyanins and antioxidant capacity determined using the FRAP assay increased after jam and marmalade processing (0.8–10.3 and 2.6–4.3%, respectively). The current study introduced a detailed understanding of the alterations in colour properties, anthocyanin content and antioxidant capacity of black carrot jams and marmalades, which can serve as novel sources of functional foods.Anthocyanins, well-known natural alternatives to the synthetic dyes, are the pigments of many flowers, fruits and vegetables responsible for their red, blue and purple colours ( Recently, black carrots ( Many fruits and vegetables, including black carrots, are seasonal and perishable; therefore there is a need to apply preservation techniques such as jam/marmalade making. As a consequence of changes in consumption practices and the presence of alternative or new products on the market, the jam/marmalade industry needs to improve its competitiveness and develop new products, such as vegetable jams ( In order to evaluate the potential role of anthocyanins in the human body, changes occurring in the gastrointestinal tract should be taken into account. For simulating the gastrointestinal conditions, The novel part of the current study is not only its focus on evaluation of the changes in anthocyanin profile and antioxidant capacity of black carrots as a result of jam/marmalade processing and storage, but also the determination of the fate of black carrot anthocyanins during Fresh black carrots ( For simulation of Colour properties of black carrot jams and marmalades were measured using a CR-400 Minolta colourimeter (Tokyo, Japan) that was calibrated using a standard white plate. The measured parameters were Samples of jams and marmalades were removed from different parts of the jars (bottom, middle and top) and transferred into Petri dishes for colour measurements. Three independent extracts for each sample were obtained by the treatment of 1 g of sample with 5 mL of 75% aqueous methanol containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid followed by 15 min of sonication in a cooled ultrasonic bath (USC900TH, VWR ultrasonic cleaner, Radnor, PA, USA) and 10 min of centrifugation (Universal 32R, Hettich Zentrifugen, Tuttlingen, Germany) at 4 °C and 2700  TAC was determined according to pH differential method ( TAC was expressed as mg of C3G per 100 g of dry weight (dw) of sample. Samples were analysed in triplicate. TAOC was estimated using two different assays (DPPH and FRAP). In both assays, trolox (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid) was used as a standard and results were expressed in terms of mg of trolox equivalent (TE) per 100 g dw of sample. Samples were analysed in triplicate for each assay. DPPH assay was performed as described by FRAP assay was carried out according to the procedure of Anthocyanin profiles of samples were determined by comparison with a previous study performed by our group ( All experiments were conducted in triplicate and the obtained data were reported as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was applied using SPSS software (version 20.0, SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Mean values were compared by analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's post hoc test ( After processing, the moisture content of fresh black carrots was decreased from 91.0 to 40.6 and 30.4% for jams and marmalades, respectively. To eliminate the differences in moisture contents, the results in current study are expressed on dry weight (dw) basis. Fresh black carrots showed a lightness value ( TAC of black carrots, jams and marmalades was determined using both spectrophotometric pH differential ( Black carrots are good sources of natural antioxidants. Antioxidant capacity of black carrots has previously been determined by other researchers using different methods. Like most of the data reported in the literature, results achieved by During 20 weeks of storage, The total and individual anthocyanin contents were highly influenced by different storage conditions ( After 20 weeks of storage, the antioxidant capacity of samples decreased significantly ( The influence of gastrointestinal digestion on total and individual anthocyanin contents of black carrots, jams and marmalades are shown in  As far as we know, the current study is the first research describing the stability of colour properties, anthocyanins and antioxidant capacity of black carrot jams and marmalades during processing, storage and This study was financially supported by