Two leaching methods were used to study colemanite leaching reactions. First, the conventional acid leaching method was performed using a glass reactor at atmospheric pressure, leaching in a water bath. Second, microwave acid leaching was carried out using the glass reactor in a modified microwave oven. The characterization of ground colemanite was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) analysis and chemical analysis. An investigation was made of the influence of the solid/liquid ratio, stirring speed, acid concentration, microwave power, reaction time and reaction temperature on the leaching recovery of boron oxide. The results of the conventional acid leaching (CVAL) method were compared to the microwave leaching (MWAL) method. The crystallization of gypsum was investigated with regard to obtaining high-purity boric acid at different acid concentrations using microwave leaching, in which all of the calcium ions in the liquid phase were incorporated into the gypsum crystals. The optimum leaching efficiency for the CVAL and MVAL methods was 99.82% and 99.9% respectively.Boric acid, B(OH) Colemanite is a calcium borate mineral (theoretically, 50.8% B The dissolution rate increases with increasing temperature for colemanite in acetic acid Recently, microwave technology has been applied to a number of mineral processing areas such as microwave leaching of copper The interaction of dielectric materials with electromagnetic radiation in the microwave range results in energy absorbance. The ability of a material to absorb energy while in a microwave cavity is related to the loss tangent of the material. This depends on the relaxation times of the molecules in the material, which, in turn, depends on the nature of the functional groups and the volume of the molecule. The dielectric properties of a material are related to temperature, moisture content, density and material geometry In this study, the aim was to shorten the leaching time, to shorten the crystallization time of gypsum, to investigate the effects of leaching parameters, to compare the effects of temperature as the result of conventional heating methods and the microwave radiation heating method, to completely remove the gypsum, which reduces the purity of boric acid, from solution, to determine the parameters affecting the crystallization of gypsum which affect the efficiency of the separation of gypsum from the solution, to determine the effects of this parameter on the crystallization time of gypsum and the purity of boric acid, and to determine the optimum conditions for the microwave leaching process by which high-purity boric acid solution is obtained. The ground colemanite sample in this study was obtained from Bigadic Boron of Eti Mine, Turkey. The laboratory tests were carried out in DEFAM. The sieve analysis of the sample was performed by sieving. The conventional acid leaching test setup design is shown in The experimental setup used for the Microwave Leaching Process is shown in 50 The leaching (dissolution) efficiency was percent The results of the particle size analysis of the dried samples are given in When evaluating the effect of microwave power on boron oxide extraction by the MWAL method, microwave power values of 360–900 Experiments were carried out according to the conditions of the CVAL method. Tests were performed on CVAL to determine the effect of time on boron oxide extraction under typical conditions as follows. Acid concentration was 10%, stirring speed was 500 Experiments were conducted to determine the effect of the length of time of microwave irradiation on the leaching rate of boron oxide in MWAL. The typical conditions for MWAL were that microwave power was 720 The effects of leaching time on the solution temperature are shown in  The typical conditions for MWAL were that microwave power was 720 The typical conditions for MWAL were that microwave power was 720 Colemanite dissolved completely in hot sulfuric acid solutions under the optimum conditions. The leaching products were determined as being solid or liquid phase. Borate ions and calcium ions were detected in the liquid leaching product obtained by filtration, and gypsum crystals were determined in the solid product. Boric acid crystals were not observed in the solid leaching product. This is because boron oxide has high solubility at high temperatures, and only crystallizes at lower temperatures as its solubility is reduced. Kuskay and Bulutcu Colemanite reacts with sulfuric acid according to Eq. As a result of the reaction between calcium and sulfate ions, gypsum crystals formed according to Eq. Boric acid crystals formed in solution cooled to 35 The CVAL tests were conducted under typical conditions, as follows. The ratio of solid-to-liquid was 10%, the temperature was 80 X-ray diffraction analysis (Philips PW3710/1830) of leaching solid product of CVAL is given in SEM analysis of (FEI Quanta 400 MK2) samples of solid residue from CVAL leaching is given in The optimum conditions of MWAL were a ratio of solid to liquid of 10%, a temperature of 183 X-ray diffraction analysis of solid leaching product of MWAL is given in The SEM analysis of MWAL anhydride crystals is given in The effect of acid concentration on the extraction of boron oxide was investigated by single-stage MWAL and multi-stage MWAL methods. A leaching efficiency of 99.9% B The results of the multi-stage MWAL experiment are given in It was found that the calcium content of the liquid phase varied according to the leaching methods. The calcium contents of the liquid phase which were obtained by applying single stage MWAL, CVAL and multi stage MWAL methods at an acid concentration of 5% were measured as 3.365%, 2.690% and 2.231% Ca respectively ( In this study, the first option was preferred in order to decrease the time of the boric acid production process. It was determined that, as a result of an increase from 5% to 25% concentration of sulfuric acid, the pH of the solution of sulfuric acid was decreased from 1.21 to 0.36. The calcium content in the liquid phase was decreased by increasing acid concentration in both single stage MWAL and multi stage MWAL methods. The calcium content of the liquid phase obtained at an acid concentration of 25% was 1.083% Ca for the single stage MWAL method and 0.017% Ca for the multi stage MWAL method. The lowest calcium level was obtained from the multi stage MWAL method at 25% acid concentration. The liquid phase containing very low calcium content can be attributed to the formation of a supersaturated solution of gypsum. The supersaturated solution of gypsum can be defined as a solution containing more Ca The dissolution of colemanite and precipitation of gypsum crystals occurs simultaneously in acidic media In this study, colemanite mineral was leached with sulfuric acid solution at atmospheric pressure at laboratory scale to obtain high purity boric acid and a shorter process time. The leaching conditions of colemanite mineral in sulfuric acid solution were optimized using both conventional acid leaching (CVAL) and single stage and multi stage microwave leaching methods (MWAL). The optimum leaching efficiency of the CVAL method was 99.82%, under typical conditions where acid concentration was 10%, stirring speed was 500 The optimum leaching efficiency of the MVAL method was 99.9%, under typical conditions where microwave power was 720 A leaching efficiency of 99.82% was achieved in 40 In the multi-stage leaching method carried out at an acid concentration of 25%, the calcium content of the boric acid solution (the liquid phase) was 0.017%. The efficiency of the removal of calcium ions from the boric acid solution was 99%. The rate of crystallization increased with the pH of the solution. A very high increase in the leaching time was observed with an increase in the solid-to-liquid ratio in CVAL, but there was no significant increase in leaching time in MWAL when the solid-to-liquid ratio was increased. This means that the solid-to-liquid ratio of the leaching process can be as high as 30%, which increases the plant capacity. The cost of production of the plant will be reduced because of the increase in the plant capacity. The removal of calcium ions was investigated using single-stage and multi-stage microwave leaching methods. The calcium content of the liquid phase in single stage MWAL was higher than the calcium content of the liquid phase in multi-stage MWAL. The reason for this is that the formation of gypsum accelerates the rate of reaction in multi-stage MWAL. The optimum conditions for multi-stage microwave leaching were found to be a microwave power of 900 Maximum leaching efficiency was obtained by the conventional acid leaching method in 40 The author would like to thank Eti Mine Works General Management for the XRD and XRF analysis and for providing samples.