Continuous and discrete event simulations are often applied to study the behavior of systems with continuous and discrete flow, respectively. However, in real-life scenarios, both continuous and discrete flows can be observed within the same system. In such cases, discretization of a continuous flow system can allow modeling the system using discrete event simulation (DES) techniques. This paper presents the development of simulation scenarios to model the main transport system at an underground longwall coal mine in the Eastern US using DES. The goal of the simulation scenarios is to evaluate the impact of different stockpiling strategies and determine the capability of the system to meet long-term performance targets. Strategies to address system bottlenecks to meeting performance targets are evaluated to identify the most effective alternative.Mining operations typically involve the extraction of useful minerals either using surface mining methods or underground mining methods. Surface mining operations are generally more cost-effective than underground mining in terms of operating costs, but underground mining operations may have a reduced environmental impact. Both surface and underground mining operations require precise planning and scheduling. Simulation has often been applied to study underground mining systems during both the planning and operation phases, to optimize extraction sequences, model equipment performance and transport processes, optimize logistics and stockpiling, estimate ventilation requirements and many other tasks. Starting from the early 1990′s simulators were written in FORTRAN or Pascal or in simulation languages like GPSS At the mine level, underground mining systems may utilize a discrete system such as a continuous miner – shuttle car system, load-haul-dump to ore dump system or a network of belt conveyors. Transporting ore to the surface can be accomplished either using discrete systems (i.e. trucks or skips) or a continuous system through belt conveyors. Bunkers, i.e., buffer areas where the mined material is temporarily stockpiled, are also common in such systems to accommodate scheduled and unscheduled downtimes. Underground longwall mines are complex capital-intensive operations. The total underground capital equipment investment at the mine in this study exceeds $150 million while the mine produces about 5 million tons of coal per year. This paper presents the development of simulation scenarios to model the main transport system at an underground longwall coal mine in the Eastern US. The total underground capital equipment investment at the mine in this study exceeds $150 million while the mine produces about 5 million tons of coal per year. Transport systems need to accommodate production from both the high-performance longwall panels as well as the lower productivity continuous miner units used to develop the openings and infrastructure for each longwall panel. It should be noted that the only profitable unit is the longwall unit, while the continuous miner units are not economically self-sustaining operations. A typical layout of simulation scenarios included two production systems, the main belt conveyor system modeled here as three distinct belt conveyors, two underground bunkers and a skip facility used to transport the coal through a vertical shaft to the surface. Note that each of the conveyor belts consists of several interconnected segments with a total conveyance length to the order of 20 miles. The objective of the simulation was to determine the optimum size of the second bunker to minimize delays and eliminate related bottlenecks in production. The mine plans to utilize the results of this study and determine the optimum bunker size in terms of return on investment. A simple schematic of the simulation components is given in The simulation of mining operations, particularly using discrete event simulation (DES) has been well document in the literature. In some early work, Basu and Baafi The application of DES to study various aspects of mining systems is further studied in recently published research. Roumpos et al. Unplanned stops of various components of a mining system also affect the production rate. Asbjörnson As implied by the name, DES is used to study systems where the behavior can be represented by discrete events. However, in some cases, the system behavior is affected by both discrete and continuous events. For example, when the system shown in Fioroni et al. The above-mentioned studies discuss both modeling applications of discrete and continuous flow using different approaches. This paper contributes to the international literature as it models underground coal production and transport at a longwall operation. Although longwall mining and production from continuous miner units is typically depicted as a continuous process, operational parameters and constraints result in a discontinuous production system with small or larger time intervals of continuous production. For example, although the longwall shearer can produce a continuous flow of material while mining along the face, production must stop when the shearer reaches the end of the cut where it should be setup again to mine in the reverse direction. In addition, while a continuous miner can produce coal continuously, it will only do so when docked to a shuttle car. When the shuttle car fills up it needs to tram to the feeder-breaker, while the CM needs to stop production. Finally, due to ventilation and roof support constraints, a CM can mine for a specified length, and then it should back out of the cut to start a new cut at a different location to allow for roof support operations. In addition, even if it is assumed that material flow on the belt conveyors can be described as continuous after the material passes through two bunkers, the material will have to be skipped (i.e. transported discontinuously) to the surface with a rate of 25 tons every 80 s. As a result it was decided that a DES with adaptive control through feedback would better fit this production and transport sequence. In this paper an approach is proposed for simulating an underground mining operation where both continuous and discrete flow systems are utilized for material transport ( The first phase involves three steps: problem scope and objective definition, field data collection, and pseudo-code development for the simulation model. The scope of the problem and the objective to be achieved will help determine the critical components of the system that need to be included in the simulation model. For example, for an underground mine model, production units, belt conveyors, intermediate storage facilities, and mechanisms to transport coal from the underground mine to the surface should be included. Subsequently, data collection is necessary to gather information about all the system parameters and variables. For the underground mining model, data related to production rates, working hours, breakdown/delay times, set up times, etc., will need to be gathered. Simulation modeling requires representing system behavior with suitable probability distributions. Thus, the longer the observation period, the closer will the distributions represent the actual scenario. However, data collection can be time consuming and costly. Therefore, it is important to carefully determine the granularity of the data required and the frequency at which they must be collected. The last step with problem definition involves the development of a pseudo-code for the simulation model. Developing a flowchart to identify the material and information flows in the system to be simulated can be instrumental in formulating the pseudo-code to sequentially document all the steps that must be simulated. The activities involved with developing a simulation model for the system can be classified into two broad steps: construction of the simulation model, and pilot testing, verification and validation. In this research the Arena® simulation software is used to construct the simulation model. Arena® is preferred due to its powerful simulation engine, visual demonstration capabilities and analysis tools The schematic in The two intermediate storage units represent underground bunkers. Separate conveyor segments represent the belt conveyor used to transport coal from the production units to intermediate storage 1 (Bunker 1) through belt conveyor 1 and from there to intermediate storage 2 (Bunker 2) through belt conveyor 2. Finally, a skip facility is used to transport the coal through a vertical shaft to the surface. The operation of the production units and intermediate storage facilities depends on the status of the system downstream. Therefore, real-time feedback is required to provide status updates to upstream units of the underground mine. This is represented by the information flow arrows shown in  One of the main challenges of modeling mining operations is the continuous production and flow of raw coal from the production units. However, in discrete event simulation systems, such as in the Arena® software, the entities are generated as discrete units. Therefore, the continuously flowing coal must be represented as discrete objects, such as illustrated in Not all the time scheduled for production (scheduled time) may be available due to various system component breakdowns. Also, the system may not be fully utilized for production during the available time if bottlenecks are encountered such as due to intermediate storage capacity constraints. The relationships between calendar time, scheduled time, available time and production time are illustrated in The proposed methodology is applied to simulate the performance of an underground longwall coal mine in the Eastern US. Raw coal is transported using belt conveyor 1 from the LS and CMs to Bunker 1 (5,000 ton capacity) and then using belt conveyor 2 to Bunker 2 (1,000 ton capacity). Belt conveyor 3 is then used to transport the coal to the skip facility that hoists the material to the surface. Belt conveyor 1 has a carrying capacity of 3,500 tons/h and for the scenario studied it takes about 70 min to transport coal to Bunker 1. Belt conveyor 2 has a lower carrying capacity of 1,200 tons/h and the travel time on this section from Bunker 1 to Bunker 2 is 40 min. Belt conveyor 3 has the same carrying capacity as that of belt conveyor 2 but with a travel time of only 5 min between Bunker 2 and the skips. The hoisting capacity of the skip facility is also 1,200 tons/h. Each skip has a capacity of 25 tons and the maximum possible number of skip trips to the surface in 24 h is 1116. Note that the carrying capacity of belt conveyor 1 matches the expected production from the production units, while the capacity of belt conveyors 2 and 3 match the capacity of the skip facility. The difference in these capacities is managed by the available bunkers.  The main function of Bunker 2 is to store and deliver raw coal to the skips, in case of breakdowns or delays in any of the upstream units. Ideally, Bunker 2 should always be full of raw coal. Once there are breakdowns either in conveyor belt 2 or Bunker 1, Bunker 2 will continue to provide material to the skips through conveyor belt 3. Due to the small capacity of Bunker 2 long breakdowns in the upstream process will also affect skip productivity. If conveyor belt 3 or the skips breakdown, then a signal would be sent to stop conveyor belt 2. In that case, Bunker 1 will continue to accept raw coal until full. A more detailed flowchart that represents the material and information flows (feedback loops) in the model is included as a supplementary document. One of the main challenges of modeling mining operations is the combination of continuous (along the conveyors) and discrete (in the skips) flow of raw coal. This means that the continuous flow of coal needs to be represented as discrete entities in the DES model. If an entity is represented by a large quantity of coal, fewer entities will need to be generated per unit time, to represent the production rate of the LS and the CMs. This, however, may not accurately represent the continuous nature of the conveyed material. On the other hand, when a single entity represents a small quantity of raw coal the number of entities used in a DES model can influence the time and computational resources required for the simulation. Therefore, the most suitable conversion of continuous flow into discrete entities should be determined by considering this trade-off. In the underground mine the LS and CMs feed coal continuously to the belts at the hourly production rates shown in A triangular distribution was selected as the most appropriate way to represent the variation of the LS production output because the goodness of fit test applied to the production data resulted in a triangular distribution with parameters Given that one entity represents 12.5 tons of material, the values that will be used in the simulation model for the LS production entity inter-arrival times will be 3.75 × 12.5 = 46.88 s, 1.67 × 12.5 = 20.88 s and 2.7 × 12.5 = 33.75 s, respectively. This means that an entity will be created, on average, every 33.84 s when the following Arena® function is used: TRIA (20.88, 33.75, 46.88). Although the mine operates three shifts a day, seven days a week, the scheduled production time is only 325 days/year due to planned maintenance stops and other operational constraints. The available time after subtracting equipment breakdowns is about 318 days/year. Finally, actual production time is only 284 days/year as the production units are forced to stop when Bunker 1 fills up even if all the other components of the system are in full operation. Model verification was done by testing different sections of the simulation model and confirming that the behavior complies with the actual operations in the mine. For example, different segments of the conveyors were randomly disabled to simulate malfunctions and system behavior was observed. In addition, intermediate storage units were filled to capacity to examine if feedback is triggered to stop the flow of coal from the upstream section of the underground mine. This testing helped verify that material flows and information feedback loops are properly implemented in the simulation. To validate the model, the average production output (tons) was compared with the actual coal production from the mine. The difference between the simulation model generated average monthly coal production output and actual output (based on data from January 2016 to June 2017) was 1.7% confirming that the simulation model accurately reflects the actual system. Current production conditions were used to validate model performance. In this scenario, the capacities of Bunker 1 and 2 are set to 5,000 tons and 1,000 tons, respectively. Results indicate that the longwall shearer utilization reaches 53.7% and that the hoisting facility can process an average of 331 skip/shift. To increase the utilization of the longwall shearer, several scenarios were examined. A quick analysis revealed that the capacity of Bunker 2 can play a significant role in increasing the number of skips hoisted per shift and therefore increase the utilization of the shearer. The experimental design adopted in the study is presented in  Analysis of the trigger level for refilling Bunker 2 indicates that the 80% refill level results in better production performance compared to the 50% refill level, when considering a bunker size up to 8,000 tons. The refill level trigger does not seem to affect daily production after that. The average monthly production rate at 50% vs. 80% refill levels was statistically significant ( In this paper a number of simulation scenarios were developed for bunker size analysis of an underground coal mine that utilizes two bunkers to streamline production. A number of discrete event simulation models were developed in order to determine the optimal capacity for Bunker 2 with the intention to maximize coal production and to improve the utilization rate of the longwall shearer. For these scenarios, DES models were selected over continuous flow models as production from both the longwall shearer and the continuous miner units used for developing the longwall panel gateroads are essentially discrete production systems, where material may flow continuously during specific time intervals, and all of the excavated material needs to be discretely hoisted to the surface. Results show that for the particular system configuration, the daily production and longwall utilization increase when the capacity of Bunker 2 increases. In particular, longwall utilization and production rate increase up to a bunker capacity of 12,000 tons. Both productivity indices follow a bilinear curve with a higher increase rate up to 8,000 tons and lower increase rate from 8,000 to 12,000 tons. At 12,000 tons the longwall utilization as well as the mine production rate level off as other system limitations are encountered. These results can be utilized to increase the system efficiency by expanding the capacity of the existing bunker. This approach can also be used to study and optimize other production configurations for this mine as well as optimize production sequences at other similar mines. Future work can focus on simulating the effects of adjusting other components of this operation, such as expanding Bunker 1 and/or expanding the skip hoisting facility. One of the co-authors, Zach Agioutantis, had a financial interest with Coronado LLC when the project started. This work was supported by a grant from Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 