Major accident prevention policy (MAPP) Organisation Performance standards Hazard identification and assessment Documentation, safety report Management of change Systems of work Inventory management Emergency plans Investigation and reporting Periodic Review Improvement plans Hazard prevention, mitigation measures Mechanical integrity Safety critical equipment Staff selection and training Contractors Communications Competence Facility description Process description Flowsheets P&IDs Layout diagrams List of hazardous materials Location of hazardous materials in the plant and inventories (in process, storage) Process safety organisation diagram Task matrix of responsibility and accountability Communications protocol Internal communications External communications Shift change procedures Shift log Communications with contractors Job descriptions Selection criteria Training manual Training register Trainer qualifications Training assessment procedure Contractor selection criteria Record of contractor personnel safety induction and training Hazard register Previously conducted hazard and safety studies Safety report prepared for the site under a Major Hazard Facility regulation Safety critical equipment register Safety critical activity register Hazardous area classification diagrams Fire protection systems layout diagram Fire and Gas (F&G) detectors layout diagrams Emergency shutdown system (ESD) List of critical operating parameters, and operating limits List of relief devices and set points Pressure vessels register MOC procedure Register of changes carried out (hardware, software, procedures) Operating manual Preparation for maintenance PTW procedures Register of PTW forms Preventive maintenance program Records of preventive maintenance F&G detectors calibration records Records of interlocks function testing Fire protection system inspection and maintenance records Integrity inspection schedules Integrity inspection records Spare parts register Inventory management procedure Historic levels of inventory Licence conditions Site emergency response plan Pre-incident plans Records of emergency drills and exercises Reporting procedure and forms Record of actual incidents Investigation procedure Record of investigation carried out Record of close out of actions arising from investigations Documentation of performance standards for SMS procedures Key performance indicators (KPI) Record of monitoring performance against KPI Previous audit reports Documentation of closeout of previous audit actions    By what standards are we to assure that the integrity of a process facility is maintained through its life cycle? How do we know that we are actually achieving the standards in practice? Defining safety critical activities and setting performance standards for these activities provides the answer to the first question. Regular auditing of the SMS and comparing the audit findings against the performance standards answers the second question. In this chapter, we shall describe how performance standards can be set, and review the principles and methods of auditing process safety management systems. In All systems of control tend to slip in their effectiveness over time, as changes occur in the facility and in the organisation. If this deterioration is not detected and corrective actions taken, the SMS is no longer as effective in hazard control. It has been said “nothing rusts faster than a procedure”. Therefore, regular auditing of the system is necessary. A process facility, a subsidiary of a large corporation, stored and handled a number of hazardous materials. The site safety coordinator was an enthusiastic individual who ensured that the SMS procedures were followed effectively, and had implemented a number of improvements. The coordinator also organised regular internal audits. A mandatory independent audit of the facility, required as part of licensing conditions, was undertaken and the site was judged to be one of the best-managed sites. After that audit, the safety coordinator had moved on, and the position had not been filled for some time. No internal audits were conducted. By the time a new coordinator was appointed, the effectiveness of the procedures had deteriorated significantly. Two years later, the same auditor was invited to conduct another independent audit to comply with regulatory requirements. The auditor was disappointed that a well-managed site could be allowed to deteriorate so rapidly. Had the internal audits been conducted, the problems could have been identified and solved much earlier. There are few important lessons in the above example:  Systems do deteriorate over time due to changes Auditing is the best tool to identify the fall in standards and take corrective actions No performance standard was set in the SMS on the need for internal audits in between scheduled biennial regulatory audit. The blame does not rest with the facility management alone, but with the corporate management as well. Without the regulatory ‘stick’ to wield, some audits may not have been conducted at all. Systems should not be dependent on individuals. If this happens, then there is effectively no system in place.   Auditing applies to all aspects of SMS, from systems development, implementation and monitoring. Auditing applies to the entire life cycle of the facility through all the stages. Provisions for effective auditing should themselves form part of the SMS framework. Auditing is not external to the management system, but an integral part of it, though external parties may undertake the audit or audits from time to time. Without a set of performance standards (PS) and key performance indicators (KPI), an audit can only make general comments in relation to industry best practice, but will be unable to focus on specific remedial measures. An audit recommendation such as “Process Safety Management (PSM) performance must be improved” does not lead one anywhere. It is more important to ask “how well are we doing against industry best practice?” rather than, “have we complied with regulatory requirements?” which would follow as a matter of course, if industry best practice can be achieved. Where performance standards are set, the following issues are of relevance (Chia et al. 2004): fit for purpose easily measurable appropriate mixture of reactive (‘lag’) and proactive (‘lead’) indicators have been developed appropriately rationalised to a manageable set accepted by all stakeholders Safety culture in organisations spans a wide spectrum. On the one hand there is a superlative safety program combining process safety, OH&S, and behavioural sciences for human error minimisation, and at the other end, there is no check against non-compliance with codes and regulations. The range of safety cultures is illustrated in  In a survey of 100 companies following the introduction of OSHA Rule 1910.119 (  There are three basic areas of coverage of an audit for measuring safety performance (  Systems and procedures Plant and equipment People All the SMS elements described in  The principal objective of an SMS audit is  This principal objective leads to a number of activities:  Review the SMS for its completeness and suitability to control the hazards in the facility Review the adequacy of procedures developed to implement the SMS Verify that performance standards and key performance indicators have been developed for the procedures for measuring actual performance Examine how the procedures are actually being applied in practice, and their effectiveness Measure safety performance of systems and procedures, plant and equipment, and people Identify non-conformances of procedures in actual practice to expected practice Identify deviations from performance standards Identify corrective actions to close the deviations. It is essential that the corrective actions identify root causes of the deviations and address them, and not just the immediate causes. Implement corrective actions and close out. There are a number of direct and indirect benefits that result from a sound audit process.  Helps to identify problem areas, and areas of non-compliance and poor performance  Independent audits help to identify problems experienced by the operators, which might not have otherwise been communicated to the management Helps to set priorities on safety improvement measures Provides feedback to management on improvements to policies, systems and procedures Ensures continued compliance with regulatory requirements Provides assurance on the quality and integrity of process safety in the facility Reduces the potential for process incidents Provides input to quantitative risk analysis, if management factors need to be integrated into the analysis. Depending on the prevailing safety culture, this may be one way of demonstrating to a complacent but self-assured management that all is not well. An audit can be conducted at different levels, depending on the area of focus. The levels vary between organisations, but the general consensus for industry best practice is:  Audits at different levels need to conducted The frequency of audits at these levels would vary, with lower level audits conducted at intervals more frequent than higher level audits At each level of audit, documentation and feedback to the management is an essential requirement It is essential that the auditors are independent of specific activity being audited, if in-house audits are conducted At each higher level of audit, the findings from previous lower levels of audit and the completeness of closeout of actions arising needs to be covered   Audits to suit different needs of the organisation, and techniques of auditing are reviewed in  The technical audit reviews the design and construction standards of the equipment to ensure that the facility meets the corporate and industry standards, such as API or IP standards for the petroleum industry. The technical audit is initially undertaken at the design stage of the facility life cycle. For plants in the chemical process industry, this review is updated during the operational phase if there have been:  changes to the facility, as part of management of change (MOC) changes to operating conditions or feedstocks changes to codes and standards For oil and gas offshore facilities and upstream onshore facilities, this review is undertaken at fixed intervals (generally on a 5 year cycle) as the reservoir conditions may have changed significantly over that period ( The main areas covered are:  Compliance with codes and recommended practices (e.g.  Hazardous area classification Relief devices and flare capacity checks Equipment and piping capacities Operating limits for process variables and design limits of plant Different areas of the audit can be carried by respective discipline engineers or managers, after consensus agreement by audit team, and lead auditor. Repeat audits take the form of a gap analysis of changes and their impact on process safety. A mineral processing facility producing nickel uses solvent extraction to extract the desired metal from the ore leachate. The solvent extraction process uses ammonia as a reagent. The design consists of 3 × 100 tonne anhydrous ammonia tanks. The process safety standards in mineral processing plants, located close to the mine in remote locations, is not the same as one would expect in the chemical process industry, located close to population centres. The design contractor did not undertake a technical audit of the design. As a result, one important standard (anhydrous ammonia code) was not applied to the design (incompetence of the designer), and another standard (pressure piping code) had been incorrectly applied (Schedule 40 piping used instead of Schedule 80 piping). Fortunately, pre-commissioning checks were undertaken using a process safety specialist (appointed at the behest of the investment bank), who discovered a number of code non-conformances during the checks. The problem was rectified, but at considerable cost and commissioning delay.  This is an important audit, and forms a separate element in process safety management ( Pre-commissioning is a vulnerable phase, as there is high pressure on the project to commission the plant and start operating. Failure to undertake a proper audit at this stage could result in extensive delays during commissioning. Main features of the audit are:  Licences and approvals Safety critical equipment been installed in correct locations Loop testing of all control loops and shutdown loops, and interlocks function correctly All signs and notices in place All equipment and instruments are tagged Commissioning procedure in place and commissioning crew trained  Pressure testing/leak testing completed Rotating equipment checked for alignment and direction of rotation Hazardous area classification integrity intact (intrinsically safe barriers for terminations of all field instruments) Spades/blinds have been correctly installed for plant sections to be isolated, and spade pressure rating is compatible with line pressure rating Interfacing conflict between various vendor equipment/packages, other plants resolved Ergonomic issues are addressed All process documentation up to date The audit is conducted by an experienced senior person or team from outside the project, not subject to the same project pressures.   An industrial complex consisted of a number of integrated process plants. Over a period of time, the ownership of the plants was split among three different companies. The common effluent treatment facility was under separate management, but shared by all the plants on site. The effluent treatment plant's new owners also received waste streams from outside the complex. When one of the plants in the complex was planning an extension, the question of whether the existing effluent treatment plant would be able to treat the additional waste generated was initially ignored, as the entire attention was focused on the interfaces between existing plant and the new extension under the same ownership. This omission was discovered only when the proposal was submitted for the approval of the environmental authority, which raised a number of questions on the effluents generated and their treatment.  This audit mainly focuses on the physical condition of the plant and equipment, housekeeping standards, and spot checks on systems of work and practices of activities that are being carried out during the audit. The audit is conducted during the operational phase of the facility life cycle. This audit is useful in obtaining symptoms of problems in safety management, and carried out by auditors from another facility plant within the same organisation. Important points to note are:   Recognise that improving housekeeping in the plant to make it look good during the audit, and reverting back to where it was after the audit is self-deception. The person doing the audit may be a colleague. Do not take offence at adverse findings, but take them as constructive criticism. The same applies to the auditor - it is not a point scoring exercise against another plant. If the symptoms indicate that there could be problems in systems of work being implemented effectively, follow up with an investigation to ensure that corrective actions can be developed.  This is an informal audit involving personnel at all levels, generally carried out during the operational phase. The key aspect of the audit is to find answers for the following:  Do personnel have the right attitude and aptitude to process safety? Are the systems of work being correctly followed by personnel? Is there a tendency to take short-cuts? Is there effective communication between area operators and control room, and between operators during shift change? To what extent there is a sense of complacency towards process safety during day to day activities? A checklist of behavioural questions needs to be prepared as part of the audit. The audit outcome is a good reflection of the prevailing safety culture. Page (1992) reports on a successful behavioural audit implemented as the first level of audit, as part of the environmental management system. A number of case study examples on human factors and behavioural issues are provided by  Operational audit covers a check of local activities against local procedures. An auditor was invited by a process facility to undertake a process safety audit. The auditor being new to the facility, had to undergo a safety induction before being allowed access to the site. The induction was a standard requirement for all contractors who would work on the site. When it came to work methods and line breaking for maintenance, the safety coordinator conducting the induction A process plant stored 98% sulphuric acid in two horizontal tanks of 40 tonnes each, within a bunded (diked) area. The tank had a local level gauge and an overflow pipe that flowed into a low point sump. Should an overflow occur, the acid would be pumped from the sump using a portable diaphragm pump to the effluent treatment area, via a PVC pipe. The effluent treatment was about 200m away and the PVC pipework passed along two pipe bridges. The operators were trained in the procedures for spill handling, especially the need to pump the spill out of the dike without dilution, or if diluted, wait for it to cool down. Unfortunately not all the operators were aware of the violent heat of reaction when water is added to 98% sulphuric acid. On one occasion, when unloading from a bulk road tanker, an overflow occurred, as the level gauge was faulty, and the fault was not discovered until after the overflow. The operator thought that it would facilitate the pumping if he diluted the spill with water, and opened the water hose on top of the acid spill, and started pumping. The heat of reaction raised the temperature of the mixture above the design temperature of the PVC pipework, and acid started leaking from the pipework below the pipe bridges. Fortunately, no one was present on the road underneath the pipe bridges at that time, otherwise serious injury would have resulted. The management was aware of this hazard, and thought that it had trained all the operators, and that the operators knew what they were doing, but this was not the case. The main features of an operational audit are:  the SMS procedures are accepted as given. This is often the case in internal audits. However, an external auditor may not accept this and question the adequacy of the SMS. This takes the audit to a higher level (see an audit protocol checklist is developed before commencement of the audit. All aspects of the plant operation and maintenance are covered. all personnel are encouraged to speak openly to the auditor when questioned on the work methods. the activities on the plant are observed with respect to observance of the procedures, and personnel are interviewed and quizzed on the activities. the paperwork and documentation relating to the activities are reviewed. These may be a PTW form, a plant modification authorised by the management of change (MOC) procedure, or control room log book.  the causes of the gaps are identified by the auditor - inadequate training, lack of understanding of the procedure, attitudinal problem etc. This is important for developing corrective actions, which may not be confined to counselling and re-training, but goes deeper into management accountability as well. the competency of the auditors is critical. An oil company continued have minor problems in the bulk tanker load out of refined products and distribution to retail outlets. An operational audit conducted by the marketing and logistics department gave the operations a satisfactory safety performance rating. On one occasion, the bulk road tanker caught fire while discharging gasoline into underground tanks, and was gutted. One of the actions recommended by the investigation was that an operational safety audit be carried out, but this time, by an external auditor. The external auditor found that the procedures were of industry acceptable standard, but there were gaps in the practices. Further, it was also revealed that the logistics department did not have the engineering expertise to carry out an operational safety audit, and the procedure that handed over the responsibility to the logistics department was incorrect. It should have been done by a trained auditor from operations or engineering.  The specialist audit is one level higher than the operational audit, and overlaps the operational audit. It checks the local procedures against ‘good industry practice’. The specialist audit can also be undertaken at the commissioning stage to ensure that a robust SMS has been developed. This audit is conducted by a process safety specialist. The main questions to ask are:  Is there an SMS framework? Is it based on a recognised model? Does it cover all the elements of process safety? Have performance standards been developed for safety critical systems and activities? Have procedures been developed to cover all aspects of process safety? Have they been issued formally under a document control system? Are these procedures well written, comprehensive, and adequate? Does the system reflect ‘good industry practice’? What are the gaps, and what is required to close the gaps?    This is a still higher level audit, and overlaps the specialist audit and operational audit. It covers the implementation of SMS standards and procedures, and an assessment of its effectiveness. The main features of this audit are to evaluate the following:  SMS implementation strategy Process safety organisation for the facility Task matrix of responsibility and accountability System of training and training records Understanding of systems and procedures by personnel Systems of work as they are understood and practised Management of third party services Emergency response plan Records of emergency training and drills Safety critical equipment register Safety critical activities register Performance standards for safety critical equipment and activities and their appropriateness Process safety performance monitoring system and record keeping Key performance indicators for performance monitoring Gaps between PS and KPI and reasons for them (finding the causes is very important to develop root cause solutions) Condition of plant and equipment and an evaluation of ‘fitness for purpose’ A comprehensive SMS audit covers all the above levels, as well as regulatory compliance. How do we know that we are in compliance with regulatory requirements and licence conditions? Sometimes it may be necessary to undertake a targeted audit to check regulatory compliance. This audit is generally a subset of the overall SMS audit. The audit focuses on the following:  List of safety related regulations applicable to the operation of the facility Conditions of licence issued by the regulatory agency. The conditions may cover a range of issues including safety related hardware and SMS procedures. Compliance with the regulation and licence conditions and identification of non-conformances  Changes in the plant hardware and operating conditions over a period of time that may be different to the requirements of regulatory codes. While non-conformances raise some questions on the effectiveness of the SMS, achieving regulatory compliance alone does not provide the assurance as to the integrity of process safety. How do we know that equipment is fully decommissioned and does not contain hazardous materials, or would not create a hazardous situation? An audit is not normally undertaken for plant decommissioning, but is a necessary factor to ensure safety during the decommissioning process. Some of the features are:  Completeness of depressuring, draining, purging Physical isolation of equipment from any part of the operating plant, and from energy sources (e.g. electrical equipment) Complete removal of hazardous materials from decommissioned equipment (atmosphere testing of vessels and tanks) Removal of equipment from site or moth-balling Management of contamination (soil, groundwater etc.), and remediation Communication and awareness of status by all personnel Approvals required for offsite disposal of material A hydrocarbon solvent tank in a process plant was to be decommissioned. The tank was emptied, physically isolated by disconnecting all pipework, but was not decontaminated. The tank was left in a disused state for a few years, and no one was aware that the tank had contained solvent vapour. The tank base had meanwhile heavily corroded. During a partial plant turnaround, a heat exchanger tube bundle was removed to the repair yard, located close to the disused tank. Welding was to be conducted on the heat exchanger, and a PTW was issued, according to established practice. The contractor personnel started the hot work at the wrong end of the rather long heat exchanger. This end happened to be close to the disused tank. The spark ignited solvent vapour which flashed back to the tank causing an internal explosion. The tank took off like a rocket, fortunately missing an operating An audit has to be well structured. While discussion can be open-ended, it is always necessary to keep to a structure to ensure that no details are missed during an audit. An audit protocol provides such a structure. Experience has shown that an SMS framework is not necessarily suitable for the structure of an audit protocol, as there are considerable overlaps. Therefore, the audit structure, while following the SMS framework for convenience, must depart from this where necessary, especially to accommodate human factor issues permeating through every element of SMS. Further, each SMS element and related procedures can be audited at different levels as described in A number of structured checklists, with cross-references for the overlaps where appropriate, provides for a useful audit protocol. The advantages of a protocol are:  Different auditors can audit different elements or different plant areas of the facility using the same protocol, and hence consistency is achieved. The protocol preparation forces the auditor to think through the entire set of SMS elements, their implementation, monitoring and effectiveness, and prepares for the audit. It allows for management review of the protocol (if this is agreed upon), to enable the facility management to prepare for the audit. It minimises subjectivity, at the same time is flexible enough to allow an investigative approach. It is not a question of giving a score if the answer is ‘yes’ and zero otherwise. The protocol should cover the line of questioning if the answer is ‘no’. For example, take the question “Do you have a register of process interlocks, with their set points?” If the answer is ‘yes’, then the next question can be ‘Do you have a schedule for function testing of interlocks?”, and if the answer is ‘yes’ again, ask to see the schedule, and proof that the schedule is actually being observed. If the answer is ‘no’, then the next question modifies to, “How do you ensure function testing of the interlocks?” An SMS audit of a process facility consists of three major steps:  Facility inspection Review of documentation Interviews of personnel at all levels of the facility (operators, supervisors, engineers, department managers and site manager)  The SMS audit is elaborate and time consuming. It requires a review of a range of documents by the auditor, even before interviews with personnel. A list of documentation associated with each element of the SMS is given in Using the SMS elements described in Checklists should not be rigid. They evolve over a period of time, with the growth of knowledge and experience of people. Examples of checklist can be found in It is sad to read reports of accident investigations which state that only a month before the accident, an SMS audit gave the facility SMS in practice a clean bill of health.  The same can be said of SMS auditing. The facility is There are a number of requirements for a successful SMS audit, which may not be met in all instances. Some of these are highlighted below. It is essential that management commitment to safety is The auditor must be experienced enough to identify this single major issue, as it is the senior management commitment and leadership, or the lack of it, that flows down the management chain throughout the organisation. The auditor's experience is paramount in the successful outcome of an audit. Main requirements are:  Experience in process safety Development and implementation of SMS Learning as a co-auditor working with experienced lead auditors People skills (putting the auditee at ease, at the same time maintaining a sense of formality - do not make it casual) Investigative approach Ability to grasp the organisation's It is not a question of using a checklist and filling in the boxes, but the ability to identify the root cause of identified problems, and suggest effective solutions. The main purpose of the audit is identifying the gaps between procedures and practices, and gaps in the procedures compared to industry best practice. Therefore, the auditor should have a clear idea of what the standards of expectation are, so that deviations can be identified.  Once the PS for the procedures are defined, the KPIs can be developed as a natural sequence. Some KPIs related to systems of work are listed below to provide an indication to the reader for the development of KPIs.  Percentage of defective PTW forms in the number of forms audited Ratio of modifications carried out with proper MOC authorisation to total number of changes carried out Ratio of the number of interlocks actually function tested to number that should be tested according to schedule Percentage of number of interlocks that failed the function test Percentage of preventive maintenance items incomplete in a given period KPIs can thus be developed for all safety critical systems and activities. One area where audit effectiveness could be undermined is when the root cause of a problem is not identified. This is illustrated by the following example. Here is an example from an audit. The auditor is an independent specialist and the auditee is the maintenance manager.  Auditee shows the schedule. It shows quarterly testing requirements.  The problem is shifted to the instruments maintenance section. If the auditor stops here, and makes a recommendation for function testing, the root cause is missed completely. This is a band-aid solution and the problem is bound to recur. Let us continue.  The plot thickens. The stop line does not end with the instruments maintenance section. It goes up the line to the maintenance manager.   By using a yes/no checklist alone, this investigation could not have been done effectively. If the problem is lack of site management commitment, then the question arises as to why this was missed in the corporate internal audits. It is useful to rotate the auditors in internal audits, so that any problem can be identified with a ‘fresh pair of eyes’ each time. If the same plant personnel do the audit, they may tend to skip over some items as having been satisfactory during the previous audit. One area where many organisations fail is in following up audit recommendations and closing them out. We have seen in many cases, rather frustratingly, that the actions from previous one or two audits are still outstanding when the next audit is undertaken. In order for an audit to produce positive outcomes in improving the SMS in practice, the following points should be observed:  Set target completion dates and responsibilities for all the action items arising from the audit. Set a PS for the task of closeout of audit actions. This can be, say, 90% of the actions shall be closed out be the target date, and the rest within 2 months after the target date. Set a KPI for closeout of actions as the percentage of actions completed by target date. Ensure that this KPI is reported by the safety coordinator in the monthly reports to senior management. Senior management should act on KPIs not meeting performance standards. In In this chapter, different types of audits to suit the facility life cycle stage have been described. Underlying all the audits is the development of a proper audit The requirements of a successful audit have been described. The competency of the auditor, and the leadership and commitment of the management are the twin arms of a successful audit. The importance of identifying root causes to non-conformances and deviations is stressed, without which, the problems are most likely to recur. The need to implement corrective actions arising from the audits within an agreed time frame is addressed. Some audit experiences have been shared in the form of examples.