CO2 removal from exhaust gasses from burning of fossil fuels is a political issue. If undertaken on a large scale, enormous amounts of carbon dioxide will have to be taken care of. This paper investigates how mechanical activation of olivine and other Ca or Mg containing silicates can increase the mineral’s reactivity. Tests by grinding in a planetary mill have been done to investigate the effects of mechanical activation and other surface changes. The reactivity towards HCl and CO2 has been determined as a function of grinding variables. Prolonged dry milling of olivine resulted in highly aggregated products, which were more reactive with respect to dissolution in acid than their respective BET surface areas would suggest. The initial breaking of bonds appears to give more reactivity on an energy usage basis than longer time activation. Most mechanical activation testwork so far has been carried out in batch mode. The result is diminishing effect of activation with increased grinding time. Continuous grinding and simultaneous reaction with some sort of classification may offer a chance of removing reaction products as soon as they are formed, giving a more energy effective process.CO A suited mineral for test purposes is the magnesium rich variety of olivine: forsterite. The simplified reaction between Mg-rich olivine and CO The direct reaction is also a technical possibility: Natural reactions require geological time spans. For industrial purposes alternatives have to be found. Testwork has been done with silicates containing magnesium. Both direct reaction with CO The Slovak researchers Tkáčová and Baláž, have probably done more than anybody else to reap industrial benefits from mechanical activation and their monographs Many experiments show that increasing milling time gives decreasing crystallinity, and this was found as increased amorphization from X-ray. (Baláž Forsterite is the simplest magnesium silicate available and therefore olivine foundry sand of the qualities AFS 50 and AFS 80 provided by North Cape Minerals from the dunite deposit at Åheim in Western Norway has been used in the current tests. X-ray diffraction shows that the sample contains 95% forsterite, the rest is chlorite and enstatite, chromite and traces of hornblende. AFS 50 had a specific surface area of 0.47 Mechanical activation is a result of lattice disturbance of a mineral surface during grinding. A significant disturbance was in this case achieved by using a planetary mono mill, with a 250 The specific surface area was measured using the BET method with N The reduction of crystallinity due to milling can be calculated from X-ray diffraction analysis of the olivine samples (Ohlberg and Strickler In most tests 0.50 The percentage of dissolved olivine was calculated for 30 The choice of milling parameters and other factors were chosen to obtain maximum difference in crystallinity as observed from XRD diffractograms and specific surface areas in order to get as wide variation in reactivity as possible. A series of batches were run where the dry activated products were exposed to gaseous carbon dioxide either during or after activation. These experiments were conducted using the mill chamber as a reactor utilising a special gas lid equipped with two valves, thus facilitating pressurisation of the chamber. Each batch was exposed to pure carbon dioxide gas by direct pressurisation of the filled mill chamber without previous flushing. An additional carbon dioxide pressure of 5.0 Three different combinations of mechanical activation and carbon dioxide exposure were studied; (1) exposure of the original olivine concentrate without any previous size reduction or mechanical activation, (2) exposure after mechanical activation, and (3) exposure during mechanical activation. The first combination involved placing the original concentrate and the grinding balls in the mill chamber before the gas lid was attached and the chamber was pressurised. Following 30 In addition to the primary or initial comminution effects, the size distribution and the specific surface of the activated products will also depend on secondary processes like aggregation and agglomeration (Juhász The results from the XRD analysis show a considerable reduction in peak height and signal to noise ratio with increasing activation time. (  Generally the materials with the highest amount of fines should have been the most reactive and given the highest increase in pH. The opposite was found, and the wet milled materials (graph C in The specific surface area, The amount of carbon dioxide sequestrated during the carbonation experiments was calculated from the concentrations of total carbon in the final product as determined by the LECO analysis. The calculations were based upon the following assumptions: (1) the original feed material contained no carbon, (2) the number of moles of carbon dioxide sequestrated during the carbonation experiments can be expressed by the following equation: The gas conversion ratio, that is, the ratio between the amount of carbon dioxide that has been sequestrated and the amount initially present in the gas phase, can be defined as: The results from the total carbon analysis are presented in If ever mechanically activated minerals have to become attractive sinks or reactants for CO Two aspects of reactivity between CO  A natural step further in order to minimize energy use, would be to introduce an (air)/CO Mechanical activation of olivine increases the specific bulk reaction rate [% dissolved after 30 Direct contact between carbon dioxide and olivine in a dry mill gives more efficient reaction possibilities than separate grinding and then mixing. It is therefore a possibility that conventional grinding in a tumbling mill in a CO