This paper presents the results from an experimental program conducted to assess the cracking behavior of reinforced concrete beam-column connections cast with engineered cementitious composites (ECC). Reversed cyclic loading tests in conjunction with acoustic emission (AE) monitoring were completed on all specimens till failure. Four ECC mixtures containing four different types of fibers along with a control conventional concrete (CC) mixture were tested. The AE data obtained from all tests were filtered and analyzed to identify and evaluate the crack growth in all beam-column connections. First, the changes in the AE parameters such as signal amplitudes, number of hits, and cumulative signal strength were considered. Then, additional b-value and intensity analyses on both signal amplitude and strength were performed to develop three further AE parameters including b-value, historic index (H (t)), and severity (Sr
                     ). The impact of fibers type and sensor location on the aforementioned AE parameters was examined. The AE analysis completed in this study led to the identification of the first cracks prior to their visual observation, regardless of fibers type and/or sensor location. The studied AE parameters were highly correlated to the process of crack propagation in all specimens until failure. The results also showed that varying the types of fibers in ECC yielded non-significant effect on the AE signal characteristics (in terms of signal amplitudes) throughout the tests. The intensity analysis parameters (H (t) and Sr
                     ) were eventually used to generate a damage classification chart to classify the stages of first crack and maximum load in the tested specimens.Engineered cementitious composites (ECC) are class of high performance fiber-reinforced concrete first introduced in the 1990s by Victor Li The performance of ECC under flexural and/or tensile loads is dependent on the interactions between the fibers and cement matrix as well as the properties of the fiber-to-matrix slip. Consequently, the geometry/type of fibers and matrix characteristics both affect the cracking behavior of ECC Acoustic emission (AE) monitoring is a powerful tool for damage detection and quantification of concrete under different damage and loading mechanisms. The use of AE monitoring in a variety of experimental investigations enabled the characterization of crack growth and identifications of micro- and macro-cracks in both plain and reinforced concrete Limited research has involved the application of AE analysis for evaluating the cracking behavior of ECC in general. For example, AE analysis of signal amplitude and peak frequency was completed to assess the crack development in strain-hardening cement-based composites (SHCC) containing PVA fibers under direct tensile and flexural tests The purpose of this investigation was to utilize the AE monitoring to better understand the process of crack development in ECC reinforced beam-column connections under reversed cyclic loading conditions. The effect of incorporating different geometries and types of fibers on the cracking behavior of ECC and the associated AE parameters was examined in this study. In addition, the study evaluates the effectiveness of AE analysis methodologies such as the b-value and intensity analyses for the quantitative assessment of damage in ECC. The impact of sensor locations on the recorded AE data is also investigated in this research. This research ultimately aims to exploit the intensity analysis of signal strength to develop damage characterization tools to characterize different stages of damage in ECC reinforced beam-column connections subjected to reversed cyclic loading. AE monitoring has been utilized in various investigations to characterize different cracking mechanisms in concrete structures mostly made with normal concrete In this study, a total of five reinforced concrete beam-column connections were constructed and tested. These connections were cast with four ECC mixtures incorporating four variable types of fibers and a control normal concrete (NC) mixture. This control NC mixture was designed to have a comparable compressive strength to those of the ECC mixtures. This mixture was added to the investigation to give a clear picture about the AE signals resulted from ECC mixtures compared to the relatively known AE behavior of NC mixtures with comparable compressive strength. The four ECC mixtures were designed with a constant volume of fibers of 2%. Type GU Canadian Portland cement with a specific gravity of 3.15 conforming to ASTM Type I The five tested beam-column specimens were designed to fail in flexure according to the CSA Throughout the cyclic load tests, the AE signals were continuously acquired via three attached AE sensors (each beam-column specimen) having an integral preamplifier (R6I-AST) (Physical The raw AE data were filtered after the conclusion of all tests to minimize the noise and/or irrelevant signals. More specifically, an amplitude-duration-based filter (Swansong II filter) was performed on the AE data attained from all tests. This filtering process has successfully been used to filter the AE signals obtained from various experimental investigations dealing with similar AE monitoring in concrete structures (For example: A number of AE parameters were analyzed in this paper for the aim of damage assessment of all tested specimens. First, the traditional AE parameters including signal amplitudes, number of hits, and cumulative signal strength (CSS) were considered. Then, a b-value analysis was completed on the AE signal amplitudes and number of hits data in order to create an additional parameter called b-value. This analysis uses the amplitude/number of hits to develop an additional parameter (b-value). This parameter can then be exploited to indicate the changes of AE events to represent the level of damage (which is the crack development in this study). The b-value analysis has successfully been implemented in previous research involving AE monitoring in concrete structures (Such as: In addition to the b-value analysis, an intensity analysis was performed on the AE signal strength data obtained from all tested specimens. This analysis resulted in the development of two other additional AE parameters including historic index ( The severity represents the average value of signal strength of a The values of the constants ( The constant     In contrast, the value of the constant  The analysis of the changes in the AE parameters including the number of hits, CSS, The variations of the AE parameters in After detecting the first crack in ECC-PVA12, the AE parameters shown in The magnitudes of the AE parameters were obtained at the maximum load stage of all specimens and are also shown in The study involved testing one NC and four ECC mixtures under the same testing protocol for the purpose of comparison. The results shown in On the other hand, the values of the average signal amplitudes of the signals recorded at the times of first crack detection and maximum load of all specimens are compared in The results of the aforementioned AE parameters at the stages of first crack and maximum load acquired from three sensors per each specimen are compared in The analysis of the AE parameters discussed in the previous sections indicated their direct correlation with the extent of damage in the tested specimens. In particular, the intensity analysis parameters ( AE analysis was utilized in this study to assess the cracking behavior of ECC reinforced beam-column connections subjected to reversed cyclic loading. A total of four ECC specimens containing four various types of fibers along with a reference NC specimen were tested herein. The AE signals released during the reversed cyclic load tests were continuously recorded by three attached AE sensors. Following these tests, the AE analysis was conducted and compared with the results of crack development of all tested specimens until failure. This AE analysis led to the following main findings: The first crack developed at the beam-column interface was detected in all tested specimens prior to its visual identification throughout the tests. The detection of the first crack was accompanied with a visible slope change in the number of hits, CSS, and An overall increase in the number of hits, CSS, In spite of their comparable compressive strengths, the ECC specimens exhibited noticeably higher average tensile strength, first and maximum loads, and number of cracks than those of the NC specimen. This observation was also associated with higher AE activities (in terms of higher average number of hits, CSS, The average signal amplitudes of all specimens at the first crack detection were slightly lower than those at the maximum load stage. The signals recorded in the NC specimen demonstrated slightly higher average amplitudes than those of all the ECCs at both first crack and maximum load stages. In contrast, the use of different types of fibers in ECC showed no significant influence on the average signal amplitudes throughout the tests. By comparing the values of the AE parameters from different sensors in the same specimen, it was found that increasing the distance between the source of AE and the sensor led to a decline in the signal amplitude, number of hits, CSS, The outcomes of the intensity analysis were utilized to develop a damage classification chart to correlate the intensity analysis parameters The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors would like to acknowledge the NSERC CRD for sponsoring this work as a part of a large research project.