Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is caused by mutations in the ABCC6 gene, which encodes a putative efflux transporter, ABCC6. The zebrafish (Danio rerio) has two ABCC6-related sequences. To study the function of abcc6 during zebrafish development, the mRNA expression levels were measured using RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. The abcc6a showed a relatively high level of expression at 5 days post-fertilization (d.p.f.) and the expression was specific to the Kupffer's vesicles. The abcc6b expression was evident at 6hours post-fertilization (h.p.f.) and remained high up to 8 d.p.f., corresponding to embryonic kidney proximal tubules. Morpholinos were designed to both genes to prevent pre-mRNA splicing and block translation. Injection of the abcc6a morpholinos into 1–4 cell zebrafish embryos decreased gene expression by 54–81%, and induced a phenotype, pericardial edema and curled tail associated with death at around 8 d.p.f. Microinjecting zebrafish embryos with full-length mouse Abcc6 mRNA together with the morpholino completely rescued this phenotype. No phenotypic changes were observed when the abcc6b gene morpholino was injected into embryos with knock-down efficiency of 100%. These results suggest that abcc6a is an essential gene for normal zebrafish development and provide insight into the function of ABCC6, the gene mutated in PXE.hours and days post-fertilization, respectively morpholino pseudoxanthoma elasticum standard control morpholino Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a heritable disease characterized by ectopic mineralization of connective tissues, with clinical manifestations primarily in the skin, the eyes, and the blood vessels (for review, see We have previously developed an As an alternative model system to study ABCC6 function, we have initiated work on the zebrafish ( The presence of two The We performed a phylogenetic analysis to determine the relationship between zebrafish abcc6 and the other members of the ABCC subfamily, including ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCC3, and ABCC10 proteins, by constructing a neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree ( Zebrafish embryos were collected during the first 8 days of development and To determine the spatial expression of To determine whether the zebrafish The consequences of the “knock-down” of To examine the specificity of the effects of morpholino “knock-down”, mRNA rescue experiments were performed. In these experiments, full-length mouse A splice donor site morpholino was designed to target the The human In this study, a RT-PCR method was established to measure Although the It should also be noted that PXE is an autosomal recessive disease, although heterozygous carriers of a mutation in one of the In summary, this study has provided novel insight into the role of the The Ensembl database was searched for human The genomic sequences of Wild-type zebrafish were maintained under standard conditions at 28.5 Morpholino oligonucleotides were obtained from Gene Tools, LLC (Corvalis, OR). The morpholino oligomer target sequences were from 5′ to 3′, as follows (Brackets around morpholino sequences, exonic sequences in capital letters, and intronic sequences in lower case letters):  CTCAGGACCAGACGAGTGA[(ATG)GATACCTTTTGCAGTCTAAGTG]  AGATCCTCTTCTGGTGGTT[CAGCGGgtaggcaattaaaatgatt]ttgaatacta  GCAACAGAGATTGG[AGAGAAGgtgcataatatggattag]tttttatgtat Standard control morpholino (antisense) (scMO): CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA Injection of the morpholinos (22.5 Zebrafish embryos were collected 0 and 6 hours and 1–8 days post-fertilization. Embryos were disintegrated by passing through a 20-G needle, and total RNA was prepared using TRizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). To remove contaminating genomic DNA, RNase-free DNase I digestion was carried out (Fisher Scientific, St Louis, MO). One microgram of total RNA was reverse transcribed using Superscript III First-Strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Controls were performed by omitting the reverse transcriptase enzyme. All cDNAs were stored at -20  The efficiency of the splice site morpholinos was monitored by analysis of splicing using PCR amplification of  Capped, full-length mouse Statistical analyses were conducted using SAS 9.2 (SAS Institute, Gary, NC). Risk differences and 5% confidence intervals were calculated between We thank HsingYin Liu and Reid Oldenburg for technical assistance; Terry Hyslop and Jocelyn Andrel (Division of Biostatistics, Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Thomas Jefferson University), and GianPaolo Guercio and Carol Kelly for help in the article preparation. These studies were supported by DHHS, NIH/NIAMS grants R01 AR28450 and R01 AR55225 (to JU), by OTKA NI-68950 of Hungary (to AV), and by the University of Virginia (to CT and BT).