This paper presents a numerical study of the particle flow and sieving behaviour of a sieve bend/low head screen combination in coal preparation. The particle flow is simulated by discrete element method while the water flow on the sieve bend is modelled by computational fluid dynamics. The effects of operational conditions are investigated by a series of controlled numerical experiments. The particle flow on the screen is analysed in terms of the velocity field, particle spatial distribution and residence time, while the sieving behaviour is analysed in terms of the overall percentage passing and percentage passing distribution along the screen. For the sieve bend, a large amount of water with slow velocity is preferable for overcoming cohesion between particles and controlling particle velocities, which can improve the percentage passing. For the low head screen, increasing the incline angle and the vibration amplitude in the horizontal direction can increase the throughput while maintaining the percentage passing.Screening or sieving is an important unit operation for the separation of particles according to their sizes ( Although screening is a traditional industrial process, most of the mathematical models of screening processes currently in use are phenomenological models ( The insight into understanding the complex screening process requires that studies be carried out on a particle scale. While this is often difficult to realise by the existing experimental techniques, numerical simulation based on the so-called Discrete Element Method (DEM) is an effective way to perform such studies. DEM has been applied in the study of particle flow in various industrial processes and is shown to be very useful in understanding the fundamentals of the processes ( The particle motion is modelled by DEM, which uses an explicit numerical scheme to trace the motion of individual particles according to their interaction with each other ( The particle–wall interactions are also calculated by the above equations, where a wall can be assumed to be a surface of infinite curvature, i.e.,  The second term of the torque in Eq. The flow of water on the sieve bend is modelled in two dimensions with some simplifications. Consider the fluid flow on a horizontal porous deck, flowing from the left to right in two dimensions as shown in In the simulations, different water flow fields can be obtained by setting the initial water level Scaled-down geometries of screens are used in the simulations to reduce the computational effort, which are shown in It should be noted that the scale-down model and some of the above treatments may not fully represent the reality. This is because the limitation of our current knowledge and a full scale model is beyond the current computing capacity. Nevertheless, the current approach can be considered as the first attempt to model such a complicated industrial process. The results are useful for better understanding of the process, if not for direct application. A simulation begins by discharging the mixture of particles from the feed end, with a certain size distribution and feed rate. The particles that reach the mesh will be either sieved or flow along the screen to the discharge end. Their movement details are recorded. The data are monitored to determine if a macroscopically steady state is achieved, at which point the inlet flow rate (feeding rate) equals to the outlet flow rate (which is the sum of the flow rates of the underflow and overflow) for each size group of particles. Only the data collected at the steady state will be used in the present analysis. To study the effect of water flow, different water flow fields are used in the DEM simulations. Here, the initial water level at the feed end and the velocity of the water flow parallel to the bend are considered.     The effect of vibration frequency is similar to that of vibration amplitude, which can be seen from Besides the drain rate, the production rate is another performance parameter to be considered in practice. To reduce the computational effort, the effect of the feed rate has not been studied for every operational condition. Instead, the residence time of particles in the overflow for each case with the original feed rate is analysed. The residence time indicates how fast particles are handled by the screen and is related to the production rate. As shown from A DEM model has been developed to simulate the dewatering and screening process of a sieve bend and low head screen combination used in coal preparation. The model has been used to examine how the sieving performance is affected by the key operational variables such as the water flow and vibration conditions. Notably, the model enables us to investigate the screening process on a particle scale, which leads to a better understanding and optimisation of the sieving process. A series of controlled numerical experiments have been carried out using the model, and the key findings from the present study are as follows. It is confirmed that particle velocity along a screen plays an important role in governing the sieving performance, as established in our previous DEM study ( On the low head screen, the percentage passing can be increased by decreasing the overall vibration frequency and amplitude and increasing the angle of inclination. However, at very low frequency and/or amplitude, the screening process may be choked. Using a high vibration amplitude along the horizontal direction and low vibration amplitude along the vertical direction can overcome this problem. A dam may entrap particles and enhance segregation but the percentage passing is low near a dam because of the formation of a thick particle bed. The throughput can be represented by the residence time of particles on the low head screen. Increasing either the vibration amplitude or frequency or the angle of inclination decreases the residence time, enhancing the throughput. Increasing the angle of inclination and vibration amplitude in the horizontal direction are two possible methods for obtaining a good sieving performance and high throughput in the low head screen. The authors are grateful to the Australian Research Council and BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance for the financial support, and Mr. Ian Brake for helpful discussion.