I refer to the recently published paper: A. Tuncuk, V. Stazi, A. Akcil, E.Y. Yazici, H. Deveci, Aqueous metal recovery techniques from e-scrap: Hydrometallurgy in recycling, Minerals Engineering, 25 (2012) 28–37. On page 31 in this paper it is stated that: “Pyrometallurgical processes can be deemed potentially suitable for the treatment of WEEE in that organic constituents can partially/wholly supplant coke as fuel and reducing agent (Hagelüken, 2006a; Cui and Zhang, 2008). However, they are energy intensive and high-cost processes with their particular requirement for high grade (rich in copper and precious metals) feed. Halogenated flame retardants used in PCBs, which lead to the formation of dioxins and furans, volatile metals and dust may present environmental problems and, hence, off-gas treatment is prerequisite (Hagelüken, 2006b).” In view of ensuring that a balanced and factually correct view prevails with regards to a pyro- vis-à-vis hydrometallurgy recovery route for WEEE, could the authors please: Provide a detailed Energy balance to verify their statement by taking all aspects into consideration i.e. the embodied energy all reagents to recover all elements, extractants (e.g. SX), and materials used, the primary electrowinning energy to recover all metals and materials from solution, treatment and costs of residues, the destination of plastics and contained metals, flame retardants, fillers, among others. Thus use the same input to compare both and the same 40 or so elements as final products, or whichever selection, to ensure the comparison is fair. By the way the feed does not need to be rich in copper (an incorrect statement). Repeat the above using an Exergy analysis, which incorporates the entropy change of elements going into dilute solutions and back to compounds/metals during EW etc. to compare the Exergy flow for both types of processing taking into consideration all >40 elements from e-scrap. Please include a detailed CAPEX and OPEX comparison to verify the statements made. Please explain what happens to the contaminated e-waste scrap after leaching, as leaching will most surely not recovery all elements from the circuit board, which pyrometallurgy does. Once the authors have done the above, could they please revisit the statement that “… Kind regards Prof. Markus A. Reuter Director: Technology Management, Outotec, Finland