Ferric ions were efficiently removed from HCl solutions using Amberlite XAD-7 resin impregnated with trioctylphosphine oxide (Cyanex 921). Iron was removed under the form HFeCl4 through direct binding on the resin or by extraction with Cyanex 921 involving a solvation mechanism. High concentrations of HCl and intermediary extractant loadings were required for maximum sorption efficiency and rationale use of the extractant. At intermediary extractant loading (in the range 300–450 mg Cyanex 921 g−1) the maximum sorption capacity increased with extractant loading. Maximum sorption capacity slightly increased with temperature, the reaction is endothermic and the enthalpy change was found close to −30.8 kJ mol−1. Sorption isotherms were fitted with the Langmuir equation and maximum sorption capacity reached values as high as 20–22 mg Fe g−1 in 3 M HCl solutions. Despite the good fit of experimental data with the pseudo second-order rate equation, sorption kinetics was controlled by the resistance to intraparticle diffusion. The intraparticle diffusion coefficient (D
                     e) varying in the range 1.2×10−11–4.7×10−10 m2 min−1 was found to increase with metal concentration and with temperature, while varying the extractant loading it reached a maximum at a loading close to 453 mg Cyanex 921 g−1. The desorption of Fe(III) can be achieved using 0.1 M solutions of nitric acid, sulfuric acid, sodium sulfate and even water, maintaining high efficiencies for sorption and desorption for at least 5 cycles.The regulations in a number of countries are imposing the recovery of valuable materials from waste before the material can be disposed of. The recovery and the recycling of metals from secondary resources (i.e., waste material, used catalysts and batteries and so on) is thus a key point for a sustainable growth. Two ways are usually cited for the recovery of metals from waste materials: the wet route (hydrometallurgy) and the dry route (pyrometallurgy) ( This work is part of a series of studies dealing with the immobilization of Cyanex 921 (trioctyl phosphine oxide, TOPO) in Amberlite XAD-7 resin for the preparation of sorbents tailored for Zn(II) ( Amberlite XAD-7 was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (Saint-Louis, U.S.A.). This is a polyacrylic acid ester type resin ([CH Cyanex 921 was supplied by Cytec (Canada) in the form of a white solid, with higher solubility in aromatic diluents than aliphatic solvents; it is the trioctyl phosphine oxide extractant (TOPO). The chemical structure is (C Other reagents (salts, acids…) were analytical grade and supplied by KEM (Mexico). Standard metal solutions were supplied by Perkin Elmer (U.S.A.). In the present work the extractant was immobilized on the resin by a physical technique. Different processes may be used for the physical impregnation of the resin including (i) the wet method, (ii) the dry method, (iii) the impregnation in the presence of a modifying agent, or (iv) the dynamic method ( The amount of extractant immobilized on the resin ( The experimental procedure allowed the preparation of EIR containing 28 mg extractant g Fe(III) solutions were prepared in HCl solutions of different concentrations (0.5–8 M) with metal concentrations ranging between 20 and 150 mg Fe L Several sorption kinetic experiments were performed by contact under agitation of a fixed amount of EIR (loading in the range 115–575 mg extractant g For the study of Fe(III) desorption, an amount of 100 mg of EIR (extractant loading: 453 mg extractant g A series of EIR loaded with increasing amounts of Cyanex 921 has been prepared and tested for the recovery of Fe(III) (C At low Cyanex 921 loading (below 100 mg g The efficiency of sorption was improved when increasing HCl concentration and Cyanex 921 loading as shown in In order to take into account the ionic strength influence, these formation constants were determined as combined constants as a function of complex concentrations and chloride activity: In this case, as a first approximation, the authors considered the ratio of activity coefficients of consecutive iron chloro-complexes ( The recovery of Fe(III) by extractant-free resin may be explained by several hypotheses including an interaction between HCl and carbonyl group of the resin (polyacrylic acid ester, [CH In the case of XAD-7 resin, similar behavior can be expected: HCl is extracted by the resin through interaction of oxygen of polyacrylic matrix ( Where R and RHCl represent the resin under the neutral form and loaded with HCl, respectively. The predominant form of the resin depends on HCl concentration in the solution: however, it appears difficult obtaining the equilibrium constants due to the complexity in quantifying the amount of HCl adsorbed on the resin. Indeed, the presence of HCl in the aqueous phase filling the pores of the resin makes the differentiation of the two types of acids difficult (i.e., sorbed and immobilized in the aqueous phase). Different reactions may be involved in Fe(III) extraction by the free-extractant resin, depending on the distribution of Fe(III) species (predominant species) ( When HCl concentration reaches 8 M, FeCl This is probably between 7 M and 8 M concentrations that the change in the predominance of R and RHCl can be observed. Considering now the extraction of Fe(III) with the resin impregnated with Cyanex 921 ( When HCl concentration is 2 M, the neutral species (FeCl With the objective of identifying the number of molecules of Cyanex 921 involved in the extraction process, the method of slope analysis was used by plotting (in log–log format) the distribution ratio ( For low concentrations of Cyanex 921 (i.e., For higher Cyanex 921 loadings ( For concentrations ranging between 2 M and 8 M, the predominant species is FeCl For HCl concentration increasing (above 3 M) the slope progressively decreased; probably due to an increased contribution of the polymer matrix of the resin in the removal of Fe(III) (according to Eq. In order to confirm these hypotheses, the distribution ratio was plotted (log–log plot) against the activity of HCl ( On the other hand, the extraction of HCl by Cyanex 921 is a secondary reaction that may significantly impact the extraction of metal ions in HCl solutions (due to the competitor effect they may impart). Various studies in liquid–liquid extraction have shown the extraction of HCl by solvating extractants. Unfortunately, there is no literature available on the equilibrium constants regarding the extraction of HCl by EIRs. However, as a first approximation for HCl extraction by EIRs systems, HCl extraction studies have been performed using Cyanex 921 without solvent, assuming that the extractant is adsorbed on the resin surface, free of organic solvents. This study has suggested that the predominant species of Cyanex 921 were L, (HCl)L and (HCl) Considering HClL as the predominant species in the 2–8 M HCl concentration range, Eq. The extraction of hydrochloric acid by Cyanex 921-impregnated resins was reported as a competitive reaction in the case of Zn(II) (  To summarize, the extraction process of Fe(III) from HCl solutions on the resin XAD-7 impregnated with Cyanex 921 proceeds from a series of simultaneous reactions, which relative contributions depend on experimental conditions: (i) formation of different Fe(III) chloro-complexes in the aqueous phase, (ii) HCl extraction on the polymer matrix of the resin, (iii) HCl extraction by Cyanex 921, (iv) Fe(III) extraction under the form HFeCl Sorption isotherms have been established for different experimental conditions, varying extractant loading in order to evaluate the stoichiometric ratio between the extractant and the metal at saturation of the EIR, and temperature in order to evaluate thermodynamic parameters. The concentration of HCl was fixed to 3 M, an intermediary concentration of HCl representative of industrial effluents and corresponding to a poor effect of the support (resin) on Fe(III) binding. In all cases, the curves were characterized by a sharp increase of the sorption capacity at low metal concentration followed by a plateau corresponding to the saturation of the EIR. This shape is representative of a Langmuir-type isotherm represented by the equation:  Sorption isotherms were established at temperatures varying between 10 and 40 °C ( The distribution ratio depends on the temperature and can be correlated through the Arrhenius plot to the reciprocal of temperature in order to determine the heat of adsorption (Δ ln The kinetics of sorption can be controlled by several steps corresponding to diffusion mechanisms or proper reaction rate control ( The external film diffusion can be experimentally approximated by a simple equation, developed by McKay and Allen, assuming the film diffusion to be the controlling step ( Plotting ln( The ratio The intraparticle diffusion coefficient ( A simple approach was also adopted for the evaluation of the reaction rates. Pseudo first-order (PFOE, the so-called Lagergren equation) and pseudo second-order (PSOE) equations were tested; however, the PSOE systematically fitted much better experimental data than PFOE. For this reason, only the PSOE was maintained. The pseudo second-order equation described by Where In order to verify the effect of conditioning of the resin on the sorption kinetics, conditioning times of 1 day and 15 days were tested and compared to a resin tested without conditioning. HCl solutions at the target concentration were used to conditioning the resin. The results (not shown) demonstrated that the conditioning in this case did not improve the kinetics of the process; kinetic profiles were almost superimposed (Additional material, available in the  The pseudo second-order equation fitted well experimental data as shown in With EIR the loading of the resin is also a critical parameter for kinetics. Four different loadings have been compared with similar experimental conditions. The comparison of sorption isotherms for different temperatures has shown the positive effect of high temperatures on maximum sorption capacities. The impact of increasing temperature has also been tested on sorption kinetics. Both the intraparticle diffusion model and the pseudo second-order equation fitted well experimental data. However, studies of solvent extraction of Fe(III) from HCl solutions by Cyanex 921 (  Several eluents were tested including neutral solutions (i.e., water and sodium sulfate) and acidic solutions (sulfuric acid and nitric acid). The desorbed EIR were tested for a series of 4 other cycles. Due to the weak effect of the type of eluent on sorption and desorption steps (over the 5 cycles) water would probably be more appropriate for Fe(III) recovery avoiding the use of chemicals. The high efficiency of these eluents can be explained by the destabilization of chloro-complexes of Fe(III) that were bound on the EIR. The absence of chloride anions leads to a change in the speciation of ferric species, which in turn contributes to make free ferric ions releasable. The reversibility is thus probably related to a change in the speciation of Fe(III) in the solution. Cyanex 921-impregnated resins revealed highly efficient for Fe(III) recovery from HCl solutions. Fe(III) sorption efficiency increased with HCl concentration. Though the extractant-free resin (Amberlite XAD-7) can adsorb Fe(III) when HCl concentration exceeded 3 M, the impregnation of the resin substantially improved resin sorption capacity. The extraction mechanism is controlled by several parameters such as the speciation of Fe(III) (chloro-complexes), the extraction of HCl by both the resin and the extractant. Metal extraction proceeds through direct binding on the resin (HFeCl The study of the kinetics showed that the resistance to intraparticle diffusion had a greater impact on the control of sorption kinetics than the resistance to film diffusion (at least under selected experimental conditions (agitation velocity and so on …)). The intraparticle diffusion increased with metal concentration and temperature. However, varying extractant loading resulted in a discontinuous trend for the variation of the intraparticle diffusion rate that reached a maximum close to 453 mg Cyanex 921 g Optical stereomicroscopy showed the formation of aggregates at the surface of the EIR when the resins were loaded with high concentrations of Cyanex 921. This could explain some of the discontinuities observed in the behavior of the EIR when increasing extractant loading. This is currently under investigation. The metal bound to the EIR was efficiently desorbed by a series of eluents, and the recycling was shown efficient for at least 5 sorption/desorption cycles using 0.1 M solutions of sulfuric acid, nitric acid, sodium sulfate and even water. The desorption efficiency remained constant over the 5 cycles, though the sorption efficiency slightly decreased (maintaining above 90% at the fifth cycle). Authors thank the Franco-Mexican PCP program (post-graduate cooperation program PCP No. 06/05) and the University of Guanajuato (CIAI 2008, 107/08) for financial support.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at