Photocatalyzed oxidation of adamantane has been investigated using several kinds of TiO2 powders in a mixed solvent of acetonitrile and butyronitrile under aerated conditions. 1-Adamantanol, 2-adamantanol, and 2-adamantanone are obtained as the main products, in which 1-adamantanol is produced at the highest yield. The quantum efficiencies for the production of 1-adamantanol, 2-adamantanol, and 2-adamantanone reach 6.4, 1.0 and 2.1%, respectively. Generally, anatase powders show higher activity than rutile powders. However, by addition of hydrogen peroxide to the solution, the activity of rutile powders is remarkably enhanced and becomes much higher than that of anatase powders. The rate for the production of 1-adamantanol is increased by more than 10 times, and the quantum efficiency for the production of 1-adamantanol reached as high as 25%.A wide range of oxygen-containing molecules including alcohols, aldehydes, ketones, epoxides and carboxylic acids are manufactured by chemical plants and utilized as the starting materials for producing, in particular, plastics and synthetic fiber materials. For producing the oxygen-containing materials, such as carboxylic acids like adipic acid, nicotinic acid, and pyromellitic acid Transformation of adamantane to hydroxylated adamantanes is important because they can be intermediates for the production of photo-resists Oxidation of adamantane by molecular oxygen has been investigated using some metal complexes or polyoximetalate as the molecular catalysts Utilization of semiconductor photocatalysts for organic syntheses is attractive because they have strong oxidation power and drive variety of reactions. In addition, these photocatalysts are non-toxic and the reactions are environmentally friendly. By utilizing the strong oxidation power of these semiconductor photocatalysts, many harmful organic compounds included in water and air are successfully mineralized In the present study, we have investigated TiO Various kinds of titanium dioxide (TiO The mixture of butyronitrile and acetonitrile was used as the solvent for the reaction because of the low solubility of adamantane in acetonitrile. We have confirmed that butyronitrile and acetonitrile are fairly stable under photocatalytic conditions. Photocatalytic reactions were typically carried out in Pyrex glass tubes, to which a mixture of acetonitrile (1.8–2.0 The quantum yield of the reaction was determined at a wavelength of 365 In order to clarify the contribution of free OH radicals to the partial oxidation of adamantane, we carried out photochemical reaction of adamantane in the mixed solution of acetonitrile and butyronitrile to which hydrogen peroxide was added, but TiO  When 2-adamantanol was used as a starting material, it was easily oxidized to form 2-adamantanone on the photoirradiation of TiO Concerning dihydroxylated compounds, we only obtained 1,3-adamantanediol. Production of 1,4-adamantanediol is suggested because we obtained 1-hydroxy-4-adamantanone, which is probably generated by oxidation of 1,4-adamantanediol. Structurally, there are five possible adamantanediols. However, we did not obtain 1,2-adamantanediol, 2,4-adamantanediol, 2,6-adamantanediol, or their further oxidized products. This result suggests that the further oxidation or ring opening reactions of these adamantanediols proceed rapidly. Photocatalytic activity of various kinds of TiO The quantum efficiencies for the production of 1-adamantanol, 2-adamantanol, and 2-adamantanone using the ST-41 powder were 6.4, 1.0 and 2.1%, respectively, which were determined after irradiation at 365 In order to determine whether or not free OH radicals are involved in the reaction, we carried out the photochemical reaction of adamantane in a mixture of acetonitrile and butyronitrile containing hydrogen peroxide without the addition of TiO In the case of the photochemical reaction in the presence of hydrogen peroxide, free OH radicals are considered to randomly subtract H atoms from adamantane, which has 12 H atoms at the secondary carbons and four H atoms at the tertiary carbons (the ratio is 3). The adamantane radicals generated as a result of the H-atom subtraction are expected to react with OH radicals to form hydroxylated adamantanes. Hence, the amount of hydroxylated adamantane at the secondary carbons is expected to be about three times as large as that of hydroxylated adamantane at the tertiary carbons. This is in accordance with the result of When hydrogen peroxide was added to the solution of the TiO In contrast to the cases of rutile TiO As discussed above, when adamantane is oxidized by photochemical reaction with free OH radicals produced by H For the reactions using molecular oxygen as the electron acceptor, we assume that the active species are OH radicals generated on the surface of TiO As for the effect of hydrogen peroxide on the TiO An important point is why the enhanced activity by the addition of hydrogen peroxide is observed only for rutile particles. Hydrogen peroxide forms complexes on the surface of TiO Although adamantane is one of the most stable organic compounds, we found that it can be oxidized into 1-adamantanol, 2-adamantanol, and 2-adamantanone using TiO