Most mineral processing system models include variables that have either systematic errors (bias) or randomness associated with them. It is essential to incorporate these uncertainties when analyze these models. In general, there are a couple of different methods of variance or uncertainty analysis used by analysts, such as sensitivity analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, etc. In this paper, the law of propagation of errors (LPE) and one of the favorite analysis tools, Monte Carlo simulation, are presented. Limitations of the LPE are emphasized. Simple applications of these two methods in mineral processing are also briefly shown, as well as a case study of evaluating the variance of flow rate in a flotation circuit.Given a system equation or formula which models a mineral processing system, such as Plitt’s classification model, obtaining an answer is usually fairly straightforward, which involves evaluating the formula using the estimates for each variable contained within the system equation. However, what exactly does the outcome represent? If the formula incorporates variables that have uncertainties (i.e., have a specific distribution or range), the results of the formula must incorporate the variable uncertainties in order to be considered valid or correct. Otherwise the results may be misleading. Evaluating models that contain random variables by exclusively using point estimate values does not incorporate the uncertainty of the independent variables and does not provide complete results ( A general statement of the problem to be solved would be: given a random variable Let a system equation or model, denoted by A general formulation of Taylor series for a single The expected value of The variance of the system equation is a function of only one term (to second-order accuracy). This term is a summation of the first derivative squared multiplied by the respective variances. Once again, after the derivative term is evaluated, the mean values for the variables should be used to get a numerical result. This forms the LPEs. One point is worth to be mentioned. Eq. In a word, the variance of Consider a simple separator, such as a single copper flotation cell, as shown in Usually it is expressed in the following way (±2 std. dev.): Although analytical solutions to the LPE problem are elegant, they are not always practical. Sometimes the system equations or models are so complex or non-linear that the preceding analytical formulas are unwieldy or the linearity and independence assumptions are not valid ( The principles of this method are fairly straightforward. To illustrate, consider the same simple example of two-product recovery calculation as in Eq. With this brief introduction above, the procedure of Monte Carlo simulation are now presented as following: Replace uncertain input values with specialized random number generators. In this example, using random number generation function in Excel to generate a set of numbers (in this case 1500) for input variables Calculate the input values of Run a simulation that evaluates the equation 1500 times. Calculate the mean and variance/standard deviation of Using the data shown earlier in Based on the results of In this example, it is desired to estimate the flow rates around a planned flotation circuit so that proper pumping capacity (pump, line and sump size) can be designed and evaluated. The flowsheet for the circuit is present in On the basis of this circuit, the flow rates of different streams can be derived as following, given the recovery of some units and grade of some streams: The estimated mean and standard deviation for the feed flow rate, unit recoveries and the grades of different streams are in The rougher recovery was not shown in Based on the principles introduced previously, the process using Monte Carlo simulation is straightforward. The basic input variables are also in First, to randomize the input values, such as recoveries, grades and cyclone split efficiency, by using the function RAND ( The mean and standard deviation results are shown in It demonstrated clearly that the Monte Carlo simulation is easy to apply and more information returns quickly. The mean values of flow rates with standard deviations are very useful in the point view of design and control. The Monte Carlo simulation can even show the probability distribution and range of the outcomes (upper bound rather than midpoint of bin is used in the    Visual interpretation is a powerful tool, more information can be retrieved from these figures ( In the process of simulation by using Monte Carlo, It was found that the iteration of 1000 times is small number in term of the stability of final results. The results will be slightly different for each individual simulation. For example, the following two figures ( Comparing the results of LPE and Monte Carlo simulation for the rougher tails flowrate, they are slightly different, the mean 340.6 tph calculated by LPE is little bit higher than 335.8 by Monte Carlo simulation, while the standard deviation of former method is smaller than that of later method. The reason is that assumption of independent variables and linearity of the system equation. Further, the LPE only returns the statistical moments while the Monte Carlo simulation returns not only the statistical moments but also the probability distribution. This analysis involves the mathematical evaluation of the system equation based on expanding it in a Taylor series with respect to the means. It results in an equation for the overall system equation statistical moments, which is a function of the variances of variable and the partial derivatives of the system equation. Typically, the series is truncated after the second-order term. The following characteristics of this type of analysis are: First, LPE is correct for functions that are linear, for non-linear function, it is only approximation. Second, numerical differentiation may be difficult or may be done incorrectly leading to incorrect results. Finally, the method is strictly based upon calculations involving a parameter’s statistical moments and does not directly incorporate the parameter’s probability distribution. Also, the return results only are statistical moments and not a distribution. The Monte Carlo simulation method of uncertainty analysis is arguably one of the most popular methods of analysis used in different research fields. Monte Carlo simulation involves replacing uncertain quantities in a model with randomly generated numbers (following a given statistical distribution) and then observing how these uncertainties affect the results. The nice thing about Monte Carlo simulation is that it is easy to apply. It also returns the information about the distribution and range of values. Better accuracy is obtained by increasing the number of cycles (random numbers) used. However, model simulation runtime may be long for some complex models. Also, selecting the model parameters’ proper probability distribution function may be difficult due to inadequate data or a lack of understanding of the underlying physical processes. Incorporating the uncertainty when evaluate the mineral processing model can lead to correct results. LPE is suit and correct for the function which is linear. Monte Carlo simulation can obtain more accurate results when it is used to analyze the variance of complex or non-linear system equations. The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate and compare the application of LPE and Monte Carlo simulation in flotation circuit. It is easy to apply the Monte Carlo simulation and more information can be obtained. A high number of samples increases the accuracy of the simulation.