Mineralization is a natural process leading to the formation of mineralized tissue such as bone. The chief mineral component of bone is hydroxyapatite (HAp), which is deposited using an organic template like fibrillar Collagen I under physiological condition. Fibrous silk fibroin is structurally homologous to collagen and acts as nucleation site for HAp mineralization when immersed in simulated body fluid (SBF) or fetal bovine serum (FBS), therefore, considered as popular bone regeneration biomaterial. Hence, the mineralization behavior of silk fibroin self-assembled gellan gum enriched 3D hydrogels is investigated under conditions closer to physiological ones using SBF as well as FBS, and also in presence of cells (e.g. human adipose tissue-derived stem cells, ASCs). Incorporation of silk fibroin induces the mineralization in acellular spongy-like hydrogels in composition dependent manner, confirmed by SEM-EDS analysis. In contrast, ASCs mediated mineralization is found in all hydrogel compositions of 3 weeks post-culture under osteogenic conditions as demonstrated by gene expression profile and Alizarin Red S staining. This is perhaps due to the co-existence of fibroin and FBS together induce cell-mediated mineralization. The blending of fibroin offers cheap alternative strategy to improve or guide the repair of mineralized tissue using gellan gum-based biomaterials.Biomineralization is a highly dynamic but well-regulated phenomenon in nature performed by a number of living organisms to obtain diverse organic-inorganic hybrid structures like teeth, spines, crustacean carapaces, and bone to carry out specific functions like mechanical stability, navigation, protections and photonics. The hierarchical organization, amazing complexity and inspiring properties of biominerals strongly contrast their geological counterparts and usually surpass the synthetic analogues Conversely, silk fibroin demonstrates the limited carboxyl groups on surface, thereby, requires non-physiological conditions such as pre-treatment with CaCl Here, gellan gum is blended with silk fibroin in different ratios and the reaction mixture is cross-linked using calcium chloride (CaCl Aqueous solution of gellan gum (GG, Sigma, USA) was obtained by dissolving appropriate amount of GG (2 wt%) in deionized water at 90 °C under constant stirring For the preparation of GG – silk fibroin (S) hydrogels; GG solution was cooled down to 45 °C while stirring, into which appropriate amount of silk solution (2 wt%) was added. The blending of gellan gum to silk was in terms of volumetric ratio such as 25 v% of GG to 75 v% of silk (1:3), 50 v% of GG to 50 v% of silk (1:1) and 75 v% of GG to 25 v% of silk (3:1) and represented as GG25:S75, GG50:S50 and GG75:S25 respectively. The cross-linker (CaCl To visualize the morphology of the untreated hydrogels, the hydrogels were frozen at −80 °C overnight, followed by drying using a freeze-dryer (LyoAlfa 10/15, Telstar, Spain) The freeze-dried hydrogels were briefly treated with ethanol (100% v/v) to induce β-sheet crystallization of silk fibroin, followed by washing with deionized water (thrice). The SBF (1x) was prepared by dissolving NaCl, CaCl For Human adipose tissues were acquired from the Hospital da Prelada (Porto, Portugal) with patient’s informed consent and processed at 3B’s Research Group following the ethical guidelines Prior to cell seeding, the freeze-dried hydrogels were sterilized by radiation (UV for 30 min) and alcohol treatment (ethanol, 70% v/v for 30 min), followed by rinsing several times (at least thrice) with sterile phosphate buffer to remove the traces of ethanol. The hydrogels were then incubated with cell culture media (αMEM supplemented with 10% v/v FBS-1% antibiotic) overnight at 37 °C- 5% CO To induce the osteogenic differentiation, hASCs (passage 3) were seeded drop-wise at a density of 1.5 × 10 The mRNA expressions of osteopontin (OPN) and osteoprotegerin (OPG) were measured to confirm osteogenesis in the hydrogel – hASC constructs. Total RNA was extracted from the constructs using TRI Reagent® RNA Isolation Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany), as per manufacturer’s guidelines. RNA was then reverse transcribed into cDNA using the qScriptTM cDNA Synthesis Kit (Quanta BioSciences, USA). Gene expression was measured using real‐time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), performed with 10 ng cDNA per 10 µl reaction mixture of PerfeCTA® SYBR Green FastMix (Quanta BioSciences), and a RT‐PCR Mastercycler Realplex system (Realplex, Eppendorf). Primer sequences employed to amplify cDNAs for genes of interest were designed using Primer‐BLAST tool ( The ASCs-mediated mineralized constructs were fixed in formalin (10% v/v, Enzifarma, Portugal) for 30 min at 37 °C, post-fixed washed with sterile PBS again. The characterization of both cellular and acelluar mineralized constructs was carried out using FE-SEM (JEOL JSM 6301F/Oxford INCA Energy 350/Gatan Alto 2500) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) for elemental analysis. Briefly, post-fixation the mineralized constructs were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series (30–100% v/v) followed by drying using critical point dryer (Critical Point Dryer (Autosamdri-815, Series A, Tousimis). The dried constructs were then sputter coated with platinum (4 nm) and imaged. The fixed constructs (the cell-laden hydrogels) were stained using Rodhamine-Phalloidin (1:500 v/v in PBS) for actin and counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (1:1000 v/v in PBS, DAPI) for nucleus at room temperature and imaged under inverted confocal microscope TCS SP8 (Leica Microsystems, Germany). The samples were observed by using λ Post-fixation, the mineralized constructs were subjected to standard histological tissue processing for embedding in paraffin (EC350-2, Microm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and sectioned into 5 μm thickness using a microtome (HM355S, Microm, Thermo scientific). The sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) (05-12011/L, 05-M10003, Bio-optica), Masson Trichrome (with aniline blue) for collagen, and Alzarin red S for Ca mineralization. All stained sections were dehydrated and mounted with Entellan® before imaged under microscope (Leica DM750, Germany) with an MRc5 camera. The results were denoted as mean ± SD, where data were collected from experiments typically performed in triplicate and analyzed by one‐way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Origin 7 software. The p < 0.05 was considered significant. The great interest in polysaccharide family is precisely related to its gelling property. Ionic cross-linking between Ca The great interest in polysaccharide family is precisely related to its gelling property. Ionic cross-linking between Ca The nucleation of HAp crystals on gellan gum-silk hydrogels treated with SBF or culture medium was revealed by SEM ( In contrast to acellular mineralization in SBF and cell culture media, the cellular mineralization and osteogenic differentiation were composition dependent. The osteogenic differentiation of hASCs was investigated both quantitatively (RT-PCR, EDS) and qualitatively (microcopy and histology). To confirm the progression of osteogenic differentiation, the transcription activities of osteopontin (OPN; the most abundant non-collagenous protein constitutes up to 10–20% of total non-collagenous bone extracellular matrix) The results indicate the guided mineralization in gellan-gum enriched hydrogels using silk protein fibroin by spectroscopic and microscopic analyses. The designed composite interface promotes the mineralization in the simulated physiological and cell mediated conditions. The extensive mineralization of the silk fibroin containing hydrogels proposed a cheap substitute for recombinant proteins, which are commonly exploited to from carbonated HAp formation in engineered biomaterials. The enhanced amount of silk fibroin not only promotes the osteogenic differentiation of hASCs but also improves the biomineralization by cells demonstrating the potentiality of the blended hydrogels as bone scaffolding materials. Through this, the hybrid hydrogels are presented as a new set of potential biomaterials for bone tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. This research was supported by the The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at