This paper presents radioisotope tracer experiments conducted in a hydrocyclone processing copper ore. Different ore grain sizes ware traced using a radioactive isotope 64Cu and the experimental residence time distribution (RTD) functions have been obtained. These functions lead to the determination of the kinetic parameters (mean residence time, flow rate or real volume occupied by matter and degree of mixing) and relative separation of each class of grain in the hydrocyclone. Macromodelling of the hydrocyclone shows that the flow behaviour of the solid is not far from perfectly mixed which results in a low efficiency observed in the relative separation of the larger and smaller grains.Copper production is one of the largest industries in Poland. This industry includes mining, concentration and foundry processes. Thirty million tons of copper ore is processed per year. In the concentration process, the copper ore, which includes around 1–2% of copper, is concentrated to material that includes 20% of copper. The concentration process includes three steps: comminution, beneficiation and dewatering The residence time distribution (RTD) is a chemical engineering concept introduced by   The hydrocyclone is a device where the classification of grains proceeds in a centrifugal field. The centrifugal forces are generated by flowing liquid on spiral trajectories in the motionless vessel. This spiral flow is generated by tangential entry of the suspended solids. The physical differences of size and specific gravity allow the separation of grains in the hydrocyclone. Inside the hydrocyclone, the two rotating streams form. One stream rotates close to the hydrocyclone wall and flows down with bigger and heavier grains to the underflow. The second stream rotates near the centre and flows up with small and lightweight grains to the overflow. The slurry density (copper and water) at the inlet of the hydrocyclone is around 1.2 ton/m One efficient method of investigating flow processes is through radioisotope tracers. It provides the means for determination of the behaviour of the selected material in a flow system. This radioisotope tracer method consists of injecting the radioactive tracer into the input of the system and analysis of gamma-radiation intensity distribution (system response) at the output. The possibility of achieving high activity of the tracer per mass unit together with high efficiency of gamma-rays detection allows injection of a small quantity of the tracer in comparison to the flowing material. Thanks to this, the injection does not disturb the process. A properly selected radioisotope, which is naturally associated with the traced population in a flow process, provides information on the main population. The method does not influence the process conditions since detectors placed outside the flow measure the intensity of gamma rays from the radioisotope. In industrial conditions, like copper ore concentration processes, the radioisotope tracer method is the only one that allows simply on-line measurements of the flow behaviour of the materials. For this purpose, separated radioisotope tracers for water, and solid ore grains of different grain size, may be used. Radioisotope tracer experiments have been done by injecting different grain sizes. The scintillation probes were placed in three places: the hydrocyclone inlet, underflow outlet and overflow outlet, as shown in Natural copper in ore contains the two stable isotopes Recent work has allowed detailed information about velocity profile inside the hydrocyclone to be obtained The tracer experiments have been interpreted to gain information about: the relative separation of the different classes of grain size, the mean residence time of the different classes of grain size, flow behaviour inside the hydrocyclone. The obtained curves have been treated to take into account the radioactive decay, and to remove the background. After this step, the area under the three curves represent respectively the total amount of tracing material at the inlet, the tracing material in the overflow and the tracing material in the underflow. This allows to determine the relative separation ( The tracer experiments also allow estimating the mean residence times of the different grain sizes inside the hydrocyclone. The obtained results are shown in A good understanding of the complex process can be obtained by simulation of the experimental RTD using compartment models A first approach is to consider that if the hydrocyclone is working properly, the inlet flow is close to a plug flow. Then the inlet flow is divided in two parts, one of which is going to the underflow, and the other to the overflow. In reality, the separation into two flows does not take place in one specific position but occurs progressively. The model is shown in Radioisotope tracer experiments have been conducted in situ in an industrial hydrocyclone for different sizes of copper ore. The results allow determination of the percentage relative separation and the quantity of the different sizes of copper ore contained in the hydrocyclone. Modelling of the solid behaviour is not easy due to the complex flow inside the cyclone. A simple model shows that the flow behaviour of the solid both for over- and underflow is close to plug flow reactor with a perfect mixing cell in a series model. However, the number of mixing cells is small (between 1 and 3) which is critical for a good separation. This work was supported by the Polonium Project No. 98164 between the Faculty of Physics and Nuclear Techniques, University of Mining and Metallurgy, Krakow, Poland and the Centre of Promotion of Chemical Engineering in Industries, Laboratory of Chemical Engineering Sciences, Nancy, France. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of International Atomic Energy Agency, Research Contract No. Pol. 11562/RBF.