Open long bone fractures are surgically challenging limb-threatening injuries. There are a variety of techniques to close a soft-tissue defect ranging from the occasionally used primary closure, through local skin and muscle flaps based on perforating vessels from axial named arteries to micro-vascular free-tissue transfer. While now an historical concept, the ‘Reconstructive Ladder’ is still relevant today. Angiography is of paramount importance and should be undertaken as a matter of routine when free-tissue transfer is considered.Until fairly recently there was a relative lack of understanding between orthopaedic and plastic surgery practitioners, which delayed the development of techniques to establish vascularized soft-tissue cover over a fractured bone. Historically, particularly in the military setting, open fractures of long bones were associated with a high incidence of mortality. Death was due to the initial traumatic event, to consequent haemorrhage associated with amputation or from gangrene as a late complication. Billroth working in Zurich reported in 1881 that 46 out of 93 of his patients died. Up until the First World War such wounds were commonly isolated gunshot injuries. In the 18th century two French surgeons Desault and Larrey revolutionized their care. There remains controversy as to the role that angiography plays in severe limb trauma. If the limb is clinically devascularized then it has no role in the acute setting In the perfused injured limb some advocate simple palpation of distal pulses but this has been shown to give an unacceptable number of false positive results. Thus routine pre-operative angiography to plan reconstruction should be the norm in severe lower limb trauma. Historically the ‘Ladder for Reconstruction’ was described to help with decision-making The lowest rung of the original ladder or the simplest tool in the box is primary closure. This can be attempted in open fractures and is occasionally achievable but the decision to do this in open tibial fractures must be made by a Consultant Orthopaedic and Plastic surgeons who have both assessed the injured limb. Gustillo Grade I and II without any de-gloving are amenable to this technique ( Human skin grafting probably dates back as 300BC. Modern practitioners will take skin grafts with air or electrically driven dermatomes that allow alteration of the thickness as well as the width of the skin graft and give a uniform, neat harvest. A process called ‘meshing’ can then increase the surface area. This procedure involves placing the skin graft onto a surface then compressing the graft against sharp ridges (which may be on the ‘derma-carrier’ or on the roller-cylinder). In complex limb trauma with open fractures skin grafts have a limited application. However, they can, in extreme circumstances, be used to reduce the size of a wound by placing graft on a good recipient bed (healthy muscle, fat and skin) but not on the fractured bone which will need a vascularized flap ( Skin grafts were used when complex procedures could not be undertaken because of the general clinical state of the patient. Split-skin grafts were used to reduce the wound size and act as a biological dressing until definitive reconstruction was possible. Modern practice, particularly the advent of negative pressure dressings, has all but eliminated the need for this type of procedure. The difficulty of replacing tissue cover lost to trauma with vascularized tissue led to extraordinary reconstructive efforts. Tube-pedicle flaps represented the birth of modern British plastic surgery. Gillies The majority of the tube-pedicle flaps used for the extremities were harvested from the abdominal wall, forming a tube of skin and sub-cutaneous fat fashioned from the abdominal wall. A maximum length-to-breadth ratio for such flaps was established be 5:1. After forming the tubes the skin had to be transferred safely to the extremity defect. One ingenious method was to attach the free end of the tube to a prepared wound on the non-dominant wrist. This shackled the non-dominant hand to the abdominal wall via the flap. The tube flap became dependent upon the blood supply from the wrist. Several weeks later the abdominal end of the tube flap was divided and sutured into the traumatic extremity defect. The final stage would be to detach the tube from the wrist to allow the graft to be finally set into the defect. This process of transferring tissue to the lower limb from the abdomen via the wrist was termed ‘waltzing’. However, not only did it mean that the patient was immobilized in sometimes un-natural positions but these procedures required several operative stages and a prolonged in-patient stay. Nonetheless, tube-pedicle flaps still have occasional applications in modern practice. The foot and ankle proved the most difficult to provide with vascularized soft-tissue cover. The case shown in While local flaps, to be described below are extremely useful, there is some evidence to suggest that local flaps should not be used when the degree of fracture comminution is high. The work in the late 19th century by Manchot The blood supply to the skin originates in the fascia. In 1970 Milton The concept of ‘islanding’ of the skin flaps was a refinement of the basic Ponten local fascio-cutaneous flap technique as it became apparent that with careful dissection the whole fascio-cutaneous flap could be safely raised with the feeder vessel perforating the fascia into the integument but arising from the axial limb vessel (see The success of large skin flaps which survived the trauma of dissection, islanding and rotation led to further developments and it was questioned as to whether there was any need to include underlying muscle in the traditional myo-cutaneous flaps used elsewhere such as the latissimus dorsi and the rectus abdominis flaps. It was argued that if, like the propeller flaps, one could free the main skin perforator from the muscle then no muscle would need to be harvested. This would reduce donor site morbidity and would permit a longer vascular pedicle and there would be less of an issue with pedicle orientation. This thinking led to perforator flaps, the second generation flaps. The most common perforator flaps for skin resurfacing are the antero-lateral thigh (ALT) flap, the scapular flap, the deep inferior epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flap and the thoraco-dorsal artery perforator (TAP) flap. Each of these is indicated in certain circumstances and also each has limitations. All are an improvement on first generation flaps, particularly in terms of reduced donor site morbidity. The latest refinement in local flap harvest is not to rely on perforators from the main axial artery but instead to use ‘feeder’ vessels that randomly feed sections of skin. Experimental micro-vascular anastomosis dates back over a century ago. The pioneers developed the technique in animal models. The basis of free-tissue transfer is to harvest tissue (be it skin, muscle or bone) from a distant site (the donor site) on a vascular pedicle (artery and vein) which is then clipped and the tissue is completely detached from the patient. The tissue is then sutured into the donor site and is re-vascularized by micro-vascular anastomosis. One of the first reported cases of successful elective free-tissue transfer was a flap of skin and sub-cutaneous fat harvested from the groin and transferred as vascularized tissue.  Treatment aims to reduce the incidence of infection at the fracture site, which is a dreaded consequence of open fractures. Monitoring for infection is difficult and inappropriate use of antibiotics is to be discouraged. Wright and Khan The first generation of free-flaps were based on a major named vessel, hence the radial forearm, the latissimus dorsi and rectus abdominis flaps to name a few. All of these first generation flaps were associated with a heavy donor site morbidity rendering them ‘expensive’ if they failed. The second generation free-flaps were driven by the need to reduce donor morbidity and utilize either smaller vessels (e.g. the gracilis muscle) or by skin flaps based on perforator vessels (see above) and not the muscle through which the blood vessel travels. The use of muscle as a covering over a fractured bone was supported by animal data showing that muscle appeared resistant to inoculation by Because plastic surgery is a comparatively small speciality it is limited to a few hospitals. Thus the majority of open tibial fractures will present to non-specialists. As they are relatively rare, initial presentation to non-specialists may expose these vulnerable patients to inappropriate treatment. Historically in the UK with soft-tissue reconstruction only offered to those who suffered complications such as infection or skin necrosis. This poor treatment was compounded by the fact that flap reconstructions had a high failure rate if there was a delay in soft-tissue reconstruction. While free-tissue transfer in limb salvage is a major advance, timing is all important. Combined care is a comparatively new concept in the evolution of severe extremity trauma. A landmark paper by Godina Osteosynthesis has also become more sophisticated and anatomical reduction and fixation may be achieved in most fractures following improvements in both implants and the techniques of their application. Thus the temptation is to definitively fix the fracture at the initial hospital followed by referral for soft-tissue reconstruction. This uncertainty concerning both timing and technique has led both the British Orthopaedic Association (BOA) and the British Association of Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgeons (BAPRAS) to attempt to clarify the timelines based both on experience and evidence. Staged soft-tissue reconstruction has been aided by the invention and popularity of Negative Pressure Dressing (NPD). It must not be forgotten that the decision making process in the management of open tibial fractures may be made difficult by the presence of other injuries particularly in the head injured patient with a limb-threatening injury. In this situation informed consent to amputate if salvage is deemed futile may be difficult to obtain. If salvage is to be attempted then this should be done when there is a safe window of opportunity to do so. Brain injury should be considered but should not deter from complex reconstruction even if the functional recovery is un-predictable. Severe extremity trauma is best managed by specialists. Soft-tissue injury must be critically assessed and when of dubious viability skin, fat, fascia and muscle must be excised. This often results in large but clean wounds. Local flaps remain a good option when there is no degloving and no fracture comminution. Free-tissue transfer is now the cornerstone of modern soft-tissue reconstruction after complex open tibial fractures. The role of angiography has now been defined and should be routine in severe open tibial fractures.