Elbow meter is a simple flow measuring device and its characteristics for the flow of single-phase fluids are reasonably well understood and the functional dependence of elbow meter coefficient (Ck) on parameters like Reynolds Number, radius ratio, pipe roughness etc. Is well documented in literature. Elbow meters are also being used for solid liquid flow in many industries. The present study aims to establish the characteristics of an elbow meter for high concentration coal ash slurry pipelines using validated CFD. High concentration coal ash slurries are known to behave as homogeneous fluids exhibiting behavior as Bingham plastic fluids. The validated CFD methodology has been used to predict the values of Ck for the flow of Bingham plastic fluid and establish its dependence on radius ratio, Hedstrom Number and Bingham Reynolds Number. Further, for the flow of high concentration fly ash slurry flows, Ck for any given radius ratio is observed to be independent of Hedstrom Number (over the range investigated He ≤ 105). Further, in fully turbulent flows, beyond a critical Reynolds number (ReB ≥ 5.3 × 103), Ck remains constant and is dependent only on the radius ratio.Bends are integral part of any pipeline system and as the fluid flows through them, a pressure differential is created between the inner and outer walls due to the curvilinear path followed by the fluid. This pressure differential, amongst other things, is dependent on the average velocity of the fluid inside the bend. This phenomenon is utilized in an elbow meter to measure/monitor the flow rate in the pipe. The schematic diagram of the elbow meter is shown in Addison [ This equation is being used extensively to estimate the value of C Based on experimental measurements, Issacs [ Jain et al. [ Morrision et al. [ Rup and Malinowinski [ Similarly, few studies have recently been conducted to bring about the effective use of CFD for the analysis of flow of single phase fluids [ The commercially available CFD package FLUENT 6.3.26 is used in the present study. The CFD methodology used has been described in detail by Rawat et al. [ The continuity equation for conservation of mass is expressed as: The conservation of momentum equation is written as: For Bingham plastic fluids, the stress tensor for laminar flow is given as: For Laminar flow, the Reynolds stress term The geometries of the bends considered in the current study are 3-D bends of different radius ratios (R/r = 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6). The diameter (2r) of the pipeline is taken as 50 mm. The pipe bends are provided with upstream pipe length of 4.6 m (92D) and downstream pipe length of 4.0 m (80D). These straight lengths are provided in order to ensure that the velocity profile is fully developed at the inlet of the bend and the downstream boundary condition has no effect on the flow inside the bend. The flow domain used in the analysis is shown in The calculation Domain is bounded by the three boundaries: inlet boundary, outlet boundary, and wall. Assuming the fluid to be incompressible, at inlet, a uniform velocity is specified, and enough upstream length is provided to ensure fully developed flow at the bend inlet. The outlet boundary condition is specified as OUTFLOW which implies that the FLUENT solver extrapolates the required information from the interior, such that zero diffusion flux is maintained for all the flow variables and continuity is satisfied. The extrapolation procedure used by FLUENT updates the out flow velocity and pressure in a manner which is consistent with the fully developed flow assumption. Wall is treated as stationery with no slip. Average roughness height has been calculated using water flow data and it was found to be of the order of 10 The momentum, turbulent kinetic energy, and specific dissipation rate equations are discretized using the first order upwind scheme. This scheme ensures, in general, higher accuracy, stability, and convergence. In the present calculations, the residual values for mass, velocity components, turbulent kinetic energy, and specific dissipation rate were set at 10 Other solution strategies were, setting the under-relaxation factor of pressure at 0.3, momentum at 0.7 and turbulence kinetic energy and specific dissipation rate at 0.8 which are default values. This helps in the faster convergence of the solution. For high concentration fly ash slurries, distribution of solids is homogeneous and behavior is like Bingham fluid [ The Bingham plastic fluids are specified by a non-zero shear stress when the strain rate is zero and the rheological equation for such fluids is given as: For τ<τ For τ>τ In FLUENT, the extended Herschel-Bulkley model consists of combined behavior of the Bingham and the power-law fluid. For low values of strain rates Where,    The Herschel-Bulkley model becomes similar to the Bingham model when An important dimensionless parameter involving yield stress is Hedstrom number ( Also, Bingham Reynolds number is given as: The grid independence studies for different radius ratio bends, are carried out by computing the pressure drop across the bends with different mesh sizes ( The CFD methodology described is first used to analyze flow of water through elbow meters. Lansford [ Several investigators Further the methodology is tested for the flow of high concentration fly ash slurries using the experimental pressure drop data of Verma et al. [ Performance of the elbow-meters of different radius ratios have been evaluated first with water and then for the Bingham plastic fluid and high concentration fly ash slurries. Further, the validated CFD methodology is used to evaluate the performance of the elbow meters for water flow (μ = 0.001 Pa s and ρ = 1000 kg/m  Equation  It is observed from Fly ash slurries at high concentrations are known to behave like homogeneous Bingham Plastic fluid and are not expected to segregate at the bends during their flow through pipe networks. Hence, in order to understand the performance of elbow meters for such slurries, computations have been made to evaluate the values of C The data is further analyzed to identify the dependence of C It has been already mentioned that fly ash slurries at high concentrations behave like homogeneous Bingham Plastic fluid ([ Generally, the diameters of the High Concentration Slurry pipelines selected for fly ash disposal in the thermal power plants in India are in the range of 50–200 mm with operating flow velocity range being 1–2 m/s. The solid concentration (C The physical and rheological properties of the fly ash slurries at high concentrations have been reported by Rawat et al. [ Further, computed values of C In order to gain further insight into the variation of C The present study has shown that a validated CFD methodology is capable of predicting the value of elbow meter coefficient for water flow over a wide range of operating conditions as long as care is taken to choose proper discretization and turbulence model. A generalized relation for C All authors have equal contribution. No conflict of interest.  Elbow-meter Coefficient Concentration of Solids, % by weight Pipe Diameter (m) Hedstrom Number Pressure head (mWc) Static Pressure (Pa) Bingham Reynolds Number  Apparent viscosity (Pa.s) Bingham Viscosity (Pa.s) Turbulent Viscosity (Pa.s) Yielding Viscosity (Pa.s) Slurry Density (Kg/m Shear Stress Tensor Yield Stress (Pa)