Over the years, using novel methods to find deep-seated ore resources has always been a hot research topic. In this paper, we present a new method to investigate deep-seated orebodies by characterizing metal-bearing nanoparticles (e.g., morphological features and chemical compositions) in various media (deep/shallow groundwater, ascending gas flow, and soil) via transmission electron microscopy (TEM). From the Kangjiawan Pb-Zn deposit (the study area), the metal-bearing nanoparticles collected from different media contain similar contents of ore-forming elements (e.g., Cu, Zn, Pb, Fe and S) and are strongly related to the presence of deep-seated orebodies. These ore-related nanoparticles are grouped into four main categories: (i) amorphous, (ii) single-crystal, (iii) poly-crystal and (iv) complex poly-crystal. In particular, many amorphous nanoparticles in different media can transfer ore-forming elements and provide mineralization information. We propose that the ore-forming elements exist and migrate in the form of these four types of nanoparticles. The results can explain the geochemical anomalies and provide insights on the role of nanoparticles in post-mineralization ore-related elemental dispersion, and could be useful in exploration for concealed orebodies.To date, geophysical and geochemical explorations are common prospecting methods that play an important role in ore discovery. Geophysical exploration methods involve gravity prospecting, magnetic prospecting, electrical prospecting, etc. ( Geochemical exploration methods include mainly primary and secondary dispersion halos, stream sediment, MMI (Mobile Metal Ions), enzyme leaching, MOMEO (Leaching of Mobile Forms of Metal in Overburden), electrogeochemistry, biogeochemistry, geogas and hydrochemistry ( Using atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), The Kangjiawan deposit is chosen as the study area here. The deposit, an important Pb-Zn producing area, is located in the southern margin of the Hengyang Basin (South China). The basin is with well-circulated groundwater, making groundwater samples readily available ( The large Kangjiawan Pb-Zn sulfide deposit is situated in the northeastern part of the Shuikoushan orefield in Changning, Hunan Province ( The deposit is composed of 61 concealed orebodies that are closely related to the silicified breccias ( There are three aquifers at Kangjiawan: Aquifer I is distributed along the overturned anticline in the Cretaceous sequence above the orebodies, and drains into the Kangjia creek and low-lying area. Supplied by meteoric water, it is a highly fractured aquifer with abundant water content (1.0–3.7 L/s.m). Aquifer II is a N-S trending karstic-fissured aquifer, and occurs in the silicified breccias in direct contact with the orebodies. It is mainly supplied by peripheral deep-water circulation, and minor by Aquifer III. The fractured Aquifer III contains low water content, and occurs in the Jurassic sequence in the middle and eastern Kangjiawan. The aquifer is supplied by meteoric water that seeps through cracks of weathered rocks ( To avoid mining-related contamination, our sampling focused on southern Kangjiawan where proven but unexploited deep-lying orebodies are located. The collected samples include (i) deep groundwater, (ii) shallow groundwater, (iii) ascending gas flow, and (iv) soil. We used 500 ml wide-mouthed polyethylene bottles for collecting groundwater samples. After washing three times with ultrapure water, the bottles were dried in pollution-free conditions. The sampling method was performed as follows: deep groundwater samples were collected in the No. 12 and No. 13 levels (at −350 m and below) near the undisturbed orebodies close to Aquifer II. Each bottle was placed below the position with well-developed fissure water, and a water sample (200 to 400 ml) from the rock fissure was collected. To avoid contamination, deep groundwater seeping from the fissure was dripped straight into the bottles. The pH of the samples was measured on site and range from 4.68 to 7.20. The shallow groundwater samples were collected through water pumps or wells, using the 500 ml wide-mouthed polyethylene bottles. The sampling sites were mainly located between Prospecting Lines No. 100 and No. 108, distal from big cities or industrial centers ( Samples of ascending gas flow and soil were collected along Prospecting Line No. 104 ( Deep and shallow groundwater samples were preprocessed under clean bench conditions, following the procedures described in After preprocessing, the nanoparticles deposited on the TEM grids, were analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2F30S-Twin, America) at the Yangzhou University Testing Center and the Lanzhou University Testing Center. The specific parameters of the test instruments were as follows: the maximum accelerating voltage was 300 kV, the dot resolution was 0.20 nm, the linear resolution was 0.102 nm, the resolution of STEM HAADF was 0.17 nm, and the maximum magnification of the TEM and STEM was 1 million and 2.3 million times, irrespectively. The morphological features, energy dispersive X-ray spectra (EDS), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image, and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the nanoparticles were obtained. Carbon and Ni contents were not considered due to the high background caused by the carbon-coated nickel TEM grid. Metal-bearing nanoparticles were identified and analyzed in the samples of deep groundwater (n = 36), shallow groundwater (n = 72), ascending gas flow (n = 29), and soil (n = 33). Mineralization-related elements were commonly detected in nanoparticles, including Pb, Zn, Cu and Fe, which usually appeared along with S. A small proportion of the nanoparticles containing common elements (e.g., O, Na, K, Si and Ba) were also found. They were commonly excluded from the metal-bearing nanoparticles because of the relatively low contrast under the TEM imaging. It is noted that the metal-bearing nanoparticles from the different media exhibit distinct diversity in crystal/aggregate features, which are described in the following section. Amorphous metal-bearing nanoparticles are abundant in the samples of various media ( In an ascending gas flow sample, an irregular nanoparticle (ID: 3) is found containing Cu (53.20%), S (16.96%), O (26.18%), Si (2.63%) and K (1.01%) ( Single-crystal nanoparticles are rarely observed, and their EDS results are listed in Poly-crystal nanoparticles are commonly observed in this study. They appear as individual particles or as particle aggregations. The EDS results are shown in This kind of polycrystalline nanoparticle aggregation is featured by its diverse nanoparticles with different morphologies and chemical components ( In background water samples, more than 14 nanoparticles were tested, mainly including Ca-, Si-, Fe-, Al-, Ti-, and Ba-bearing nanoparticles. The nanoparticles, in contrast, have much simpler elemental combinations, and the materials from deep-seated orebodies disappeared in the background area. Our TEM analysis results indicate that ore-forming elements can occur in the form of nanoparticles in various media (e.g., water, soil) around the deposit. The detected metal-bearing nanoparticles fall into four groups, i.e., amorphous, single-crystal, poly-crystal and complex poly-crystal. SAED patterns reveal that amorphous metal-bearing nanoparticles are common with broad amorphous diffraction rings. In contrast, single-crystal metal-bearing nanoparticles are less common than other types of nanoparticles, such as those containing Ag-Cu and Fe-O ( Poly-crystal nanoparticles are found in diverse media, and occur as individual particles or particle aggregations. The aggregation consists of nanoparticles that are similar in size, shape and chemical components. Meanwhile, regularly distributed diffraction rings are distinct in the SAED pattern. Diverse elemental combinations, including Cu-S, Cu-Fe, Cu-Zn-Fe, Pb-Sb, Cu-Pb-As, Cu-Pb, Zn-Mn, Zn-Fe and Fe-Mn, are detected in the simple polycrystalline nanoparticle aggregation. On the contrary, the complex polycrystalline nanoparticle aggregation is usually composed of inhomogeneous materials; as such, SAED patterns reveal scattered diffraction spots or intricate diffraction rings, and EDS results show diverse types of metal contents. It is hard to differentiate each nanoparticle based on those SAED patterns and EDS results. Meanwhile, more complex elemental combinations are detected in the complex polycrystalline nanoparticle aggregation, including Pb-Cu-S, Pb-Cu-S-Ca, Pb-Cu-As-S, Pb-Sb-Cu, and Pb-Cu-As-Bi. Amorphous metal-bearing nanoparticles are commonly found in our groundwater, ascending gas flow and soil samples. They are regular, rounded, nearly quadrilateral or hexagonal; indications are that amorphous structures are irrelevant to the mature morphology ( Our analysis suggested that amorphous nanoparticles commonly contain high and diverse types of metal contents ( Despite there are many types of metal-bearing nanoparticles, just a few single-crystal nanoparticles are observed in the shallow groundwater samples. Regarding the ore-related chemical components, the metal-bearing nanoparticles collected in the deep and shallow groundwater samples (commonly oxides or sulfates) contain mainly Cu, Zn, Fe and S, but rare Pb. Additionally, several Ag-, Sn-, Sb-, Mo-, and Ce-bearing nanoparticles are also found in the shallow groundwater samples. This suggests that the nanoparticles captured in the deep and shallow groundwater samples are highly similar. Metal-bearing nanoparticles with different crystalline features and aggregated characteristics, except for single-crystal ones, are also found in both ascending gas flow and soil samples. In terms of ore-related elements, nanoparticles in the ascending gas flow samples (commonly oxides or sulfates) contain mainly Pb, Cu, Fe, S and As, and minor Zn, Sb, and Bi. Nanoparticles in the soil samples (commonly oxides) contain mainly Cu and Fe, and minor Zn, Pb, S, V and Os. Based on the results, we conclude that finding of these metal-bearing nanoparticles in any medium is not just by chance, although single-crystal nanoparticles are extremely rare. Considering the variations in behaviors of nanoparticles in liquids and gases, a comparison of the nanoparticles in groundwater and ascending gas flow samples is emphasized in Nanominerals are common and widely distributed in the atmosphere, seawater, groundwater and soil ( In this study, amorphous nanoparticles, simple and complex polycrystal nanoparticles are found in the background samples. These nanoparticles only contain common elements (e.g., O, Na, Ca, Si, Ti, Mg, Al and Cl), whereas ore-related elements (e.g., Pb, Zn, and Cu) are barely detected. This suggested that the Cu-, Zn-, Pb-, Fe-, As-, and S-bearing (some Ag-, Sb-, Bi-, and Sn-bearing) nanoparticles from the Kangjiawan deposit are most likely related to the concealed orebodies, which contain minerals of similar metal assemblages such as sphalerite, galena, arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite, pyrite, silver sulfosalts and electrum ( Based on the characteristics of nanoparticles, geological Metals may be transferred from the orebodies upwards and/or laterally through transported covers ( Based on the geological characteristics of the Kangjiawan deposit and the discussion above, a schematic genetic model of the metal-bearing nanoparticles is shown in This research was supported by the