Experiments are being conduced in a photography technique to examine flow of aluminum, cast iron and steel into the molds. The purpose is to observe some parameters such as gas gap length, foam decomposition products, metal front and mold filling time in lost foam casting of aluminum, cast iron and steel. Foam-metal interface reactions and gas evolution have been observed during mold filling. The results indicate that the metal pouring temperature and foam density and coating layer thickness affect mold filling time. In the steel lost foam casting, the gas gap length and gaseous products volume and the mold filling time are significantly larger than the cast iron. In both the cast iron and the steel lost foam casting, the foam pattern escapes from the mold mainly in the form of gases but in the aluminum lost foam casting foam pattern mainly decomposes into liquid polystyrene and no gas gap layer has been observed. Results of back pressure measurements show that with increasing foam density and melt head (sprue height) gas pressure increased significantly.The lost foam casting process utilizes polymeric foam pattern for the production of metallic components. Pattern of the desired shape and dimension are coated with a refractory coating, then dried and embedded in unbounded sand. Molten metal is poured directly on the pattern, the foam undergoes thermal degradation and replaced by the liquid metal. Expanded poly-styrene (EPS) is the most common polymer used in commercial practice. The thermal degradation of the foam pattern at metal front has a significant effect on casting quality. The back pressure of gaseous degraded products affect mold filling time and metal front geometry. The nature of degraded products, are related to the pouring temperature. In ferrous castings, major part of the degradation products are gases ( The mold filling has historically been studied using several techniques: Transparent mold or photography technique. Real-time X-rays. Water simulation. Computer modeling. Embedding position probes.  This research utilizes a photographic technique to investigate mold filling time and metal front geometry in the lost foam casting ( The gas gap pressure in the steel lost foam casting was measured in a new technique. In this procedure, steel tube ( Although the glass window technique for metal fill behavior differs from real conditions in lost foam casting, more detail can be observed in this technique compared to other techniques such as real-time X-ray. The gray iron nominally contained 3.4% C, 2.2% Si, 0.60% Mn, and 0.08% S. The relative amounts of liquid and gaseous decomposition products and the gas gap length depend mainly on the metal front temperature and the velocity. In the steel lost foam casting, polystyrene did not completely convert to the gaseous products. Although in the cast iron lost foam casting SEPS In ferrous alloys, LFC generation and escape of the gaseous products from the mold cavity through the coating control mold filling rate. The rate of gas generation depend on the metal front temperature and the rate of escape of the gaseous degradation products depend on the metallostatic head pressure, coating and sand and pattern permeability and the effective coating area (the local pattern area-to-perimeter ratio). The metal front velocity governed by a dynamic balance between the back pressure and the metallostatic head. When the gas escape rate is low (two layer coating) or the gas generation rate is high (high density foam) the back pressure increased and then the mold filling time and the gas gap length increased ( In the case of the aluminum lost foam casting, no gas gap detected and LEPS In the aluminum lost foam casting several video frames at different times during filling illustrates that LEPS do not accumulate in the metal front and there is only a narrow band of the LEPS between the SEPS and the metal front. This narrow band of the LEPS decreases heat flux from the metal front to foam pattern. In the aluminum lost foam casting the heat flux rate in the metal-foam interface (on the other hand kinetic of foam decomposition) control the mold filling rate. In the aluminum lost foam casting, in the first video frame (1.56 In the case of conventional casting the mold filling rate is greater than the LFC process and the metal front have more turbulence. In this case metal entered the sprue at about 1.03 The results show that metal front temperature, foam density and coating permeability have significant effect on the volume of gaseous degradation products in ferrous LFC. Based on the present research, at high cast thickness and metal front temperature and at low coating permeability, exposure time of degradation products to heat increases. Consequently, more atomic bond break and the volume of gaseous products are produced. Maximum pressure in the steel casting in 1H mold was 33.75 The back pressure depends on the rate of gas generation as well as the rate of gas escape. The rate of gas generation depends on the foam density and the metal pouring temperature. With increasing foam density the volume of gas generated per unit volume of the foam increased and this lead to back pressure increment. There is a dynamic balance between the gas pressure and the metallostatic head pressure. At high melt head, the back pressure increased and gases escape the mold quickly. The effect of back pressure on the mold filling rate and the metal front has been simulated by SUTCAST software. In this simulation, pressure of the gas remained constant during mold filling. According to result of this simulation mold filling velocity decrease with increasing back pressure and back pressure has significant effect on molten metal behavior. On the other hand, the metal fill rate becomes slower and smoother when the gas pressure increased in the mold cavity. As the pressure of mold cavity reaches 825  In aluminum lost foam casting a narrow layer of the liquid polystyrene (<3 In steel lost foam casting a large gas gap (up to 60 In the steel lost foam casting when the foam pattern is exposed to extra heating time, the LEPS drops on the metal front and leads to metal front boiling. The filling behavior of aluminum alloys is substantially affected by the SEPS foams present in the mold cavity, and the influence of gravity is comparatively small. The back pressure in the steel lost foam casting is affected significantly by melt head. The combustion of gaseous degraded product showed that they were manly hydrocarbons and hydrogen in the steel casting. However, these gaseous decomposition products were not observed in the aluminum LFC.