The micro-processes inside comminution machines are decisive for the grinding result and the overall process efficiency. Especially the estimation of the amount of particles which is captured and stressed between colliding grinding media is of great interest in order to model and optimize the mill operation for dry fine grinding processes. This study investigates the capturing of fine dry particles by means of simplified experiments using a drop-weight tester: While an increase of both the powder flowability and the material fineness were shown to enhance the displacement of the particles out of the zone between a static plate and a falling ball, higher impact velocities and larger media sizes increase the particle capturing. Additionally, the capturing becomes more dependent on the above-mentioned parameters for finer feed materials. Finally, an extension of the active-volume-model, originally developed by Schönert, was proposed to describe the impact of those parameters more adequately.Modeling has been evolved to a very powerful tool to design and optimize comminution processes since the end of the 19th century [ Regarding media mills, which use freely moving grinding balls (e.g. tumbling, planetary and vibratory ball mills) or smaller beads (e.g. attritors and stirred media mills) as grinding tools, numerous models can be found in the literature [ The integration of the breakage properties into the grinding model is mostly done by terms describing the breakage probability as well as the particle breakage function, i.e. the fragment size distribution resulting from one stress event. Depending on the major stress mechanism inside the mill, these breakage data can be obtained by different kinds of experimental breakage tests such as single particle impact tests, drop weight tests, compression test etc. Especially for stress occurrences on single particles, these tests enable the investigation of well-defined stress conditions, leading to reasonable correlations between the energy consumption and the resulting particle size distribution [ In general, the modeling of industrial media mills demands reliable descriptions of a) the mechanical stress conditions provided by the mill, b) the number of stresses per particle, which is determined by the residence time of the material inside the mill as well as the particle capturing between the grinding media, c) the present stress intensities as a consequence of both the mechanical stress conditions and the particle capturing, and d) the breakage behavior of the particles under these conditions. The capturing of particles between the grinding balls is therefore a key parameter. A crucial aspect within non-confined particle beds, as usually present in media mills, is caused by the fact that some of the particles are displaced out of the active grinding zone without finally being stressed. The displacement of particles out of the grinding zone is a consequence of different forces acting on the particles within the impact event. Thereby, contact forces generated by pulse transmission at the particle surfaces as well as fluid forces due to the displacement of the air inside the particle bed are assumed to be of major importance [ A possible measure to quantify the particle capturing between the grinding tools is the use of the active volume between the media Previously, Hanisch and Schubert [ Barrios et al. [ Nguyen et al. [ As described above, the capturing of particles between the grinding balls is a key parameter for the modeling of media mills, but has hardly been investigated for fine particle systems so far. Therefore, this study investigates the capturing of fine limestone particles between approaching grinding tools for different particulate products, size fractions as well as powder flowabilities. In order to enable the quantification of the aforementioned active mass, a new procedure based on a drop-weight tester including a falling ball and a static plate is introduced. Besides product-related parameters, further important process-related parameters such as the powder bed height, the impact velocity and the ball size are investigated. The aim of this study is not to postulate the drop-weight test as a suitable breakage test method for modeling dry fine grinding processes. This study rather helps to understand the motion of dry fine particles between approaching grinding tools under high stress velocities. Finally, a worthwhile extension of the approach of Schönert is given, which is especially beneficial for modeling dry fine grinding processes in media mills. A drop-weight tester shown in Prior to the measurement, a defined powder bed was casted on the flat steel surface directly underneath the fixed ball. Therefore, different templates were used, each having a circular hole with a diameter of 13 mm but varying heights – depending on the type of sample and the amount of powder. Before dropping the ball, the template was placed on the steel surface and filled with the powder sample. Afterwards, the particle bed was smoothened with a blade. The template was then removed in order to realize an unconfined particle bed. Bed heights were varied to obtain different initial amounts of particles (= mass of particles per area) of 0.065, 0.13 and 0.39 g/cm In the case of the 50 mm steel ball, the capturing was also investigated for a ball-ball geometry. Therefore, another 50 mm ball was placed and fixed underneath the falling ball. It needs to be noted that the placement of a defined and stable powder bed on a convex ball surface is very difficult – in the case of highly flowing powders even impossible. This is the reason why the ball-ball contact was only investigated for selected powders and rather thin particle beds. Thus, the main focus of this manuscript is on the investigation of the ball-plate geometry. As described above, a significant amount of the particles are pushed out of the grinding zone, while only a certain fraction is captured between the approaching grinding tools. By using sufficiently high drop heights (here The capturing of particles between a falling steel ball and a static plate as shown above was investigated for different powder samples. Four different calcitic limestone fractions as well as one Portland cement clinker fraction were used as test materials within this study. All raw samples are listed in The particle size distributions of the different samples were analyzed using a Helos laser diffractometer (Sympatec, Germany). Measurements were performed in 96% ethanol using the SUCELL dispersion unit. The fresh powder samples were stirred in the liquid while being treated with ultrasonic (60 s) prior to the measurements in order to disperse agglomerates and aggregates. On the contrary, analyzing the size distributions of the broken particles within the stressed and compacted flakes required a much higher dispersing time including 60 min of ultrasonic to completely disperse the compacted flakes. The powder flowabilities of the samples were analyzed with the ring shear tester RST-XS (Dietmar Schulze Schüttguttechnik, Germany) at ambient conditions. Pre-shearing was performed under a normal stress of 10,000 Pa in order to load the bulk material with a consolidation stress Furthermore, the powder flow behavior of the limestone samples was specifically adjusted by applying different liquid additives. In the present case, heptanoic acid (HepAc) as well as diethylene glycol (DEG) were chosen as additives, as they are known to cause significantly different powder flowabilities of fine limestone powders [ In a first instance, the capturing of particles was investigated with special regard to the initial particle amount between the ball and the plate. The results are shown in  Independent of the impact velocity and the applied additive, larger amounts of particles are captured when stressing thicker initial particle beds. In the present case, the amount of stressed particles is thereby increased up to 50%. However, the relation between the initial amount of particles and the finally captured particle mass turns out to be non-linear since all of the curves flatten with increasing initial amount of particles. It clearly shows that the ratio of captured to displaced particles decreases for large initial amounts. The particle-related probability of being stressed therefore decreases, even though generally larger amounts of particles are captured when stressing thicker particle beds. This also emphasizes why an excessively high product filling inside media mills may result in a low grinding performance: On the one hand, particles may leave the mill without being stressed often enough due to the lower capturing probability. On the other hand, also the particle stressing may become less efficient, as decreasing stress intensities as well as further damping effects can be expected for excessively high captured masses. Unfortunately, the estimation of appropriate initial particle amounts for the drop-weight test, which lead to comparable stressing conditions as they are found in industrial media mills, is hardly possible. In general, industrial mills are operated in a narrow range regarding the product filling ratio. Usually, product filling ratios From In addition to that, the altered powder flowability as a consequence of the applied additive has a crucial impact on the amount of captured particles: Independent of the initial amount of particles, an enhanced capturing is seen for the more cohesive DEG formulation. It leads to stressed masses being >50% higher compared to the HepAc formulation. The increased capturing in the case of low powder flowabilities can mainly be attributed to higher particle-particle interactions and greater internal friction. As both aspects counteract the particle displacement out of the active zone, the probability to capture particles between the grinding tools before they are displaced is increased by low powder flowabilities. This finding is of great importance for the modeling of industrial fine grinding processes, especially since powder flowabilities may not only vary with the nature of the ground material, but also with attributes like particle size distribution, moisture or applied additives/grinding aids. In a next step, the influence of the feed particle size on the particle capturing was investigated for a constant initial amount of particles of 0.13 g/cm First of all, it is visible that the capturing of particles increases for higher impact velocities independent of the size fractions. Other than that, the flow-assisting additive HepAc generally leads to lower stressed masses compared to DEG. An exception can be observed for the coarsest limestone fraction, where the stressed masses are independent of the applied additive. Furthermore, significantly smaller masses are obtained for the finest sample, while the largest values are seen for the coarsest fraction. The results clearly show that the particle size and the powder flowability cause counteracting effects: As shown above, high powder flowabilities promote the displacement of particles out of the grinding zone. However, an enhanced capturing is also observed for the coarse particle fractions, even though the powder flowability generally increases for coarser materials. This phenomenon can probably be explained by two aspects: As already postulated by Schönert [  It is evident that the number of stressed particles is significantly smaller for the 30 mm ball. This is not surprising since the area in which particles can generally be captured increases with large ball diameters. Schönert [   It is apparent that both materials lead to similar stressed masses for all impact velocities, with slightly higher values for the cement clinker at low velocities of 1.5 and 2.0 m/s. This finding might seem somewhat surprising, because a lower powder flowability was measured for limestone. In contrast to past results, a lower powder flowability was shown to promote the capturing of particles between the grinding tools. At this point, the solid densities of the cement clinker (3.21 kg/L) and the limestone (2.73 kg/L) need also to be considered. For particles of identical size, the capturing can additionally be assumed to be enhanced by higher solid densities due to the higher mass inertia of the particles. This aspect may compensate differences of the powder flow behavior. Furthermore, the clinker also shows a slightly higher bulk density in comparison to the limestone sample; leading to higher active masses for similar active volumes. Drop-weight testers are normally used to evaluate the breakage behavior of relatively coarse materials. Therefore, it was also examined whether the used test procedure is also applicable for the characterization of the breakage properties of fine particle fractions. In a first instance, the extent of energy dissipation was investigated by means of the coefficients of ball restitution, which were determined exemplarily for the limestone fraction 2. The values are shown in The compacted flakes, which were obtained from testing the limestone fraction 2, were further dispersed in ethanol and analyzed by laser diffraction to characterize the breakage efficiency. The measured particle sizes For stressing feed particles of the limestone fraction 2 ( In order to characterize the energy utilization of the breakage event, not only the size distribution of the fragments but also the total amount of broken particles needs to be considered. It is apparent that the formation of the new product surface proceeds continuously, even though the formation of fine fragments is limited above the afore-mentioned critical stress intensity. Above this level, the growth of the surface area is mainly attributed to the increased number of broken particles, which results from the enhanced particle capturing at high impact velocities. Assuming that only particles within the compacted flakes are stressed and broken into smaller fragments, significant differences can be seen: On the one hand, the energy utilization for breakage is indeed much lower for the high-flowing HepAc powder. On the other hand, the surface formation is higher and very similar for the other two product formulations.  In general, the proposed drop-weight method contributes to very valuable insights regarding the micro-processes between colliding grinding tools, especially in terms of particle capturing and energy dissipation. However, it is less applicable for the characterization of the breakage results in the case of very fine materials in the lower micron range. This is according to a variety of reasons: On the one hand, it is hard to monitor whether the size distribution of those particles that are finally captured between the surfaces equals the distribution of the original feed material. This may be especially critical for additives like HepAc, which are also known to decrease the tendency of agglomeration [ The choice of appropriate stress intensities for the breakage testing is a further critical issue, especially due to wide stress intensity distributions in most of the common media mills. In our study, the proposed drop-weight method demanded sufficiently high stress intensities, since the formation of compacted flakes was essential for both the sampling of the material as well as the determination of the stressed mass. Such high intensities, which lead to an excessive material compaction, can generally be assumed to play only a minor role in most of the mills. For an exclusive characterization of the breakage behavior the test should be carried out under stress intensities, to which the breakage is not limited by the compaction of the material. This could be done by either ensuring higher stressed masses (for example by using lateral confinements within the drop-weight tester, see e.g. [ The results shown above reveal that the proposed drop-weight procedure is rather suitable to describe the capturing of dry fine particles between approaching grinding tools than for the characterization of the associated particle breakage. Therefore, it is examined whether the above-mentioned Schönert approach [ Eq. For dry fine grinding processes, normally values in the range of For this purpose, the active mass Thereby, the capturing behavior was estimated using values of It is clearly shown that the values obtained from the Schönert approach are in the same magnitude as the experimental values from the drop-weight test. However, an adequate agreement is not achieved. This is not surprising, since the results shown in section 3.1 reveal several influencing parameters, which are not considered by the model. Notably, values such as the impact velocity of the ball as well as the powder flow behavior are not regarded. Furthermore, it needs to be noted that the Schönert relation was derived for a ball-ball geometry, whereas the results of this study were mostly obtained from an idealized model experiment using ball-plate impacts. Nevertheless, parameters such as the ball diameter and the feed particle size are already considered in a reasonable manner. Thus, the question arises to how far the existing approach can be modified in order to give a precise description of the particle capturing. Thereby, especially the capturing angle In order to identify certain regularities regarding parameters like the stress geometry but also the impact velocity and the powder flowability, the values of sin In a first instance,  The diagram reveals that a significantly wider range of capturing angles needs to be considered for dry fine grinding than originally postulated by Schönert. Especially the contact velocity of the ball, which is a widely distributed parameter in industrial media mills, can be assumed to cause a wide variation of capturing angles depending on the mill type, its geometry as well as the process parameters. The relation of  A comparison of the fit parameters The incorporation of Eq. Unfortunately, it remains difficult to estimate the influence of the degree of powder filling  It can generally be assumed that this approach helps to estimate the particle capturing for a wide range of fine grinding application or rather a variety of media mills. The shown impacts of the particle fineness or the powder flowability on the particle capturing also explain a number of different aspects which are already known from industrial grinding processes. For instance, flowability-assisting grinding aids are normally avoided in mills, which operate with comparatively high stress energies (e.g. tumbling ball mills with large grinding balls or vertical roller mills). It also explains why in some those applications, such as the production of very fine cements, sometimes also water is injected to the mill. In this case, the water makes the powder more cohesive, and thus, helps to maintain a certain particle bed between the grinding tools. In contrast to that, other mills with rather small stress energies like stirred media mills are known to have higher efficiencies as long as the powder flowability is above a critical value [ In this study it was shown that the motion behavior of fine particles between a static plate and falling ball is determined by various product- as well as process-related parameters: While an increase of both the powder flowability and the material fineness leads to an enhanced displacement of the particles out of the grinding zone between the grinding tools, higher impact velocities as well as media sizes promote the particle capturing. In addition to that, the capturing subsequently appears to be progressively dependent on the above-mentioned parameters for finer feed materials. Selected experiments using a ball-ball geometry revealed that the particle capturing is nearly four times higher for ball-plate contacts. A comparison of these results with the already existing active-volume-model by Schönert demonstrated that the model yields values in the right magnitude only for the ball-plate geometry, even though Schönert actually aimed for modeling ball-ball contacts. For ball-ball contacts in turn, the Schönert model overestimated the particle capturing. In addition to that, the model does not allow an adequate description of most of the influencing parameters. Therefore, a model extension was proposed to describe the impact of those parameters more adequately. A much more accurate definition of the active volume was achieved by a) categorizing the flow behavior together with the fineness range of the feed powder, b) incorporating the effect of the relative impact velocity of the grinding media and c) considering the stress geometry. It was confirmed that this kind of simplification enables a very fast but sufficiently precise characterization of the particle capturing. It was further determined that the proposed drop-weight procedure is certainly a helpful tool to characterize the particle capturing between approaching grinding tools. In its present installation it is not suitable for the evaluation of the breakage behavior of fine dry particles though. Moreover, the coefficients of restitution, which were obtained from the drop heights as well as the rebound heights, underlined that the displacement of particles from the grinding zone is accompanied by an increase of energy dissipation. By that, new valuable insights into stressing of particle beds between two approaching surfaces are achieved. We acknowledge the German