Emulsions have wide applications in various fields, especially in the petroleum industry. The rheological behavior of water-oil emulsions plays an important role in oil production, transportation and enhanced oil recovery methods Rheology of emulsions is affected by various factors such as dispersed phase fraction, droplet size distribution, a concentration of emulsifying agents, solid concentration, etc. Emulsion stabilization by solids, especially nanoparticles increased the stability, improved the rheological properties and consequently, incrementing the oil recovery from a subterranean formation. It can be pointed out that in very limited cases, the effects of nanoparticles on droplet size distribution of emulsion were investigated and models for prediction of the rheological behavior of solid-stabilized water-in-oil emulsions were not presented. The experiments were carried out using crude oil (petroleum) and fumed silica particle (namely Aerosil R972). In this communication, the effects of different parameters, including water volume fraction, nanoparticle concentration, shear rate, and angular frequency were investigated on the rheological behavior of water-in-oil emulsion. According to the results of rheological experiments, it can be pointed out that the influence of the nanoparticles on the viscosity of water-in-oil emulsions is mainly affected by the water/oil ratio, a number of nanoparticles, shear rate and angular frequency. Nanoparticle decreased water droplet diameter and increased the stability, elasticity and viscosity of the emulsion. In addition, for a better understanding of the effect of these parameters on the viscosity of the water-in-oil emulsions, apparent viscosity models were used. Based on the experimental data, a new equation was developed to estimate the relative viscosity of solid-free and solid-stabilized emulsions. The obtained results demonstrated that the proposed model has increased accuracy than previously published correlations.Energy [kT] Radius [m] Consistency index [-] Flow behavior index [-] Relative viscosity [-] Ratio of dispersed phase viscosity to the continuous phase viscosity [-] Constant parameter [-] Regression correlation coefficient [-]  The average value of the kth input variable [-] Pressure difference [-] Frequency factor [-] Activation energy [J/mol] Gas constant [J/mol Temperature [K] Nanoparticle concentration [wt%] Storage modulus [Pa] Loss modulus [Pa] Angular frequency [rad/s] Dynamic viscosity [Pa Complex viscosity [Pa Frequency [Hz] Time constant [Sec] Viscosity [Pa Predicted emulsion relative viscosity [Pa Average value of the predicted emulsion relative viscosity [Pa Dispersed phase volume fraction [%] Maximum packing concentration volume fraction [%] Apparent yield stress [dynes/cm Apparent viscosity [Pa Interfacial tension [N Contact angle [°] Shear stress [dynes/cm Shear rate [ Emulsion (water-in-oil and oil-in-water) is a disperse system consisting of at least two immiscible liquids in which liquid droplets finely suspended in a second immiscible liquid. As a matter of fact, emulsions are composed of two main phases, continuous and dispersed. Moreover, emulsions contain a surface-active agent (surfactants or emulsifiers). the Surface-active agent may be derived from the oil itself or can be added manually. Surface-active agent has two main functions: (1) to decrease the interfacial tension between phases; consequently, the energy required for emulsification is reduced, and (2) adsorbed on the droplet surfaces and create an interfacial film, which prevents coalescence between the water droplets; thus, stabilize the formed emulsion Emulsions may contain solid particles in addition to gas In this equation, Emulsions have wide applications in various fields such as food product, pharmaceutical, cosmetic, paints, adhesives, inks, pulp and paper, biological fluids, agricultural product, explosives, petroleum industry (drilling, production, enhanced oil recovery, transportation and process) and so on as a result of their highly variable physical properties Different criteria can be used to classify the emulsions. Based on the classic classification, water and oil play the main roles. Typically, the emulsions are divided into four groups namely water-in-oil, oil-in-water, oil-in-water-in-oil and water-in-oil-in-water As previously mentioned, one of the water-in-oil and oil-in-water emulsion applications in the petroleum industry is an improvement of the recovery factor. Two alternative approaches to decrease the percent of oil remaining in porous media are reducing the interfacial tension or increasing the shear viscosity of the driving fluid Poor sweep efficiency, especially for heavy oil waterflooding, because the crude oil mobility is much less than the water mobility (or crude oil viscosity is higher than that of water). Due to this problem water quickly channels through the formation to the producing well, so water cut increases. This problem more occurs in thief zones. Reservoir pore blockage due to retention of discrete droplets within the pore spaces. Because the interfacial tension between the reservoir oil and water is too high. Surfactant flooding boosts oil production by lowering interfacial tension, decreasing the water mobility and altering the wettability of the reservoir. Surfactant flooding is more efficient than water flooding to mobilize the trapped oil. This method has problems such as high price and inability to control mobility very well The flow properties or in other words, rheology is the most significant feature of emulsions. Rheology is the science which focuses on the alteration in form and the flow of materials under influence of an applied shear stress. The rheology of fluids is characterized using the viscosity concept. In fact, viscosity plays a key role in simulation and prediction of different oil production operations Prediction of the emulsion viscosity is important for petroleum industry such as understanding the emulsion behavior during emulsion flooding. Recently, correlations and models have been presented for estimating the viscosity of the emulsion. Most of these correlations have been developed for suspension but used for emulsion viscosity prediction. None of these equations consider the effect of added solids to the emulsion. In 1966, Gogarty and Olson described the advantage of emulsion flooding in the enhanced oil recovery process in which tried in 1963 by Marathon Oil Company From the information presented in the literature, it can be pointed out that in very limited cases the effect of nanoparticles on droplet size distribution of emulsion were investigated and models for prediction of the rheological behavior of solid-stabilized water-in-oil emulsions were not presented. The objective of this study is to investigate the influence of nanoparticles on the rheological properties, the droplet size distribution and rheological models of water-in-oil emulsions. To achieve our aims, various parameters, especially the effects of nanoparticle concentration, water volume fraction, shear rate, and angular frequency are investigated. One of the faults of the previous works was using nanoparticles and surfactant together (sometimes addition of the surfactant, co-surfactant was used), which was solved in this project with using nanoparticles alone. Surfactant increases the ultimate price of the project. Moreover, to evaluate the effect of nanoparticle on the viscosity behavior of the water-in-oil emulsions, twelve emulsion equations were used. Ten existing emulsion viscosity models were evaluated using the experimental data. Non-linear regression of the experimental data is undertaken to conclude the maximum packing concentration volume fraction of the water droplets at nanoparticle concentration and shear rate. Based on experimental data, develop an equation that takes into account the variation of relative viscosity with water volume fraction, nanoparticle concentration and maximum packing concentration volume fraction. The results of this study can be used for a better quantification of the properties of nanoparticle stabilized water-in-oil emulsions during crude oil production and transportation operations. The experiments were carried out using crude oil. The API gravity and density of used crude oil are 25.6° and 0.87861 It is necessary to mention, other nanoparticles were used in this study such as Cloisite 20A, Aerosil R380, Calcium carbonate and Clay. As previously discussed, hydrophobic particles with contact angles more than 90° stabilize water-in-oil emulsions. As a result, Aerosil R972 selected because increases the stability more than other nanoparticles. Also, Aerosil R972 is more affordable. The water-in-oil emulsion was prepared in the lab at room temperature (25 Microscopic observations of the prepared emulsion were conducted using an Eclipse TE2000-U (Nikon) polarized light microscope. Emulsion stability was given by the bottle test method. Emulsions were placed in graduated glass test tubes and stored at 70 Droplet size distributions of stabilized and non-stabilized water-in-oil emulsions were determined by Laser Particle Sizer ANALYSETTE 22 (FRITSCH) at room temperature (25 Rheological measurements of crude oil at various temperatures and also water-in-oil emulsion samples at different water volume fraction and nanoparticle concentration were measured using a Physica MCR 301 rheometer (Anton Paar) which operates by the Rheoplus software. For crude oil, the steady shear data was collected. Furthermore, for emulsion, the steady shear and the frequency sweep data were collected. Three rheological models namely Power Law (Eq. The emulsion rheology experiments were performed based on, a factorial experimental design with DX7 software. Two replicates were utilized to increase the performance. Emulsion viscosity is a key parameter for the computational flow simulation. Different models have been developed for prediction of the emulsions apparent viscosity. The most well-known correlations for emulsion viscosity are those developed by Einstein Using the Krieger-Dougherty Based on the experimental data, development of an equation that takes into account the variation of relative viscosity with water volume fraction, nanoparticle concentration and maximum packing concentration volume fraction. Statistical and graphical error analysis can be used to evaluate the performance of the presented model. The statistical analysis implements employed for this purpose were the percentage means mean percentage error (MPE), mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) and standard deviation (SD). Definitions and equations of these parameters are given as follows: 1. Mean Percentage Error (MPE): it measures the relative deviation of the predicted values from the experimental values, which is defined by: 2. Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE): It evaluates the relative absolute deviation of the predicted values from the experimental values, which is defined by: 3. Standard deviation (SD): This is a measure of dispersion, which is defined by: Graphical tools can be used to check the accuracy of the presented correlation. 1. Error distribution: It is a tool to quantify the error distribution around the zero line to designate if the correlation has an error trend or not. 2. Crossplot: In this technique, all estimated data are sketched versus experimental data. The closer the plotted data to the 45° perfect model line, the higher the validity of the correlation. To check out the effect of the input parameters on the developed correlation, sensitivity analyses can be used  Aerosil R972 is hydrophobic particles, which have a contact angle of 114°. Therefore, these particles form water-in-oil emulsions. During the experimental work, the highest stable emulsion that can be observed was about 70% water cut. Catastrophic phase inversion does not occur. This indicates that the inversion point of solid free and solid-stabilized water-in-oil emulsion at 25 For stability measurement, emulsions were placed in graduated glass test tubes and stored at 70 Water cut and nanoparticle have an influence on the size of the emulsified water droplets. By increasing water volume fraction the droplet diameter of emulsion increments, which indicates the droplets packed closer. Consequently, the separation distance between water droplets decreases where small droplets occupy the free space between large droplets. It could be concluded that the mean droplet diameter of emulsion decreases and more uniform with increasing the nanoparticle concentration. Added nanoparticles are adsorbed onto the water–oil interface, then the surface energy of the system is reduced and, hence, the established emulsion droplet becomes smaller. Through reducing the droplet diameter, the Peclet number (Pe) decreased. Subsequently, a movement of these small droplets inside the oil phase is due to diffusion (or Brownian). The droplet size distributions of the water-in-oil emulsions containing 50% water cut without nanoparticle and with 0.1 The flow behavior of crude oil was investigated at four different temperatures. As mentioned above, fluid viscosity is a function of temperature. The effect of temperature on the crude oil viscosity can be studied with Arrhenius equation, which is defined by: The Power Law, Bingham and Casson models (Eqs. A thorough understanding of rheology of the solid-free and solid-stabilized emulsion is significant for enhanced oil recovery process and improved crude oil transportation in the pipeline. Rheological measurements of prepared emulsions were carried out at 25  Traditionally to display the rheological behavior of fluids, viscosity plotted based on shear rate changing. This type of curve is not discriminating. To solve this problem, drawing viscosity versus shear stress is recommended To better understanding the viscous and elastic properties of the emulsion, oscillatory measurements must be used in addition to steady shear measurements. The frequency sweep is a significant method of oscillatory measurements. The angular frequency ( Comparison of steady shear and the frequency sweep experiments can conclude all samples (solid free and solid-stabilized emulsions) are viscoelastic fluids because the complex viscosity is higher than viscosity.  It is observed from The Power Law, Bingham and Casson models (Eqs. The results of the statistical tests (ANOVA) for two rheological tests are summarized in Rheological parameters (shear-thinning behavior and viscoelastic behavior) were obtained through experiments and equations indicated the presence of elastic network structure. In this part, Krieger-Dougherty and Bicerano et al. models are used to determine the maximum packing concentration volume fraction in the range of 0.2–1. Experimental determination of the emulsion viscosity is time-consuming; therefore, valid correlations need to be developed for characterizing water-in-oil emulsion flow through porous media, pressure drop and pumping energy calculations. The rheological measurement showed that the nanoparticle concentration has a significant effect on emulsion viscosity. Most of the correlations published in papers are based on surfactant-stabilized emulsion. The correlations available in the literature, fail to take into account the nanoparticle concentration. For this reason, according to nonlinear regressions, a new correlation was developed. The emulsion viscosity is considered to be a function of water volume fraction, nanoparticle concentration and maximum packing concentration volume fraction. Based on nonlinear regressions, a new correlation form was developed and minimization of MAPE has been considered as the objective function of these regressions: These polynomials and constants are given below: Statistical error analysis for emulsion relative viscosity correlations are illustrated in One of the most precise correlations, including Eilers correlation has been chosen to visualize the veracity and performance of these correlations as well as the newly presented correlation. Error distributions of Eilers and the new proposed correlations as a function of shear rate, water volume fraction and nanoparticle concentration are illustrated in  The relative effect of input parameters (water volume fraction, nanoparticle concentration and maximum packing concentration volume fraction) on the emulsion relative viscosities are measured with Eq. To check the validity of the proposed models, emulsion relative viscosity variation with the water volume fraction at different nanoparticle concentration using previously mentioned correlations, the new proposed correlation and experimental data were sketched in In this study, the effects of the nanoparticle (Aerosil R972), water volume fraction, shear rate and angular frequency on the rheology of water-in-crude oil emulsion were experimentally and theoretically investigated. For this objective, emulsions were prepared at different water volume fraction and nanoparticle concentration. The obtained results from experimental measurements showed that the three models including Power Law, Bingham and Casson models can be used for prediction of rheological behavior of the crude oil, solid-free and solid-stabilized emulsions. The shear viscosity, complex viscosity, elasticity and time constant of water-in-oil emulsions are influenced by a number of nanoparticles, volume of water fraction, shear rate and angular frequency. Also, droplet size of emulsions decreases with the addition of nanoparticles. Rheological parameters were obtained through experiments and equations indicated the presence of elastic network structure. The effect of water cut and nanoparticle concentration on the stability of water-in-oil emulsions has also been investigated. Stability of emulsion increases as a function of decreasing the water cut and increasing nanoparticle concentration. For measuring the maximum packing concentration volume fraction, Krieger-Dougherty and Bicerano et al. models are used at different nanoparticle concentration and shear rate. The obtained parameter from these models indicates that the maximum packing concentration volume fraction increases with shear rate and nanoparticle. Also, sensitivity analyses demonstrate the emulsion relative viscosity decreases with maximizing the packing concentration volume fraction. Ten correlations for relative viscosity of solid-free and solid-stabilized emulsions were evaluated through statistical and graphical error analyses. The results show the inaccuracy of these correlations. Finally, the new correlation has been developed for predicting the relative viscosity of solid-free and solid-stabilized emulsions. The statistical and graphical error analyses illustrated that the developed model more accurate and reliable over the existing correlations.