If cuttings carrying performance is poor and cuttings removal is not in time during the drilling of horizontal wells, drilling cuttings will accumulate in the lower sections, leading to backing pressure, BHA binding and even drill pipe sticking. In this paper, a new type of Helmholtz pulse grinding bits suitable for horizontal wells was designed based on the theory of Helmholtz oscillation chamber to generate pulse, jet pump and high pressure jet after the formation of cuttings beds was analyzed. In this type of bit, a high-speed pulse jet is used to assist rock breaking, a reverse jet is used to remove the cuttings at the bottom of the bit under negative pressure, and its inner grinding structure is used to reduce the particle size of cuttings. By using this bit, efficient cuttings removal and rock breaking will be both realized, the chip hold-down effect will be reduced and the cuttings beds in a horizontal well will be also removed. Then, the hydraulic models were established for a pulse generation device, an efficient rock breaking device and a reverse swabbing device, respectively. It is shown from the simulation results that the optimal resonance flowrate increases with the increase of the diameters of an inlet chamber and a feedback chamber and with the decrease of the diameter of a resonance chamber, and it is approximately in linear relationship with each factor. The optimal flowrate ratio of the reverse swabbing device increases first and then decreases with the increase of dimensionless flowrate ratio, and decreases with the increase of dimensionless area ratio. It is indicated from example analysis that the inherent frequency of Helmholtz oscillation chamber is 24.00 Hz, the optimal oscillation flowrate is 23.92 L/s and the optimal flowrate ratio is 0.59. Based on case studies, the accuracy of hydraulic models is verified. It is concluded that this new type of bits provides a new solution to the accumulation of cuttings beds.With the rapid development of global unconventional oil and gas exploration and development, highly-deviated wells and horizontal wells are increasingly applied widely in order to further improve the efficiency of oil and gas exploration and development. However, if the cuttings carrying performance is poor and the cuttings removal is not in time during the drilling, drilling cuttings usually accumulate in the low side in the migration process and form cuttings bed, which restricts the drilling rate and drilling efficiency and even causes such drilling complications as pump suffocation and drill pipe sticking. Conventional solutions to the above mentioned problems include frequent “short tripping”, drilling speed improvement, and displacement increase. Although these solutions have some effects, they cannot fundamentally eliminate the cuttings beds that may appear at any time during the drilling Due to gravity, the cuttings settle on the low side of wellbore in the process of the wellbore flow and form cuttings bed at the section with a large well deviation However, the relevant theoretical and experimental studies are based on steady-state fluids, and there is little research on pulse fluids. Compared with the conventional steady-state fluid, the pulse jet can greatly improve rock breaking and cuttings removal efficiency with its asymmetric and non-uniform cutting of rocks In view of this, a new type of Helmholtz pulse grinding bit was designed based on the Helmholtz oscillation chamber The Helmholtz pulse grinding bit consists of a Helmholtz oscillation chamber, a lower jet channel, a swabbing chamber, a reverse high-speed flow channel, a mixing chamber, an accelerating chamber, an internal grinding chamber, an internal grinding machine and a diffusion chamber. The Helmholtz oscillation chamber is composed of an inlet chamber, a resonance chamber, a feedback chamber and a diverging section. Different from the conventional PDC bit, the Helmholtz pulse grinding bit consists of a pulse generation device, a high-efficiency rock breaking device and a negative-pressure swabbing device. There is no chip space in the structure. Instead, the cuttings are discharged through circulation in swabbing chamber – mixing chamber – accelerating chamber – internal grinding chamber – diffusion chamber. Its structure and flow channel are shown in As shown in In the Helmholtz pulse grinding bit, a high-speed pulse jet is generated by a pulse generation device to assist in high-efficiency rock breaking, a negative pressure is formed in the swabbing chamber and at the bottom of the bit by a reverse swabbing device to enable the cuttings backflow, and the particle size of cuttings is reduced by means of its inner grinding structure. It thus provides an effective means for reducing the chip hold-down effect and for removing the cuttings beds in horizontal wells. Its advantages include: A large-scale vortex ring structure is formed in the Helmholtz oscillation chamber, which converts the steady-state flow of the circulation drilling into pulse jet. The pulse jet impacts the rock asymmetrically and nonuniformly, which improves the hydraulic assistance in rock breaking. The high-speed jet produced by the reverse high-speed flow channel forms negative pressure in the swabbing chamber and at the bottom of the bit and swabs the cuttings, which reduces the chip hold-down effect and improves the cuttings removal efficiency of the drilling fluid. The inner grinding structure is used to reduce the particle size of cuttings, which is favorable for the cuttings carrying of the drilling fluid and the cuttings bed removal of horizontal wells. Based on the theory of Helmholtz oscillation chamber, a pulse generation device was designed so that a large-scale vortex ring structure was formed through pressure wave interference, and then the steady-state flow was converted into pulse jet, as shown in When the frequency of the pressure disturbance in the Helmholtz oscillation chamber is The inherent frequency of the Helmholtz oscillation chamber is expressed as:  The high-speed rock breaking device makes rock breaking through the asymmetric and non-uniform impact of pulse jet, as shown in The drilling fluid flows into the diverging section through Section A, diverges in the diverging section, and then flows to the high-efficiency rock breaking device and the negative-pressure swabbing device respectively. The drilling fluid diverges in the diverging section, and converges in the mixing chamber. The flow channels of Sections B–E and Sections C–D are in parallel, and the pressure head of the two flow channels is equal, which is expressed as below: According to the continuity equation, the relationship between the drilling fluid flowing through Sections A, B and C can be expressed as: According to the simultaneous equation of Equations The drilling fluid flowing through Section A is half that pumped by the drilling pump. At the same time, taking the ground as the datum plane, the Bernoulli equation of Sections A and B, and Sections A and C is as below: According to the simultaneous equation of Equations The pressure of Section A is: The drilling fluid flows through Section C of the high-efficiency rock breaking device into Section D of the negative-pressure swabbing device. The uneven distribution of drilling fluid flow is often caused by bottom turbulence. Therefore, In this process, the drilling fluid will also have pressure loss, which is manifested as the bit pressure drop Δ Considering the drilling fluid will have pressure loss in the lower jet channel and swabbing chamber, Meanwhile, the drilling fluid has no flow loss in the reverse high-speed flow channel, that is, the flow through Section E is exactly the flow through Section B. In this process, considering the pressure loss of the drilling fluid in the reverse high-speed flow channel, The negative-pressure swabbing device is designed based on jet pump theory, which swabs the cuttings by virtue of the high velocity of reverse jet. Its schematic diagram is shown in The intermediate variables In the second section at the depth of 3000 m in a horizontal well, the Ø244.47 mm casing was run in the Ø311.15 mm borehole, and then the Ø215.9 mm drill bit was applied in horizontal drilling, in which the rate of penetration (ROP) and rotation speed were 9.144 m/h and 50 r/min respectively, and the drilling fluid was water-based with the visual viscosity of 0.058 Pa·s and the density of 1.08 g/cm In order to verify the feasibility of the Helmholtz pulse grinding bit, the authors studied relevant theories about the critical drilling fluid flow in horizontal wells It can be obtained from The optimal resonance flowrate in the resonance chamber is determined by the structure of the oscillation chamber. It is not only affected by the diameter of the resonance chamber, but also is related to the diameter of the inlet chamber and the diameter of the feedback chamber. Under the condition that other parameters remain unchanged, the variation of the optimal resonance flowrate with various factors is obtained through calculation by the above As can be seen from The flowrate ratio of the reverse swabbing device is a key factor affecting the swabbing efficiency of Helmholtz pulse grinding bits. Under the condition that other parameters remain unchanged, the variation of the It can be observed from  It can be observed from  In a Helmholtz pulse grinding bit, a new type of bit, the asymmetric impact of pulse jet is employed to assist in rock breaking, a reverse jet is used to remove the cuttings under negative pressure, and the particle size of cuttings is reduced by means of its inner grinding structure, so that the high-efficiency rock breaking can be promoted and the problem of accumulation of cuttings beds can be solved. The hydraulic models of pulse generation device, high-efficiency rock breaking device and reverse swabbing device were established respectively. The inherent frequency of the Helmholtz oscillation chamber, the optimal resonance drilling fluid flowrate and the optimal flowrate ratio were obtained through case analysis, which were respectively 24.00 Hz, 23.92 L/s and 0.59. The accuracy of the model was verified through case analysis. The parametric study shows that the optimal resonance flowrate increases with the increase of the diameters of an inlet chamber and a feedback chamber and with the decrease of the diameter of a resonance chamber, and it is approximately in linear relationship with each factor; and the optimal flowrate ratio of the reverse swabbing device increases first and then decreases with the increase of dimensionless flowrate ratio, and decreases with the increase of dimensionless area ratio. Therefore, in the design and the application of the Helmholtz pulse grinding bit, it is necessary to pay attention to the influence of these parameters.