Nanoparticle loaded quasi solid electrolytes are important from the view point of developing electrolytes for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) having long term stability. The present work shows the influence of isoelectric point of nanopowders in electrolyte on the photoelectrochemical characteristics of DSSCs. Electrolytes with nanopowders of silica, alumina and magnesia which have widely differing isoelectric points are used in the study. Adsorption of ions from the electrolyte on the nanopowder surface, characterized by zeta potential measurement, show that cations get adsorbed on silica, alumina surface while anions get adsorbed on magnesia surface. The electrochemical characteristics of nanoparticulate loaded electrolytes are examined through cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). DSSCs fabricated using liquid, silica or alumina loaded electrolytes exhibit almost similar performance. But interestingly, the magnesia loaded electrolyte-based cell show lower short circuit current density (J
                     SC) and much higher open circuit voltage (V
                     OC), which is attributed to adsorption of anions. Such anionic adsorption prevents the dark reaction in magnesia loaded electrolyte-based cell and thus, enhances the V
                     OC by almost 100 mV as compared to liquid electrolyte based cell. Also, higher electron life time at the titania/electrolyte interface is observed in magnesia loaded electrolyte-based cell as compared to others.Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are low cost photovoltaics which have attained an efficiency of 12.3% in the lab scale Studies carried out by Bhattacharyya et al. have shown that the adsorption of ions on the powders depends on their surface properties Powders having low (∼2–3), intermediate (∼6–8) and high (∼12–13) values of isoelectric points were selected for this study. Silica, alumina and magnesia respectively matched the requirement. Hence, silica, alumina and magnesia nanopowders were used to prepare the nanoparticle loaded electrolytes. Silica -Aerosil 200 (Degussa, specific surface area ∼200 m Liquid electrolyte of composition 0.6 M PMII, 0.1 M iodine and 0.5 M TBP in MPN was prepared by mixing the components. Initial studies showed that the performance of the milled nanopowder loaded electrolyte was better than sonicated nanopowder loaded electrolyte. Nanoparticle loaded electrolytes were thus prepared by adding nanopowders to the liquid electrolyte and milling the mix in order to disperse the particles in the electrolyte medium homogeneously. The solid loading of the powders in electrolyte was chosen to be 5 wt%, 10 wt% and 15wt% for silica, alumina and magnesia respectively. The choice of powder loading was to maintain the overall surface area of the powders in the liquid electrolyte nearly same for all as the ratio of specific surface area in case of silica: alumina: magnesia was almost 3:2:1. Zirconia grinding media of 2–3 mm diameter was added in 1:1 ratio to the mixture of nanopowder and liquid electrolyte and roller milled for 8 h at 90 rpm in order to disperse the powder in the electrolyte. Milling process was particularly essential for preparation of magnesia based electrolyte as the magnesia powder which had the least initial surface area could not trap the liquid electrolyte within the particle network unless ball milled. Glass substrates were cleaned with detergent solution followed by cleaning with distilled water and ethanol prior to coating of the TiO Nanopowders were characterized for size by particle size analyzer (Delsa Nano C, Beckman Coulter). Zeta potential of silica, alumina and magnesia nanoparticles as suspended in solvent (MPN) or electrolyte of composition 39 mM PMII and 6.5 mM iodine in MPN was measured using low concentration flow cell of the instrument (Delsa Nano C). 0.13 wt%, 0.26 wt% and 0.39 wt% of silica, alumina and magnesia respectively were suspended in electrolyte. Surface area of MgO powder was measured by Smart sorb 92/93 (Smart Instruments Co., Mumbai). The nanopowders were also observed by transmission electron microscope (TEM) [Philips CM200]. To examine the adsorption of ionic constituents of PMII from the electrolyte on the nanoparticle surface, the nanoparticles were separated from the electrolyte by centrifuging at 10,000 rpm for 10 min followed by washing with acetonitrile to remove the excess ions. Acetonitrile was used for washing as it has nearly same dielectric constant as MPN but its viscosity is lower. The washed gel was dried and the mass obtained was treated as residue of corresponding gel. Thermal analysis was done in flowing air by SDT Q600 (TA Instruments) at a heating rate of 10 °C min Photocurrent–voltage (I–V) characteristics were obtained using a Keithley model 2420 source measure unit. The irradiation source was a 150 W xenon lamp on a Newport solar simulator with AM 1.5 G. The cell active area was 1 cm The average particle sizes as determined by light scattering for silica, alumina and magnesia in suspension were 205 nm, 286 nm and 1282 nm respectively. The specific surface area of magnesia nanopowders was found to be 67.8 m Thermal analysis of the nanopowders, gel residue samples and PMII respectively are shown in To further examine the adsorption of PMII on the nanopowders the bonding characteristics were examined from the FTIR measurements. In order to further characterize the interaction of nanopowders with the electrolyte zeta potential was measured. Zeta potential measurement was carried out to observe the surface charge of nanopowders in solvent (MPN) and electrolyte (PMII, I Grotthuss-like mechanism of charge transport occurs in electrolyte by adsorption of imidazolium group ions and corresponding arrangement of iodide/triiodide on the surface of nanopowders The photovoltaic performance of the DSSCs diminished on moving from silica containing electrolyte to magnesia containing electrolyte as shown in The photoelectrochemical analysis of the cells showed two distinct semicircles ( Peak in case of magnesia loaded electrolyte was shifted to a lower frequency as observed from bode phase plots ( The effect of addition of nanopowders with different isoelectric points to the electrolyte on photovoltaic performance of DSSCs was examined. Silica and alumina loaded electrolyte based cells performed almost similar to liquid electrolyte based cell. But addition of magnesia to electrolyte decreased the photocurrent and efficiency of the cells. Adsorption of anionic species (iodide/triiodide) on the nanopowder surface was responsible for poor performance in magnesia based electrolytes. However, photovoltage was enhanced in magnesia based electrolytes due to prevention of recombination reactions. Finally, it was observed that low isoelectric point materials are suitable for nanoparticulate loaded electrolytes which can perform efficiently. The authors acknowledge