The present work addresses the recovery of rhenium from scrub liquor of molybdenite concentrate roasting fume and dust by solvent extraction method. According to the results, recovery of rhenium from the scrub liquor is not practical unless molybdenum is removed in advance. The extraction of molybdenum was carried out using a D2EHPA-TBP system which resulted in up to 99.8% Mo extraction in a two-stage solvent extraction at pH = 1 and O/A = 1. Up to 99.6% of Re was extracted subsequently using TOA in a single-stage extraction at pH = −0.3 and O/A = 1:20. The organic phase was stripped by ammonium hydroxide 32% and the resultant liquor was further subjected to evaporation as a result of which, an enriched purified solution was obtained. Ammonium perrhenate was precipitated from the enriched liquor by adjusting the pH to 6.5–7.Rhenium is a precious metal with a wide variety of metallurgical as well as chemical applications. The main application of rhenium is in the production of nickel-based superalloys used in combustion turbines. Rhenium has several valences such as +7, +6, +5 and +4, and easily changes from one valence to another. This feature has made rhenium an ideal element for the manufacturing of reforming catalysts ( Solvent extraction of rhenium from acidic solutions is carried out using neutral extractants such as TBP (Tributyl phosphate) and TOPO (Trioctylphosphine oxide) ( The separation of molybdenum prior to rhenium is reported in the literature. Kim et al. studied the removal of molybdenum from molybdenite roasting fume leach solution using lime slurry. The rhenium content of the solution was then recovered by solvent extraction with Alamine 304-1 as the extractant. They produced high purity ammonium perrhenate after stripping the organic phase in ammonium hydroxide followed by selective precipitation ( Olazabal et al. developed the molybdenum species distribution diagram in the aqueous solutions as a function of the pH using thermodynamic analysis. According to this study, there are several types of molybdenum species in acidic solutions. Molybdenum polynuclear anions such as In Pars Molybdenum Co. of Yazd, Iran, molybdenite concentrate is roasted in order to produce molybdenum products. The roasting outgas is scrubbed using the venturi scrubbers, as a result of which an acidic liquor containing Mo and Re is produced. Due to high sulfate content of the scrub-liquor of molybdenite concentrate roasting fume and dust, which enters into the solution obtained from scrubbing the fume output of the roasting furnace, selective separation of rhenium from the scrub-liquor is not possible unless almost all of the Mo concentration of the solution be removed. In this study, separation of Mo over Re was carried out using the synergistic effect of TBP and D2EHPA as a different approach with high Mo extraction efficiency and low Re loss. Separation and purification of Re were then conducted using an anion exchanger, followed by stripping and production of ammonium perrhenate. The extraction mechanism of molybdenum was investigated and the effect of various parameters on the extraction was studied. Based on the experimental results, the overall flowchart of the process was devised. The scrubbing solution of molybdenite concentrate roasting fume and dust (venturi solution) was obtained from Pars Molybdenum Co. (Yazd, Iran). The chemical composition of the venturi solution is given in After adjusting the pH of the solution (inoLab pH 7110, WTW pH-meter), known volumes of the organic and aqueous phases were equilibrated for 20 min in a 100 mL Erlenmeyer flask on a magnetic stirrer. The extraction of Mo from the venturi solution was conducted by a mixed organic phase of known volume fractions of TBP and D2EHPA. At the pH or acidity tested, D2EHPA would strongly extract Fe Reduction of Fe Based on the Stabcal modeling ( Based on the literature, by using TBP as the extractant high extraction percentages of rhenium are obtained at values of pH close to zero, and the extraction is decreased with increasing the pH ( The role of D2EHPA in the extraction process is to exchange the Mo (VI) oxycations while TBP extracts the Mo polynuclear anions, which are existing in the solution at the same time, by solvation mechanism. Addition of Zn powder to the venturi solution results in the reduction of Fe Addition of D2EHPA to the organic phase shifted down the Re extraction curves, while Mo extraction curves shifted up drastically. This is due to extraction of Mo (VI) oxycations by D2EHPA which increases the distribution coefficient of molybdenum (D = Mo  Using a mixed extractant with a high volume fraction of TBP brought about higher Re loss especially at high acidities. Since the sulfate content of the venturi solution is high, using TBP with a volume percent <20 gives rise to the formation of a third phase owing to high organic phase loading with the acid. Therefore, when using an organic phase containing D2EHPA by itself, extraction of Mo from the venturi solution would not be practical. Also, as reported in the literature ( Sodium sulfite was added to the venturi solution as a reductant before the molybdenum extraction in order to reduce the ferric ion content to ferrous ion. It can be seen that addition of sodium sulfite has remarkably decreased the iron co-extraction and only 5.4% of the iron content has been co-extracted, which is pertained to iron(II) and can be scrubbed further with dilute sulfuric acid. The chemical composition of the raffinate after a one-step Mo solvent extraction is shown in The effect of O/A on the extraction of Mo and Re is depicted in In order to study the Mo extraction mechanism exploiting the synergistic effect between D2EHPA and TBP, the Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy analysis (FT-IR) of the organic phase was carried out. The FT-IR spectra of a mixture of 30 vol% D2EHPA and 20 vol% TBP before and after the Mo extraction were compared in The theoretical number of stages for maximum molybdenum extraction at V The molybdenum content of the venturi solution should be removed completely since our previous studies demonstrated that selective separation of Re from the venturi solution using neutral extractants (TBP) and anion-exchangers (TOA) is not practical due to high Mo co-extraction. The proposed process for Mo extraction in this study can be used through a multi-stage mixer-settler. Extraction of Mo was conducted according to the flowsheet presented in Complete stripping of Mo from the loaded organic phase was done using a 0.5 M solution of Na Separation of Re from the Mo extraction raffinate was carried out through solvent extraction at different phase ratios (O:A) from 1:25 to 1, pH = −0.3 using an organic phase with a mixture of 10 vol% TOA and 10 vol% Decanol modifier and 15 min contact time. All parameters were chosen based on the literature ( McCabe-Thiele plot for Re extraction was constructed using 10 vol% TOA - 10 vol% Decanol organic phase at pH = −0.3 ( Stripping of Re from the loaded organic phase was completed with 32% ammonium hydroxide at phase ratios from 1 to 5. Based on the results shown in The flowsheet of the extraction of Re from the Mo extraction raffinate is represented in The stripped liquor was evaporated on a hot plate after which a concentrated liquor containing 29.9 g/L Re was obtained. The precipitation of APR was started right after the pH of the liquor was adjusted to 6.5–7. The x-ray diffraction pattern of the produced ammonium perrhenate is shown in A sample of the final product was dissolved in a 5% ammonium hydroxide solution for assaying. The analysis showed that the purity of the final APR product was 95.8% with ammonium sulfate as the main contaminant. The composition of the evaporated strip liqueur before and after precipitation showed that 89.4% of Re was precipitated as APR. Scrubbing the molybdenite concentrate roasting fume and dust using the venturi scrubbers leads to producing a high-sulfate-content liquor, which affects the solvent extraction of Re over Mo using neutral extractants as well as anion exchangers owing to the complexation of Mo polynuclear anions and Mo neutral complexes with the organic extractants. Since Mo anionic species are dominant at weak acidities and Mo (VI) cationic species are formed at pH < 2, by using a two-stage solvent extraction with a mixture of TBP and D2EHPA at pH = 1 the molybdenum anionic, cationic and neutral species were extracted up to 99.8% at the same time, while Re co-extraction was <7.5%. The Mo extraction raffinate was then subjected to solvent extraction followed by stripping to produce a purified liquor containing 9.955 g/L Re. After increasing the concentration of Re in the strip liquor through evaporation, ammonium perrhenate was precipitated at 6.5 < pH < 7 as the final product with a purity grade of 95.8%. Consecutive dissolution and recrystallization are necessary for obtaining a high-grade APR.