A large amount of waste copper slag containing about 35–45wt.% iron is generated every year from pyrometallurgical processes for producing copper from copper concentrate. Recovery of iron from the waste copper slag is of great interest for comprehensive use of mineral resource and reduction of environmental problems. In this study, a method for upgrading iron from the waste copper slag discharged as an industrial waste has been developed. The process first crushes the waste copper slag between 150 and 203μm, followed by reduction reaction at 1250°C for 1.5h. And then, the resulting material is again crushed to 75–104μm, followed by dry magnetic separation. Using the developed process, a magnetic product containing more than 65wt.% iron was obtained from magnetic separation under a magnetic field strength of 0.03T for the waste copper slag treated by reduction reaction. At the same conditions, the percentage recovery of iron was over 85%. It was also found that iron in the magnetic product mainly exists in iron metal, iron carbide, and iron oxides.In a typical pyrometallurgical process for producing copper from copper concentrate, approximately 2 Recently, a few methods have been suggested to recover iron from waste copper slag ( Therefore, the present research is concerned with experimental investigations for the upgrading of iron from waste copper slag by a physico-chemical separation process. The waste copper slag used in the experiments is discarded from a slag cleaning furnace during the production of copper bullion at a copper smelter in Korea. At the smelter, the waste slag was granulated and cooled quickly by spraying with water. The waste slag was verified to have a complex amorphous structure by X-ray analysis. This is the reason that a quick solidification by such water spray cooling provides amorphous granulated slag ( Before and after the experiment, samples were analyzed for Fe by a potassium dichromate titration method and Si by the loss in weight on volatilization with hydrofluoric acid. Also, Al, Ca, Mg, Cu, Pb and Zn were determined by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) method (JY-38 plus, Horiba Ltd, Kyoto, Japan). The solution for ICP analysis was prepared by decomposition with concentrated inorganic acids. Also, the morphological characterization of the samples was performed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-6380LV, JEOL Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS, Link Isis 3.0, Oxford Instrument plc, Oxon, U.K.). The purpose of the reduction reaction of waste copper slag is to convert iron oxides contained in the waste copper slag to magnetic substances in preparation for magnetic separation. Before doing dry magnetic separation, the waste copper slag reduced by the reduction reaction step was first crushed to a particle size of 75–104 Based on the above results, it was considered that the proposed process scheme is a possible method for the upgrading of iron from waste copper slag to utilize it as an iron raw resource for manufacturing pig iron. A physico-chemical separation process for upgrading iron from waste copper slag discarded from the conventional pyrometallurgical processes for producing copper from copper concentration was developed in the study. The proposed process includes the steps of: (a) crushing waste copper slag between 150 and 203 This study was supported by the