The Reflux Classifier (RC) is a separation technique which has been used in the coal and mineral processing industries. It uses water as a medium, and is therefore a suitable preparation device for studies on coking coal as other separation techniques may change coking properties. The separation process was conducted by using a channel spacing of 3mm between two adjacent plates (a deviation from the previous 1.77-mm spacing which promoted laminar flow). The 3-mm channel gap which equated to nominal particle size of coking coal in coke oven charge could lead to a transition from laminar to turbulent flow in the separation process. By changing water flow rate in the separation system, two coals, one coking coal and one thermal coal with particle size of −210+100μm, were separated into different fractions. The fractions contained vitrinite-rich and inetinite-rich concentrates with vitrinite concentration between 28–84% for the coking coal and 20–75% for the thermal coal. In both coals, telovitrinite and semifusinite were the two maceral components of which concentration varied the most. The products relative density and ash yield both decreased with increasing vitrinite content without any apparent changes in the particle size distribution. The mineral content had a significant impact on maceral separation, especially in vitrinite-rich concentrates obtained at low water flow rates.Coal macerals are microscopically recognisable constituents which form the organic components in coals There are differences in density between the maceral groups In density gradient centrifugation, coal is demineralised and ground to ultrafine particle size (< Recently, the Reflux Classifier The Reflux Classifier has now been commercialised for coal beneficiation (and in other mineral industries), however maceral separation is still in its infancy. Previous works on separating macerals from coal using 1.77-mm channel gap under laminar condition were proved to be successful. However, this gap was relatively smaller than coal particle size in coke oven charge (80% Maceral samples were obtained by dividing a high quality coking coal (coal A) and a thermal coal (coal B) into different fractions. Both coal A and coal B were obtained from single seam sources. Their reflectance-frequency histograms or reflectograms are presented in Details of proximate and ultimate analyses of the two investigated coals are given in The Reflux Classifier was employed in this work to divide parent coals into different fractions by varying the water-flow rate. The principle of operation is based on particle settling rate, where heavy particles settled prior to reaching the top of the inclined column. Upon settling, these particles slide down the top-side surface of the lower plate and are “refluxed” back to the fluidised bed. Lower-density particles of settling rates lower than the residence time through the inclined channels will be carried out of the top of the RC to be collected. In practice, the settling rate of each particle will be determined by both its size and density. By controlling the particle size prior to separation, the intention was to use the RC as a density based separator. The RC apparatus used in this work consisted of nine parallel inclined channels (1.2-m long and 0.115-m wide) arranged above a conventional fluidized bed. The gap between two adjacent plates was 3 Maceral particles elutriated on top of the Reflux Classifier at a predetermined flow rate were collected on a 22-μm filter located above the water reservoir. As samples were collected on this filter, the water flow through the filter was restricted, leading to an increase in water level in water column arranged above the filter. A pressure transducer was inserted between the column and the filter to automatically shut the solenoid valve when the water column level reached its maximum containment volume, indicating that the filter was full. Water coming out of the 22-μm filter was recycled back to the reservoir to form a closed-loop system. Separated macerals were dried under nitrogen at room temperature before being stored at low temperature (− Prior to separation, estimation of water flow rate was conducted so that a suitable flow rate could be used to concentrate vitrinite. To serve this purpose, the water flow rate was determined based on an estimation of the superficial velocity. The relation between superficial velocity of the fluid passing through the inclined channel and particle terminal velocity can be established using the expression proposed by Galvin et al. This relation can also be calculated via the equation proposed by Laskovski et al. The basis on which a channel gap is considered relatively narrow or relatively wider can be estimated by calculating the critical gap Zigrang and Sylvester Eqs. The average densities of liptinite, vitrinite, and inertinite groups in bituminous coals are 1.20, 1.275, and 1.36 Maceral average relative densities were then used as input parameters in Eq. To obtain vitrinite concentrates, water flow rate was set to increase from 2.5 Separated macerals density was measured using 50 Particle size of separated macerals obtained from the RC was analysed using laser diffraction technique. The Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, United Kingdom) was used. Petrographic analysis of separated maceral samples was performed by Pearson Coal Petrography using ISO 7404/5. The vitrinite content was obtained through visual maceral counting and reported on mineral-matter-free basis. A suite of coal maceral concentrates was obtained by progressively increasing the flow of water and collecting the particles contained in the overflow. Results of separation process in terms of vitrinite and ash yield of obtained macerals are shown in In the case of coal A, enough material was received when the water flow reached 7.5 In addition to vitrinite content (%V), results of petrographic analysis performed on separated macerals also provided information on the proportion of their maceral components. These components were defined by International Committee for Coal and Organic Petrology (ICCP) in 1998 for vitrinite In Maceral components as presented in The same trend in two coal macerals was that an increase in vitrinite content was accompanied by an increase in telovitrinite maceral. Semifusinite, similarly, was the maceral responsible for the increase in inertinite in low-vitrinite content samples. It can also be noted that higher proportions of detrovitrinite, fusinite, and inertodetrinite were recorded in inertinite-rich samples. Nevertheless, the change in detrovitrinite maceral between samples separated from coal A was less significant compared to those from coal B. In contrast, mineral matter varied more in coal B macerals while coal A macerals exhibited little variation in mineral matter content across separated samples. Separated macerals were characterised by obtaining the information of their particle size and relative density. The particle size distributions of maceral concentrates are presented in Particle sizes measured in the range of 50 to 450 For further investigations, the volume moment mean (D[4,3]) was chosen to represent the mean particle size because the number of analysed particles was not required to obtain this value. Separated macerals density (as received basis, ar) and their mean particle size (D[4,3]) are presented in In both cases, the mean particle size of collected samples increased with increasing water flow rate until the flow reached 15 From relative density analysis, maceral concentrates obtained at higher water flow rates possessed higher particle density although the difference between macerals densities was small. For example, a difference of 0.17 The measured density of coal macerals was then used to verify the prediction shown in The separation boundary in Comparison between the measured and the calculated water flow rate for wide-channel model was obtained and demonstrated in As expected, even using the measured particle size and relative density (mineral matter included), there were still difference between calculated (x-axis) and real values used for separation (y-axis) as shown in Maceral separation is simple in principle but not without experimental challenges Despite employing a relatively larger channels (3 To retain coal in its natural form, demineralisation was not performed prior to maceral separation Furthermore, a comparison of coals from different rank revealed that separating maceral concentrates using the Reflux Classifier was coal specific. Coal A produced higher levels of vitrinite compared to Coal B for the same flow conditions. Comparing the “product” based on each flow setting revealed that coal A particles had lower ash yield, lower density and marginally higher particle size. This is to be expected from a device that operates on the principle of particle settling and is a reflection of the variability coal particles within a tightly controlled particle size. Early work with the RC on maceral separation showed significant size classification when the feed material was not carefully controlled The Reflux Classifier was utilised to divide two coals into different fractions by varying water flow rate supplied into the system. It was shown that with the 3-mm channel gap of the Reflux Classifier, maceral separation could also be achieved at the expense of higher water flow rate as compared to a narrower channel spacing (1.77 The authors gratefully acknowledge the