This study aimed to investigate the effect of canola oil-emulsion gels (EGs) stabilized by pork skin and dietary fibers to replace the total content of pork back fat in emulsified meat products. A Plackett-Burman (PB) design was carried out to select the best ingredients (pork skin gel (PSG), inulin, polydextrose, α-cyclodextrin, and bamboo fiber) for the functional properties of the EGs. Three variables (PSG, inulin, and bamboo fiber) were select for the full factorial design to choose the best combination of ingredients for EGs enhancement. PSG, inulin, and bamboo fiber contributed to increasing the stability and the rupture stress of the EGs, the rupture strain of the EGs was increased only by PSG. Bamboo fiber was also associated with an increase in the meat emulsion stability. Besides, the meat emulsions incorporated with the EGs presented emulsion stability and pH very similar to those observed for meat emulsion made with pork back fat. These results show that EGs made with PSG and dietary fibers are an alternative ingredient to replace pork back fat in the manufacture of emulsified meat products, considering the nutritional aspects and the valorization of byproducts of the meat industry.Meat and meat products are recognized as good sources of high biological value proteins, fat-soluble vitamins, minerals, and bioactive compounds ( The differences in texture, plasticity, and higher susceptibility to oxidation of oils as compared to animal fats make it difficult for its use in meat products. Therefore, several methods of structuring oils using oil bulking system, structured emulsions (hydrogelled and organogelled) and oleogels have been reported aimed at improving the oil stability and its functional properties providing similar characteristics to those conferred by fat ( Emulsion gels (EGs), due to their soft-solid texture, can exhibit a fat-like physical behavior in the functional properties of the emulsified meat products. EGs are a soft-solid material, which may be formed from the dispersion of the emulsified droplets in a continuous gel matrix or by aggregation of the dispersed droplets in a particulate gel ( Dietary fibers improve both the nutritional and technological properties of meat products. Among the soluble fibers, inulin and polydextrose have been used in reduced-fat meat products due to improving nutritional and technological properties ( Among the insoluble fiber sources, bamboo fiber has a great potential for application in foods; it is flavorless, adds negligible calories to the products and also improves the texture and stability, once it binds 3 to 5 times its weight in water ( Besides the nutritional aspects of the EGs, the development of sustainable strategies should be considered. The meat industry generates several protein-rich byproducts that have a great potential application, including pork skin that has high collagen content ( Recent studies have demonstrated the potential of pork skin gel (PSG) combined with wheat fiber ( The EGs were made with pork skin (moisture: 52.2% ± 0.64; protein: 37.7% ± 0.9; lipid: 9.08% ± 0.39; ash: 0.31% ± 0.09) and canola oil (Cargill, Brazil) obtained in the local market, and the following dietary fibers: Creafibe QC 90 bamboo fiber (99.6% of purity, pH 5.32 ± 0.03 (10% solution) Nutrasim - Extrema, MG, Brazil), inulin Orafit GR (96.5% of purity, pH 5.2 ± 0.02 (10% solution) of Beneo - São Paulo, SP, Brazil), polydextrose III (95.1% of purity, pH 5.13 ± 0.01 (10% solution) of Nutramax - Catanduva, SP, Brazil) and α-cyclodextrin Cavamax W6 (99% of purity, pH 6.4 ± 0.03 (10% solution) of Vogler Ingredients - São Bernardo do Campo, SP, Brazil) donated by the respective companies. For the meat emulsion model systems, pork ( A Plackett-Burman (PB) two-level factorial design was used to select the most significant variables to raise the emulsion gel stability according to the first-order polynomial model, as follows: To elaborate the EGs, PSG (50% water and 50% pork skin) was prepared as follows: pork skin cut into cubes (2 cm To determine the emulsion stability, 15 g EG were placed in 50 mL tubes and heated in a water bath at 80 °C for 30 min. The samples were then centrifuged (Excelsa® II 206-BL, Fanem®, Brazil) at 2500 rpm for 1 min. The released exudate was removed and weighed. The analysis was performed in five replicates. The pH was determined directly in the EGs at room temperature using an MA130 pH meter (Mettler-Toledo, Ohio, USA) coupled with a penetration probe. The color parameters (L*, a*, b*) of the EGs were measured in the Colorquest II spectrophotometer (Hunter-Lab, USA) using the RSEX mode and CIELab color system. Four measurements of each sample obtained in the factorial designs were used to determine the pH and the color parameters. The compression test was performed in a TA.XT Plus Texture Analyzer (Texture Technologies Corp., Scarsdale, USA) according to the methodology reported by The microstructure of the EGs was determined in the TM 3000 Tabletop scanning electron microscope (Hitachi Technologies, Japan), using acceleration at 15 kV. A sample of 1 cm EGs were used to replace pork back fat in the meat emulsion model systems containing 65% pork meat or MDCM, 20% pork back fat, 2% sodium chloride, 0.25% sodium tripolyphosphate and 12.75% ice. The ground meat (−1 °C) were homogenized with sodium chloride and sodium tripolyphosphate until completely homogenization, then, ice and EGs or pork back fat were added, followed by comminution until the temperature of the meat batter reached 12 °C, in food processor Thermomix (Vorwerk, São Paulo, Brazil). The meat emulsions (35 g) were stuffed into plastic tubes and cooked at 75 °C for 40 min in a water bath, following cooling at 25 °C and stored in vacuum bags (Spel, São Paulo, Brazil) at 4 °C until analyses. The determination of pH and rheological parameters of the meat emulsions were carried out according to the methodologies described in sections The first-order polynomial models were analyzed by Analysis of Variance-ANOVA at a confidence level of 95% (p < 0.05). The regression equations were determined considering only the significant regression coefficients (p < 0.05) and the correlation coefficients (R Pork skin is a good source of collagen, a protein with high gelling capacity and a good emulsifying property The emulsion stability (ES) of the EGs ranged from 63.44% to 96.04%. Although all variables led to an increase in ES (p < 0.05), bamboo fiber and α-cyclodextrin had the most significant effects on this parameter. Bamboo fiber consists mainly of cellulose (86–88%) that has a large linear structure, and it could be responsible for the thickening effects and the water retention of the EGs. The PSG increased the emulsion stability due to the reinforcing of the gel network provided by collagen. Inulin and polydextrose contributed less effectively to this behavior ( The pH of the EGs ranged from 5.50 to 5.75 and was negatively influenced (p < 0.05) by the bamboo fiber, polydextrose, and inulin additions, possibly due to the pH values presented by the dietary fibers (see section The rupture stress (σ According to the results discussed, the bamboo fiber and inulin were selected to compose the PSG-based EGs. The bamboo fiber was selected due to the significant improvement in emulsion stability of the EGs, once despite a similar performance was observed for α-cyclodextrin, the EGs were brittle with it. Inulin and polydextrose showed similar behavior in most of the parameters evaluated. However, inulin raised the σ The results of the 12 factorial trials are presented in The pH of the EGs varied from 5.19 to 5.76 between treatments and was negatively influenced (p < 0.05) by bamboo fiber and inulin and by the interactions between inulin/PSG and inulin/bamboo fiber. Although a significant increase in fiber content of the EGs when compared to the levels used in the PB design, the pH varied in a narrow range, which was considered satisfactory for the use of EGs in meat products. The σ The microstructure of the EGs can be seen in  In the pork-based meat emulsions, the pH (5.95–6.12) lowered with bamboo fiber but raised with bamboo fiber/inulin interaction. No significant regression coefficients were observed for emulsion stability (96.07–99.36%), σrup (1.49–1.89 N mm MDCM is widely used to obtain low-cost emulsified meat products in Brazil, being allowed the incorporation of up to 60% of MDCM in sausages ( The σ The results showed that PSG is a low-cost ingredient that can be easily produced by the meat industry. PSG had adequate emulsifying and gelling properties to obtaining the EGs. Besides, the positive interaction between PSG and dietary fibers led to a significant increase in the hardness and stability of the EGs. The incorporation of EGs into the meat emulsion model systems resulted in similar effects to those observed with the use of pork back fat. As well, EGs containing bamboo fiber increased emulsion stability and texture-related aspects of the MDCM-meat emulsions. These results indicated that EG based on canola oil, pork skin, and dietary fibers could be a promising ingredient for developing healthier emulsified meat products. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to