Multiple metacarpal dislocations combined with carpal fracture – dislocations are rare injuries. We report a new combination of these injuries where fracture–dislocation of the base of the 1st metacarpal bone occurred simultaneously with a comminuted fracture of the trapezium, dislocation of the trapezoid and metacarpal joints (2nd to 5th) and an avulsion fracture of the hamate. This specific carpal injury has not been previously described and our description will contribute to understanding the mechanism of these complex injuries. The injury pattern in the case featured here was multifaceted and resulted from rupture of both transverse and longitudinal carpal columns. According to the Garcia-Elias classification of axial carpal disruptions, this particular injury mechanism was a combined axial–radial–ulnar type injury. These injuries are extremely rare and are only sporadically described in the literature. Trapeziectomy, followed by open, partial, low-profile screw fixation of the fracture of the first metacarpal and open reduction and pinning of the carpometacarpal joints and the trapezoid injury yielded a good result at the 1-year follow-up.Various injury patterns can result from high-energy trauma directed towards carpal area of the hand and its carpometacarpal (CMC) joints. To better understand injury patterns and to properly deal with these complicated injuries, it is essential to know the anatomical structures. A strong ligamentous connection in the carpus comprises both extrinsic and intrinsic components. The CMC 1 is the most mobile CMC joint with many ligamentous structures, particularly on the volar side corresponding to the trapezium whose distal articular surface is saddle-shaped. The 2nd metacarpal joint articulates with the ulnar facet of the trapezium, the trapezoid and the radial facet of the CMC 3 joint. The 3rd metacarpal articulates proximally with the capitate and on its sides with the corresponding 2nd and 4th metacarpals. The range of motion of the CMC 2 and CMC 3 joints is limited by strong intrinsic ligament structures and a stiff joint capsule. Both the 4th and 5th metacarpals articulate with the distal surface of hamate and each other (4th metacarpal with the ulnar facet of the 3rd metacarpal). They both have a greater range of motion and 5–10° is possible at CMC 4 and 15–20° at CMC 5. Transcarpal CMC fracture–dislocation occurs when a large mechanical force is transmitted from the palm to the dorsum of the hand, forcing the base of metacarpals dorsally. The injury line runs between or across the bones of the distal carpal row causing associated lesions, such as CMC fracture–dislocations, and sometimes distal radius fracture Various combinations of injuries in this area have been described previously. We will describe a clinical case of axial carpal injury with comminuted fracture of the trapezium associated with dislocation of the trapezoid, avulsion fracture of the hamate, Rolando type fracture–dislocation of the 1st metacarpal and dorsal dislocation of all CMC joints of a patient's non-dominant hand. To our knowledge, this particular injury combination has not been previously described in the literature. The aim of this paper was to describe this novel injury and to contribute to classifying these difficult and rare carpal injuries. A 27-year-old, right-hand dominant man was brought to the trauma center after being involved in a high-energy traffic accident with his motorcycle. He had a hematoma and pain over the 1st and 2nd metacarpal bone of his left hand; the skin, sensation and vascularity were normal and no other injuries were present. Plain radiographs showed a dislocation of all CMC joints, total dislocation of the trapezoid, Rolando type fracture of the 1st metacarpal and a comminuted fracture of the trapezium bone ( The definitive surgery was performed at a hand surgery unit on the fifth day after the injury event through a dorsoradial incision, while using an axillary nerve block. The multifragmented trapezium bone was removed; K-wire fixation between the trapezoid and capitate bones was performed before final reduction and percutaneous K-wire fixation of the 2nd to 4th CMC joints. Lastly, low-profile screw fixation (Leibinger™ 2.3 The percutaneous K-wires securing the CMC joint were removed at the week 5 follow-up, and the trapezoid–capitate K-wire was removed at the week 8 follow-up. Hand therapy was carried out for 2 months. At the 4-month follow-up, the patient had good motion of the wrist and fingers and had returned to work. Measurements of wrist mobility found dorsal flexion of 45° (50°), volar flexion of 40° (45°), ulnar deviation of 25° (35°), radial deviation of 10° (15°), supination of 80° (80°), and pronation of 80° (80°) on the injured hand and the contralateral, dominant hand, respectively. Finger pulp–palm distance was 0 At the 1-year follow-up, the patient had regained normal hand function and grip strength was measured at 40 kilogram-force (KgF) in the injured hand and 74 KgF in the contralateral hand, respectively. Pinch strength was measured at 7 KgF in the injured hand and 12 in the contralateral hand. On rare occasions, high-energy trauma can cause unusual variations of thumb/metacarpal/carpal injury spectrum. Delay in assessing the full extent of the injury is common due to the difficulty in visualizing the complete injury on plain radiographs. A preoperative CT scan is recommended The mechanism of injury in our case likely involves forces starting from distal and radial side of the first metacarpal, going around it and continuing proximally (axially), causing fracture of the trapezium, and in the transverse (ulnar) direction causing the CMC dislocations. The injuring forces simultaneously caused dorsal distraction of all the CMC joints and counterclockwise rotation around the 1st CMC joint, with occurrence of a Rolando fracture; this is proof of the divergent nature of the forces. The injury forces were probably transmitted axially on the radial side of the hand, and from the palmar side to the dorsum of the hand during extension, forcing all the metacarpals dorsally and causing dorsal avulsion fracture of the hamate. One case of total CMC joint dislocation was reported by Chim et al. Most authors advocate stable internal fixation of trapezium fractures. Closed, or if necessary open, reduction of carpometacarpal joint dislocations is recommended, together with K-wire stabilization. In the case presented here, stable fixation of both the trapezium and the base of the 1st metacarpal fractures was impossible because of the comminution ( The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.