Steady-state rising foam is an ideal medium for studying foam coalescence phenomena. The coalescence process in this type of foam is characterized analytically. The spatial distribution of bubble size depends on the effect of individual coalescence events on the bubble size distribution, the rate at which they occur, and the rise rate of the bubbles. The film rupture rate is assumed to depend on the film area and the film drainage time, and is calculated using several simple models. This analysis agrees well with measurements conducted in a laboratory foam cell. However, the time-scale of the experiments indicated that film drainage was occurring predominantly in the hydrodynamic regime, and that non-equilibrium rupture mechanisms were primarily responsible for the observed coalescence.A key determinant of the performance of commercial flotation cells is coalescence in the froth phase—the merging of smaller into larger bubbles, due to rupture of the intervening liquid films. Coalescence in a flotation cell determines not only the bubble surface area available to carry valuable hydrophobic particles, but also the amount of entrained liquid, and hence the quantity of hydrophilic gangue, reporting to the product ( It is usually assumed that the rupture rate of an ensemble of liquid films, and hence of foam, is proportional to the film area in the ensemble (  In this paper, we present a simple and flexible analytic method for steady-state coalescing foams in one dimension. It does not attempt to incorporate the latest refinements in thin film theory, particularly as many of these (e.g., the significance of the ‘hydrophobic force’ in film rupture, We now determine the effect of a typical film rupture on the mean bubble size. The initial stages of the analysis are similar to those of   Model (ii) takes no account of the effect of age on the stability of the foam films. Each film continues to thin over time, as the interstitial liquid is driven out by capillary pressure. This thinning is ‘classically’ modelled as Reynolds flow between circular parallel discs ( Experimental studies of film drainage (e.g. The analytic method described in the previous sections is now applied to a set of experimental data, previously published elsewhere ( Vertical profiles of the mean bubble radius and liquid were measured, and are shown in Best agreement was achieved for As previously noted, the value of We now validate our assumption that the observed coalescence occurred in the hydrodynamic regime. From Eq. This study was ultimately motivated by a desire to understand the coalescence process in flotation cells. Thus far, no reference has been made to mineralisation of the froth, and it is worth speculating as to what effect particles may have upon the coalescence process. Particles can affect both drainage and stability. Hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles affect drainage in different ways, since the former tend to stick to the bubbles, while the latter tend to remain suspended in the interstitial liquid. Particles thus suspended will alter the density ( We have outlined a simple analytic method by which the variations in bubble size and liquid fraction in a steady-state coalescing froth can be characterized and understood. This analysis considered only the evolution of the mean bubble radius, not the full bubble size distribution. The rate of change of the mean bubble size with successive rupture events was determined; this and the rupture rate together allowed the scaling behaviour of the time rate of change of the mean bubble radius to be calculated. This rate of change in bubble radius was compared to values calculated from experimental profiles of the bubble size and liquid fraction, obtained in a laboratory cell. The rupture rate was calculated using simple coalescence models, which took into account total cell area, planar film area and film drainage time for a rising element of foam. The coalescence rate model incorporating the planar film area and drainage time was able to describe the scaling behaviour of the observed coalescence quite closely. This is a significant observation, which may have important practical consequences. Many aspects of foam coalescence, particularly of dry or standing foams, will continue to be inexplicable without a detailed understanding of the role of interfacial forces in film stability. The central role of that field in the study of coalescence remains undiminished. However, in many practical cases (such as flotation cells), especially those involving wet foams and short residence times, film drainage may take place in predominantly the hydrodynamic regime. In that case, observed coalescence will be mainly due to transient mechanical perturbations rather than ‘equilibrium’ film drainage. It may be possible in those cases to understand and describe the coalescence behaviour in quite simple terms on the basis of macroscopically measurable variables. The author is grateful to the Australian Research Council for its support of the Centre for Multiphase Processes, under the Special Research Centre scheme, and to Graeme Jameson for his advice and support.