Rock discontinuities have always been of paramount importance, inasmuch as they considerably affect the mechanical response of rock masses. The decisive role of rock joints in any structure interwoven with rock has motivated many researchers to study the influencing parameters on joints' mechanical response. These variables can be indicated as surface topography, mating status, mechanical properties of adjacent walls, shear direction, normal stress path, and scale effect, which can be considered as a subcategory of surface topography. Many investigators have studied the effect of surface topography In order to quantify joint roughness coefficient ( The applicability of various conventional statistical parameters in quantifying of roughness was also investigated by a number of researchers These statistical parameters shown in Eqs. By considering roughness from a wider view range, it was understood that obtaining a quantitative value for roughness representation is not the only vital subject in surface topography effect. Scale is also a disputied issue, which was to be studied as well. The variation in the mechanical behavior of joints with increasing scale has been a well-known phenomenon, which has caused engineers to use the mechanical parameters worked out in the laboratory with doubt for the natural discontinuity in its real size. Scale effect is caused as a result of the difference between the surface topography of different scales. In this circumstance, Pratt et al. Bandis et al. In Eq. In Eq. Based on the above-mentioned difficulties on the applicability of Eqs. Following the introduction of fractal geometry by Mandelbrot A number of methods have been suggested in the literature to estimate fractal dimension of roughness profiles of a rock joint surface. They are the divider by Mandelbrot (see Primary applications of fractal on rock joints was by applying self-similar concept (see In self-similar fractal, it is assumed that the roughness value of an original-sized profile and its enlarged profile would be the same provided both of the length and height of asperities are enlarged by the same scaling factor. In self-affine fractals, on the other hand, the roughness value of an original profile and its enlarged profile would be the same as long as the length is enlarged by Following the wide application of fractal and technological developments in the field of surface mapping, Fardin et al. Based on the above-mentioned researches, it can be induced that the surface roughness of some concentric joints with different sizes, selected from a large-area joint surface, can whether increase or decrease by changing the joint size. The reason for this fact is that the added rims to the small surface (for generation of a larger surface) cause the surface geometry to alter. As a result, study of scale effect becomes a complex process because the interpretation of the tests is really hard to perform. In other words, as the surface geometry and roughness of a natural joint vary at different scales, the shear test results of a portion and the whole surface will be different and this cannot be interpreted as scale effect. Apart from statistical and fractal methods presented above, Grasselli et al. In this paper, the applicability of self-affinity concept on scale of rock joints is investigated. The subject is firstly discussed theoretically and the result of theoretical propositions is then verified by the results of experimental tests. A new technique called laminated object manufacturing technology (LOM) is employed to generate joint surfaces at different scales with controlled topography As stated in the previous paragraphs, researchers showed interest in studying the scale effect by focusing on damage area concept Based on the applicability of damage area consideration in joint shearing, the damage area ratio in sheared joints is calculated in this paper for both of the original-sized (S10) and self-affine-enlarged (H20) joint specimens to investigate the scale effect of joint surface on the shear behavior. In this study, a joint surface molded from a natural mica-schist joint ( The original surface together with the digitized surface generated by the obtained discrete data points has been shown in The topography of a natural joint is actually a three-dimensional geometry. In order to study the self-affinity application on scale effect of rock joints, it is required to generate a rock joint with a larger scale but with the same Hurst value (satisfying the self-affinity concept; The random variable The roughness index ( The example of the schist joint surface in Based on the Fractal Brownian Motion theory, the two surfaces (S10 and H20) are statistically the same. However, a comparison is to be made between the geometries of the two surfaces using statistical and analytical geometric methods. The most frequently used statistical and quantitative roughness indices (Eqs. It is worth noting that most of the statistical roughness indices are highly sensitive to interpolated points. This means that if the number of data points representing the surface topography is raised by adding the interpolated data in-between the original points, the roughness index may show different values of roughness for the same surface. The roughness difference is obtained, while the surface topography is the same and we have only added some interpolated points. In order to show this importance, a subroutine was written using FORTRAN based on linear interpolation method in order to gain the required coordinates in-between the original points (using a new interval). The procedure is that the plane equation of each triangle on the triangulated surface is obtained and then, the in-between coordinates are simply calculated using the selected interval. Based on the smaller sampling interval, the number of profiles in each direction is raised. In After preparation of the required input data points with interpolation, the subroutine of each roughness index mentioned in Eqs. By comparing the results of roughness evaluation for S10 surface with and without interpolated data points, it was observed that all the three-dimensional roughness indices ( As the joint surface is kept the same, without any change in the topography, any parameter, which has been obtained different for the two surfaces of S10 with and without interpolated points should be used with care. After doing the enlargement (isotropic (I20) and self-affine (H20)), a comparison is made between the roughness of the three surfaces of S10, H20, and I20 ( By comparing the calculated values in Apart from these two parameters, all of the other parameters mentioned in The interesting work by Grasselli et al. The method is implemented without the need of any interpolation (insensitive to sampling interval) or requiring the joint to be scanned more than once. The apparent angle and azimuth of each triangle in the triangulated surface is determined and the in-contact asperities are simply calculated considering shear direction and apparent angle of asperities in the shear direction. The subroutine of this method was written in order to do the surface characterization. Based on the implemented subroutine for the two directions of 0→180 and 270→90 ( In order to have a complete analysis of the surfaces (S10, H20, and I20), the code is implemented for all directions from the direction of 0–355° with a direction difference of Δ Considering Based on the discussions presented in the previous section, the question is as follows: “Is always the decrease in surface roughness slight or it depends on any other factor?” In order to answer this question, consider a triangle representing a two-dimensional asperity, the up-coming angle of which is Considering Eq. The dependency of self-affine-enlarged angle on the original asperity angle can be clearly explained by the example depicted in By looking at By again looking at the case of the schist surface, only a slight decrease is observed for high-angled asperities (only Δ The changes of asperity angle as a result of using different length scaling factors is graphically shown in It is observed in From the above-derived relationship, it can be easily realized that As an extreme example, for It is worth noting that the slight decrease in higher asperity angles is only for low values of length enlargement factors ( The dependency of asperity angle (in self-affine-enlarged surface) on length enlargement factor ( All of the above-mentioned discussions have been done in the domain of theory without any experimental observation. In order to experimentally investigate the effect of self-affine enlargement on the surface, it is required to use a devise capable of constructing joint specimens with different sizes but the same Hurst exponent. The procedure of specimen construction is described in the following section. The procedure of working with LOM technique to generate surfaces with input data series (S10 and H20) is as follows. First of all, the created CAD data representing the joint surface geometry goes into the process controller of the LOM system. Then, based on the geometric information provided by the triangulated stereo lithography (STL) file, an algorithm is developed. According to the produced algorithm, cross-sectional patterns similar to the iso-altitude contours are created by the LOM software system. After that, a laser beam cuts the first cross-sectional outline in the top layer of multiple sheet papers (each paper is 0.1075 As it is difficult to remove the crosshatch parts in a horizontal bonded sheet model containing many isolate cutting contours, the bonding direction is to be changed. In fact, a three-dimensional joint surface is consisted of a large number of two-dimensional joint profiles. Thus, the cutting and bonding direction of the traditional LOM process should be changed to the diametrical direction of joint specimen. In this way, each sheet paper is stack-bonded along the diametrical direction as a joint profile. Then, the edge shape in each sheet paper is cut according to one profile altitude of the three-dimensional joint surface. After bonding and cutting of the whole profiles (more or less 930 sheet papers), a three-dimensional surface geometry of LOM joint model is obtained. LOM paper mold is frequently used for silicon rubber molding to make urethane or epoxy cast plastic parts. As LOM objects do not undergo phase changes and are resistant to shrinkage, the accuracy of the master is reliable regardless of the initial measured geometry. Moreover, LOM masters do not react with silicon rubber. Therefore, using the LOM model as a mold for silicon casting causes a mother mold to be constructed. The modeling material is silicon rubber (RTV-533, Product of Wacker, Japan) together with silicon catalyst in the ratio of 25:1, which is able to duplicate the joint surface geometry. In this way, it would be feasible to cast plaster specimens of a joint surface from the silicon mother mold to perform a series of direct shear test. The cast plaster specimens of S10 and H20 surfaces are shown in A rock-like model material of plaster and water in proportions of 1:0.9 by weight was selected in this experimental study. All of the molded specimens were cured at a temperature of 25 Furthermore, in order to prepare a mated joint specimen, the coinciding direction of top and bottom replicas of the joint specimens was signed with a vertical line on the sidewalls. Then, the joint half replicas were put onto each other corresponding to the drawn line. In this way, a mated joint with its right position was obtained to be subjected under direct shear. To ensure the repeatability of every test, any direct shear test was repeated (mostly about three times) under the same conditions (i.e., with the same size, roughness and normal stress) until a similar trend in the shear stress-displacement curve was obtained. In addition, normal stress values had to be considered in a range in which we have both of the shear mechanisms from sliding upon asperities to asperity cut off. As a result, three normal stress values were selected as In this section, it is intended to check any observable difference between the shear responses of the two specimens of original-sized (S10) and its self-affine enlarged surface (H20). In order to examine the effect of self-affinity enlargement, the two different-sized specimens were subjected to shear. It is believed that at lower stress levels, relative shear movement of joint surfaces causes almost only sliding upon the joint asperities but not asperity cut off. However, as the normal stress increases, the shear mechanism transforms to shearing off of the joint asperity. If the value of angle and the spatial positions of asperities in the two specimens are the same, the shear strengths and also the peak dilation angles will also be the same. The effect of self-affine enlargement can be investigated by comparing the obtained shear behaviors between the two different-sized specimens of S10 and H20 under three different normal stress levels. In In At higher normal stress levels, the shear strength of the small-scaled joint specimen (S10) is observed higher than that of the large-scaled specimen (H20) as shown in Again by referring to the analytical discussions presented in In order to tangibly show the difference between S10 and H20 shear responses, the peak values of shear strengths have been drawn in It is evident in By looking at Considering the Mohr–Coulomb shear strength criterion ( Shear displacement is an important factor in damage area creation on joint surfaces. Hence, a series of shear tests were continued up to the peak shear displacement for both of the different-sized specimens. Then, perpendicular photos were taken from the sheared joint surfaces. After that, the taken photos were changed into a binary image (black and white pixels) using image analysis software. Finally, a subroutine was written in order to analyze the picture, count the black (intact area) and white (damaged area) pixels, and finally calculate the damage area ratio by dividing the damage area by the whole surface of the joint. The taken photos from the tested specimens with shear displacement up to the peak shear displacement are shown in First of all, it is clearly evident that the spatial distribution of damage areas is completely different for the two shear directions. This matter confirms the anisotropic shear behavior of the schist joint (see also Secondly, the spatial distribution of the damage areas for H20 specimen corresponds to the damage areas in S10 specimens under similar shear conditions (similar shear direction and normal stress). This means that if one asperity in a certain spatial position in H20 surface has been damaged, the asperity located on the corresponding spatial position on S10 surface has also been damaged. This matter shows that there is no striking difference between the original surface and its self-affine enlarged surface (as also stated by In order to show the difference between the damage area ratios of S10 and H20, the relationship between damage area ratio ( By considering the damage area in Based on the above experimental observations and the analytical discussions, it is demonstrated that the asperity angle is altered as a result of self-affine enlargement. The reason for this fact can be indicated as the same mentioned for It has always been assumed that self-affine enlargement of a joint surface performed based on its specific Hurst exponent does not influence its roughness. In this paper, the surface topography of a schist joint sample was used to generate a self-affine enlarged surface. Thereafter, it was tried to investigate the effect of self-affine enlargement on the surface topography of the rock joint from analytical and experimental approaches. In the analytical stage, the most prominent statistical and quantitative parameters were applied in order to check the similarity of roughness between the original size and its self-affine enlargement. First of all, it was expressed that any two-dimensional roughness index ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at   