The flow stress of 0.4C–1.9Cr–1.5Mn–1.0Ni–0.2Mo die steel for plastic moulds during hot deformation is predicted using the conventional regression method and the artificial neural network method. The temperatures at which the steel is compressed are 800–1100°C with strain rates of 0.001–10s−1 and to strains of 0–0.7. Comparisons with the result of physical tests show that the efficiency and accuracy of the flow stress predicted using a multi-layer perceptron network with the back propagation learning algorithm are better than that predicted using the Zener–Holloman parameter and a hyperbolic sine function. It is also shown that the flow stress of die steel for plastic moulds deformed under hot deformation conditions can be predicted very well using the multi-layer perceptron network with the structure of 3–9–10–1.In order to describe the flow stresses of metals during hot deformation, many mathematical models have been proposed In this paper, the flow stress of 0.4C–1.9Cr–1.5Mn–1.0Ni–0.2Mo (shortened to 40CrMnNiMo) die steel for plastic moulds during hot deformation is predicted using the conventional regression method and using ANN with the back propagation (BP) algorithm, comparisons between them being made. The cylindrical compressed specimen of 40CrMnNiMo steel studied in this paper was machined from annealed bar. The size of the specimen is 8 The flow stress curves of 40CrMnNiMo steel with different temperatures and different strain rates are shown in The conventional regression equation for description of the flow stress during hot deformation is The typical neuron is shown in The ANN in the present work is the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) network with two hidden layers as shown in When a sample is replaced with another sample, the error may become much larger, so more adjustment is required and more iterative time is needed. In order to avoid this disadvantage, one way is to introduce an inertia item in the above equations such as The ANN requires that the range of both input data and output data should be within 0–1. Consequently, data must be unified before input into the network. The following equation is used widely for unification The training process of the ANN with the BP algorithm is shown in  The prediction of flow stress during the hot deformation in 40CrMnNiMo steel indicates that the BP ANN is better than the conventional regression method, but the following problems need to be investigated further. Firstly, no theoretical guidance for the choice of the number of hidden layers in the neural network and the number of neurons in each hidden layer can be followed, while the accuracy of the predicted results varies greatly with different structures of the ANN. Secondly, the unification method of the data also influences the predicted result greatly.  The flow stress of 40CrMnNiMo die steel for plastic moulds can be predicted very well by using an ANN with the BP algorithm. The accuracy when using this method is higher than that when using the conventional regression method. The structure of ANN greatly influences the accuracy of the predicted flow stress. The optimum structure is 3–9–10–1, in which The unification method of data in the input-layer and the output-layer also greatly influences the accuracy. A good accuracy can be obtained when a logarithmic equation is used to unify the data This work is supported financially by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 50075053). Acknowledgement is also due to Prof. Dang Zijiu and Prof. Zhang Yan who provided help in the hot deformation tests.