The surface morphology plays a significant role in floatability, wettability and hydrophobicity of mineral particles. However, the existing investigations for revealing the relationship between surface roughness and wettability of mineral particles are not sufficient. Meanwhile, there are nearly no existing researches about relationships between surface roughness and coal particles due to the fact that coal is a mixture of organic and inorganic materials and hence the study is difficult to achieve. The aim of this paper was to investigate the influence of surface roughness on natural wettability of coal. Taixi ultra-low ash coal particles were used. In order to obtain coal particles having different surface roughness, coal particles were polished using sand papers with different meshes. The surface roughness of coal particles was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Mitutoyo SJ-210 surface roughness measurer, and the natural wettability of coal particles was characterized using contact angle measurement. Due to the measurements of SEM and surface roughness were conducted at the gold-coated coal surface, both the wettabilities of natural and gold-coated coal surface were obtained in this investigation. Throughout this paper, it was found that the surface roughness had a significant effect on the natural/gold-coated wettability of Taixi ultra-low ash coal. This paper indicates that the wettability of natural/gold-coated coal surface increases with the increase of surface roughness first, decreases second, and then has a little increase.The natural floatability, wettability and hydrophobicity of minerals are determined by many factors, such as physical and chemical properties of mineral surface However, the significance of surface physical properties on the wettability of minerals has not been sufficiently studied. The physical properties of minerals include surface topography, surface roughness and pores structures. The existing observations about the significance of surface roughness on the wettability of minerals show that the wettability decreases with the increase of surface roughness In addition, even though the observations have attempted to show the relationship between the surface roughness and wettability of minerals, the significance of surface morphology on wettability of coal particles was not studied throughout the world due to the fact that coal is a mixture of organic and inorganic materials. It is difficult to investigate the effect of surface roughness on wettability of coal solely because it is difficult to obtain a coal particle without ash content In this investigation, Taixi ultra-low ash coal makes it possible to reveal the true actions of surface roughness on wettability of coal. This paper was to investigate the natural wettability of coal surface with the use of flotation reagent (collector) on the modification of coal surface. Coal particles with different surface roughness were obtained by using sand papers with different meshes to polish the coal surface. The surface roughness of coal particles was characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Mitutoyo SJ-210 surface roughness measurer, and the wettability of natural/gold-coated coal particles was characterized using contact angle measurement. The results of this paper may provide some new insights to coal flotation and surface science. Samples of ultra-low ash coal samples were selected from Taixi Coal Preparation Plant in Ningxia province of China. The contents of elements (C, H, O, N, and S) based on dry ash free are 94.43%, 3.73%, 0.91%, 0.79% and 0.13%, respectively  In order to obtain the flat of coal particles with different surface roughness, lump coal particles were polished using different sand papers with different meshes by hand. The sand papers were made by MATADOR in Germany. The meshes of particles on sand papers surface are 220, 240, 280, 320, 400, 600, 800, 1000, 1200, 1500, 2000, 2500, 3000 and 5000. Using these sand papers with different meshes, the flat of coal particles with different surface roughness were obtained. The coal particles were forward to contact angle, SEM and surface roughness measurements. Quanta 250 SEM (FEI, USA) was used to analyze the surface morphology of flat of coal samples of different surface morphologies. The magnification times were fixed at 100 and 500. The flat of coal particles were prepared by surface cleaning using absolute ethyl alcohol. After surface cleaning, the flat of coal particles were dried in air. Before the SEM measurements, the flat of coal particles were sputter-coated with a layer of gold. In here, we want to indicate that the contact angle of natural coal surface is obtained before SEM measurements. The gold-coated coal surface is also forward to obtain its contact angle. Both the wettabilities of natural and gold-coated coal surface were obtained in this investigation. The Mitutoyo SJ-210 surface roughness measurer was used to indicate the surface roughness of the flat of coal particles with different surface morphologies. Due to the coal surface was not very hard. Before the roughness measurements, the coal surface has been coated by a layer of gold. The surface roughness measurements were conducted on the gold-coated coal surface. As a probe moves on the flat of coal particles, the surface roughness readings of coal particles were recorded on the work line and the average value was used for analysis. Three indexes were obtained based on the results of Mitutoyo SJ-210 surface roughness measurer. Roughness parameters Ra, Rq and Rz will be obtained. Each coal particle is measured three times and the final Ra, Rq and Rz values are obtained using the arithmetic mean values. The flat of coal particles of different surface roughness were measured using water contact angle analyzer (  As shown in  The results of this investigation suggest that a higher roughness does not directly lead to a higher natural wettability of hydrophobic surface (coal or gold-coated surface). Also, a higher roughness does not directly lead to a lower natural wettability. As mentioned in the literatures, some researchers found that the wettability of minerals decreases with the increase of surface roughness In the literatures, the wettability was investigated related to the hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity. In our views, the hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity of mineral particles are usually investigated in the flotation process. In the flotation process, the flotation reagents are added and the surface of mineral particle cannot be considered to be natural properties. The flotation reagents, such as collectors and surfactants can cover the mineral surface. The hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity of mineral particles are proved and determined using the flotation recovery, bubble-particle attachment and detachment. However, this paper used the water contact angle measurement, such as a water droplet on the natural/gold-coated surface of coal particles in air. The wettability of natural/gold-coated surface was investigated using the natural methods without the addition of flotation reagents. Therefore, the results obtained from this paper show some different from the results of literatures With the increase of meshes of sand paper, the surface roughness of coal particle shows the decreasing trend. The surface roughness should have a significant effect on the natural wettability of both natural/gold-coated coal surfaces. The results show that a higher/lower roughness does not directly lead to a higher/lower natural wettability of coal surface. The wettability of natural/gold-coated coal surface increases with the increase of surface roughness first, decreases second, and then has a little increase. A proper surface roughness should exist if a higher or lower natural wettability of minerals is wanted. The results of this paper are based on the investigation of hydrophobic surfaces. The relational studies about hydrophilic surfaces will be conducted in the future. This work was supported by the