In-situ investigations are the most direct and authentic approach for determining the law of strata movement. In this study, in-situ investigation was carried out to determine the law of fracture and movement of a key stratum. Four-point surface extensometer (FPSE) inside overlying strata and borehole camera observation were used in the overlying strata of a fully mechanized caving face of a super-thick coal seam in the Datong coalfield. The time–space correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key stratum and ground pressure in stopes was established in combination with observations of the ground pressure of the working face. Results show that the primary key stratum of the overlying strata is the main controlling stratum and its fracture and movement are the underlying cause of strong ground pressure behaviours, such as rib spalling, roof fall, and support crushing. The findings suggest that the primary key stratum can be weakened, and the energy release can be decreased by hydraulic fracturing, deep hole blasting, and other measures, thus relieving ground pressure behaviour. The research method of establishing the time–space correspondence between fracture and movement of the key stratum and ground pressure behaviours based on in-situ investigation can provide guidance for mining engineering schemes, such as exploring master control strata with strong ground pressure behaviour under similar conditions and determining a reasonable capacity for the support.The Datong mining area is one of the 14 coal production bases in China with an annual production of over one hundred million tons. Its subsidiary, the Tashan and Tongxin coal mines, have a production capacity of up to 20 Mt/a and are model mines with high production and high efficiency. During the mining of coal seams, the overlying strata fracture and move, leading to the ground pressure behaviour of the working face. Therefore, the scientific approach toward revealing strong ground pressure behaviours in super-thick coal seam mining is to study the fracture and movement law of the overlying strata. Existing research on the movement of overlying strata in fully mechanized caving mining focused on the conditions of coal seams of less than 10 m in thickness, In-situ investigations are the most direct, authentic, and effective approach to reveal the fracture and movement law of overlying strata. Therefore, this study first conducted in-situ investigation on the law of fracture and movement of overlying strata using FPSE and applied borehole camera as a means of auxiliary observation to simultaneously capture the fracture and movement of the key stratum of the overlying strata in the advancing process of a working face. Second, changes in the support resistance and decreasing amount of movable columns in the advancing process of the working face were monitored to obtain roof weighting information of the working face. Finally, the time–space correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key stratum of the overlying strata and ground pressure of the working face at the same time was established to determine the main factor influencing strong ground pressure behaviour. The research results can provide guidance for the development of scientific prevention and control measures and guarantee safe and efficient mining of super-thick coal seams. A clear understanding of the law of strata movement is the key to effectively solving the difficult problem of strong ground pressure behaviour control in a fully mechanized caving face of super-thick coal seams. In coal measures, each stratum has its unique formation time and mineral compositions. Many strata in the seams have different thicknesses and strengths, which play different roles in the fracture and movement of overlying strata. Among them, strata with large thickness and high strength are the controlling body of strata movement, while thinner strata with lower strength are loads applied on the underlying thick and strong strata. Based on this, Qian, a Chinese scholar, proposed the “theory of key strata in ground control” in 1990. The test mine is the Tongxin Coal Mine in the Datong mining area of China and the test working face is the first working face of the second panel, namely, working face 8203. Working face 8203 adopts fully mechanized caving mining and its coal mining machine has a coal cutting height of 3.9 m, a coal caving height of 12 m, and a cumulative mining thickness of 16 m. The coal seam dip angle is 1–3°, and the width of the working face is 200 m with an advancing length of 2,500 m. The working face advances along the strike of coal seam with a cycle mining step pitch of 0.8 m, as shown in Two boreholes were laid out on the surface of working face 8203 for field observation, as shown in Strata movement was mainly observed by mounting a four-point surface extensometer (FPSE) inside Borehole No.1. The FPSE consists of several components, including anchors, high-strength wirerope, pneumatic system, magnetoelectric meter, data display, and storage cell. First, the anchors were lowered to the pre-installation position inside the borehole and then spurted out from the air cylinder using a pneumatic system; the anchors would be bounced off and then embedded into the wall of the borehole. Using this approach, the anchors were fixed to the key stratum. Second, the other end of the high-strength wirerope connecting the anchor to the magnetoelectric meter was fixed to the borehole opening on the ground surface and then the reading was reset to zero. The movement of the key stratum drives the movement of the anchor, and the meter can accurately identify the degree of vertical sinking motion of the anchor through the transmission of the high-strength wirerope with a precision of 1 mm. Third, the magnetoelectric meter transmits collected data to the storage cell in real time to be read by researchers. The design of monitoring strata movement and related components are shown in In addition to the FPSE inside overlying strata, an HD Borehole Camera was also used to assist in observing overlying strata movement. The Borehole Camera system comprised a 15-inch SONY Professional Polymer LCD and a SONY Industrial Wide Dynamic High-speed Camera with twelve million static pixels. The probe downhole cable was a professional waterproof downhole cable capable of withstanding a maximum tensile force of 200 kg. The equipped cable was 600 m long, which is suitable for observation under drilling conditions of approximately 500 m in depth in the Datong mining area. The HD Borehole Camera was used in Borehole No. 2, and observations were made for a total of thirty times in six months, with an advancing length of 900 m for continuous observations. The observing frequency of the Borehole Camera was subject to the distance between the working face and the borehole. Observations were made every five days on average when Working face 8203 was equipped with ZF15000/27/42 type four-legs shield support with low-level caving window. Real-time observation of the support resistance was carried out by mounting Uroica pressure sensors (Uroica Precision Information Engineering Co., Ltd, Shandong, China) inside the hydraulic cylinders of the hydraulic supports at the working face. The pressure sensors were mounted on twelve hydraulic supports (#5, #15, #25, #35, #45, #55, #65, #75, #85, #95, #105, and #115). The supports were equally spaced at the working face, as shown in With decreasing distance between working face 8203 and Borehole No.1, fracture and movement occurred successively in each key stratum of the overlying strata. The variation pattern for the fracture and motion of each stratum with the change in distance (      The field observation results of key stratum movement show that the key strata began to fracture and move successively from the bottom to the top when the working face passed the borehole and went 7.5 m ahead; the active stage of overlying strata movement occurred when the working face was 7.5–93 m ahead of the borehole. Strata movement at this stage was closely related to the ground pressure of the stope. In particular, when the working face was at a distance of 7.5–60 m ahead of Borehole No. 1, the support of the working face was completely under fractured blocks of the key strata near Borehole No. 1. Detailed analysis of the measured strata movement at this stage is critical for establishing the space–time correspondence between the stratum fracture movement and stope ground pressure, and exploring the mechanism of strong ground pressure activity in the fully mechanized working face of super-thick coal seams. With the working face at a distance of 93 m ahead of the borehole, strata movement at Borehole No. 1 tended to be stable, and then full-scale slow subsidence occurred under the actions of the intrinsic weight of the strata and load of the overlying strata. The phenomenon of “step-up" ceased at this stage, but the characteristics of gradual and slow subsidence appeared. It can be inferred from the key stratum theory that when the key stratum fractures and moves, the strata under its control will fracture and move simultaneously. When the key stratum fractured, the top interface of the soft strata controlled by the fractured key stratum was dislocated to a certain extent. The amount of dislocation was recorded as It can be inferred from the borehole dislocation theory that borehole dislocation occurs due to fracture and movement of the key strata. This also indicates a correspondence between the location of borehole dislocation and the position of the key stratum. A variation curve of the depth of dislocation in Borehole No. 2 with the advance of the working face was obtained. It can be observed from Based on real-time monitoring of support resistance by Uroica, the stope ground pressure behaviour of working face 8203 was observed at regular intervals and recorded in detail. According to the commonly used evaluation indexes of ground pressure, such as support pressure (The yield force and setting force of ZF15000/27/42 is 15000 kN/41 MPa and 12788 kN/33 MPa), shrinkage of support plungers, and depth of coal wall, and the degree of influence on coal mining production, a brief classification of the severity of weighting events of No.8203 working face is proposed as follows: General: The shrinkage of the support plunger is less than 200 mm, the support pressure is less than 41 MPa, and the depth of rib spalling in the coal wall is about 0.5 m. Moderate: The shrinkage of the support plunger is 200–600 mm, the support pressure is less than 41 MPa, and the depth of rib spalling in the coal wall is about 0.8 m. Strong: The shrinkage of the support plunger is more than 600 mm, the support pressure is less than 44 MPa, and the depth of rib spalling in the coal wall is about 1–2 m. On this basis, the ground pressure near the borehole No. 1 and borehole No. 1 can be evaluated, as presented in There was a high hydraulic support resistance with a partial support resistance up to 47 MPa, which was significantly higher than the yield pressure of 41 MPa under normal roof weighting. Most of the safety valves were damaged and some of the hydraulic support cylinders broke down. This indicates that the load on the roof under this weighting is extremely large, forcing the movable supporting column to shrink downward significantly and rapidly, and a quick discharge of the emulsion was required. It was difficult to achieve timely removal of the emulsion due to limited maximum flow rate of the safety valve on the hydraulic support cylinder. This resulted in a higher support resistance compared to the yield pressure and damaged the hydraulic support safety valve and the hydraulic cylinder to varying degrees. The amount of shrinkage for #65–#80 movable supporting columns was up to 1100 mm and the height of supporting frame was significantly reduced. The coal mining unit in this area could not pass through normally and was able to move forward only after roof brushing. This section describes an analysis of the monitoring results from the FPSE in the overlying strata and borehole television observations (sections Before September 12, the measured points in Borehole No .1 did not move, Borehole No. 2 was completely unobstructed, and no ground pressure occurred on the working face, indicating that the key stratum on the roof of the working face had not fractured. Ground pressure was first observed on September 13, as presented in The second appearance of ground pressure was observed on September 14. When the working face was 12 m ahead of Borehole No.1, the step-up section of rock stratum movement was recorded at anchors #1 and #2 in Borehole No.1, and borehole dislocation was found at a hole depth of −390 m through borehole Camera observation, indicating that SKS 1 (at −460 m), SKS 2 (at −423 m), and SKS 3 (at −400 m) below −390 m had fractured and rotated. At the same time, ground pressure appeared on the working face, opening the working face safety valve with a maximum support resistance of 42 MPa, which is nearly equal to the yield pressure. The amount of downward shrinkage of the movable supporting column was approximately 200–350 mm. The depth of coal wall rib spalling was approximately 0.5–0.8 m, but no roof fall occurred. The strength of ground pressure behaviour was comprehensively evaluated as medium. The ground pressure appeared to be caused by the combined actions of the three key strata under the PKS, namely SKS1, SKS2 and SKS3. The third appearance of ground pressure was observed on September 17. When the working face was 26 m ahead of Borehole No. 1, the step-up section of rock stratum movement was recorded at anchors #1–#4 in Borehole No. 1, and borehole dislocation was observed at a hole depth of −350 m through the borehole Camera, indicating that the four key strata below −350 m had fractured and rotated. At the same time, a strong pressure appeared on the working face, opening the working face safety valve with a maximum support resistance of 47 MPa, which is higher than the yield pressure, leading to serious damage of some safety valves and hydraulic cylinders of the shield support. The amount of downward shrinkage of movable supporting column was approximately 800–1100 mm. The depth of coal wall rib spalling was approximately 1.5–2.0 m and the height of caving gangue accumulation on the scraper conveyor was greater than 1.5 m. The amount of downward shrinkage of movable supporting columns #65–#80 was up to 1100 mm. As the height of the support frame was significantly reduced, the coal mining unit in this area could not move forward. The strength of ground pressure behaviour was comprehensively evaluated as very strong. Unlike the second appearance, the third appearance was due to the fracture motion of the PKS in the overlying strata and led to such a strong ground pressure behaviour. The fracture and movement of overlying strata was controlled by the key strata, exhibiting the characteristics of “group fracture and holistic movement”. With continuous advancing of the working face, the strata successively fractured from the bottom to the top, and the characteristics of “group fracture” with the key stratum at the bottom as the main control body were observed throughout the overlying strata. When a key stratum in the overlying strata fractured, the strata (between this key stratum and the upper stratum adjacent to the key stratum) under its control fractured successively, and the characteristics of “holistic movement” occurred in each group of overlying strata. When a key stratum fractured, the borehole dislocation position directly jumped from the bottom interface of this key stratum to the bottom interface of the upper key stratum that had not fractured. Meanwhile, the step-up section of stratum movement was observed. If the key stratum was in an unfractured state, the flat section of stratum movement was observed. The characteristics of “step-up section + flat section” were observed in the stratum movement of overlying strata and the borehole dislocation position, which reflects the controlling effect of the key stratum on the fracture and movement of the overlying strata. Influence of inclination (not vertical) on the dislocation in borehole No. 2. It is indeed difficult to ensure a full vertical downward drilling. However, the inclination of the borehole does not affect our judgement of the dislocation in the borehole. That is, even if there is a certain degree of inclination in the borehole, the dislocation position of the borehole will still occur at the bottom interface of the key stratum, and the principle can be explained using It can be observed from When the borehole remains vertical, as shown in It can be observed that compared to the vertical borehole, the dislocation of the borehole slanting to the right, shown in In addition, the total installation length of casing is 330 m, and the deformation degree of casing varies with the depth from ground surface to −330 m. In the shallow part, the casing has been extrude and deformed but not sheared off, while in the deeper part, the casing has been shear off, and the degree of shear-off is slightly different at different depths, as shown in The establishment of the spatiotemporal correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key stratum in overlying strata and the stope ground pressure is the basis for determining and designing a reasonable shield support capacity. The fracture and movement of overlying strata was controlled by the key stratum and showed the characteristics of “group fracture and holistic movement”. The stope ground pressure appeared as a result of the fracture and movement of the key stratum. Determining a reasonable shield support capacity is a prerequisite for effectively controlling stope ground pressure. In early coal mining practices of China, only the influence of the fracture movement of the main roof (the first key stratum in the overlying strata) on the stope ground pressure was considered, and multiple (4–8) mining height volume weights were adopted to determine a reasonable shield support capacity. This method was widely used under mining conditions with low mining height. For conditions with large mining height and where the fracture and movement of the key strata affect the stope ground pressure behaviour, it is necessary to establish the spatiotemporal correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key strata and the stope ground pressure behaviour based on the movement pattern of internal strata in the overlying strata, and determine the fracture and movement of the stratum or strata that would account for the stope ground pressure. These factors should be taken into account to scientifically determine a reasonable capacity of the shield support in fully mechanized caving working faces of super-thick coal seams. The fracture and movement of overlying strata caused by coal seam mining were controlled by the key stratum, exhibiting the characteristics of “group fracture and holistic movement”. The characteristics of “step-up section + flat section” between the movement of the key stratum and dislocation position of the ground borehole with the advancement of the working face were presented. The depth position of the “flat section” of the curve corresponded to the position of the bottom interface of the key stratum. Therefore, the pattern of internal stratum movement in the overlying strata and dynamic changes in the pattern of borehole dislocation position could be predicted by distinguishing the position of the key stratum in the overlying strata. The in-situ measurement of internal stratum movement in overlying strata and HD borehole camera observations represent important techniques to fully understand the pattern of movement of overlying strata after coal seam mining. The observation of ground pressure is the basis for accurately evaluating the influence of the fracture and movement of the overlying stratum on the stope ground pressure. Based on the combined observation results, the spatiotemporal correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key stratum and the appearance of stope ground pressure under the mining geological conditions of working face 8203 in Tongxin Coal Mine was established. The main cause of strong ground pressure behaviour was determined to be the fracture and movement of the primary key stratum in the overlying strata. Based on the spatiotemporal correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key stratum and stope ground pressure behaviour, the stratum controlling mainly the strong ground pressure behaviour in the fully-mechanized working face of the super-thick coal seam can be determined. The stratum controlling the strong ground pressure behaviour can be weakened through deep hole blasting, hydraulic fracturing, and other technical measures. In this manner, the fracture release energy can be reduced, and the ground pressure behaviour can be eased. In addition, based on the spatiotemporal correspondence between the fracture and movement of the key stratum and stope ground pressure behaviour, the stratum or strata in the overlying strata that account for the stope ground pressure were identified. This provides guidance for determining a reasonable capacity of shield support under mining conditions of super-thick coal seams. Financial supports from the