It is well known that organic solar cells (OSCs) with inverted geometry have not only demonstrated a better stability and longer device life time but also have shown improved power conversion efficiency (PCE). Recent studies exhibit that incorporation of metal and/or semiconducting nanoparticles (NPs) can further increase the PCE for OSCs. In this present work, we have synthesized SiO2 NPs of various sizes (25, 50, 75 and 100nm) using the modified Stober method and incorporated them into P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer and ZnO based electron transport layer (ETL) in order to investigate the light trapping effects in an OSC. Absorption studies have shown a considerable increase in photo absorption in both cases. The fabricated devices demonstrated 13% increase in the PCE when SiO2 NPs are incorporated in P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer, whereas PCE was increased by 20% when SiO2 NPs are incorporated in ZnO based ETL. Mott–Schottky analysis and impedance spectroscopy measurements have been carried out to determine the depletion width and global mobility for both the devices. The possible reason for PCE enhancement and the role of SiO2 NPs in active layer and ZnO ETL are explained on the basis of the results obtained from Mott–Schottky analysis and impedance spectroscopy measurements.Owing to the promising features like low cost, light weight, easy processability, eco-friendly, and high-mechanical flexibility, bulk heterojunction based organic solar cells (OSCs) are always at the helm of research when compared to other energy harvesting devices Different strategies such as folded device architectures To overcome these obstacles, in our present work, both the size of SiO Ammonium hydroxide, tetraethoxysilane (TEOS, 99%) and Ethyl alcohol were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and their aqueous solutions were prepared in deionized (DI) water (resistivity The conventional Stober method was utilized to synthesis the silica nanoparticles and the method was further modified for synthesizing different sizes of SiO ZnO was used as an ETL and its preparation procedures were adopted from the literature Devices were fabricated by the method reported in our previous work   The optical absorption studies have been carried out to experimentally investigate the influence of incorporation of different sizes of SiO The scenario is slightly different when the different sizes of SiO Two different types of devices ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM:SiO  All the extracted parameters from the 1/  As discussed in our previous work In conclusion, we have successfully synthesized and characterized different sizes of SiO The authors would like to acknowledge Solar Energy Research Initiative (SERI) program (Grant No. DST/TM/SERI/2k12/21(G) DTD 03/07/2013) of Department of Science and Technology (DST), India and Erasmus Mundus Student Exchange program for providing funding to carry out this research. The authors also thank National Center for Photovoltaic Research and Education (NCPRE), Center for Excellence in Nanoelectronics (CEN), Department of Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science (MEMS) at Indian Institute of Technology Bombay (IIT Bombay), Mumbai for providing various facilities for device fabrication and characterization. Further, Sankara Rao Gollu is thankful to Prof. Rajeev Ahuja and his research group members at Condensed Matter Theory Division, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. All the authors declare no financial conflict of interest.