The idea to organize an international workshop dedicated to glass and entropy was born during the session ‘Thermodynamics, Rheology, and Glass Transition’ held at the 21st International Congress on Glass, Strasbourg, 2007. In this most interesting session, controversial viewpoints and opinions on the entropy of the glassy state clashed and led to a highly emotional scientific debate. Since then, none of the controversial issues could be resolved in a satisfactory way, and more and more researchers from different fields (glass and polymer sciences, statistical mechanics, and computational simulation) agreed that there is a need to meet within the frame of a workshop specifically dedicated to glass and its entropy. Representatives from Corning’s European Technology Center, Avon, France spontaneously opted to sponsor such a workshop, and the two of us agreed to organize and chair it. The workshop was endorsed by the newly founded Technical Committee 08 ‘Relaxation Phenomena in Glasses’ of the International Commission on Glass and supported locally by the Slovak Glass Society. The basis of today’s controversy is Nernst’s theorem which he presented in 1905, one day before Christmas, at a meeting of the Königliche Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften (Göttingen, Germany The eventual formulation of the third law, however, goes back to Planck Since, scientists have been wrestling with the possibility of finite entropy – more precisely, of a finite positive entropy difference to the universal limit – at absolute zero temperature for certain types of materials. The debate focused on the concept of internal equilibrium and based on pioneering experimental work by Simon on glassy glycerol and silica The essence of the present controversy may be highlighted by the following questions, Does a glass possess a finite residual entropy at absolute zero? And how does the entropy of a glass forming system change in the glass transition range? Based on the computation of energy landscapes and the concept of broken ergodicity, the glassy state is described in terms of a liquid confined to a single metabasin of the configurational phase space with an entropy loss – but no latent heat – accompanying the glass transition. In this frame of description, a glass does not appear to have any residual entropy at absolute zero. The opposite answer is derived by means of classical thermodynamics and the thermodynamics of irreversible processes. This controversy clearly shows that the statement made in the year 1995 by the 1997 Nobel laureate (physics) Anderson The International Workshop on Glass and Entropy was held at Trencin, Slovak Republic, from June 25 to 27, 2008. It attracted contributions from 38 outstanding scientists. The present volume of the Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids compiles most of these contributions. For the time being, is not the intent of this compilation to resolve the above controversy. Rather, the intention is to give individual scientists a platform to present their viewpoints and mark their positions in contrast to deviating opinions within one single document. It is hoped that the present volume of the Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids will serve as a reference point for future discussion. Curiosity is one of the fundamental motivations to explore nature, controversy and doubt are the mechanisms pinpointing the unsolved questions, but experiment is the ultimate criterion to resolve such questions. It is hoped that, as a result of the workshop, crucial experiments will be suggested which will, ultimately, help to settle the controversy in a satisfactory way.