In this laboratory study thermo-gravimetric analyses were conducted to determine the influence of the addition of an alkaline metal catalyst (K2CO3 incorporated into a fine discard coal agglomerate mixture by physical mixing) on the CO2 gasification char reactivity of 10mm coal pellets subjected at high temperatures (900–1000°C). It was found that catalyst addition significantly increased the reaction rate of the carbon conversion. The reaction rate was doubled for the 5% catalyst addition runs compared to the base case (0% catalyst at 900°C), 120% faster at 950°C and, 93% faster at 1000°C. The temperature influenced the reaction rate, thereby decreasing the reaction time from 6.4h at 900°C to 3.4h at 950°C and, 1.9h at 1000°C for the 5% catalyst addition. The fastest time needed for conversion was with the use of 5% catalyst addition at 1000°C, which required only 13% of the total time needed in comparison with the base case (14h). The conversion plots were further analyzed, and it was concluded that the lines followed the homogeneous model (REF) up till a conversion of 50% for the pelletized particles and 20% for the raw coal.The observed activation energy was also found to be lower in the coal pellet catalyzed system when compared to raw run of mine (R.O.M.) coal of the same dimensions as for the coal agglomerates (199kJ/mol) and was calculated to be 195kJ/mol, 184kJ/mol, and 156kJ/mol for the 1%, 3% and 5% catalyst addition runs, respectively. These results show that there is an opportunity to possibly improve on the fluidised-bed/large particle gasifier throughput by speeding up the time needed for the rate limiting CO2 gasification reaction in a catalysed system comprising of fine discard coal agglomerates containing an alkaline additive.Of the 255 Agglomeration of fine coal can be classified into briquetting and pelletizing, either with or without binders. Pellets are normally cylindrical with a diameter ranging from 6 to 12 Much lab research has been conducted in the field of catalytic gasification, where small coal particles (<1 The main objective of the study is to determine, if the addition of a catalyst (1%, 3%, 5% K This section will describe the preparation of the coal pellets and the apparatus used, as well as the reactivity testing experimental procedures followed. Coal samples used in the study include (1) discard seam 4 Highveld coal filter-cake with a size of <212 The catalyst used in the study is potassium carbonate (K The LRX plus machine is primarily used for material testing. In this study, it was used for the pressing of coal pellets as well as for pellet compressive strength testing. It has a single column with a crosshead travel range of 735 The reactivity experiments were conducted in duplicate on both the pellets and R.O.M. coal using a TGA/DSC1 STAR thermo-gravimetric analyser (TGA.) The machine contains a horizontal furnace which minimizes possible turbulence caused by thermal buoyancy and purge gas. The machine is fully automated and can contain 34 samples (carousel fed) and run 24   When comparing the results presented in The conversion plots, These results show that there is an opportunity, to possibly improve on the fixed-bed gasifier throughput by speeding up the time needed for the rate limiting CO This study proved that the addition of a catalyst (1–5% K It was found that the addition of catalyst substantially increased the reaction rate of the conversion. The reaction rate was doubled for the 5% catalyst addition runs compared to the base case (0% catalyst at 900 The activation energy was also found to be lower in the coal pellet catalyzed system when compared to raw R.O.M. coal (199 The information presented in this paper is based on the research financially supported by the South African Research Chairs Initiative (SARChI) of the Department of Science and Technology and National Research Foundation of South Africa (Coal Research Chair Grant No. 86880). Any opinion, finding or conclusion or recommendation expressed in this material is that of the author(s) and the NRF does not accept any liability in this regard.