In this paper, novel thiadiazole-thione surfactants including 5-heptyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione (HpSDT), 5-phenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione (PSDT) and 5-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione (HPhSDT) were synthesized and originally introduced as collectors in froth flotation. Micro-flotation tests showed that HpSDT exhibited better flotation response to malachite than PSDT and HPhSDT, as well as excellent flotation selectivity against quartz. The contact angle results inferred that the hydrophobization intensity of these collectors toward malachite was in the order as HpSDT>PSDT>HPhSDT. ζ-potential recommended a chemisorption of HpSDT on malachite surfaces. FTIR deduced that cupric or cuprous atoms might bond with the S and N atoms of HpSDT to form a conjugated ring. XPS further gave an additional evidence that HpSDT-Cu(I) complexes were produced on malachite surfaces via combining surface Cu atoms with HpSDT’s N and S atoms, with reducing surface Cu(II) to Cu(I). The tighter orientation arrangement on malachite and stronger hydrophobicity rendered HpSDT to possess better flotation affinity toward malachite than PSDT and HPhSDT.As important raw materials for commercial production of copper, copper oxide ores have become increasingly significant due to the overexploitation of copper sulfide ores To promote the flotation recovery of copper oxide minerals, diverse chelating-type collectors have been developed and evaluated Recently, the excellent flotation performances of 2-hexyl-4-amino-1,2,4-triazole-5-thione (HATT) to malachite and chalcopyrite has been proved Thiadiazole-thione surfactants also contain S, N-donor atoms and own powerful coordination ability to metal atoms In this paper, novel thiadiazole-thione surfactants including 5-heptyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione (HpSDT), 5-phenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione (PSDT) and 5-hydroxyphenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thione (HPhSDT) were synthesized and characterized by FTIR (Fourier transform infrared) and NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) spectra, and their collecting power toward malachite or quartz was investigated by micro-flotation experiments. Afterwards, the adsorption mechanism of thiadiazole-thione collectors to malachite was evaluated through contact angle, ζ-potential, FTIR and XPS (X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy). HpSDT, PSDT and HPhSDT were synthesized in our laboratory and their purity was over 98.5% after recrystallization A modified 220 The wettability of new-polished malachite surfaces before and after HpSDT, PSDT or HPhSDT adsorption was detected on the JC2000C device (Zhongchen Digital, China) The ζ-potential of malachite particles with or without HpSDT, PSDT or HPhSDT treatment was detected under 1 The FTIR spectra of HpSDT, its reaction products with Cu During HpSDT interaction with Cu The XPS spectra for HpSDT, HpSDT-Cu The synthetic route of HpSDT, PSDT and HPhSDT was shown in Hydrazine compounds ( The dithiocarbazate intermediates (  The flotation response of malachite to the dosage of the three thiadiazole-thione collectors at pH ∼9.2 was presented in  The results in The contact angle of the freshly-polished malachite surface was measured to be around 43° by the static water drop method. The effect of pH (at 5    XPS is a useful tool for directly detecting the elemental compositions and chemical states of interaction products  The S 2p XPS spectra are constituted of two Gaussian–Lorentzian bands with a 1.18  The micro-flotation results elucidated that HpSDT exhibited better flotation properties toward malachite than PSDT and HPhSDT, as well as excellent flotation selectivity against quartz. The contact angle measurement confirmed the improved hydrophobicity of malachite surfaces after adsorption of HpSDT, PSDT or HPhSDT. The hydrophobicity of malachite surface after adsorption of these collectors followed the order as HpSDT HpSDT, PSDT and HPhSDT have the same minerophilic group (i.e., thiadiazole-thione) and different hydrophobic groups (i.e., heptyl, phenyl and hydroxyphenyl, respectively). They might exhibit the different strength of hydrophobization to malachite. The log P (i.e., The pK FTIR spectra results exhibited that after reaction with Cu The fine Cu, S and N XPS recommended that the HpSDT-Cu complexes was produced on malachite through formation of Cu Actually, the structure of the HpSDT-Cu According to the analyses and discussion mentioned above, a potential adsorption model of HpSDT, PSDT or HPhSDT on malachite surfaces was recommended as listed in In this paper, novel thiadiazole-thione surfactants including HpSDT, PSDT and HPhSDT were synthesized and characterized by FTIR and NMR spectra. Their flotation properties or adsorption mechanism to malachite or quartz were also evaluated. Based on the findings and analyses of micro-flotation, contact angle, ζ-potential, FTIR and XPS, we can draw the conclusions. The micro-flotation results displayed that HpSDT exhibited better flotation response toward malachite than PSDT and HPhSDT, as well as excellent flotation selectivity against quartz. The contact angle and ζ-potential findings inferred that the adsorption of thiadiazole-thione collectors on to malachite improved its surface hydrophobicity. And, the intensity of their hydrophobization toward malachite was in the order as HpSDT FTIR spectra recommended that the Cu The tighter orientation arrangement and stronger hydrophobicity of HpSDT rendered it to possess better flotation affinity toward malachite than PSDT and HPhSDT. The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The detailed description of experimental operations, the figures and tables of NMR spectra for HpSDT, PSDT and HPhSDT, and the survey XPS spectra and their analyses were listed in Supporting Information. The following is Supplementary data to this article: