Regional-scale faults typically experience complex, long-lasting histories, commonly recording evidence of multiple reactivation events. Therefore, they contain multiscalar structural domains characterised by varying microstructures, mineralogical compositions and kinematics. These domains result from differential strain partitioning during the recorded faulting stages, and, as a result, can preserve the isotopic and kinematic signature of the different slip periods. Their detailed structural analysis integrated with K-Ar dating of the fault rock assemblage can help to identify these commonly tightly juxtaposed, although not coeval, domains, which we refer herein to as “Brittle Structural Facies” (BSF). BSF analysis is pivotal (i) to understand the structural heterogeneity of fault zones, (ii) the diachronic formation of geometrically and kinematically complex fault cores and (iii) to reconstruct faults' evolution in time and through space. Following this approach, this study relies on meso- and microstructural analysis, chemical characterisation and K-Ar dating to unravel the evolution of the Lærdal-Gjende Fault (LGF, southwestern Norway). The LGF is a multiply reactivated top-to-the-NW extensional fault with a 1 m thick poorly consolidated core. We recognised, sampled and characterised five BSF: I) Indurated dark reddish gouge, (II) Poorly consolidated cataclasite, (III) Weakly foliated greenish gouge, (IV) Clay-rich gouge and (V) A few mm-thick clay smear decorating the principal slip surface. Samples were separated into five grain size fractions (from <0.1 to 6-10 μm) and analysed by X-Ray Diffraction, Transmission Electron Microscopy and K-Ar geochronology. A c. 180 Ma age cluster defined by 10 ages of the coarsest grain size fractions (2-10 μm) likely documents fault nucleation during Jurassic rifting in the North Sea. The ages of the finest fractions, enriched in synkinematic K-bearing minerals (illite, smectite and K-feldspar), constrain four periods of faulting at c. 121 ± 3, 87 ± 2, 78 ± 2 and 57 ± 1 Ma. Ages indicate that the LGF accommodated strain due to hyperextension of the Mid-Norwegian margin down to the Late Cretaceous and finally slipped again during the Paleogene. The alternating widening and narrowing of the active fault zone in response to varying deformation mechanisms, including coseismic rupturing, formed the present complex fault architecture. This study highlights the importance of BSF characterisation as part of a multidisciplinary workflow to derive structural and temporal datasets of complex fault zones. BSF analysis, moreover, is demonstrated to be key for investigating the diachronic evolution of fault cores and to resolve multiple slip events of faults.Fault zones are expression of brittle deformation in the Earth upper crust, where slip localises in response to stresses that exceed the rock strength. Their nucleation and progressive growth lead to the formation of fault cores and surrounding damage zones ( Many brittle faults can be interpreted as the summation of multiple deformation events through time. During each faulting episode, slip and strain localisation lead to progressive comminution of the host rock and synkinematic crystallisation of new minerals, such as clays and phyllosilicates. Importantly, Unravelling the relationships between mineral assemblages, age and kinematic framework of all recorded slip events within a fault remains, however, an arduous task ( The necessity of a time-constrained reconstruction of faults' evolution has therefore led structural geologists to study in detail their internal architecture (e.g. To document our approach and the usefulness of the BSF concept, we present a structural-geochronological workflow that serves as an example of general validity when aiming to unravel the evolution of long-lived faults. We studied the Lærdal-Gjende Fault (LGF), a multiply reactivated extensional fault in southwestern Norway ( The study area is in southwestern Norway, near the town of Lærdal ( Caledonian collisional tectonics led to an over-thickened orogenic pile that collapsed during the Early Devonian (408-402 Ma; Thermochronological studies indicate that two main episodes of enhanced, rapid exhumation affected southwestern Norway in the Permo-Triassic and in the late Cretaceous-Cenozoic ( Two studies have focused on the age of brittle deformation along the LGF. Our study is based on a combined structural-geochronological approach ( Characterisation of the samples for K-Ar radiometric dating was performed at the laboratories of the Geological Survey of Norway (Trondheim, Norway) following the routines described by The mineralogical composition of each grain size fraction for each sample was obtained by XRD analysis (with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer). Mineral quantification was carried out on randomly prepared specimens using Rietveld modelling with the TOPAS 5 software. Refined parameters include crystallite size, unit cell dimensions, sample displacement, preferred orientation and background coefficients. The lower limit of quantification and accuracy are mineral-dependent but are generally 1 wt% and 2-3 wt%, respectively. The finest <0.1 μm grain size fractions could not be analysed by XRD due to too low sample mass being recovered from these fractions. Detection and imaging of K-bearing phases therein were thus carried out with a TEM (JEOL JEM-2100) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyser (EDS) at the NORTEM laboratory of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU). After the structural characterisation of the BFS, and the identification of the K-bearing phases, all grain size fractions were dated by K-Ar technique. Readers are referred to Appendix The LGF is a composite brittle structure defined by a 1-1.5 m thick fault core and an up to 200 m thick asymmetric damage zone. The damage zone is mainly composed of grey-pale green cohesive cataclasite and is thicker in the hanging wall. A dense and complex network of 1-3 cm thick epidote and quartz veins cuts across the hanging wall ( The fault core is a tabular structure containing a principal slip surface that dips 35° to the NW and bears W-plunging slickenlines ( The fault core contains juxtaposed discrete brittle domains delimited by sharp boundaries, each corresponding to one of the identified BSF of the LGF ( Crosscutting relationships at the outcrop allowed to define the relative temporal sequence of BSF formation, from the oldest (BSF I) to the youngest (BSF V). The fault core contains competent and internally fractured lenses of a dark reddish grey indurated gouge (BSF I, White, undulating zeolite veins are sub-parallel to the principal slip surface ( Two other distinct types of clay-rich gouge occur in the inner part of the core. A green-grey and plastic gouge variety is preserved exclusively at the north-western exposed termination of the fault, geometrically below the principal slip surface (BSF IV, The damage zone in the hanging wall is mainly composed of proto-cataclastic to ultracataclastic rocks ( Rocks in the fault core form a heterogeneous fault rock assemblage from a microstructural point of view. The dark reddish grey indurated gouge (BSF I) is mainly composed of ultrafine-grained feldspar and clay minerals. Additionally, it exhibits rounded glassy and microcrystalline domains, containing spherulites varying in diameter from 5 to 10 μm ( The pale green cataclasite (BSF II), which forms the thickest portion of the LGF core, is composed of different domains and types of clasts ( Other clasts within the pale green cataclasite are, instead, remnants of earlier generations of brittle fault rocks. Dark reddish, very fine-grained clasts are interpreted to be derived from BSF I. Some clasts in the pale green cataclasite, moreover, contain a fine-grained matrix embedding variably sized, reworked sub-rounded quartz and plagioclase ( 1 to 5 mm-thick zeolite veins cut across the fault core (BSF I, II and III) but are absent in the gouges along the principal slip surface. Zeolite forms either euhedral or stretched fibres elongated perpendicular or at high angle to the vein walls. Randomly oriented laumontite crystals are found in dilatant domains around angular clasts of earlier generations of fault rocks ( Vertical and sub-vertical calcite veins strike NE-SW and have a variable thickness between 10 μm and a few mm. Fibrous calcite crystals are oriented WSW-ENE/W-E, at high angle to the vein boundaries ( In summary, microstructural observations constrain an increasing intensity of brittle deformation toward the LGF core. Mylonite- and different generations of reworked cataclasite/gouge clasts indicate a polyphase deformation history. Clasts of pseudotachylyte reworked within the indurated fault gouge prove the coseismic character of at least one of the early deformation events. Microstructural analysis and the observed crosscutting relationships permit constraining the following temporal sequence of veining, from old to young: 1) Pervasive chaotic system of epidote and quartz veins within the damage zone ( Samples from all the studied BSF have different mineralogical compositions. The relative abundance of mineral phases varies with grain size within the same sample. K-feldspar, epidote, chlorite and smectite occur in all structural facies ( In all samples, except that from BSF II, the percentage of K-feldspar decreases towards the finer grain size fractions ( Chlorite is present in all dated fractions and its content tends to increase with decreasing grain size. Plagioclase is not ubiquitous in the samples, but it is one of the main components in BSF II and III. Epidote is a common phase in all BSF, but its content generally decreases with decreasing grain size. It is very abundant (c. 45 wt%) in the foliated greenish gouge of BSF III. Quartz is only sporadically found in BSF III, IV and V, and its concentration decreases steadily with grain size. Two zeolite types occur with different relative abundance, stilbite and laumontite ( In summary, the general trend of decreasing quartz, epidote and K-feldspar contents in the finer grain-size fractions (0.1-0.4 and 0.4-2 μm) is compensated by the increase of illite, smectite and chlorite. This trend suggests that quartz and epidote are protolithic minerals that did not crystallise during deformation. Pyroxene is a high temperature phase, and is thus considered to be inherited in all BSF. The euhedral habit of K-feldspar in the <0.1 μm grain size fraction ( K-Ar ages range from 195 ± 4 Ma to 57 ± 1 Ma ( For the greenish cataclasite (BSF II) we could not date the <0.1 μm fraction; the 0.1-0.4 μm fraction yielded a date of 132 ± 3 Ma, which progressively increases towards the 6-10 μm fraction and represents the oldest age of the entire dataset at 195 ± 4 Ma. In the “age vs. grain size fraction” diagram of The “age vs. grain size” curves obtained during this study ( Since brittle faulting is dilatational and may thus enhance the ingress of fluids into the actively deforming rock volume, synkinematic formation of new phases and/or recrystallisation of pre-existing minerals (or parts thereof) is common ( The coarser grain size fractions, on the contrary, are enriched in protolithic (inherited) minerals, such as, for example, older generations of K-feldspar. If the coarser grain sizes of different samples from one single fault zone yield the same age, it is reasonable to conclude that they constrain a common thermal or faulting event. Such an early event likely occurred at higher temperature than the more recent ones recorded by the finer fractions (e.g. In agreement with our compositional data, we adopt the Age Attractor Model ( In this study, the ages of all BSF of the fault core span the c. 195 to 57 Ma time interval. Interestingly, there are no ages older than 195 ± 4 Ma (Jurassic). The Jurassic mean age of 179 ± 2 Ma calculated from all the 2-6 and 6-10 μm grain size fractions cannot be related to the age of the host rock, because the youngest host rock in Lærdal is Cambrian ( The K-Ar dating approach to brittle faults is generally applied on clays separated from fault rocks ( In order to reconstruct the LGF evolution, being able to assign a K-Ar date to each recognised BSF allows us to correlate the age of K-bearing mineral authigenesis with a specific brittle deformation event. Microstructural observations indicate that the LGF grew in response to widespread cataclastic flow and fracturing superposed on an earlier ductile precursor. The presence of mylonite clasts and multiple generations of cataclasite/gouge support the interpretation of a polyphase deformation history. Additionally, the different composition of each BSF suggests that the LGF has deformed different lithologies and units during its multiple reactivations. In the following, we deconvolve the LGF deformation history and propose a time-constrained conceptual model for the fault ( At c. 87 Ma a weakly foliated gouge formed in the centre of the fault core (BSF III, In agreement with the discussed scenario of decreasing temperature through time, the progressive evolution of the fault caused the formation of unconsolidated, extremely localised fault gouges (BSF IV and V) in the centre of the core. BSF IV and V are distinctly different from the older brittle facies as they include significant amounts of smectite and illite. A green-grey gouge enriched in synkinematic illite, smectite and chlorite formed at 78 Ma ( Our new dataset has also implications for the regional geological framework. The obtained LGF geochronological results do not record any evidence of fault activity prior to the Jurassic ( The LGF preserves evidence of at least five geological significant (re)activation episodes (from the Jurassic to the Paleogene), with indications of coseismic rupturing. Pseudotachylyte developed likely during the Jurassic or the possible earlier localisation history of the LGF. The oldest recorded event at c. 180 Ma could represent crustal stretching associated with the second phase of the North Sea rifting ( We have presented a methodological approach that is of general validity and that can aid when reading geological archives stored in brittle faults. The present-day LGF core exposes the tight juxtaposition of several BSF. Each BSF is defined by specific fault rocks and is characterised by a unique isotopic signature, fully resolvable by K-Ar geochronology. This study also confirms that extreme localisation of strain, associated with synkinematic (re)crystallisation is indeed a common process within brittle faults (cf. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This paper presents some of the results obtained during the BASE project (“Basement fracturing and weathering onshore and offshore Norway—Genesis, age, and landscape development”), a research initiative launched and steered by the Geological Survey of Norway ( The mineralogical composition of all grain size fractions was studied with X-ray diffraction (XRD). Randomly-oriented samples were prepared by side-loading and analysed with a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer operating with a Cu X-ray tube (40 kV/40 mA) and Lynxeye XE detector. XRD scanning was performed from 3 to 75° 2 The procedure followed to perform K-Ar dating of each grain size fractions starts with packing aliquots of air-dry clay samples in molybdenum foil. They are weighed using a Mettler Toledo XPE26DR microbalance, with a resolution of 2 μg and a combined weighing uncertainty of 4 μg. Samples are degassed at 1400 Potassium concentrations are determined by fluxing approximately 50 mg of clay sample in lithium tetraborate. The resulting glass is dissolved in HNO Radiogenic 40Ar* concentrations, relative uncertainties, and K-Ar ages are calculated using the equation of