A new type of solid contact ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) with two PVC-based sandwiched membranes are described. The first membrane contains suspension of halogen salts of silver and alkaline metals as well as silver nanoparticles and is placed on Ag substrate or conducting substrate covered with silver. It acts as a solid contact of an ion-selective electrode when covered with the second PVC membrane sensitive to potassium, sodium or chloride ions. In this way, the potassium, sodium and chloride electrodes characterized by very stable and reproducible standard potentials and slope were obtained. For example, all tested potassium electrodes with KBr/AgBr based solid contact exhibited E° values equal to: −191.2 ± 1.7 mV and the slope values equal to: −57.1 ± 0.8 mV/pK. Similarly, good results were also obtained for sodium and chloride ISEs. The solid contact offered allows to fabricate so-called “calibration free” ion-sensors.The ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) have been widely applied as potentiometric sensors in chemical analysis for many decades [ Applying current pulse to the solid contact ISEs with an intermediate layer consisting of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) doped with poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) or short-circuiting of such ISE with a conventional reference electrode provides an interesting route to control the phase boundary potentials at the intermediate layer [ It was also shown that the ion exchanger membrane with tris(1,10-phenanthroline) complexes of Co(II) and Co(III) in 1:1 ratio significantly reduced the standard deviation of E°, [ In 2017 we have described the all-solid-state reference electrodes with PVC based heterogeneous membranes deposited on Ag substrate [ Similarly, good results were obtained for the reference electrodes with PVC based membranes containing chloride salts. These reference membranes contained (in weight %): PVC - 17.6%, DOS – 29.3%, AgCl – 14.7%, KCl – 38.4%. In this case the potential values measured for all electrodes tested were in the range −1 ± 10 mV. Again, for short series of the electrodes, potential differences didn’t exceed ± 3 mV. It should be noted that the equally good results were obtained also for the electrodes containing suspension of NaBr/AgBr or NaCl/AgCl in PVC/DOS matrix. It is well known that PVC based membranes absorb 0.1–0.4 wt % of water during contact with solutions. Taking into account the amount of salts and possible water content inside the PVC membrane, one can suppose that solution saturated by soluble salts and soluble complexes of silver can be formed inside the membrane phase. Such solution can determine the potential drop on the membrane/Ag substrate phase boundary. It was confirmed experimentally. It was also confirmed that soluble salt is very slowly washed out from membrane phase and saturated solution is still present inside the membrane phase, even after ten days long water test. Almost invariant potential values measured prior to and after water test confirmed this assumption. Our reference heterogenous membrane contact can be treated as a kind of “internal solution”, made by soluble salt and silver complexes filling the membrane pores. This mixture is responsible for the stable and reproducible potential drop on Ag/reference membrane phase boundary. Moreover, a constant concentration of soluble salt inside the reference membrane (saturated solution), opens perspective that after covering the reference membrane with the ion-selective membrane, stable and reproducible potential drop at this REF-ISE boundary is developed. All internal potential drops for a series of such solid contact electrodes should be reproducible, standard potential values as well. This means “calibration free” electrodes should be within reach, which was proved experimentally. In this paper we report on the behavior the heterogenous membrane used as the internal solid contact for sodium, potassium and chloride ion-selective electrodes Potassium ionophore I (valinomycin), Sodium ionophore II (tridodecylmethylammonium chloride), potassium tetrakis(4-chlorophenyl)borate, 1,2-Dimethyl-3-nitrobenzene, 2-nitrophenyl octyl ether, sodium tetraphenylborate, dibutyl sebacate, Bis(2-ethylhexyl) sebacate (DOS), poly(vinyl chloride) high molecular weight (PVC), were purchased from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). Silver nanowires of diameter 175 nm x 20–50 nm as 0.5% suspension in isopropanol obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany) were used as received. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) purchased from Sigma-Aldrich was distilled before use. The other compounds used were obtained as p.a. form POCh, Poland and Merck, Germany and used as received. Gases were obtained from Linde Gas, Poland. Water re-distilled from quartz was used to prepare the solutions. All solutions with concentrations lower than 0.01 mol dm 2.06 g Bis(2-ethylhexyl)-sebacate (DOS) and 1.24 g poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC) were dissolved in 25 ml of freshly distilled THF. To prepare AgBr/KBr based reference cocktail, silver bromide and potassium bromide were dried, mixed in molar ratio 1:5, and thoroughly ground. Next 1.5 ml of PVC/DOS solution in THF were added to 0.336 g of AgBr/KBr mixture. To prepare AgBr/NaBr based reference cocktail silver bromide and sodium bromide were dried, mixed in molar ratio 1:5, and thoroughly ground. Next 1.5 ml of PVC/DOS solution in THF were added to 0.304 g of AgBr/NaBr mixture. To prepare AgCl/KCl based reference cocktail, silver chloride and potassium chloride were dried, mixed in molar ratio 1:5, and thoroughly ground. Next 1.5 ml of PVC/DOS solution in THF and 0.1 ml silver nanowires in isopropanol were added to 0.224 g of AgCl/KCl mixture. To prepare AgCl/NaCl based reference cocktail, silver chloride and sodium chloride were dried, mixed in molar ratio 1:5, and thoroughly ground. Next 1.5 ml of PVC/DOS solution in THF and 0.1 ml silver nanowires in isopropanol were added to 0.189 g of AgCl/NaCl mixture. The potassium, sodium or chloride sensitive cocktails were prepared according to Fluka prescriptions. Before membrane casting, each reference cocktail was vigorously mixed and a cloudy mixture of 100–200 μl (REF electrodes) or 20–50 μl (solid contact ISEs) was deposited on the silver or silver covered substrate. Before the reference cocktail casting, the surfaces of the Ag or Ag covered substrate were rinsed with methanol and THF. The reference cocktails were allowed to dry for at least 24 h. To prepare solid contact ISEs, dry reference membranes were covered with the appropriate ion-selective cocktails (100–200 μl) and allowed to dry for at least 24 h. The potentiometric measurements were performed using a homemade 16-channel set-up. The input impedance was greater than 10 In the potentiometric measurements the double junction REF251 (Metrohm; Switzerland) reference electrodes were used. All experiments were performed at room temperature (22–24 °C). It was shown earlier [ Usually, 200 μl of the reference cocktails containing (after drying) 9.87 mg PVC, 16.5 mg DOS, 10.8 mg AgBr and 34.4 mg KBr (or 9.87 mg PVC, 16.5 mg DOS, 8.3 mg AgCl and 21.6 mg KCl) were deposited onto Ag substrate to prepare the reference electrodes. It is known that PVC based membranes absorb 0.1 – 0.4 wt % of water during contact with solutions. Assuming the biggest value of 0.4 wt%, it follows that the membrane containing 9.87 mg PVC can uptake 0.04 mg of water. Taking into account KBr and KCl solubility (68 g and 35.5 g in 100 g of water, respectively) it follows that saturated KBr or KCl solutions must be formed inside the reference membranes after the electrode conditioning. Under such conditions, soluble silver complexes with bromide or chloride can be formed as well. According to our assumption, the presence of such solution inside the membrane determined potential drop at Ag substrate/membrane phase boundary. To prove this hypothesis, the potential values of the uncovered silver electrodes as well as potential of the electrodes with reference membranes deposited on Ag substrate were measured, first in saturated KBr or KCl solution and then in the solution saturated with both KBr or KCl, and adequate silver complexes. In the saturated KBr solution, mean potential values measured for the Ag electrode and the KBr/AgBr based reference electrodes were different and equal to: If measurements were performed in the solution saturated with both KBr and AgBr, almost the same potential values for both types of electrodes were measured: Similarly, in the saturated KCl solution, mean potential values measured for the Ag electrode and the KCl/AgCl based reference electrodes were different too: Again, if the measurements were performed in solution saturated with both KCl and AgCl almost the same potential values with both types were measured: The obtained results have proven our assumption that such solutions are present inside the reference membranes and determine the potential drop at Ag substrate/reference membrane phase. Both kind of the reference electrodes with membranes containing chloride or bromide salts mixtures, preserved stable potential during prolonged contact with water. For example, mean potential values recorded during 15 h long contact with deionized water was equal to 0.1 ± 1.0 mV for chloride based electrodes and −155.0 ± 1.1 mV for bromide based electrodes. These mean and SD values were calculated on the basis of 2700 potential readings taken within 15 h experimental period. It indicated that composition of solution inside the reference membranes was not changed, i.e. dissolved salts were washed out very slowly from the reference membranes. Observation of water conductivity changes remaining in contact with chloride or bromide based reference membranes has proved it. For example, water conductivity increased up to 3500 μS after ten days long contact with the membranes containing KBr/AgBr suspension. As it follows from calibration, conductivity close to 8000 μS should be obtained after complete KBr removing from membranes. This indicates that only 45% of KBr initially present in membranes was washed out. The amount of KBr remaining (about 18.9 mg) is still high enough to form saturated solution inside the membrane phase. Almost unchanged potential values measured prior to and after water test have proved it additionally. Similar results were obtained also for the membranes containing NaBr/AgBr, KCl/AgCl or NaCl/AgCl mixtures. On the other hand, slow salt outflow may stabilize diffusion potential at the reference membrane/solution phase boundary. The heterogenous membrane of the reference electrodes developed, owing to trace amount of water, might be treated as the container for “internal solution”. After covering such a membrane with ion-selective membrane sensitive for ions presents in the REF membrane the ion transfer exchange processes will be possible. Because of constant main ion activity inside the REF membrane (saturated solution), the potential drop formed on the ISE/REF membrane phase should be determined and stable. In this way, all internal potential drops (formed on the REF/Ag substrate and REF/ISE membrane phase) should be the same for the series of such solid contact electrodes. Any potential changes may be caused by changes of the potential drop formed at the boundary of ISE membrane with the investigated solution only. In this way, the so called “calibration free” electrodes can be obtained. Initial potential drift of such electrodes was dependent on ISE membrane thickness, as it is shown in the So far, the best electrodes with longest time of operation and readout stability were obtained for 0.3 – 0.5 mm thick potassium membranes. Potential drifts of such electrodes during conditioning in 0.1 M KCl are shown in the  The mean values of standard potentials and slopes determined on the basis of calibration presented in Standard potential and slope values of such K-ISE remained almost unchanged for two weeks long conditioning in 0.1 M KCl solution. For example, E° and slope values were equal to −192.8 ± 0.4 mV and −56.3 ± 0.2 mV/pK after 3 h of soaking, whereas after two weeks of soaking these were equal to −192.6 ± 0.7 mV and −57.4 ± 0.2 mV/pK (determined in the concentration range 0.0001 M– 0.1 M). Potential differences measured for the reference electrodes with AgBr/KBr and AgCl/KCl based membranes are close to 156 mV. Both membranes contain saturates KBr or saturated KCl solutions with similar potassium ion activity. In this way, after covering with potassium sensitive membranes, the potential drops formed on ISE/REF phase boundary should be similar. Under such assumption the measured potential differences between electrodes with chloride and bromide based solid contact should be mainly dependent on potential drops formed on REF/Ag phase boundary, and close to 156 mV. This assumption was also fully confirmed experimentally. As an example, in Potential differences between the electrodes with bromide and chloride based solid contact within the concentration range tested were equal to 155.4 ± 2.0 mV for the series made in year 2017 and 157.9 ± 2.3 mV for series made in year 2018. Both types of electrodes with bromide as well as chloride based solid contact gave reproducible values of standard potential and slopes. For example, mean values of standard potential and slope determined in the concentration range 0.0001 M - 0.1 M for the electrodes with bromide based solid contact were equal to: The mean values of standard potential and slope determined in the concentration range 0.0001 M– 0.1 M for the electrodes with chloride based solid contact were equal to: Similarly, good results were obtained if NaCl/AgCl reference membranes were covered with conventional sodium sensitive membranes to produce solid contact Na-ISE electrodes. The potential changes recorded for the set of such electrodes during calibration in NaCl solution are presented in Determined (in the concentration range 0.0001 M–0.1 M) mean values of standard potentials and slope were equal to −64.7 ± 1.6 mV and −55.3 ± 0.4 mV/pNa. Good results were also obtained for the chloride sensitive electrodes with KCl/AgCl based REF membrane as a solid contact covered with conventional chloride sensitive membrane. The potential changes recorded during calibration in KCl solution for two sets of such electrodes prepared in years 2017 and 2018 are presented in Mean values of standard potential and slope determined in the concentration range 0.0001 M–0.1 M on the base of subsequently performed calibrations were equal to: A new type of solid contact electrodes with two PVC-based membranes is presented. The first membrane contains suspension of the halogen salts of silver and alkaline metals as well as silver nanoparticles and is placed on Ag or Ag-covered substrate. This membrane acts as a kind of a porous solid contact for potassium, sodium or chloride ion selective membranes. All electrodes prepared exhibited very good standard potential and slope reproducibility as well as readout stability. In this way, the obtained electrodes meet demands characteristic for the so called “calibration free” electrodes. In contrast with the results presented by other authors reporting negative effects of water uptake by solid contact electrodes, in our case water uptake is apparently needed and advantageous for proper operating of the electrodes. 