In this paper the treatment of red mud by autoclave leaching for its conversion into ferrous hydrogarnet product and extraction of valuable components (i.e. Na2O, Al2O3, Ga and V2O5) was investigated. Leaching of red mud using high modulus alkaline solution (Na2O 240g/L; αк
                     =30) in the presence of lime at 240–260°C was found to allow the recovery of the contained values (98.5% Na2O, 65.3% AI2O3, 55.5% Ga and 65.8% V2O5) and the fixing silica in the form of hydrogarnet mud (3СаО·Fe2O3·2SiO2·2Н2О) with a low alkali content (0.35% Na2O). An effective treatment scheme for the leach solution based on precipitation and two-stage carbonization processes was developed and demonstrated. This allowed the generation of alkaline solutions suitable for recycling back to leaching stage and recovery of a concentrate (30% AI2O3) that is rich in Ga (0.32%) and V2O5 (3.7%). The chemical and phase composition of the solid products obtained from each stage of processing were determined by XRF and XRD analyses. This study has demonstrated that Bayer–hydrogarnet process can be suitably exploited for processing of red mud.Red mud is the solid waste product of Bayer process for the production of alumina from bauxite ores (  A red mud sample from Seydişehir Aluminium Plant (Konya, Turkey) was used in this study. Chemical composition (by a Axios Panalyical B.V. X-Ray Fluorescence) and phase characterisation (by BRUKER D8 Advance X-Ray Diffractometer) of the red mud sample were carried out prior to the leaching tests. The sample was determined to contain 9.5% Na Following the characterisation studies, the treatment of the red mud sample was carried out using the Bayer–hydrogarnet process, which involved high-temperature leaching of the sample in high modulus alkali-aluminate solution in the presence of lime followed by treatment of leach solution by CO The red mud sample was submitted to autoclave leaching using a high-modulus solution (α Aluminate containing alkaline leach solution obtained from autoclave leaching was treated by the method of tricalcium hydroaluminate precipitation and carbonization. Precipitation of tricalcium hydroaluminate was performed by involving lime in solution to achieve sediment molar ratio CaO:Al In accordance with the technological scheme ( By suitably modulating the conditions for synthesis of hyrdogarnet compounds, it is possible to obtain the end solid product (i.e. hydrogarnet) with the maximal content of the ferric phase and minimal content of the alkali and alumina. The autoclave leaching of the red mud sample was determined to yield approximately 864 The hydrogarnet mud obtained from autoclave leaching of red mud is characterised with its low content of alkali ( After separation of hydrogarnet mud from autoclave leaching pulp, aluminium was recovered from the leach solution via precipitation and carbonization processes. The leach solution was treated with lime for 3–4 The HTA precipitate was determined to contain 22.4% Al Following the filter-separation of the precipitate, the decomposition of HTA by carbonization with the carbonate solution obtained from the second stage of carbonation (Eq. The solution from the HTA decomposition stage was carbonized in two stages, for precipitate the most part of Al The precipitate obtained from the second stage of carbonization process (ACS) was determined to contain 30% AI The hydrogarnet process of red mud resulted in production of red mud with the low content of alkali, aluminium oxide and concentrate of rare metals as gallium and vanadium. This technology offers minimization of alkali and alumina losses, and reduction of energy consumption in comparison with the traditional Bayer-sintering way of processing of the aluminium-containing raw materials. Hydrogarnet mud with the low content of alkali may be used in the production of construction materials. This study has demonstrated development and application of Bayer–hydrogarnet process for processing of red mud to recover the contained values; Na This collaborative research was based on the results of bilateral contacts of the Mineral-Metal Recovery and Recycling (MMR&R) Research Group, Mineral Processing Division, Department of Mining Engineering, Suleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey and the Centre of Earth Sciences, Metallurgy and Ore Beneficiation, Almaty, Kazakhstan. The authors would like to thank Cengiz Holding (Seydisehir Aluminium Plant, Konya, Turkey) for kindly providing the samples.