Sunflower oil-modified polyester (SOMPE) was prepared via the ring opening polymerization of ɛ-caprolactone (CL) using partial glycerides (PGs) and stannous octoate (SO) as the initiator and catalyst, respectively. In addition to being the initiator, PGs participate in the drying process of the film sample for coating purposes. The structure of the sample was characterized by FT-IR and 1H NMR. The film of SOMPE cannot reach a fully dried state as a result of its less oil moiety content. By increasing the oil fraction, the chain length of polycaprolactone (PCL) decreased by changing the [monomer]/[initiator] mol ratio and shortening the reaction time. Even with these precautions, the molecular weight of SOMPE could not be reduced below 5000g/mol, and this caused the film to become soft. Therefore, hydroxy-functional benzoxazine monomer (HFB-a) was prepared and used in a further modification of SOMPE. HFB-a was chemically combined with SOMPE via the urethane linkage formed from the reaction of 2,4-toluene diisocyanate, yielding SOMPE-HFB-a. Because the SOMPE-HFB-a sample also had a soft film, additional HFB-a was used to prepare the SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a blend. The cured blend prepared with SOMPE-HFB-a and HFB-a in a weight ratio of 1/8, [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/8], had good film properties. The cured film was examined by FT-IR and DSC following the curing process. After our modifications were applied, PCL and polybenzoxazine lost their softness and brittleness, respectively, and a binder with good film properties was formed.Polyesters are widely used in coating purposes and are produced in a variety of reactants and formulations. Alkyd resin is also a polyester, by far one of the most important binder materials for surface coatings and is produced through a reaction between polybasic acids and polyhydric alcohols. Alkyd resin is modified by substituting fatty acid for some parts of the polybasic acid to eliminate brittleness. The drying process for the applied films is accomplished by oxidative polymerization and crosslinking through the double bonds of the fatty acid chains. The oil moiety of the structure of the films provides flexibility, adhesion, imperviousness and abrasion resistance. Such contributions define the oils as major precursors of the oil-modified alkyd resin It is well known that ring opening polymerization (ROP) is an easy and featured method of producing polyesters. ROP allows one to generate new polymers with tailored material properties such as high molecular weight, low polydispersity and other characteristics as required according to the specific application. For example, polycaprolactone (PCL) is an aliphatic polyester with remarkable features such as good mechanical strength, biocompatibility and biodegradability One procedure for producing PCL is the ROP of ɛ-caprolactone (CL) in the presence of a stannous octoate catalyst. Activated stannous alkoxide is formed in the presence of alcohol groups and promotes polymerization In this study, sunflower oil partial glycerides were used as an alcohol component to initiate the ROP of CL in the presence of stannous octoate and to take advantage of the oxidative polymerization potential, which causes the film to become dry. However, because long PCL chains were formed, the fraction of the oil moiety was not sufficient to convert the film to a hard state (although some degree of crosslinking did occur through the fatty acid chains). To solve this problem, sunflower oil-modified polyester (SOMPE) was further modified with benzoxazine. Polybenzoxazines (PBZs), a class of thermosetting phenolic resins, have gained more attention recently, in light of their intriguing characteristics, such as high thermal stability, good flame retardance, high glass transition temperature, low moisture absorption, rich molecular design flexibility, good mechanical properties, small shrinkage after processing and the absence of by-products during curing In the present study, PBZ was chemically combined with SOMPE to obtain a product that is appropriate for a surface coating material. By applying this modification, deficiencies arising from the softness of polyester and brittleness of polybenzoxazine were eliminated, and a product with good film properties was achieved. Refined sunflower oil was purchased from the market and used as received. ɛ-caprolactone (Alfa Aesar, 99%) was dried over calcium hydride (Aldrich) for 48 Partial glyceride (PG) was prepared through a glycerolysis reaction between triglyceride oil and glycerol in a three-necked round-bottomed flask equipped with a dry nitrogen flow through an inlet and a reflux condenser. A total of 120 SOMPE was synthesized by a ring opening polymerization of CL initiated with PGs of sunflower oil in the presence of a SO catalyst in a toluene medium according to a previously reported procedure 6-Amino-1-hexanol (51.7 For the preparation of SOMPE-HFB-a, SOMPE and HFB-a were linked through their hydroxyl groups by a reaction with 2,4-toluene diisocyanate (TDI) under nitrogen atmosphere. HFB-a and an equimolar amount of TDI were placed into the reaction flask in a temperature-controlled oil bath at 45 SOMPE-HFB-a samples were thinned with toluene to 70% of the solid content and then applied on substrates according to standard procedures. After the solvent was evaporated, samples were cured sequentially in an air-circulating oven at 150 To determine film properties such as flexibility Molecular weights were measured against a polystyrene standard using gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and employing a Viscotek GPCmax autosampler system consisting of a pump as well as a Viscotek differential refractive index (RI) detector with THF as eluent at a flow rate of 1.0 Proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( Product structures were characterized using Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (PerkinElmer FT-IR Spectrum One B spectrometer). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermograms were determined using a PerkinElmer (DSC 4000) instrument with a heating rate of 10 The objective of this study is to synthesize a surface coating material with good film properties that utilizes the advantages of both SOMPE and PBZ. As stated previously, SOMPE was prepared by the ROP of CL initiated by PGs in the presence of SO. To this end, oil was first converted into PGs by a glycerolysis reaction as shown in The hydroxyl and acid values of PG were determined to be 107 and 1.74, respectively. Inserting the oil moiety into the polyester structure was achieved directly using PG as an alcohol component during the ROP, without any additional steps. The formation of SOMPE is shown in  The chemical structure of SOMPE was also examined by recording In order to determine the drying capability of SOMPE, as prepared with a ([CL]/[PG]) mol ratio of 40, the film sample with 0.5% lead naphthenate and 0.05 cobalt naphthenate as metal based on solid content was allowed to dry by oxidative polymerization at 25 The chemical structure of the prepared HFB-a monomers was also confirmed using FT-IR and As seen in  Thus, it was understood that HFB-a was successfully combined with SOMPE through urethane linkages and that SOMPE-HFB-a was obtained. The SOMPE-HFB-a sample was applied as a thin film and cured according to the procedure explained in experimental part. It is well known that curing proceeds via the ring opening polymerization of the cyclic structure without a catalyst and without by-products The cured film was still tacky, implying that more HFB-a should be used. Thus, SOMPE-HFB-a was blended with additional HFB-a monomer at different weight ratios (these samples were assigned as [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/6], [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/8], [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/10]) and cured ( FT-IR spectra of SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a blends before and after curing are given in In order to clarify the degree of curing, the cured and uncured samples were subjected to thermal analysis. In To examine the level of unpolymerized HFB-a, the cured samples were also studied by DSC. The thermograms of cured samples of HFB-a and SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a are given in The film properties of [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/8], [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/10] and pure HFB-a were determined using the cured film samples. The applied tests and results are collected in Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was also performed, and the obtained thermograms of the cured films are illustrated in In this study, PG could be used as an initiator in the ROP of CL. The resulting polymer (SOMPE) that was obtained in this manner demonstrated soft film properties due to its low oil moiety content. In order to avoid the soft property, oil-modified PCL was further modified with benzoxazine (HFB-a). First, HFB-a was chemically combined with SOMPE by a urethane linkage through the reaction of TDI with the hydroxyls of SOMPE and HFB-a (SOMPE-HFB-a). SOMPE-HFB-a also showed tacky film properties because the soft segments of the molecular structure were still dominant. To reduce such dominance, additional HFB-a was blended with SOMPE-HFB-a. For this purpose, HFB-a was mixed in different weight ratios, and the properties of the resulting film were determined. The sample [SOMPE-HFB-a/HFB-a:1/8] had good film properties. At the end of our study, it was understood that the product obtained by the modification of PCL with triglyceride oil and benzoxazine could be used as a binder for organic coating purposes.