Biosulfidogenesis, the generation of hydrogen sulfide by microorganisms, in acidic (pH 2.5–3.0) bioreactor cultures was investigated using pure cultures of facultatively anaerobic Acidithiobacillus spp. (by sulfur reduction) and an enrichment culture containing acidophilic sulfate-reducing bacteria. Preliminary experiments showed that hydrogen sulfide was produced in anaerobic cultures of Acidithiobacillus 
                     ferrooxidans and Acidithiobacillus 
                     ferrivorans by sulfur respiration, using hydrogen derived from acid dissolution of zero-valent iron (ZVI) as electron donor. Bioreactors containing strains of these acidophiles, operated at pH 2.5–2.6, were set up to generate H2S that was used to precipitate copper, either off-line (in a separate reactor) or on-line (within the bioreactor itself). When the influent liquor in the At. ferrivorans reactor was changed from copper only to a mixture of copper and zinc, the metals were segregated, with copper precipitating within the bioreactor and zinc remaining in solution. A separate enrichment culture using an acidic, gelatinous microbial mat from a mine drainage stream as an inoculum and ZVI-derived hydrogen as an energy source was able to generate hydrogen sulfide at pH 3 via sulfate reduction. Again, separation of zinc and copper was obtained by selective precipitation of copper sulfide within the reactor vessel. The main SRB identified in the enrichment culture was Desulfosporosinus acidiphilus although other bacteria (but no archaea) with non-ascribed roles within the mixed community were also present. The results demonstrate the potential of biosulfidogenesis in acidic liquors to selectively recover metals from mine drainage waters and related waste streams.The generation and migration of contaminated waters are a major environmental problem associated with metal mining ( Sulfidogenesis (the biological generation of hydrogen sulfide as a result of reductive metabolic processes) has the attraction of (i) being a proton-consuming reaction; (ii) generating a product that very effectively precipitates many metals and metalloids (such as copper, zinc and arsenic) present in ARD; and (iii) lowering concentrations of sulfate (and of total dissolved solids). Commercial-scale operations using sulfidogens (“active biological treatment”), under the auspices of two biotechnology companies, Paques bv (in the Netherlands) and BioteQ (based in Vancouver, Canada), are currently in operation in various parts of the world. Sulfidogenesis may be mediated by prokaryotic microorganisms via desulfhydration, sulfate reduction, sulfur respiration and sulfur disproportionation (“inorganic S fermentation”). Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) are the most widely studied of all bio-sulfidogens, but their application for remediating acidic, metal-rich mine waters has been limited by the fact that characterized SRB are highly sensitive to even mild acidity (pH < Here we describe two variants of laboratory-scale sulfidogenic bioreactors that operate at low pH (pH 2.5–3.0) and which were used to demonstrate the selective precipitation of copper from a mixed-metal solution. The bacteria used were, in one case, an anaerobic enrichment culture containing acidophilic SRB and, in the other case, Two species of autotrophic acidophiles and an enrichment culture containing acidophilic SRB were used in this study. The autotrophs were the type strain of The bottles were sealed, de-aerated by sparging with oxygen-free nitrogen (OFN), injected with 1 A bioreactor (Electrolab Ltd., UK) fitted with a 2.5 A second bioreactor was set up using A batch control (non-inoculated) bioreactor was also set up, as described for A bioreactor culture was set up to enrich for a microbial consortium that was able to reduce sulfate to sulfide at low pH, again using hydrogen derived from acid dissolution of ZVI as electron donor. The bioreactor set up was similar to that described above, with the culture pH set at 3.0 Microbial cells were enumerated using a Helber counting chamber marked with Thoma ruling (Hawksley, U.K.) and viewed with a Leitz Labolux phase contrast microscope (at ×400 magnification). Concentrations of ferrous iron were measured using the ferrozine colorimetric assay ( Preliminary screening provided evidence of sulfidogenesis by both Hydrogen sulfide was produced in the anaerobic bioreactor cultures of Hydrogen sulfide was also produced in the non-inoculated reactor, although rates were less at pH 2.5 than in the  Data from the acidophilic SRB enrichment culture are shown in Remediation of acidic, metal-rich mine waters using biosulfidogenesis has a number of advantages over conventional active chemical treatment (liming and aeration). Many transition metals that are often present in elevated concentrations in ARD form highly insoluble sulfide minerals. These have different solubility products, allowing their selective precipitation by controlling the concentration of the reactant S The first evidence for hydrogen sulfide production by The acidophilic sulfate-reducing enrichment cultures also used hydrogen derived from acid dissolution of ZVI as an energy source. Previous work had shown that at least one species of acid-tolerant SRB ( On the other hand, the SRB reactor had the advantage that sulfate, present in the influent liquor (as it would be in ARD in a full scale application), was the electron acceptor used, rather than elemental sulfur, which was needed to supplement the Previously we have described the selective recovery of zinc from a solution containing both zinc and iron using biogenic sulfide in an “on-line” bioreactor system ( This work was carried out in the frame of BioMinE (European project contract NMP1-CT-500329-1). The authors acknowledge the financial support given to this project by the European Commission under the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development. We also wish to thank our various partners on the project for their contributions to the work reported in this paper. Barrie Johnson is grateful to the Royal Society for the provision of an Industrial Fellowship.