This paper presents a study on the adsorption of two basic dyes, methylene blue (MB) and rhodamine B (RhB), from aqueous solution onto mesoporous silica–titania materials. The effect of dye structure, adsorbent particle size, TiO2 presence, and temperature on adsorption was investigated. Adsorption data obtained at different solution temperatures (25, 35, and 45 °C) revealed an irreversible adsorption that decreased with the increment of T. The presence of TiO2 augmented the adsorption capacity 
                        (
                        
                           q
                           e
                        
                        )
                     . This would be due to possible degradation of the dye molecule in contact with the TiO2 particles in the adsorbent interior. The adsorption enthalpy was relatively high, indicating that interaction between the sorbent and the adsorbate molecules was not only physical but chemical. Both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm equations were applied to the experimental data. The obtained parameters and correlation coefficients showed that the adsorption of the two reactive dyes (MB and RhB) on the adsorbent systems at the three work temperatures was best predicted by the Langmuir isotherm, but not in all cases. The kinetic adsorption data were processed by the application of two simplified kinetic models, first and second order, to investigate the adsorption mechanism. It was found that the adsorption kinetics of methylene blue and rhodamine B onto the mesoporous silica–titania materials surface under different operating conditions was best described by the first-order model.Colored organic effluents are produced in the textile, paper, plastic, leather, food, and mineral processing industries Reactive dyes are the largest single group of dyes used in industry. Being highly water-soluble, it is estimated that 10–20% of reactive dye remains in wastewater during the production Furthermore, the expanded uses of dyes have shown that some of them and their reaction products, such as aromatic amines, are highly carcinogenic Reactive dye wastewater is characterized by poor biodegradability, thus conventional wastewater treatment is not suitable A wide variety of materials, such as clay minerals Semiconducting titania materials are currently attracting attention due to their marked photocatalytic effect in removing pollutants TiO Anatase titania nanocrystals were obtained by the cooperative self-assembly of surfactants to wrap titania particles once. The combination of anatase titania nanocrystals with mesopores leads to the construction of nanostructured titania film with mesostructure, larger surface area, and quantum size effects It is advantageous for pollutants to react on the surface of mesoporous titania films, and diffuse within the mesopores for heterogeneous photocatalytic reaction. In this work, adsorption on titania–silica mesoporous materials from aqueous reactive dye solutions has been studied. The focus in the present research is on characterizing the sorption properties of these materials. Titania mesosized particles were obtained by TiCl In this study three different mesoporous silica–titania materials were used: hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide template material (HTAB + TiO The synthesis of TiO As adsorbates, two cationic dyes, methylene blue (MB) and rhodamine B (RhB), were chosen. MB is a basic blue dyestuff, CI classification number 52015. The chemical formula is C All reagents were obtained from Aldrich and were of analytical grade. Both dyes were utilized without further treatment. For aqueous dye solutions only double-distilled water was used. Adsorption experiments were carried out in 5-ml glass-stoppered round-bottom flasks immersed in a thermostatic shaker bath. For this 50 mg of adsorbent was mixed with 5 ml of aqueous dye solutions of (0.1–2.5) mmol/L concentration range. The flasks with its contents were then shaken for the different adsorption times at 25, 35, and 45 °C. In the experiments, the stirring speed was kept constant at 90 rpm. At the end of adsorption period, the supernatant was centrifuged for 1 min at a speed of 3000 min The concentration of MB and RhB in the supernatant before and after adsorption was determined using a Spectronic-20 UV–vis spectrophotometer at 661 and 543 nm, respectively. Adsorbent structure analysis, mesopore size distribution, and surface area determination were done in a previous work An adsorption isotherm describes how adsorbates interact with adsorbents. Thus, the correlation of equilibrium data by either a theoretical or an empirical equation is essential to the practical design and operation of an adsorption system. Two isotherm equations are tested in this work. One is the Langmuir isotherm equation, which has been widely applied to describe experimental adsorption data based on the assumption that maximum adsorption corresponds to a saturated monolayer of adsorbate molecules on the adsorbent surface with constant energy and no transmigration of adsorbate in the plane of adsorbent surface. The theoretical Langmuir isotherm equation can be represented as The equilibrium adsorption capacity, The constants The Freundlich isotherm Equation In order to determine the mechanism of dye adsorption and evaluate the effect of temperature on adsorption capacity, the experimental data, The adsorption capacity variation vs concentration for the different adsorption systems is shown in The parameters and correlation coefficients calculated for the models are given in From the obtained data, it was clear that dyes' adsorption mechanisms depend on the adsorbent structure, on the dyes molecular structure, and on the temperature. To determine which of the adsorption isotherms better represents the experimental data, the difference between correlation coefficients ( For both MB and RhB, Δ For the DDAB + TiO For the HTAB without addition of titania-templated material, Δ When Δ For the HTAB + TiO The behavior in the DDAB + TiO As a consequence of this discussion, the thermodynamic data of the systems having an inversion of the Δ Lamellar structure materials with and without titania presented higher adsorption with respect to the honeycomb structure adsorbents. The presence of TiO This fact is due to possible degradation of the dye molecule in contact with the TiO In general, for all systems (dye + adsorbent), there was a diminution of the adsorption capacity, From the analysis of When large molecules (which also have peripheral dipoles and polar groups) are adsorbed, the dispersion forces energy is greater than the electrostatic interaction energy. As a consequence, the adsorbed molecule presents a forced dipolar orientation, since the molecule dipole axis is oriented at a certain angle with respect to the adsorbent surface electrostatic field. The Freundlich equation predicts that the adsorption will increase monotonically with the increase of the solution dye concentration. The Freundlich parameters, The adsorbent characteristics also play an important role in the adsorption process, especially if there are significant differences in their specific surface areas and porosity. For RhB adsorption the order at 25 and 35 °C, was DDAB + TiO From the adsorption isotherm data at different temperatures, the enthalpy The results are presented in Such interactions depend on the type of surfaces and the compound of interests. Dyes molecules as an organic material can adsorb via several different mechanisms because they can be either polar or nonpolar in all or part of the compound and because they may or may be not charged. The high adsorption enthalpy values are a result of number of chemical interactions involving electrostatic attraction, covalent bonding, nonpolar interaction, water bridging, and hydrogen-type bonding between the dye molecules and the adsorbent structure and between adsorbed dye molecules Electrostatic interaction forces between dye molecules and the adsorbent structure are clearly involved because the dyes' molecules have a positive net charge and the adsorbent SiO–TiO has a negatively charged surface (mainly due to oxygen or hydroxyls). In addition to electrostatic interaction, there is the possibility of H-bond and water-bridge formation between the amine, carboxylate, and heterocyclic N or O groups in the adsorbate organic structure and OH group which is present at the silica–titania adsorbent surface. Hydroxyl groups are bonded to Si atoms at the Si Moreover, dye molecules which have highly periphery electronic displacements (peripheral dipoles, quadrupoles, and The existence of H-bonds and water bridges between the adsorbent and the adsorbate augments the total interaction energy, leading to a high enthalpy of adsorption. Furthermore, the presence of the TiO The formation of bonds between the metal atoms of the adsorbent and the adsorbed molecules produces heat, providing energy to loosen the bonds between the metal atom and its neighbors. This allows it to move from its original position and thus strengthens the chemical bond between the adsorbed molecule and the metal  A last contribution to the adsorption enthalpy would be due to the adsorbate–adsorbate molecular attraction. The dipoles and quadrupoles in dye structures can orientate and favored interaction between the adsorbed molecules. In general, for both dye molecules, the The values of The adsorption process is exothermic and this fact explains the diminution of adsorption capacity with the augment of The positive adsorption entropy indicates a decrease of disorder. This fact may be related to the extent of hydration of cationic dye molecules. The reorientation or restructuring of water around dyes is very unfavorable in terms of entropy, because it disturbs the existing water structure and imposes a new and more ordered structure at the solid–solution interface during the dye adsorption Negative values of To analyze the entropy values, a rough computation of the entropy involved in the adsorption was made. The adsorption was assumed as change transference of To compute the area occupied by a dye molecule    The kinetic adsorption data were processed to understand the dynamics of the adsorption process in terms of the order, The logarithmic variation of According to the obtained values of The correlation coefficients for MB and RhB adsorption on the three adsorbent systems are found to be higher than 0.98 and the calculated equilibrium adsorption capacities are agreed with experimental values. The obtained For RhB adsorption process, the Kinetic data were further treated with a pseudo-second-order kinetic model The sorption of two basic reactive dyes, methylene blue (MB) and rhodamine B (RhB), from aqueous solution onto three different mesoporous adsorbent systems containing TiO The variation of adsorption capacity In general, for all systems (dye + adsorbent), there was a diminution of the adsorption capacity, It was clear that the adsorption of MB in all the proved adsorbent systems was higher than that of RhB. The effect may be due to the larger molecular size of RhB than MB, which may render unattainable the pore interior of adsorbents for the dye molecules. So, in many cases, the external surface may be covered with dye molecules, whereas the pores may remain free of adsorbate. To determine the mechanism of dye adsorption and evaluate the effect of temperature on adsorption capacity, the experimental data were treated with the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm equations. The analysis of the obtained parameters and correlation coefficients for both models showed that the adsorption of the two reactive dyes (MB and RhB) on the three proved silica–titania adsorbent systems at the three work temperatures was best fitted by the employment of the Langmuir model. The Freundlich parameters showed that in general the adsorption conditions were favorable The change of temperature affected dye adsorption. The increase of temperature reduced the values the The temperature effect was also used to calculate the enthalpy, entropy, and free energy of adsorption. The analysis of these thermodynamic parameters suggested that the adsorption is mainly chemical because of the high adsorption enthalpy, and that it is accompanied by strong dehydration of the adsorbate because of the low negative value of the adsorption entropy. The kinetics of adsorption was also studied and the results followed a first-order model. The obtained For RhB adsorption process, the The adsorption kinetic was not significantly affected by the variation of This work was financed by Banco Río and PIP No. 2739 of CONICET. P.M. is an assistant researcher of the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas de la República Argentina (CONICET).