Quantitative automated mineralogy is the acquisition of mineralogical and textural data by scanning electron microscopy-based energy dispersive analytical methods. The technique is used in the metals and energy resource extraction industries to provide accurate mineral characterization information over large data sets. We have employed this method to three projects related to diamonds: mantle peridotite, kimberlite, and garnet concentrate. The first example assesses the metasomatic clinopyroxene-phlogopite modal mineralogy in peridotite xenoliths from Premier/Cullinan (South Africa). Understanding mantle mineral variability can be coupled with measureable mineral properties to develop mantle geophysical and geochemical models. The second example compares kimberlites from Letšeng Satellite Pipe (Lesotho) and Ngamiland (Botswana), to assess the variability of kimberlite mineralogy. Kimberlite domains can be identified on a micro scale with potential to understand parameters such as hardness and grindability, or to identify kimberlite clusters with discrete mineral assemblages. The third example applies mineral compositional variability in garnet concentrate samples as a possible tool for evaluating exploration projects. Application of garnet definitions to concentrates through digitally grouping grains into discrete populations results in improved understanding of large sample populations and hence diamond prospectivity. Quantitative mineralogy applied to diamond-related projects utilizes the principles of geometallurgy in evaluating large data sets for greater understanding of the variability of mantle materials.Quantitative mineralogy based on scanning electron microscopy (SEM) has been in development for over 20 For diamond deposits, geomet refers to identifying the important parameters in a deposit, such as diamond grade, recovery, kimberlite hardness, grindability, and mineral abundances. The distribution and alteration of megacrysts, the degree of silicification or serpentinization, and the presence or absence of clays, for example, can directly impact the processing and breakage characteristics of the various volcanogenic phases of a kimberlite and the final recovery of diamonds. The degree to which these variables can be predicted will impact the final risk and cost effectiveness of a project ( The development of SEM-based automated quantitative mineralogy had its roots in the 1980s at Australia's Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO). Two systems were developed: one is the QEM-SEM system that developed into the QEMSCAN, produced by Intellection until the end of 2008 and now by FEI Corporation. The other is the Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA), developed by JKTech at the University of Queensland. Both systems were developed to provide statistically valuable mineralogical data sets for the metals mining industry, for the purpose of optimizing metallurgical and mining operations. The ability to quantify mineral distributions, textural relationships, and paragenetic associations in a variety of materials (cores, blast hole products, concentrates, plant feed, leach residues, tails) enabled improved monitoring and prediction of metallurgical recoveries, grinding behavior, and operating costs. Several generations of instruments have been used over the past three decades. The present study employed the QEMSCAN The mantle peridotite study was aimed at portraying the distribution of mineral phases in metasomatised mantle xenoliths. Discrete peridotite samples were collected from the Premier (Cullinan) kimberlite mine, South Africa, from 1990 to 1992. Previous studies (  The ability to accurately identify and quantify primary, secondary and later mineral assemblages in xenoliths opens up areas for research and investigation of mantle materials, such as identifying the statistical distribution of mineral phases in large data sets. Large mineralogically controlled sample populations can be incorporated into validating and constraining geochemical and geophysical mantle models. Subcontinental lithospheric mantle sections beneath cratons and surrounding regions could include quantifiable mineralogical data such as compositional variability, modal proportions, mineral occurrences and associations, and grain size. Mineralogical data combined with experimentally determined physical parameters such as density, conductivity, and resitivity can be incorporated with better geological and geostatistical representation into regional geophysical models (e.g. The kimberlite samples investigated in this study were prepared as thin sections, thin slabs and split drillcore. As reported by other workers (e.g. Three kimberlite samples from the Letšeng Satellite Pipe, Lesotho were provided by Gem Diamond Technical Services (Pty) Ltd for a proof-of-concept study. The goal of this study was to quantify the mineralogical and textural variation in the kimberlite material. Letšeng is a mine that has produced an unusual number of large diamonds ( Samples of kimberlites from Ngamiland, northwestern Botswana were provided by Tsodilo Resources Inc. ( The third example is a study of garnet heavy-mineral concentrates applicable to exploration samples. Large volumes of unconsolidated material are routinely collected in regional and local diamond exploration programs, and in some cases need to be shipped long distances for time-consuming processing and heavy mineral identification. Such samples can produce thousands of mineral grains per project that may be analyzed, typically by electron microprobe (EMP), to guide exploration programs toward the source kimberlite and provide an estimate of the economic viability of a prospect. The purpose of this study was to develop a new application for assessing large populations of mineral grains in an effective manner. Because quantitative SEM analysis originally was developed for particulate materials and concentrates to capture information such as composition, grain shape and size, and mineral surface variations in metal mining, this was an fairly predictable application to exploration. Some companies are using similar concepts in diamond exploration at the present time (P. Agnew, Rio Tinto, pers. comm., 2008). The garnet concentrates were mounted in resin blocks and analyzed using a 5-micron pixel resolution. The challenge in this study was to establish and refine the X-ray count-based definitions for a range of garnet compositions previously determined by EMP analysis. First, a set of garnet mounts that had previously been analyzed by EMP and ion probe was selected from three well-known localities: Kimberley, Jagersfontein, and Premier concentrates and xenolith garnets (  SEM-based quantitative mineralogy techniques provide an additional method for evaluating and understanding mineralogical and textural data, specifically because large amounts of quantified data can be processed, characterized, analyzed and grouped on a statistical basis. For diamond-related projects, any material requiring mineral characterization at the micro scale is a candidate for analysis by this technique. Concentrates, rocks, thin sections, drill core and mill products all are amenable. However, as an overall assessment of the methodology, it must be stressed that there are potential pitfalls in the analytical side, and as with any analytical technology, the data are only as good as the procedure and the analyst. The software takes a considerable time to master and to integrate with the intricacies of the analytical process. Stitching of images, identifying boundary phases, peak overlap identification, and providing geologically sound results are some of the challenges the methodology presents. For the projects in this paper, for example, one of the biggest challenges was in producing a reasonable mineral list for mantle materials. Because the system operates on EDS X-ray identification, minerals with similar compositions (olivine, serpentine, and orthopyroxene, for example) must be carefully characterized compositionally, often by means of element ratios. Because the QEMSCAN system was developed for the metal mining industry, with an emphasis on identification of sulfide minerals, a 25 Once the results are viewed to be of high caliber and geologically reasonable, the beauty of the technology is that larger data sets can be run and compared internally and quantitatively. Thus, for the concentrates example, thousands of garnets may now be classified and compared to existing data sets much the same way as with EMP databases established over the past 30 Furthermore, it is important to bear in mind that the principles of geomet revolve around two main concepts: first that mineralogy and texture are the primary elements for any project assessment and development, and second, that the variability in a material (or grain) is important and cannot be represented by a single, averaged value. Quantitative mineralogy provides an opportunity to examine the variability in materials and to identify key parameters and domains from data sets of thousands to millions of data points. These can be accommodated through sophisticated statistical simulation methods to better understand the mineralogy and therefore geology (and hence prospectivity) of projects. Finally, improved mineralogy enhances the capabilities of the geologist, from research, exploration and onward through project development. We are seeing more and more exploration geologists, particularly the younger students, wishing to perform preliminary data analysis in the field without the delay of sending samples to remote labs and waiting for interpretational reports soley on the basis of geochemistry and petrography. A geologist can perform basic mineral separation in the field using new heavy-mineral separation methods (impeller-activated cells with W-based powders and readily obtainable oils, for example), ship smaller samples to an SEM facility, receive the raw data electronically, and interpret the entire data set on a laptop in the field. We thank industry partners at Gem Diamonds and Tsodilo Resources for discussion and sample materials. Discussions with P. Sergeant of De Beers were instrumental in developing some of the formative ideas in this paper. Two reviewers and the guest editor provided very valuable comments on the manuscript, which resulted in a much improved contribution.