In nature, proteins play a critical role in the biomineralization process. Understanding how different peptide or protein sequences selectively interact with the target crystal is of great importance. Identifying such protein structures is one of the critical steps in verifying the molecular mechanisms of biomineralization. One of the promising ways to obtain such information for a particular crystal surface is to screen combinatorial peptide libraries in a high-throughput manner. Among the many combinatorial library screening procedures, phage display is a powerful method to isolate such proteins and peptides. In this chapter, we will describe our established methods to perform phage display with inorganic crystal surfaces. Specifically, we will use hydroxyapatite as a model system for discovery of apatite-associated proteins in bone or tooth biomineralization studies. This model approach can be generalized to other desired crystal surfaces using the same experimental design principles with a little modification of the procedures.In nature, proteins play a critical role in the biomineralization process ( The formation of HAP crystals in the body is thought to occur through templated mineralization of HAP by the surrounding proteins, which include collagen and many HAP-associated proteins ( More than 200 HAP-associated proteins have been identified. These include collagens ( Phage display is a combinatorial process used for identifying specific binding peptides through a rapid high-throughput screening process involving phage and bacterial biology ( To select the best peptide sequence that will bind to a given target material, the engineered phage library pool goes through several rounds of a selection process commonly called screening or biopanning ( Previously, many research groups have used phage display to isolate peptides that interact with polycrystalline and single-crystalline HAP and showed various HAP-specific activities ( We believe that our approach on how to prepare the target crystal surfaces and discover the functional peptides through phage display can be generalized to many crystal surfaces involved in other biomineralization processes by applying similar experimental design principles. Therefore, here we provide the detailed methodology that we use in our laboratory as a model procedure. We will describe (1) target crystal preparation, (2) phage display for the crystal surface, and (3) functional peptide identification. Ph.D.™-12 and Ph.D.™-C7C Phage Display Peptide Library Kits were purchased from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA, USA). Tris–HCl, glycine–HCl, NaCl, BSA, Tween 20, Atto 425-streptavidin, and IPTG/X-gal were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Polycrystalline hydroxyapatite was obtained from Alfa Aesar Co. (Milwaukee, WI, USA). For peptide synthesis, preloaded (cysteine and biotinylated lysine) Wang resins were purchased from Novabiochem (San Diego, CA). Fmoc-amino-diethoxy-acetic acid and cleavage reagents trifluoroacetic acid, thioanisole, water, phenol, ethanedithiol, and triisopropyl silane were also obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). It is critical to prepare well-defined target crystal surfaces for successful discovery of the functional peptides and design of the binding and biomineralization assays. Many researchers have been identifying functional peptides from phage display using polycrystalline HAP as target materials. Although one can obtain interacting peptides this way, it is then very challenging to characterize the interaction between the identified peptides and the target crystalline surfaces. In order to study and optimize the interaction between peptides and HAP surfaces at the molecular level, the target surfaces need to be well defined. The more you know about your crystal targets, the higher chances you have to discover functional peptides. The following is the modified protocol for the synthesis of single-crystal HAP as targets of peptides based on the molten salt synthesis method (  Mix potassium sulfate (K Place mixture in a clean alumina crucible and heat it in a furnace from room temperature to 1190 Hold the temperature at 1190 Cool the product naturally to room temperature within the furnace. Wash the solidified mass with 90 Dry single-crystal HAP whiskers in air for 24 Place 10 Neutralize the mixture by adding 150 Wash crystals with TBS (50 Store crystals (~ We can identify HAP-specific binding peptides by using phage display. The phage display protocol in the succeeding text uses of a mixture of three different commercial libraries.  Mix equal amounts of three different types of commercially available phage library suspensions, 7 mer, 7 mer constrained, and 12 mer (Ph.D.™-7, Ph.D.™-C7C, and Ph.D.™-12, New England Biolabs, MA) to generate a diverse randomized library of more than 6.7 Incubate HAP crystal suspension (5 Wash HAP crystal with pH Add 1 Add 150 Incubate 10 Amplify the rest of eluate by adding it to the 10 Transfer the culture to a 30-mL centrifuge tube and spin for 10 Transfer the upper 80% of the supernatant (7–8 Spin the phage suspension at 12,000 Apply the same procedures to the following rounds of selection with increased amount of surfactant concentration of Tween 20 (0.2%, 0.3%, and 0.4% sequentially from second to fourth rounds). After the elution step of each round, prepare 10- to 10 Add 10 Transfer the infected cells to 40 Pick a well-separated blue plaque from a tittering plate using pipette tip and transfer it to a culture tube filled with 1 Incubate the tubes with shaking for 4.5 For DNA sequencing, place 400 Spin at 10k rpm for 10 Add 100 Spin at 10k for 10 Suspend the single-stranded DNA pellet in 30 The dominant binding peptide sequences identified from the phage display are often fast-amplifying peptides biased by the phage biology. In order to determine the strongest HAP-binding peptides from the large subset of phage display results, the phage-bearing HAP-binding peptides need to be collected. Each selected phage sample needs to be separately amplified and diluted into a single minilibrary of HAP-binding phage mixture having 10  Incubate the phage mixture solution with 5 Spin the suspension at 10k rpm for 5 Add 1 Titer the eluate-containing phage on LB X-gal/IPTG agar plates as shown earlier in The alanine-scanning technique is a way to determine the contribution of a specific residue to the function (binding affinity) of a peptide. Alanine is used due to its small side chain functional group (methyl). A series of control phage-displaying peptides, which are substituted with alanine(s) at the specific residue(s), can be constructed by genetic engineering of phage DNA. After phage binding to targets is carried out in identical condition, a comparison study can be performed by titering the eluate containing each phage from the target HAP.  Incubate 5 Spin the suspension at 10k rpm for 5 Add 1 Titer the eluate containing each type of phage on LB X-gal/IPTG agar plates as shown in Phage binding to HAP crystals can be detected by labeling the phage bound to the surface with fluorescent dye-conjugated monoclonal pVIII antibody. The extent of the phage binding can be comparatively assayed by observing the fluorescence intensity of the samples using either fluorescence microscopy or FACS (fluorescence-activated cell sorting).  Incubate 4 Spin the suspension at 10k rpm for 5 Treat HAP crystals with 1 Label the phage bound to HAP crystals with R-phycoerythrin-conjugated monoclonal pVIII antibody (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, UK). Acquire fluorescence images (Nikon fluorescence microscope, Japan) and quantify the fluorescence intensity by FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, CA). Elute the bound phage using 0.2 After peptide discovery through phage display, it is important to confirm that the same peptide sequences without the phage body structures possess similar or identical function. In order to verify the peptide activity, identified functional peptides from phage display can be prepared by using standard Fmoc solid-phase peptide synthesis. The general procedure of solid-phase peptide synthesis is composed of repeated cycles of coupling/wash/deprotection/wash. The free N-terminal amino group of the peptide attached to a solid-phase with an acid-labile linker is coupled to an Fmoc-protected amino acid building block. The protecting group is then deprotected to reveal a free amino group to which a new amino acid building block can be attached.  Preswell Rink amide resins (1.0 Prepare a mixture solution of Fmoc amino acid, HOBt, and DIC (five equivalents each to the amino group loading on the resin) in NMP solution. The use of concentrations higher than 0.1 Perform a coupling step by treating the deprotected resins with the mixture in the preceding text on a rocker for 2 Deprotect the Fmoc group of the amino acid coupled to the resin by using 3% (v/v) DBU in NMP as described earlier. Repeat steps 2–4 until the desired peptide is synthesized. Wash resins with dichloromethane three times for more efficient drying of resins prior to peptide cleavage step. Dry resins in the vacuum desiccator for 6 Cleave the peptides from resins (200 Collect the solution by filtration into round-bottomed flask. Wash the resins with 1 Reduce the volume of the combined solution to 1–2 Add 10-fold volume of ice-cold diethyl ether to the mixture to precipitate down the peptides. Spin the suspensions at 5k rpm for 2 Dissolve the dry solid in DI water to reach a concentration of 5–10 Purify the crude product solution by running preparative HPLC. Collect the desired peptides and freeze them at − Confirm the desired peptides by analyzing the molecular weight of the product by using liquid chromatography equipped with ESI-MS. After the discovery of the functional peptides, the first functional assay that can be utilized is a biomineralization assay. The ability of the peptides to promote nucleation can be characterized by incubating them with the precursor ions of HAP. The resulting peptide-induced mineralization can be observed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) or scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques.  Dissolve peptides in DI water (1.5 Prepare the precursor ion solutions by dissolving corresponding salts in DI water and syringe filtering the solution. Treat the peptide-coated TEM grid with 10 Observe the morphologies of mineralized samples using TEM or SEM. After phage display screening, the identified peptide sequences can be compared with natural bone-associated proteins such as collagen type I, amelogenin, and statherin. Natural bone-associated proteins possess [Pro-(OH)-X]-rich tripeptide patterns, while the identified sequence resembled the tripeptide repeat (Gly-Pro-Hyp) of type I collagen, a major component of bone extracellular matrix (ECM) (  Go to UniProtKB Web site ( Select a box of your protein of interest ( Click “Align” at the bottom to display the result page ( If you want to add additional sequences, write the sequence name as “>,” fill in the bottom box with the sequences, and click “Align” ( In addition, you can add “Annotations” and color via “Amino acid properties” on the aligned sequences. The methods described here for high-throughput phage peptide library screening against target HAP crystals enable one to identify functional peptide sequences that might be useful in the study of bone- or tooth-associated proteins. The resulting peptide sequences can provide important insights into bone and tooth biomorphogenesis. This approach can be generalized to other desired crystal surfaces using the same experimental design principles with a little modification of the procedures.