The management of intra-articular calcaneal fractures remains controversial with strong arguments supporting both conservative and operative management. This study assesses the results of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum in two independent centres where the indications for operative management had been strictly defined.
                  Forty-seven patients (51 fractures) who had sustained such injuries underwent an ORIF performed by one of the senior surgeons using the technique described by Eastwood et al. [JBJS 75-B(1993)189] All of the fractures were assessed by plain X-ray and CT scan and graded according to the Sanders classification [Clin. Orthop. 290(1993)97]. Patients were assessed at a minimum of 2 years post-surgery both clinically and with a standardised questionnaire based on that described by Kerr et al. [Injury 27(1996)35].
                  The mean age at operation was 42 and 50 years for the two centres, and the mean follow-up was 44 months. Seventy-six per cent of the patients were male. Eighty-eight per cent of the injuries were due to a fall from a height. Fifteen patients had contralateral foot/ankle injuries. Thirty-four of 46 patients were in employment at the time of the injury, 24 of these were in physical jobs and 20 sustained their injury whilst at work.
                  Overall, the satisfaction rate was 90%. Ninety-four per cent of patients in work returned to work at a median of 6 months. Bilateral injuries were associated with a significantly poorer outcome as were those with heel pad pain. Delay to operation greater than 14 days was associated with a higher infection rate. Smoking was not related to infection rate.The debate over the most appropriate treatment for displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum continues. Essex-Lopresti This paper reports the results of open reduction and internal fixation of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum performed independently by two surgeons in two centres using the same strict criteria for patient selection and the same operative technique. Since August 1993, displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum presenting to the Royal Free Hospital, London and the Princess Alexandra Hospital, Harlow, Essex have been managed by an agreed protocol. On admission, lateral and axial X-rays of the affected calcaneum are taken. Further imaging includes a coronal CT scan in all cases and an axial scan when possible, as described by Eastwood et al. All limbs are elevated on admission to reduce soft tissue swelling and open fractures undergo immediate wound debridement. The radiological criteria for considering open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture are one or more of the following features: A step and/or gap in the articular surface of the posterior facet of the calcaneum of greater than 5 mm on the reference coronal scan Displacement of 1 cm or more (impaction and/or lateral shift of the tuberosity fragment) at the medial wall fracture site. Angulation of more than 10° of the tuberosity fragment relative to the weight-bearing axis of the ankle/subtalar joint complex. Severe comminution, of the sustentacular fragment, particularly, precludes open reduction and internal fixation by the standard means, and such cases have been excluded from this report. Clinically, age and general health were also taken into account when considering whether or not to operate. All patients are counselled prior to giving informed consent for the procedure. The aim of the procedure is to restore hindfoot alignment and joint congruity. We explain that subtalar joint movement would be restricted but comfortable. Aching is to be expected at the end of the day but not sharp pains. Patients should expect to regain their ability to walk and perhaps run. Recovery would take at least 6 months, and improvement in symptoms could be expected up to 12 months post-injury. Under a general anaesthetic, the patient is placed in the lateral position for unilateral fractures and prone for bilateral injuries. An above-knee tourniquet is used in all cases. The incision and the operative technique used are those reported by Eastwood et al. The accuracy of both the reduction and the fixation is confirmed intra-operatively using an image intensifier with the C arm positioned horizontally to obtain the axial view. All patients receive prophylactic antibiotics. Post-operatively, all limbs are placed in a plaster backslab with the foot in neutral and elevated until the swelling has settled and the wound is healing (approximately 7 days). Patients are non-weight-bearing for the first 6 weeks following fracture fixation and then progress from partial- to full weight bearing over the subsequent 6 weeks. Patients who had undergone open reduction and internal fixation of their fracture and who had completed a minimum follow-up of 24 months were invited to attend a dedicated research clinic, where they were assessed by two independent reviewers (RDS and PRC). The basis of the assessment was the clinical scoring system for calcaneal fractures described by Kerr et al. The time from injury to operation was noted, as were the presence of any complications. Forty-seven patients with a total of 51 surgically managed fractures of the calcaneum were reviewed at a mean follow-up of 44 months (range 25–74). The demographic details of the patients in this study were similar to those previously reported: 76% were male, and 72% of patients were employed at the time of the injury. Twenty-four of these 36 patients were in heavy manual jobs (roofer, builder, etc.). Fifty-nine per cent of injuries in employed patients arose whilst at work. The median and the mean time from injury to operation was 11 days (range 3–23). An additional bone grafting procedure was performed in only three of 51 cases. The two centres managed different populations of patients. The population treated in Harlow consisted of 6.8% bilateral injuries, whereas in the London population, 58.8% had sustained an injury to the other calcaneum, foot or ankle. Comparison between the two groups is therefore difficult, but several observations can be made. The mean ages for the two groups were significantly different ( Overall, 90% of patients were satisfied with their outcome, and there was no significant difference between the two centres ( Patients who sustained a unilateral calcaneal fracture and who did not have any other injury to the contralateral hindfoot had a mean calcaneal fracture score Only 32 patients in this study had a unilateral injury, and when subdivided by Sanders grade The overall infection rate was 22%. The majority responded to antibiotics alone, but one patient required a flap, and three required wound debridements before the infection could be eradicated. Three fractures occurred in two diabetic patients. Two of these fractures became infected, with one being the case that required a flap. One infection occurred in a patient with a pressure sore over his heel. As the delay between injury and operation increased, so did the infection rate ( In total, 28 patients smoked, but the rate of infection did not vary between smokers and non-smokers. At follow-up, seven patients still complained of pain on heel strike. The heel pad was tender to the touch and subjectively felt thin and atrophic. All patients with heel-pad pain had Sanders Type 3 or 4 fractures, and their mean calcaneal fracture score was 55, compared to a mean score of 88 in Type 3 or 4 fracture patients who did not have heel pain. Thus, it would seem that persistent heel pain is a determinant of a poor clinical result. There was no significant difference between the width of the injured and uninjured heels. Normal shoes were worn on 42 of the 51 feet that had sustained calcaneal fractures. Three of the remaining nine used insoles inside normal shoes, and the rest could not wear their preferred shoewear. The injured foot did not hinder the ability to walk on an uneven surface in 42 of the 51 injured feet. Forty patients returned to work, which represents 94% of those employed at the time of their accident. The mean time taken to return to work was 9.4 months (2–48), although the median time was 6 months. Three of 51 feet have undergone a subtalar fusion at a mean of 24 months after the injury. In one case, the major indication was a malunion due to a poor initial operative procedure. In the remaining two patients, the indication was persistent disabling sharp pain arising from the subtalar joint. The calcaneal fracture scores in these three patients at the time of subtalar joint fusion were 61(range 59–52). Internal fixation of calcaneal fractures has been likened to the “nailing of a custard pie to the wall” However, the last 20 years have seen a considerable improvement in our appreciation of calcaneal fracture anatomy with the advent of CT scanning Conservative management is not without its complications, as reviewed by Myerson in 1993 We accept that the evidence to support operative intervention in the management of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum is limited, although the principles of management have been shown to be beneficial for similar fractures affecting all other joints. We are also aware that the study we have described here has undoubted limitations in that all fractures were treated operatively, and the results have been analysed retrospectively, and in these respects, it does not help the evidence base. However, to our knowledge, it is the first study to have defined its indications for operation. The study does, therefore, produce data from two independent centres that employed the same protocol for the management of this selected group of displaced intra-articular fractures of the calcaneum. The indications for operation and the surgical technique used both emphasised the importance of considering the articular and non-articular (alignment) components of the injury. This paper highlights a number of interesting points that have not been demonstrated before. Firstly, the subjective patient satisfaction with the procedure is high regardless of the severity of the injury and may reflect the pre-operative counselling that the patients received. Secondly, the results as defined by the calcaneal fractures score are significantly poorer if the patient sustained a bilateral injury. Persistent heel-pad pain was associated with the more severe injuries, as judged by the Sanders classification, and in its own right was linked with poorer calcaneal fractures scores and a poorer outcome. Lastly, the infection rate increases significantly if the interval between injury and operation is greater than 14 days. Fractures of the calcaneum are significant injuries affecting a relatively young working population. The outcome can be good in terms of both patient satisfaction and objective score, even if there is severe articular comminution if hindfoot relationships are restored. The authors recommend that all intraarticular fractures with significant displacement should be considered for prompt open reduction and internal fixation but that the patient with the bilateral injury should be warned that the result is worse than that obtained with an isolated injury.