A ceramic composite constituting the formula 78wt% WC–16wt% TiC–6wt% Co denoted as the 78WC–16TiC–6Co ceramic composite was fabricated using a powder metallurgy process, by utilising commercially available WC and Co powders, and laboratory produced TiC powders. TiC powders were produced from machining chips of Grade 4 Titanium. Five different procedures were followed for the manufacturing process by altering the amount of the binding agent (stearic acid) and/or compacting pressure and/or sintering regime (temperature and time) and/or mixing process (dry mixing and mechanical alloying). Characterisation investigations conducted on the sintered samples revealed that stearic acid as the binding agent resulted in the decrease of the relative density while mechanical alloying (MA) induced finer microstructures. The 78WC–16TiC–6Co composites manufactured from commercially available and laboratory produced TiC powders using similar process procedures (including MA) exhibited similar characteristics in terms of relative density, hardness, and wear performance.Cemented carbides represent a group of hard and wear-resistant refractory materials, in which hard carbide particles are bound together by a ductile binder matrix. WC–Co based ceramic composites are especially attractive in the machining of ferrous and non-ferrous alloys. Commercial-grade WC–Co composites comprise WC contents in a range between 50% and 97% (along with other metallic carbides), and Co between 3% and 16%. The present study focuses on the production and characterisation of WC–TiC–Co ceramic composites with an ISO code of P05, which is extensively used in machining steels. Commercially available WC and Co powders were used as starting materials. The TiC powder, which is a potential material for high temperature applications because of its high melting point and the low density, The WC and Co powders utilised in this study were the commercial products of Dr. Fritsch (Germany) and Eurotungtene (France), respectively. Both powders had spherical morphology with an average grain size of 1 In the scope of this study, an attempt has been made to fabricate the 78WC–16TiC–6Co ceramic composite with an ISO code of P05 ( After sintering, characterisation investigations including microhardness tests, density measurements, microstructural examinations, and wear tests were conducted on the samples. Microstructural characterisations were carried out using a TM1000 (Hitachi™, Tokyo, Japan) scanning electron microscope (SEM). The hardness measurements were made using a microhardness tester (Schimadzu™, Tokyo, Japan) under an indentation load of 1  According to the results of hardness measurements, composites having relative density values higher than 71% yielded higher hardness levels (between 1963 and 2057 HV). Considering the scatter of the hardness data ( The SEM micrographs obtained in the back-scattered mode ( The highest amount of porosity ( In the scope of the present study, a new 78WC–16TiC–6Co composite was manufactured by utilising a commercially available TiC powders (average grain size 2.7 Following the wear tests, measurable wear tracks were not detected on the surfaces of the samples fabricated according to Process Procedure No. 4 in Stated below are the observations and conclusions obtained based on the characterisation tests conducted on the 78WC–16TiC–6Co ceramic composites fabricated by the powder metallurgy process. The addition of stearic acid as the binding agent to the mixture of WC, TiC, and Co powders caused relatively high porosity and low relative density. The application of the MA process during preparation of powder mixtures refined the microstructure, reduced the porosity, and increased the relative density, while yielding a hardness value higher than that of conventional grade 78WC–16TiC–6Co ceramic composite with an ISO code of P05. The density, hardness, and wear performance of the ceramic composites did not change remarkably with the type of TiC powder (commercially available or laboratory produced) added to the mixture of WC and Co powders. TiC powders produced from machining chips of Grade 4 Titanium possibly have technological potential to be used in the fabrication of commercial grade WC–Co composites for machining applications.