Composite films of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) with polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPY) or poly[3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene] (PEDOT) were prepared via electrochemical co-deposition from solutions containing acid treated CNTs and the corresponding monomer. In the cases of PPY and PEDOT, CNTs served as the charge carriers during electro-deposition, and also acted as both the backbone of a three-dimensional micro- and nano-porous structure and the effective charge-balancing dopant within the polymer. All the composites showed improved mechanical integrity, higher electronic and ionic conductivity (even when the polymer was reduced), and exhibited larger electrode specific capacitance than the polymer alone. Under similar conditions, the capacitance was enhanced significantly in as-prepared PPY-CNT and PEDOT-CNT films. However, the fresh PANI-CNT film was electrochemically similar to PANI, but PPY-CNT and PEDOT-CNT differed noticeably from the respective polymers alone. In continuous potential cycling tests, unlike the pure polymer and other composite films, PANI-CNT performed much better in retaining the capacitance of the as-prepared film, and the possible cause is analysed.Conducting polymers with good electrical conductivity In fact, composites of conducting polymers and CNTs have been synthesised by either chemical or electrochemical polymerisation in the presence of CNTs. In the chemical approach, an oxidant is needed and converted to a reduction product that may, if present, affect the properties of the product. The reaction product is always a powder which means a binder has to be used for the construction of an electrode According to the literature, two electrochemical approaches can be used for making the composites of CNTs and conducting polymers. One is to make an electrode substrate with a preform of CNTs on which the conducting polymer is then electrodeposited There have been many investigations on the electrochemical capacitance of composites of conducting polymers and CNTs prepared by chemical synthesis or electro-deposition on the CNT preforms. To fill in this gap, this paper presents a comparative study of the electrochemical synthesis and capacitance of CNT composites with PANI, PPY and PEDOT. Particularly, the stability of these electro-co-deposited composite films in continuous potential cycling tests is reported and compared for the first time. An inevitable difficulty in this comparative study was the different electrolytes needed for the preparation and the characterisation of the three composite films. Therefore, the comparison was made mainly from the viewpoint of practical uses. The co-deposition was carried out under conditions to ensure the co-deposition of each of the composite films based on previous work. In addition, the deposition potentials were selected to be as low as feasible according to cyclic voltammetry to minimise energy consumption of the synthesis process, but also as close as possible for each composite to make the comparison more meaningful. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to compare the microstructures of the deposited films. In capacitance measurements, the electrolytes and charging–discharging conditions were selected so that each composite could perform at or close to its best level. The comparison then extends to cycle life tests of these composites. Details of the applied experimental conditions are explained later. It is worth pointing out that the majority of literature work on the electrochemical capacitance has been focused on the mass specific capacitance ( An Ag/AgCl in 3.0 Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were the commercial product from chemical vapour decomposition of acetylene [Guangzhou York Point New Energy, or Shenzhen Nano-Technologies Port Co. Ltd. Both suppliers specified 10–30 The electro-co-deposition of the PPY-CNT composite films was carried out in an aqueous solution of 0.25 The PGSTAT30 Autolab Potentiostat was used for all electrochemical control and measurements. Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was carried out on the AVATAR 360 FTIR spectrometer. Microstructure images of the samples were obtained on the JEOL JSM6340F (PEDOT-CNT) or Phillps XL30 ESEM (others) field emission gun scanning electron microscopes. Previous work found that CNTs could be dispersed in water through acid treatment The CNT suspension could be cast onto the graphite disc (6 Following the literature work In It is noticed that the currents for the co-deposition of PANI and CNT are much larger than those of the other two. This is because of the presence of HCl in the monomer solution. The HCl not only enhanced the ionic conductivity of the monomer solution but also provided Cl The electrodeposited composite films were all black in colour. However, as observed in this work under similar electro-deposition conditions, the thin PPY film was blue; PANI showed a range of colours from purple to blue; and PEDOT was navy blue. Clearly, the black colour of the composite films was due to the presence of CNTs. As reported before Under SEM, all the composites prepared by electro-co-deposition presented similar and uniform microstructures, differing from the conducting polymers deposited on a pre-made CNTs substrate In contrast to the comparable micro- and nano-porous structures of the composite films, the corresponding pure polymers formed under similar condition showed very different features from each other, see It is worth pointing out that the porous structures in the PANI and PEDOT films should also favour ionic and solvent motion. However, it has been shown that incorporating CNTs into these polymers improve not only their mechanical and electrical properties, but also the electrochemical performance, partly because of the anionic CNTs, and also the direct interaction between the highly conjugated CNTs and the doped polymer  The CV of pure PPY in In the fully reduced pure PPY film, the polymer chains are uncharged. Oxidation of the polymer introduces positive charges to the polymer chains. To maintain electrical neutrality, anion ingression from the electrolyte into the PPY film takes place. In the fully reduced PPY-CNT film, the polymer chains are also uncharged, but the embedded CNTs are negatively charged and have to be neutralised by cations from the electrolyte. Unlike the mobile ions from the electrolyte, these large CNT anions are immobile and hence exert a permanent electrostatic repulsion to the electrons on the polymer chain. This repulsion makes it easier to remove electrons from the polymer chains, i.e. a negative shift of the oxidation potential. This effect from the anionic CNTs is very similar to the self-doping effect observed in conducting polymers with chemically bonded and hence immobile anionic groups It is worth mentioning that if the above discussed self-doping effect were correct, it should have been absent for composites with CNTs free of the surface anionic functional groups. Such uncharged CNTs may be prepared by heating the acid treated CNTs to elevated temperatures under argon It is noticed that there are two oxidation peaks on the PPY-CNT CV, implying two different charge transfer processes. Also, the oxidation peak at −0.50 Unlike the similarity between the CVs of PANI-CNT and PANI, PPY-CNT exhibits significantly larger CV currents than pure PPY, even at potentials close to the negative end. This difference in current between PPY and PPY-CNT can be explained by the latter having a significantly more porous structure for ion transport, and higher and potential independent electronic conductivity through the embedded CNTs. Note that on the CVs in In comparison with PANI and PPY, the CV of PEDOT in Like the CV of PPY-CNT, the peak at −0.40 It was suggested that the highly conjugated CNTs could enhance the electron delocalisation along the polymer chains in the PANI-CNT composites There is another possible origin. In a previous study involving the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM), it was revealed that the electron transfer to and from a very thin PPY-CNT composite film was accompanied by both cation and anion transfer at negative and positive potentials, respectively It is acknowledged that the above discussion is far from exhaustive, but aims to offer some thoughts for future investigations. A more comprehensive understanding of the electrochemistry in the composites of conducting polymer–CNTs requires more advanced techniques such as the scanning electrochemical atomic force microscopy The CVs as discussed above were recorded to explore the complete electrochemistry of the composite and pure polymer films. However, it is known that charge transfer to and from conducting polymers follows quite different mechanisms depending on the oxidation state or doping level of the polymer. At low doping levels (or less positive potentials), the polymer chains are not or less conjugated, and charge transfer occurs in a localised manner and does not contribute to capacitance For the CVs to exhibit better capacitive features (e.g. a rectangular shape), the potential ranges should be chosen to avoid the polymer becoming undoped (insulating) at very negative potentials, and over-oxidised at too positive potentials. According to The CVs recorded in the narrower potential ranges are presented in The mean value of the total charge, As discussed before, because of the large potential perturbation, the CV currents may include contributions from both localised and conduction band charge transfers, and hence give overestimated capacitance values. However, charge transfer kinetics could also affect the current according to the potential scan rate, leading to underestimated capacitance at high potential scan rates. As a steady state technique with small potential variation, electrochemical impedance spectrometry (EIS) is more reliable for measuring the capacitance with minimised effect from non-capacitive Faradaic contributions. Therefore, the composite and pure polymer films were studied by EIS. The resulting Nyquist plots are shown in The higher capacitance of the composite films results obviously from the contribution of the embedded CNTs which can exert a number of effects: (1) the provision of interconnected pathways for electrons through the CNTs and ions through the pore network, regardless of the conductivity of the polymer; (2) the thinness of the polymer layer on each CNT, minimising barriers both to ion transfer across the polymer/electrolyte interface and ion transport within the polymer phase; (3) the role of smaller cations in charge balancing due to the presence of the immobilised negatively charged CNTs; (4) direct interaction between the delocalised electrons on polymer chains and the CNTs The real impedance at low frequencies, where the capacitive behaviour dominates, is an indication of the combined resistance of the electrolyte and the film including both electronic and ionic contributions The charge–discharge stability of the composite films was studied by continuous sweeping the potential for 5000 cycles between 0.10 and 0.65 The PPY-CNT film showed a capacitance decrease by 14.5% after the first 1000 cycles, and a further 10.8% decrease in the following 4000 cycles. The corresponding numbers were 12.5% and 7.8% for the PEDOT-CNT film. Therefore, the capacitance decline tended to slow down with increasing the cycle number for these two composites. Also, these data indicate that the PEDOT-CNT film was more stable than the PPY-CNT film. This difference can be attributed to PEDOT being electrochemically more stable than PPY, as shown by the data of the PEDOT and PPY films in What was unexpected was that, after an initial decrease of about 9% in a few cycles, the PANI-CNT film exhibited a gradual increase in capacitance with continuous potential cycling. After 5000 cycles, the capacitance increased to a value even slightly higher than that of the as-prepared film. In contrast, the PANI film decreased its capacitance by 21.4% after the first 1000 potential cycles, and a further 3.5% in the following 4000 cycles. In another experiment, the CNTb sample with a wider range of diameters was used to prepare the composite film under the same conditions. The behaviour of this film, labelled as PANI-CNTb in For all the films studied in this work, the capacitance decrease was fastest in the first 1000 cycles, disregarding the presence of CNTs in the films. Therefore, it may be a common cause associated with the as-prepared polymers. One possibility is the oligomers that were inevitably present in the as-prepared films. They could have contributed to the currents in the early cycles, but gradually re-dissolved back to the electrolyte with further cycling. The capability of the PANI-CNT films to retain or even increase the capacitance in later cycles could be a combined effect of the electrochemistry of PANI and the acid treated CNTs. In the polymerisation solution of aniline and CNTs, the pH was lower than 1 because of the use of HCl. This means the functional groups on the CNTs were mostly protonated. Thus, charge balancing in the as-prepared PANI-CNT films was largely undertaken by the Cl As stated in the introduction of this paper, a good electrode material for supercapacitor applications should not only have a high mass specific capacitance ( From these CVs, the electrode specific capacitance, Unfortunately, numerous attempts to make thicker PEDOT-CNT films were not as successful as initially thought. In the experiments, the CNT supported metastable organoaqueous mixtures (or emulsions) could remain visually unchanged up to a few hours Electrochemically synthesised composite films of conducting polymer (PANI, PPY and PEDOT) and CNTs have in common a porous structure at the micro- and nano-meter scales. They have better mechanical integrity, higher electronic and ionic conductivity and, most importantly, larger electrode specific capacitance and greater stability in charge–discharge cycling compared with the pure conducting polymers. The electrode specific capacitance of PPY-CNT and PEDOT-CNT is double of similarly prepared pure polymer counterparts. With the same deposition charge, the PANI-CNT composite shows the largest electrode specific capacitance and highest conductivity among the three composites but the smallest potential window. Thicker PANI-CNT and PPY-CNT deposits also exhibit ideal capacitive behaviour and high electrode specific capacitance. Under similar conditions, the enhancement effect of CNTs was in the order of PEDOT The authors would like to thank the EPSRC for the research funding, the International Office and the School of Chemical, Environmental and Mining Engineering of the University of Nottingham for the scholarships, and D. Jewell for careful proofreading.