The effect of the polyaluminum chloride (PAC) on reducing the kaolinite entrainment in coal flotation is studied in this paper. The settling experiments show that the settling velocity of kaolinite was the highest when pH was around 5.5. With the addition of PAC, the settling velocity of kaolinite increased at low PAC concentration whereas it reduced at high PAC concentration. The flotation results show that PAC significantly reduced the concentrate ash content. The particle size measurements and the aggregate images show that kaolinite was aggregated by low concentration PAC and was dispersed by high concentration PAC while coal was not aggregated by PAC. The zeta potential measurements indicate that PAC neutralized the negative charge of kaolinite at low concentration and then increased the positive charge of kaolinite at high concentration. The electrostatic double layer repulsion induced the dispersion of kaolinite when the PAC concentration was high.The contamination of flotation concentrate by gangue minerals has arisen for a long time in the separation of minerals ( Researchers have tried various methods to reduce the gangue contamination. Ultrasonic treatment ( However, the research in reducing the gangue contamination by selective aggregation is mainly focused on the flotation of sulphide or oxidized minerals. Scarce research can be found in the selective aggregation of the gangue minerals in coal flotation. One reason may be that coal is more likely to be aggregated than the gangue minerals such as quartz, kaolinite, and montmorillonite because coal can be easily flocculated through hydrophobic interaction ( PAC is the hydrolysis and polymerization product of aluminium salts. It is widely used in the water purifying process ( In this research, it is found that PAC with low concentration selectively aggregated the kaolinite particles so the kaolinite entrainment in coal flotation was reduced. The charge neutralization was the main aggregation mechanism. With higher concentration, the kaolinite particles were dispersed due to the electrostatic double layer repulsion. The bituminous coal sample was provided by a coal preparation plant in Zaozhuang, China. The proximate and ultimate analysis of the sample is shown in The results of the X-ray diffraction measurements are shown in The PAC with the basicity of 0.5–0.7 was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., China. The Al The settling experiments of the kaolinite were conducted in a 100 The flotation experiments were conducted in a 0.5 Particle size measurements of coal and kaolinite with the addition of PAC were conducted using the laser diffraction particle size analyzer (S3500, Microtrac, the US). The coal or kaolinite suspension of 100 The coal or kaolinite suspension of 100 The coal or kaolinite particles of 6  Due to the highest settling velocity, pH The flotation results with the addition of PAC are shown in  However, with PAC concentration higher than 50  The particle size distribution and the coal particle images in   The precipitate enmeshment mainly happens when the PAC concentration is very high ( The zeta potential of coal also increased with the PAC concentration. It gradually increased from − The addition of PAC decreased the concentrate ash content in the flotation of coal from kaolinite. The settling experiments and particle size measurements indicated that PAC aggregated kaolinite with concentration below 50 This work was supported by the