To improve our understanding of microbially mediated pyrite dissolution, the influence of different archaeal metabolisms and crystallographic orientations of pyrite surfaces was studied. Therefore, synthetic pyrite surfaces of different orientations, including octahedral {111} and pentagondodecahedral {210} faces, were etched by Metallosphaera sedula and Sulfolobus metallicus during a time period of up to 16 days. A ferrozine assay was used in order to determine the concentration of iron ions in the solution as result of pyrite oxidation. It revealed that M. sedula produces more ferric iron in the solution than S. metallicus, indicating M. sedula as the more active organism. Epifluorescence microscopy observations showed that cells of both strains partly attach to the mineral surface whereas the rest remains planktonic, suggesting that both organisms might act through both, the ‘contact’ and ‘non-contact’ mechanisms of the indirect biooxidation mechanisms for the dissolution of pyrite. Studies with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) showed cell attachment and etching effects during the whole time period. Surface alteration forms features depending on surface crystallography up to 30 μm in size in 16 days of etching, while the shape of the features varies with face-symmetry.Sulfide mineral oxidation in nature is the result of a complex interplay of processes depending on mineral structure and chemistry, fluid abundance, microbial community, and temperature. The oxidation of pyrite is a complicated process which includes several types of oxidation–reduction reactions, hydrolysis and complex ion formation, and kinetic effects. Because pyrite consists of pairs of sulfur atoms ( The overall processes describing pyrite oxidation have been specified by several authors (e.g. There have been many investigations focusing on the interaction between pyrite and microbe, but there are still only few publications dealing with the effects of surface crystallography. For abiotic and bacterial oxidation of pyrite single crystals, Single crystals of synthetic pyrite with diverse forms of about 2 mm side length (each weighing between 2 and 5 mg) were employed. The pyrites were grown via the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method, using AlBr Microbial strains used were the thermophilic Archaea The concentration of iron in the solution was measured using the ferrozine assay method proposed by To determine the cell densities during the experiments, a phase contrast microscope (Olympus BX 60) with an oil immersion objective UPlanFl 100/1.3 was used. The cell numbers were determined with a Thoma-count-chamber (volume: 0.0025 mm Control experiments under the described conditions were performed, using the above mentioned media, but remaining sterile, and iron(III)sulfate solution, containing 5 g ferric iron per liter, at 70 °C. The pH value and the alteration of the surfaces were investigated and for experiments with sterile media, iron concentrations were measured. To allow assessment of microbial etching effects before and after exposure of the pyrite surfaces, they were characterized with the above mentioned SEM before and after incubation. Pyrite crystals were mounted onto standard SEM Al-stubs with Leit-C Plast® and studied without additional sputter coating. Upon removal from cultures, microbial cells were fixed on the pyrite surfaces with glutaraldehyde. Samples were air-dried and kept in a desiccator before SEM investigation. During all biological experiments metabolic activity was observed. After 16 days of incubation, cell densities of 1–2 Differences in concentrations of ‘total iron’, ferrous and ferric iron were observed for the microbial etching. In the control experiments with sterile media, the amount of dissolved iron was low in comparison to those observed during biological etching and did not increase significantly with time (data not shown). The pH value remained constant in these incubations, and also in experiments with iron(III)sulfate solution. SEM investigations were performed on pyrite samples at two incubation times. After days 7 and 16, pyrite single crystals were taken from the reaction medium and microscopically examined. The symmetries of the euhedral etching features presented in The symmetry of {210} faces is For both face-symmetries and both organisms a difference in the size and clarity of the etch pits after the two incubation periods is visible, etch pits are larger and diffuser after 16 days than after 7 days of incubation. In addition, the etching of The control experiments with sterile medium did not show any surface alteration effects after the same time of incubation as with microorganism (data not shown). After exposure to iron(III)sulfate solution, however, features of similar shape to those observed after biological etching were observed, although significantly smaller in size (data not shown). Consequently, we conclude that the surface alteration features observed in In this study, microbial effects on synthetic {111} and {210} pyrite faces, after incubation periods of up to 16 days by archaeal strains By comparison of etch features observed for both organisms, it appears that the sizes of the structures produced by The appearance of precipitations was observed for both organisms after 16 days of incubation. The occurrence of precipitations during biological etching of pyrite has been observed by several authors and addressed as jarosite or other Fe-rich minerals (e.g. The SEM images shown leave no doubt that the crystallographic orientation plays a key role in the etching process of pyrite crystals by Archaea. This is in accordance with earlier investigations for abiotic ferric iron etching by However, the euhedral expressions of the etch pits produced by archaeal etching is dependent on surface crystallography. This observation is at variance with several previous reports, where microbially induced etch pits had unrelated symmetries on different crystallographic orientations ( With the approach described in this study it is demonstrated that microbially mediated pyrite oxidation is influenced by the surface symmetries. The etching pits produced by both Archaea are characterized by euhedral etch pits. They are induced by the ‘contact’ and ‘non-contact’ mechanisms. Cells are found attached to the surface inside the etch pits, as well as on the surface surrounding the pits, and planktonic. Between the two archaeal strains similarities in the expression of etch features and differences in the size of the features were observed. The shapes of the etch pits reflect the symmetry of the face. Pyrite dissolution by This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), grant numbers DE 412/29-1/2 and TH 422/9-1/2.