Continuous adsorption of platinum (Pt) was performed by using a batch reactor and a packed-bed column system in which amine-treated activated carbon (AC) pellets (Norit RO 0.8) were used as adsorbents. The feed solution (pH 2.0) contained a mixture of Pt and base metal ions (Fe 2+, Cr3+) in chloride media. The central focus of the study was directed at comparing selectivity and mass transfer characteristics of Pt ions in a batch reactor and packed-bed column.
                  In a batch reactor, the AC particles were agitated mildly (500 rpm) within the bulk solution (810 mL) while fresh feed was fed (6 mL/min) to the reactor continuously in up flow mode. The ratio of AC mass to solution volume in the stirred batch reactor was kept constant (1 g: 810 mL) at ambient conditions. The mass transfer of Pt ions in the packed-bed column was evaluated by correlating the ratio of Sherwood and Schmidt numbers with Reynolds numbers. In the case of a batch reactor, the rate equation was integrated and then fitted to the adsorption data in order to determine the rate constants and mass transfer coefficients. Separation factors (β
                     Pt/Fe, β
                     Pt/Cr), in the order of 102 were achieved in a packed-bed column. However, separation factors in a batch reactor were hundred-fold higher than packed-bed column values indicative of superior mass transfer of Pt in an agitated-carbon-in-liquid (ACIL) process.In industry, the carbon-in-liquid (CIL) process is widely used to recover gold from cyanide solutions. Recently, several authors have reported on selective adsorption of other precious metals in chloride solutions using native or chemically modified activated carbons (ACs) ( In this study, the mass transfer characteristics of Pt ions in a packed-bed column and batch reactor were investigated in terms of Pt recovery, selectivity and mass transfer coefficients. In order to make a meaningful comparison between the batch reactor and packed-bed column, the quantity of ACs in the column, initial metal concentration and solution feed rate to both process units were kept the same. In addition, amine-treated ACs were used as adsorbents. The ratio of solution volume (810 mL) in the batch reactor to the mass of ACs (1 g) was kept constant while the adsorbent itself was held in suspension in the bulk solution. The theory of mass transfer in a batch reactor where the feed solution is in continuous mode and the adsorbent is held constant in suspension or mass transfer in a packed-bed columns have been discussed broadly in literature ( Upon integration of Eq. The mass transfer coefficient can be determined from a graph of Evaluation of mass transfer in a packed-bed column begins with determination of the Sherwood number, which is expressed in terms of the Reynolds (Re) and Schmidt (Sc) numbers ( Upon substituting Eq. The Wilke–Chang relationship (Eq. All the chemicals used were of pure analytical grade (HCl, H  In Norit 0.8 AC pellets (BET unit surface area The batch-wise tests were performed by mixing 0.2 g of amine-treated ACs with 50 mL of metal-rich solution. The initial concentrations of metals {[Pt] All the adsorption tests were conducted in continuous upward flow mode. Prior to usage, the ACs were treated with primary amine solutions at 40 °C ( A cylindrical batch reactor, diameter 6 cm, was fitted with a glass impeller. The feed solution (pH 2.0) with a Pt assay of 10 ppm was fed continuously to the reactor in an up flow mode. The eluant was a pure 4M HCl acid solution. Initially, the amine-treated carbon pellets were poured into the column which was full of a mixed chloride solution (810 mL) and then agitation was resumed (500 rpm) to keep all the AC pellets in suspension. The peristaltic pump was started immediately after pouring AC pellets in the bulk solution. Solution samples were drawn at intervals from the discharge line at the top. Results from batch-wise adsorption tests provided information on Pt adsorption capacities, separation factors and specific enthalpy of adsorption. Also, the minimum dosage of amine groups on the surface of ACs was established.  By plotting the natural logarithm of the adsorption equilibrium constants, In terms of metal adsorption kinetics, the adsorption rate constant was evaluated from the plot of log [ In Exhaustion point ( According to In As shown by  In the case of a packed-bed column ( From the slope of graph in In the case of a packed-bed column, the mass transfer coefficients were evaluated at different feed solution through the packed bed (6–16 mL/min). By combining information from The elution tests in this study provides critical information about whether it would be possible to upgrade the platinum solution from 2.5 to 10 ppm in the pregnant solution to 100–130 ppm in the final strip solution, which is suitable for downstream processing either by precipitation or refining processes. From the adsorption information obtained in fixed-bed and ACIL processes, the concept of sequestering Pt from solution selectively and completely was established except for back extraction of metals from the surface of ACs. The results below illustrate that continuous stripping or elution of loaded ACs in fixed-bed column is an extremely slow process even at higher HCl acid concentration. This is probably due to mass transfer resistances in the boundary film of the AC particles. However, when the ACIL process was utilized for this purpose, elution results were satisfactory as shown in The result reported in The agitated-carbon-in-liquid process yielded better separation factors for platinum from a mixed chloride solution in the order of 10  Separator factor between Average linear velocity (m/s) Effective particle diameter (m) Sherwood number ( Schmidt number ( Reynolds number ( Clinton–Colburn factor, ShRe Mass transfer coefficient (m/s) Density of solution (kg/m Mass fraction of a component in liquid phase [−] Solute diffusivity (m Temperature (K) Molar volume (m Molecular weight (g/mol) Dynamic viscosity of fluid (N s/m Initial metal concentration (kg/m Metal concentration in bulk phase (kg/m Adsorption equilibrium constant (L/mg h) Fluid superficial velocity (m/s) Concentration of species in bulk solution (kg/m Concentration at time Surface concentration of species (kg/m Total interfacial area (m Total working volume in reactor (m Mass ratio of a metal on AC surface and in solution at equilibrium Adsorption after time Adsorption capacity at equilibrium (mg/g) Ideal gas constant (kJ/mol K) Change in entropy (kJ/mol K) Change in enthalpy (kJ/mol) Change in free energy (kJ/mol) The financial support from DST-Innovation Fund (South Africa) (T 40026 Grant) is gladly acknowledged. Logistical support from Northam Platinum Ltd is greatly appreciated especially the assistance to analyze PGMs in solution using the ICP-MS instrument at the mine site.