The electrochemical behaviors of a marmatite – carbon paste electrode with the chemical leaching of Fe3+ ions, or the microbial leaching using Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, were compared. The cyclic voltammograms of the electrode in the presence and absence of bacterial strains showed that the leaching process of marmatite was carried out by the different reactions occurring in the interface of the marmatite electrode — leach liquid. The polarization currents of the electrode under the differently applied potentials suggested that the microbial leaching of marmatite could be accelerated by the applied potential. The SEM observations indicated that the corrosion pits formed in the electrode surface were similar to the attached bacterial cells in shape and size, other than that by the chemical leaching of Fe3+ ions. The contact leaching of the attached cells on the mineral substrate played an important role on the dissolution of marmatite in addition to the chemical leaching of Fe3+ ions.The bioleaching of sulfide minerals involves electrochemical and chemical reactions of the mineral with the leach liquor and the extra-cellular polysaccharide layers on the microorganisms. The electrochemical behaviors of some sulfides, such as pyrite Usually, it is considered that mineral solubilization was achieved both by ‘direct (contact) leaching’ by bacteria and by ‘indirect leaching’ by ferric iron that is regenerated from ferrous iron by bacterial oxidation The bioleaching of marmatite flotation concentrate by The marmatite flotation concentrate used in this study was obtained from a lead–zinc mine in Yunnan province of China. The chemical and mineral compositions of the concentrate were shown in a literature The original strains of An electrochemical cell with double-wall glass, a volume of around 300 ml, was equipped with the marmatite – carbon paste working electrode, a platinum inert (counter) electrode and a saturated calomel (reference) electrode (SCE) with a salt bridge (capillary), and its temperature was controlled by a thermostat. The cell was charged with 200 ml Leathen medium (inoculated or sterile). The electrochemical measurements were performed by an electrochemical workstation (IM6e, ZAHNER Elektrik) and the experimental data was recorded by a computer.  In the sterile controls, the stable potentials of the marmatite electrode were about 92 mV/SCE and the corresponding current were close to 0 in the solution with 10 g/L [Fe In the leaching solution with 10 g/L [Fe Compared with that in the presence of bacterial strains, the peaks (B′, B″ and B‴) in the cyclic voltammogram of the electrode almost disappeared in the sterile solution with 10 g/L [Fe The effect of Fe After 12 h of bioleaching, the peaks (B′, B″ and B‴) in the cyclic voltammogram of the electrode almost disappeared and the current values of peaks (C, D and E) increased markedly (as shown in The Peak C indicated the reaction occurring in the interface of the marmatite electrode and leach liquid as followed The current of peak C in  In the same electrolytical solution, the open-circuit potentials of the electrode were different from the stable potentials, which were indicated by the polarization curve. When the applied potential was swept from the negative to positive potentials, the concentrations of deoxidized products in the interface of the electrode and the leach solution higher than that in reality solution and the concentrations of oxidized products in the interface of the electrode and the leaching solution lower than that in reality solution, so the stable potential was lower than the open-circuit potential under the same leaching conditions. In addition, the ratio of Fe  Selvi, et al. The typical SEM images of the marmatite electrode after 12 h of leaching in the differently electrolytical solutions were shown in The electrochemical behaviors of a marmatite – carbon paste electrode in the presence and absence of bacterial strain showed that the cyclic voltammograms of the electrode presented the different features under the different leaching conditions, which meant that the leaching of marmatite could be carried out by the different reactions. The reductive components were difficult to form or were oxidized immediately by Fe The polarization current of the marmatite electrode increased with the increase of applied potentials and was proportional to the overpotential, which suggested that the dissolution of marmatite could be accelerated by the applied potential. Other than that with the chemical leaching of Fe This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (project No. 59834150).