When in contact with water, calcined gypsum rehydrates through dissolution, nucleation and crystallization steps. Additives may be used to improve the paste workability and the mechanical properties of the hardened piece. This study investigated the effect of addition of polysaccharides on the setting time, hydration heat, consistency and compressive strength. The changes in the gypsum microstructure were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The results showed that dextrin, starch and cellulose did not affect the gypsum properties. However, the addition of only 0.025% of carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) results in an increase in the initial and final setting time of 12 and 52%, respectively, without significantly affecting the mechanical strength of the hardened piece. The effect of CMC is attributed to the formation of calcium carboxylate, which reduces the availability of calcium in the crystallization step, slowing down the setting time.Gypsum is a calcium sulfate dihydrate mineral that occurs in several regions around the world with a wide variety of industrial applications. It can be used in its natural or dehydrated form. Depending on the calcination process, alpha or beta hemihydrate types can be obtained ( Dihydrated calcium sulfate shows the peculiar facility to lose and recover water due to crystallization. During the calcination process, it loses 3/4 of water due to crystallization, and changes into calcium sulfate hemihydrate (CaSO When in contact with water, however, the hemihydrate rehydrates back to the dihydrate form as shown in reaction (R-02).  Thus, the hemihydrate in contact with the mixing water forms a saturated solution of Ca The number of nuclei per solution volume unit influences the microstructure growth rate and crystal size ( The crystal growth conditions directly affect the physical and mechanical properties of the products in the fresh and hardened states, which allowed both to adjust the paste workability to the time required for handling and to adjust the mechanical strength of the product in the hardened state to meet the market standard requirements. The amount of water, impurities and use of additives in the paste may interfere in the crystal growth and modify the mechanical properties of products. The paste workability increases by increasing the water/gypsum ratio that, in turn, results in reduced mechanical strength. Thus, a great challenge to the gypsum technology is to obtain paste with the following antagonistic characteristics: easy handling (adequate consistency), adequate setting time and good mechanical strength of the hardened piece. In the production of more elaborated commercial plasters, different reagents are added to reach consumers' requirements for each particular application. The reagents used to delay or to accelerate the setting time change the crystal morphology ( Various additives have been used to modify the setting time ( A commercial alpha gypsum sample produced and provided by Minera San Jorge (MSJ) — Pernambuco/Brazil, with average particle size of 14.3  Mechanical stirrer, IKA Eurostar, microcontroled. Vicat apparatus, manufactured by SOLOTEST. Manual Hydraulic Press, with capacity of 20 Table by shock compaction, with controller digital, manufactured by SOLOTEST. Elektro Therm Oven. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), model 200F, FEI QUANTA. Particle Size Analyzer, laser, model Mastersizer 2000, Malvern.  Corn starch, SIGMA-ALDRICH. Dextrin 5 — obtained from corn starch, SIGMA-ALDRICH. Cellulose, PIETSCH. Carboxymethylcellulose sodium salt (CMC) — medium viscosity (2% aqueous solution at 25 Sodium citrate. The following parameters were fixed during the tests: Water/gypsum mass ratio: 0.4 Mechanical agitation: 250 An adaptation to the methodology specified by the Standard American Dental Association — No. 25 ( Three hundred grams of gypsum were mixed with the chosen additive and this mixture was powdered on 120 The paste was poured into a mold. Three readings were taken from the conical probe penetration for each of the pastes prepared, on the seventh, eighth and ninth minutes, from start of mixing. Twenty grams of gypsum were added to 8 The pseudo-adiabatic system used to monitor the hydration reaction of gypsum (an adaptation to the system used by The additive was added to 100 This test included the following steps: gypsum (600 The fragments of specimens broken by compression were analysed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at low vaccum, model 200F, FEI QUANTA. The fragments were placed in the sample holder covered by double-face carbon tape. The addition of polysaccharides: starch, dextrin and cellulose did not result in significant changes in the gypsum properties under the conditions tested. On the other hand, significant changes were observed with the addition of CMC. The setting time increased with the addition of CMC. With the addition of only 0.025%, the initial setting time was from 4.2 to 4.7 The heat released during the hydration reaction of gypsum by the addition of CMC is shown in The retardant effect of CMC is attributed to the presence of carboxylic groups, which react with calcium from the hemihydrate dissolution, resulting in the formation of calcium carboxylate. This reduces the availability of calcium in the medium, slowing down the crystallization step, extending the setting time and decreasing the paste consistency.  The effect of the addition of CMC on the hardened gypsum compressive strength is shown in Based on the fact that under the conditions tested, the behaviors of starch, dextrin, and cellulose are not different, it could be inferred that the size of macromolecules (starch is larger than dextrin), or the orientation of molecules of carbon 1 of glucose (alpha for starch and beta for cellulose) is not decisive in the action mechanism of polysaccharides. In turn, the difference with respect to the CMC is the presence of a carboxylic group, resulting from the reaction of cellulose with monochloroacetic acid to obtain CMC. The carboxylic groups of CMC react with calcium from the hemihydrate dissolution, resulting in the formation of calcium carboxylate. This reduces the availability of calcium in the medium, which retards the crystallization step, extending the setting time and reducing the paste consistency.  The effect of polysaccharides on the physical properties of alpha gypsum was investigated. Starch, dextrin, and cellulose did not influence the gypsum rehydration process. The addition of only 0.025% carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) induced a significant increase in the initial and final setting time by 12% and 52%, respectively, without significantly affecting the mechanical strength of the hardened gypsum under this condition. Scanning electron microscopy confirmed the changes in the gypsum microstructure. CMC activity is attributed to the formation of calcium carboxylate, which limits the availability of calcium in order to slow down the crystallization step and consequently the setting time.