This work studies the effects of wood amendments on soil microbial community functioning and on the potential of this community for linuron degradation. For this purpose, soil dehydrogenase activity and the number of live bacteria, which represent broad scale measurements of the activity and viability of soil organisms, were assessed in soil treated with linuron and either amended with pine or oak wood or unamended (sterilized and non-sterilized). The overall results show that the microbial community had a significant role in linuron degradation. The linuron half-life values indicated a slower degradation rate in pine and oak amended soils than in unamended ones. This is attributed both to the higher sorption of linuron by these soils compared to the unamended ones and a consequent lower bioavailability of the herbicide for microbial degradation, and to the use of the pine and oak as an alternative carbon source by degrading microorganisms. Linuron did not affect the microbial community in terms of dehydrogenase activity and number of live bacteria, presumably because it had adapted to the herbicide. However, the dehydrogenase activity was significantly higher in the soils amended with pine or oak than in the non-amended ones, indicating that the presence of a carbon source favoured the overall bacterial community.Linuron ( Chemical degradation of phenylurea herbicides is of minor importance in most agricultural soils compared to biodegradation ( The degradation data reported are quite variable, with DT Recently, point sources of pesticides, such as spills from the devices used to apply them and uncontrolled disposal in soil of waste and equipment-washing water, have been identified as causes of soil and water pollution which can be more significant than that due to agricultural practice ( For this purpose, the number of live bacteria and soil dehydrogenase activity were assessed in soil treated with linuron and either amended with pine or oak residues or unamended. The ability of microbiologically active soils to degrade the herbicide linuron was evaluated by comparing the half-lives ( Soil samples were collected from the surface layer (0–15 Wood samples consisting of pine and oak residues were selected because of their different Freundlich adsorption constant ( The pine and oak residues were obtained from a local company in Salamanca (Spain), the <1 The amended soils were prepared by uniformly mixing soil with oak or pine (5%, w/w). Sub-samples were analyzed to assess both the total organic carbon (TOC) content, by using an elemental carbon analyzer (Wosthoff Carmograph 12 H Omega, Bochum, Germany), and the soluble carbon, by using a Shimadzu 5050 Carbon analyzer (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD). The carbon content in the soil amended with pine (SP) or oak (SO) sawdust was about 4-fold greater than that in unamended soil (S). Moreover, the most soluble carbon content was found in SP ( Linuron ( The herbicide degradation experiment was conducted in duplicate in accordance with SETAC guidelines ( Soils were maintained in beakers closed with a sterilized cotton plug wrapped in gauze to allow air exchange. The soil moisture was kept constant during the entire period of the experiments by periodically weighing and replacing any losses with sterile water. Samples were incubated at 20 Sampling was performed at different times (0, 2, 7, 14, 30, 50 and 66 days) for both chemical and microbiological analysis. The ability of microbial populations to degrade the herbicide linuron was evaluated in terms of half-lives ( Two soil replicates (1 Soil dehydrogenase activity (two sub-sample replicates for each microcosm) was determined using 6 The total cell number (no. bacteria Cell viability was measured (three sub-sample replicates) in 1 Analysis of variance (one-way analysis of variance) was used to determine the significant differences in dehydrogenase activity and number of live bacteria among the different soil treatments, using the Statistical software SIGMASTAT (version 3.0). The decrease (expressed in percentages of linuron initially applied) of the linuron concentrations in unamended soil (SL), unamended and sterile soil (SSL) and soils amended with pine (SPL) or oak (SOL) over a period of 66 days is shown in The degradation patterns of linuron in all scenarios fitted first-order kinetics. The half-life ( The curves representing the linuron concentrations vs. time in the soil treated with pine or oak residues are always above the curve tracing linuron in unamended soil. This indicates a higher residual amount of compound in amended soils, i.e. a higher linuron persistence in wood residue-treated soils. Monitoring of linuron metabolites in different soils was also carried out. The herbicide effect on dehydrogenase activity and number of live bacteria was studied in all herbicide-treated soils (SPL, SOL, SL) and compared with non-treated ones (SP, SO, S). We calculated the number of viable cells (no. live bacteria The half-life for linuron (14 days) found in SL suggests the presence in our soil of an active microbial community able to transform this herbicide, supporting the key role of biotic processes in phenylurea degradation ( Although the transformation products searched for were The results of the microbiological analysis indicated that linuron did not affect the activity of bacterial populations (in terms of viable cell number and dehydrogenase activity) and therefore did not have any toxic effect on these functions, presumably because they were adapted to its presence. On the contrary, the presence of pine and oak had a positive effect on it, as shown by the significant increase of dehydrogenase activity in all amended soils. The stimulation of microbial activity by the carbon readily bioavailable from organic amendments, has been found by other authors ( The overall results show that the microbial community had a significant role in linuron degradation, as shown by the degradation results in the sterile soil vs. microbiologically active soils. The presence of the pine and oak amendments had a positive effect on the entire bacterial community during the experiment, as shown by the increase in their number and their dehydrogenase activity. During this short-term study, however, the specific activity of the linuron degrading populations was less stimulated by the amendments. This was ascribable both to a lower bioavailability of the herbicide for degradation, due to the linuron adsorption, and to the use of pine and oak as an alternative carbon source by soil microorganisms. The results indicate that the use of wood amendments can be effective in limiting the mobility of linuron in soils, although the capacity of amended soils to adsorb it should be taken into account since this can modify the persistence of the herbicide. This work was funded by the CSIC/CNR Bilateral Agreement. “Adsorption and degradation of pesticides in soils modified with low cost biomaterials: Study of the microbial communities responsible for the biodegradation” (Project reference 2006IT0022). The authors thank F. Falconi, L.F. Lorenzo, J.M. Ordax and J.M. Marín-Benito for their technical assistance.