Nanosized tungsten carbide–cobalt composite powder was synthesized by a thermal plasma process, in which ammonium paratungstate (APT) and cobalt oxide were reacted with a gas mixture containing CH4, H2, and Ar. The reduction and carburization of vaporized precursors produced nanosized tungsten carbide (WC1−x
                     )–cobalt composite powder, which contained small amounts of W2C and/or W phase.
                  The particle size of synthesized tungsten carbide powder was less than 20nm. The synthesized composite powders were also subjected to a hydrogen heat treatment to fully carburize WC1−x
                     , W2C, and W phases to the WC phase as well as to remove excess carbon in the product. Finally nanosized WC–Co composite powder of particle size less than 100nm was obtained.Cemented tungsten carbide has many industrial applications in such fields as metal working, drilling, and mining industries under severe conditions, thanks to its superior properties of high hardness and excellent wear resistance. Owing to its high brittleness, tungsten carbide is typically used in the form of a metal matrix composite with cobalt as the matrix. However, the addition of too much cobalt will not be beneficial to the composite, as this lowers the overall hardness. Cobalt contents in WC–Co composites are typically limited to the range of 3–30 Ammonium paratungstate (APT), obtained from the high grade concentrates of wolframite or scheelite ore, is the main intermediate in the conventional process for the production of tungsten and tungsten carbide. Tungsten oxides are produced from APT by calcination in an oxygen bearing atmosphere between 560 Recently, a plasma processing technique has been developed for the preparation of nanosized powders by vapor phase reactions. Thermal plasma process provides a high processing rate and many other advantages with respect the synthesis of nanosized powders such as high temperature, high quench rate to form ultrafine powders, and a wide choice of reactants In this work, nanosized tungsten carbide (WC  Ammonium paratungstate [(NH Ammonium paratungstate [APT, (NH The equilibrium composition diagram for the WO The initial experiments were conducted to evaluate whether APT and cobalt oxide (Co Due to the high temperature of plasma flame, vaporized APT and cobalt oxide were directly reduced and carburized. No intermediate phases such as Co The reaction mechanism in the plasma process can be described by equations given below: Thermal decomposition of APT Hydrogen reduction: Carburization by methane: The formation of WC The grain size of WC Free carbon was always present in the composite powder since excess methane was used in the reaction. By controlling the CH The composite powders obtained from the plasma reactor was placed in a ceramic boat of 3.6 Nanosized tungsten carbide–cobalt composite powder was synthesized in a thermal plasma process, in which APT and cobalt oxide were used as the precursor. The particle size of the composite powder, which mainly consisted of WC The authors extend special thanks to Messrs. Rick Riley and Tim Webb of Kennametal for the chemical analysis of powders, and Dr. Anthony Griffo of Smith International for his helpful suggestions. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Prof. Patrick R. Taylor of Colorado School of Mines and Dr. Gilsoo Han of Yanbian Univ. of Sci. and Technol., China for their help with the selection, design and initial operation of the plasma reactor system. Thanks also go to Mr. Robert W. Byrnes of the University of Utah for his competent work with the design and repair of the experimental facilities. We also thank ATI Alldyne Co of Huntsville, Alabama, USA, for providing ammonium paratungstate (APT) powder. This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Award No. DE-FC36-04GO14041 with cost sharing by Kennametal and Smith International and technical collaboration with Idaho National Laboratory.