Recovery of copper, nickel and cobalt from the acidic pressure leaching solutions of Jinbaoshan (YN Province, PRC) low-grade sulfide flotation concentrates was investigated. The proposed technique includes four major steps: (1) the acidity adjustment of the acidic pressure leaching solutions; (2) solvent extraction (SX) separation of copper by organic reagent XD5640, and then stripped from the loaded organic phase by H2SO4 solution for copper recovery; then (3) iron in raffinates after copper extracting is selectively removed by high-temperature hydrolysis precipitation in an autoclave; and lastly (4) nickel and cobalt are selectively precipitated by Na2S from the final solutions after removing iron. The experimental results for treating 1L acidic leaching solutions per batch by this new technique were reported, and some evaluation and further comparisons with previous investigations were also carried out. It was reported that the total percent recovery of Cu could reach 95% or more, and that of Ni and Co were all more than 99%. In the processing, the percent removal of impurities, such as Fe, Mg and Ca, were all also near to 99%.Jinbaoshan proterozoic platinum mine (Yunnan Province, PRC) is the second largest platinum mine in China. It is estimated that the mine has a potential reserve of about 100 tons of Pt This report is focusing on the processing of the acidic pressure leaching solution from Jinbaoshan flotation sulfide concentrates, for the purpose of recovering of Cu, Ni and Co from that solution. The evaluation of mass balance of metals (CuNiCo) in the process is carried out also. The processing of the acidic pressure-leaching residue for further enrichment and extraction of PGMs and the studies on the behaviors of Cu, Ni and Co in acidic pressure leach process was discussed in other reports ( The chemical component analysis of the acidic pressure leaching solutions indicated that the concentration of Cu, Ni and Co were about 5–10 As for the SX processes of Cu, Ni and/or Co from their hydrometallurgical leaching solutions, the reported candidate solutions all had higher content of main objective metals of Cu, Ni and/or Co, whiles the impurity content of Fe, Ca and Mg etc. were low enough even unnecessary to be considered their influences on the recovery of Cu, Ni and/or Co ( Since 2004, the following two processing options have been proposed: Copper was firstly solvent extracted and recovered by organic reagent Lix 973 or Bk 992; then iron could be further removed by the ferro-vanadium salt hydrolysis method at room temperature; nickel and cobalt were precipitated finally by NaOH from the solutions after removing iron ( Copper was firstly solvent extracted and recovered by organic reagent XD5640; iron and calcium were further separated by P204 solvent extraction; the remnant calcium and most of magnesium were then precipitated by NaF; and nickel and cobalt were precipitated by NaOH from the final solutions ( Preliminary extraction investigations show that: For option 1, percent recovery of copper could reach higher than 97%, however that of nickel and cobalt were low (only 70–85%) because of the co-precipitation of them during the processing of removing iron by the ferro-vanadium salt hydrolysis at room temperature. In addition, calcium and magnesium still contained in the solutions after removal of Fe, which resulted in the final obtained NiCo residues still containing many of Ca, Mg, etc. impurities. For option 2, although calcium and magnesium impurities could be effectively removed before NiCo precipitation, poisonous fluorides were introduced and difficulties still existed in future practical industrial application because of the lengthy processing flowsheet and high reagent consumption, which will result in higher economic cost. In present paper, another possible new improved technique is suggested for recovery of CuNiCo from that acidic pressure leaching solutions. Namely, copper is firstly extracted by organic reagent XD5640; iron in the extraction raffinates is then selectively removed by high-temperature hydrolysis precipitation; and lastly nickel and cobalt are selectively precipitated by Na  XD5640, produced by Tianjin chemical factory, and C The experimental procedure includes the following four major steps: (1) The adjustment of the acidity of the acidic pressure leaching solutions. Because the acidity of pressure acid leaching solutions were pH 0.5–1, and the effective pH for selectively extracting of copper by the extractant XD5640 is pH 2 ( The 1     Metal content in the solution samples were analyzed by either atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) or inductively coupled plasma (ICP), dependent on the content level. The extraction recovery of metals is calculated by back-calculated from solution analysis results. The reported data in experiments, if not specially indicated, represented an average of multiple analyses. For different batch tests (multiple trials), the data variation was indicated. The measurement error for higher concentration data (>1 The chemical analysis results of the acidic pressure leaching solutions after the pH adjustment are as shown in From the data listed in One litre of pressure acidic leaching solution after pH adjustment was contacted with the mentioned organic phase for extraction and separation of copper. After four steps of continuous extractions, (Note: That extracting numbers depends on the concentration of copper in the original solution and the loaded capacity of XD 5640.) the loaded organic phase was then contacted with 3 Based on the data listed in In previous report, The solutions after copper SX separation were introduced into an autoclave, and reacted at 200 Calculated based on the data listed in Previous investigation ( However, in that process the loss of nickel reached 25%, and that of cobalt was 14%. At the same time, the content of calcium in the solutions also increased, which brings further difficulties for latter recovery of nickel and cobalt. Separation of iron by P204 solvent extraction method had also been employed in the previous researches ( For the treatment of the solution after removing iron, there are two possible ways to recover nickel and cobalt. Those are: (1) further removing calcium and magnesium impurity elements to obtain a relatively pure solution, then separating and recovering of nickel and cobalt from that solution; and (2) directly and selectively recovering of nickel and cobalt from that solution. It was reported that P507 can extract calcium and magnesium effectively, however it was found that in the processing, nickel and cobalt could also be co-extracted at the same pH conditions ( In present paper, another promising method was examined. By using Na The authors had examined the precipitation behaviors of Ni The results presented in The experimental results of selective precipitation of nickel and cobalt by Na Calculated based on the data listed in After precipitation of Ni and Co by Na It is concluded that: The developed new technique in present work can effectively recover copper, nickel and cobalt from the acidic pressure leaching solutions of Jinbaoshan low-grade sulfide flotation concentrates. That technique is also suitable for the processing of such solutions with low content of Cu, Ni and/or Co, but correspondingly almost same concentration of co-existed impurity metal ions of Fe, Ca and/or Mg, for the purpose of recovering objective metals (CuNiCo). The total percent recovery of Cu can reach 95% or more, and that of Ni and Co are all more than 99%. In the processing, the percent removal of impurities, such as Fe, Mg and Ca, are all also near to 99%. It should be addressed that for the suggested technique in present paper, after the SX and separation process of Cu, to further recover Ni and Co in solutions by using the Na The whole process for recovery of Cu, Ni and Co is effective and compact, and has almost no environmental impact; therefore it is suitable for the future industrial application. The financial support from the Chinese National Nature Science Foundation Projects (Grant nos. 50404004 and 50374060) is gratefully acknowledged. The Yunnan Economic Developing and Planning Committee and Yunnan Geological and Mineral Resource Bureau are also thanked for their funding support and supply of low-grade Pt–Pd sulfide flotation concentrate samples.