Microalgae harvesting is the major bottleneck for biomass production on a large-scale. In this study, coagulation followed by dissolved air flotation (DAF) was used as a harvesting method for Chlorella sorokiniana cultivated in wastewater. The harvesting performance was evaluated using four coagulants (aluminum sulphate, ferric chloride, Tanfloc SG and Zetag 8185) usually used in water or wastewater treatment. All coagulants tested showed high flotation efficiency at different conditions of dosage, pH and flotation velocity. The optimal doses were 10 mg L−1 Zetag 8185; 75 mg L−1 Tanfloc SG; 500 mg L−1 Al2(SO4)3, and 1000 mg L−1 FeCl3 at pH 7, which showed the maximum efficiency of 98.4, 94.5, 95.4, 96.7% at 8 cm·min−1, respectively. Moreover, the photobioreactor effluent quality significantly improved after harvesting tests using the optimal doses. High removal was reached for turbidity (93.7–96.2 %), apparent color (91.7–92.3 %), TKN (90.2–92.6%), total phosphorus (89.4–90.9 %) and TSS (88.6–92.5 %). The use of metal salts requires caution due to the high residual concentration of iron and aluminum in the final effluent.Microalgae is an environmental source of added value bioproducts (e.g. pigments, protein, lipids, fatty acids, carbohydrates), however the high costs associated to the biomass production do not make it commercially viable [ Many techniques have been used for microalgae harvesting, which comprises mainly filtration, centrifugation, sedimentation and flotation [ Dissolved air flotation (DAF) is a traditional type of flotation and has been reported as an efficient microalgae harvesting method [ To reduce the cost incurred by cultivation, various studies have suggested microalgae production coupled with wastewater treatment [ Futhermore, DAF is an efficient treatment for wastewater, removing the turbidity, chemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, phosphorus and pathogenic protozoa, as well as In addition, information about the influence of retention time in the flotation tank on the harvesting efficiency and the final effluent quality have not been investigated. This information is important to scale up the process and promote an efficient integration of microalgae production coupled with the wastewater treatment. In this paper, coagulation followed by DAF was tested as a harvesting method for  The untreated wastewater mixture was prepared weekly using 400 L of piggery wastewater and 1200 L of municipal wastewater from a swine farm (Brotas, Brazil) and a full-scale Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) (São Carlos, Brazil), respectively. It was pumped and anaerobically treated by a UASB reactor, operating with a volume of 0.65 m³ and hydraulic retention time of 3 days. Then, the treated wastewater mixture was collected to feed three 50 L flat panel photobioreactors for microalgae growth. Piggery wastewater was used as an additional nutritional source to increase the nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations in the wastewater mixture. Batch cultivation was carried out according to Leite et al. [ The harvesting experiments on a lab-scale were perfomed using coagulation followed by DAF to promote the microalgae separation from PBRE. In general, coagulation and flocculation processes are required before the DAF process. However, preliminary tests showed that the floc size achieved in the coagulation process was enough to conduct an efficient DAF process. It saves time and energy as the flocculation (slow mixing) duration is usually applied in the order of 15–30 min [ Coagulation is usually induced by adding chemical compounds and rapid mixing, which causes the destabilization and aggregation of microalgae and particles in the solution. Here, the coagulation tests were carried out in a traditional Jar-test apparatus and four coagulants were tested: aluminum sulphate (Al Flotation tests were conducted in a DAF unit ( Samples of the flotation test effluent (FTE) were collected at different times according to the flotation velocity tested (V The coagulation tests were perfomed in a Jar-test apparatus using 2 L of PBRE. Rapid mixing was carried out at a velocity gradient of 500 s The experimental procedure was divided into two steps: Determining the optimal dose for each coagulant. The concentrations used were 0.5, 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5 and 10 mg L Determining the optimal pH range for each coagulant. The best dose of each coagulant was tested at different pH values (pH 5–11). The pH was ajusted using 0.5 N HCl (Qhemis, Brazil) or 5 N NaOH (Qhemis, Brazil), before the coagulantion. All experiments were performed using PBRE from one cultivation cycle to ensure the same conditions. Each condition was tested in triplicate and the maximum experimental error was ±4%. Flotation efficiency (FE, %), or the percentage of biomass recovery from the wastewater, was calculated according to Eq. Coagulant dosing can affect the flotation efficiency (FE), influencing the attraction-repulsion forces and surface charges in the solution, expressed by the zeta potential (ZP). To measure this effect, samples were collected immediately after the coagulation process. The ZP was measured using the Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern, UK) at 25 °C. Each coagulant dose was measured at least eight times. The improvement of the wastewater quality was assessed using the optimal dosages previously described in item 2.2.1. Coagulation-flotation tests were performed at the environmental condition (pH 7) using the flotation velocity of 8 cm·min Physicochemical characteristics of PBRE and FTE samples were determined by apparent color, chemical oxygen demand (COD), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), soluble COD (sCOD), total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN), total phosphorus, total suspended solids (TSS), true color and turbidity. For DOC, sCOD and true color analysis, the samples were previously filtered in glass microfiber filters of 0.45 μm (Macherey-Nagel, Germany). The analyses were performed in triplicate and according to the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater [ The concentration of Al and Fe was determined in FTE, when Al All results were expressed by mean value ± standard deviation. The two-way ANOVA and Tukey test were used to compare the flotation efficiencies found using different conditions. The Tukey test was also used to compare the final wastewater quality reached using each coagulant. Statistical analyses were performed with a significance level of 0.05 using Minitab software (version 18.1, Minitab LLC., PA, USA). The DAF performance using the four coagulants at different doses is shown in In order to understand the effect of the coagulant dose in the electrostatic interactions, ZP measurements were carried out immediately after the coagulation ( However, a different ZP tendency was found for the organic coagulants ( The ZP is an important tool and can be used to control the coagulation efficiency for the DAF process. Henderson et al. [ The V The optimal dose of each coagulant (10 mg L The metal salts are known by consuming the alkalinity, and consequently reduce the pH in the solution [ In contrast, the organic coagulants did not significantly change the initial pH of the sample. The Zetag 8185 showed high FE in the whole range studied (pH 5–11), even using pH values higher than those recommended by the manufacturer (pH 4–9). The Tanfloc SG showed high FE in the range of 5–9, which is slightly higher than what is recommended by the manufacturer (pH 4.5–8). It has been reported that high pH induces the formation of inorganic precipitates in wastewater (e.g. Mg As the pH adjustment was done before the coagulant addition, it could promote a synergic effect. To investigate this possibility, a blank test was carried out with only pH adjustment ( In order to understand the pH effect in the electrostatic interactions, ZP measurements were done immediately after coagulation ( As an exception, the Zetag 8185 reached a high FE (>96.7%) at all pH values tested. The characteristics of the coagulant (high positive charge and high molecular weight) may contribute to its resistance to the ZP variation. For instance, the ZP variation was from -7.8, mV at pH 7 to -10.2 mV at pH 11. A summary of the conditions which promoted effective microalgae harvesting by coagulation-DAF is shown in The results found in this work are according to the previous studies using flotation for microalgae harvesting ( Concerning the operation parameters, the flotation time used here (2.5 min; V The selected analyses are widely used for wastewater characterization and, quantify the physical (apparent color, true color, turbidity, COD, sCOD and TSS) and chemical (pH, DOC, TKN and total phosphorus) parameters of the samples. The tests were perfomed at 8 cm·min The wastewater quality improved significantly ( The Tukey test was performed to evaluate the FTE quality obtained using each coagulant. The differences between the results obtained for each treatment are not significant for most of the studied parameters (Tukey Test, The coagulants promoted different magnitudes of DOC removal. Organic coagulants showed lower efficiencies (13.8% for Zetag 8185 and 0.5% for Tanfloc SG) than the metal salts (25.3% for Al Differently from the metal salts, the organic coagulants do not consume the wastewater alkalinity and few change the pH. For this reason, the difference between the final pH is significant only for the metal salts (Tukey Test, An important concern about using metals salts in the harvesting process is the residual concentration in the final effluent. In determined levels, iron and aluminum can promote harmful effects to the environmental and human health [ Based on the results obtained, coagulation followed by DAF is an effective harvesting method for microalgae cultivated in wastewater. All coagulants tested showed high flotation efficiency at different conditions of dosage, pH and flotation velocity. The optimal doses found were 10 mg L None. This work was supported by the