A field experiment to investigate the interaction of soil fauna and organic resource quality in the applied organic material mass loss was conducted on a Eutric Cambisol in southern Burkina Faso during the 2000 rainy season. Plots were treated with the pesticides Dursban and Endosulfan or left untreated (main treatments). Sub-treatments consisted of surface-placed maize straw, Andropogon straw or cattle dung. Organic materials were applied at a rate equivalent to the application of 40kgNha−1. Litterbags and direct estimation methods were used to follow the litter mass loss of the different organic materials. Without soil macrofauna, 96% of Andropogon straw, 70% of cattle dung and 34% of maize straw were not broken down 3 months after application, whereas in the presence of soil fauna only 19% of Andropogon straw, 8% of cattle dung and 5% of maize straw remained 3 months after application. Soil depth (surface-placed or buried) had little or no influence on organic resource disappearance in the absence of soil fauna. The interaction between organic resource quality and soil macrofauna had a large influence on the timing of organic material disappearance. Termite density was strongly correlated with the remaining organic material, with organic material being preferred over easily decomposable organic resources. In semi-arid low-input agricultural systems, soil fauna (termites) determine the rate of decomposition of organic resources.The beneficial effect that soil faunal communities have on the sustainability of low-input agricultural systems based on organic fertilisation is largely ignored in soil fertility management ( According to their size, soil organisms are usually classified into microflora, microfauna, mesofauna and macrofauna ( Root biota which consist of organisms that live in association with the living plant, either beneficially or detrimentally affecting plant growth, e.g. nitrifying bacteria and mychorrizas. Decomposers which involve microflora and micro/mesofauna which mineralise nutrients and/or act as regulators of numbers and activities of microorganisms and microbial feeders. This group also includes meso- and macrofauna that comminute litter entering the soil without physically reworking the mineral part of the soil. Ecosystem engineers consisting of meso- and macrofauna which create microhabitats for the other soil biota by reworking the soil. Earthworms and termites are considered the most important ecosystem engineers in soil because of their far-reaching and lasting effects on other species and their ability to modulate soil physical and chemical properties. The latter group is considered as the most important faunal component in the semi-arid zone ( The decomposition of organic residues is related to their C/N ratio, their lignin and polyphenol content ( The study was conducted at Kaibo (11°N–12°N) in 2000 in southern Burkina Faso, located in the north soudanian climatic zone. Annual rainfall ranges from 750 to 1000 A split plot design with four replications was laid out. The site was previously under fallow for 6 years. The main treatment was the use of insecticides, to establish plots with fauna (F) and plots without fauna (NF). Dursban (with chloropyrifos as active ingredient applied at the rate of 400 The plots were sown with sorghum ( Litter mass loss was measured using the litterbag technique and direct estimation of litter disappearance. Litterbags ( Surface-placed litterbags were kept in place with earth around each litterbag. The use of litterbags with mesh size 1 After the experiment was set up, four litterbags (two mesh sizes, two depths) from each sub-plot were removed every month. Soil material was washed away from the remaining organic material, which was air-dried and weighed. Soil fauna in each litterbag were collected and conserved in 70% alcohol until identification and counting. Direct estimation of the remaining surface-placed organic material was carried out at harvest using the method adapted from Soil faunal contribution to organic material mass loss was calculated using the following formula adapted from  Significant differences were noted in the organic material remaining in the 1- and 4-mm litterbags. In treated as well as in non-treated plots, organic material remaining in the 4-mm litterbag in When comparing the impact of pesticide and mesh size on organic material disappearance, significant differences were observed in all treatments, suggesting that small mesh size was more efficient in suppressing soil faunal activities in the litterbags than pesticides. However, direct estimation of organic resource disappearance showed that the organic material mass loss was significantly (  In general, the disappearance of organic material from the buried litterbags with mesh size 4  The seven most important groups of soil macrofauna found in the litterbags were termites, ants, Coleoptera, Myriapoda, Arachnida, Dermaptera and earthworms. Termites accounted for 78% of total soil fauna ( Ants were dominated by When soil fauna were excluded, organic material remaining was up to 99% for recalcitrant organic material compared with less than 20% in the presence of soil fauna. In the absence of soil fauna, recalcitrant organic material disappearance was apparently not effective in 1 year. When pesticides were applied, the organic material remaining in the 1 The results indicate a strong correlation between organic resource mass loss and the dynamics of termites with low quality organic material being preferred over easily decomposable material. The present study confirms the findings of previous studies, which have shown that soil faunal activity is a key element in the decomposition of organic residues under semi-arid conditions ( Organic resources are a major natural source of plant nutrients and play a key role in the reconstitution of soil organic matter, especially in low-input agricultural systems. Therefore, how their quality affects the contribution of soil fauna to decomposition is important for the management of crop residues, manure and other organic resources at farm level. The study showed that organic resource disappearance was very slow in the absence of soil fauna in an annual crop production cycle under semi-arid conditions. Soil macofauna, dominated by termites mediated the disappearance of these organic materials depending on their quality. Termites prefer recalcitrant organic material. Further research should focus on termite activity in organic resource comminution and incorporation into soil for better plant nutrition and improved soil physical properties. We are grateful to Dr. Moussa Ouédraogo, entomologist at INERA (Burkina Faso), Mahadou Traoré and Basile Sidibé for their technical assistance with the identification of soil fauna. Thanks are due to Prof. L. Stroosnijder and two anonymous reviewers for useful comments on an earlier draft of the manuscript.