The quasi-ternary TiB2-CrB2-WB2 system has been studied up to 2300 °C by means of hot-pressing, SPS and pressureless dilatometry. Liquid phase is generated by two binary eutectics at the TiB2-WB2 edge at 2230 ± 30 °C (e1) and at the CrB2-WB2 edge at 1965 °C (e2). A large homogeneity range of a (Ti,W,Cr)B2 solid solution has been noticed. A new ternary γ-phase emerges from a critical tie line between (W,Cr,Ti)2B4 and α-(Ti,W,Cr)B2 solid solution at 1950 °C, spreads slightly into both the WB2 and CrB2 direction and decomposes by the peritectic reaction P: γ ⇆ α-(Ti,Cr,W)B2 + (W,Cr,Ti)2B4 + Liquid at 2170 ± 30 °C. γ reacts with the CrB2-WB2-rich liquid according to the transition equilibrium T: δ-(Ti,Cr,W)B2 + (W,Cr,Ti)2B4 ⇆ γ + Liquid at 2050 °C. The γ-phase is characterized by broad 00 l x-ray reflections which implies a layerwise accumulation and differentiation of Cr and W atoms in the basal plane of the AlB2-type structure.In a previous publication, we reported on the quasi-binary subsystems CrB In this paper, we will present constitutional details on the eutectoidal formation and the peritectic decomposition of this γ-phase as well as identify how the ternary liquid phase emerges from the eutectic in the CrB Telle et al. [ Treating sample compositions close to the WB The starting powders of TiB Generally, the powder blends were homogenized at temperatures of 2000 °C and 2400 °C in Ar atmosphere under an axial pressure of 50 MPa for holding times of between 0.5–2 h (Cr-rich) and 14 h (Ti- and W-rich), respectively. The heating rate from room temperature to 1200 °C was 20 K/min followed by 10 K/min until the temperature limit was reached. For the treatment of several samples together under the same conditions, the annealing was also carried out without pressure in argon in a graphite furnace. In case of CrB As the starting composition of the samples changed during processing and sintering by the debris of WC-Co milling beads and the evaporation of CrB Microstructural characterization and local elemental analysis were performed by scanning electron microscopes (i: SEM, Leo 440i, Leo Electron Microscopy, Cambridge, UK; ii: FESEM Gemini 500) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, Oxford Instruments, Oxon, England, system Link Isis and system Aztec Advanced with Xmax 80 detector). Transmission electron microscopy was carried out with a CM30 (Philips, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) and a CM300UT-FEG (Philips) at 300 kV acceleration voltage. Microprobe analyses for the boron and carbon content was conducted by HDZ Prüf- und Analyselabor Aachen with a JEOL JXA-8600 Superprobe. The lattice parameters were analysed by x-ray powder diffraction (Bruker D8 Advance DaVinci, BrukerAXS, Karlsruhe, Germany) with Cu Between 1950 and 2170 °C the phase diagram is governed by the formation and decomposition of the ternary γ-phase. This phase can easily be recognized by broad 00 l-reflections and by a   To start with, Going to higher temperature, additional reflections appear in the x-ray diagrams if the starting composition is located in the vicinity of 7 mol% CrB As can be seen from  Going to 2150 °C, the homogeneity range of γ becomes smaller while the three ternary phase fields α + γ + (W,Cr,Ti) At higher temperature, the γ-phase cannot be found anymore, and the entire system is controlled by the three-phase field Liquid + α + (W,Cr,Ti) Regarding the γ-phase the question may arise whether it is an individual phase or not. There is no doubt that its structure belongs to the space group There is, however, the general evidence that the partial occupation of the metal site in (Ti,W)B Thus, taking γ as a distinct phase of a quite limited range of composition and temperature range of stability, a self-consistent phase diagram could be established obeying to the well-known rules of heterogeneous equilibria since all expected and necessary equilibria together with the neighboring phase as well as the evolution of the ternary liquid phase could be proven by XRD and microstructural evaluation. Another argument is that the γ-phase can be prepared as almost single phase samples with only graphite or hexagonal boron nitride as minor impurity. The quasi-ternary TiB The γ-phase consists of a composition ranging between 4–9 Mol% CrB The solid solubility of both CrB This research was not funded by any external source. Instead, the author likes to gratefully acknowledge the input by many student workers as well as Diploma-, Master- and PhD students who individually contributed putting spotlights on selected chemical compositions, sintering and annealing treatments or microstructures during the last years (by the order of time): E. Fendler, A. Pohl, I. Mitra, D. Büttner, E. Schüller, D. Reschke, Y. Menke, C. Schmalzried, A. Momozawa and A. Klein. Fortunately, both raw materials powders and experimental facilities were all the same so that the various results could be combined in here. For their permanent and strong technical support the author likes to thank P. König (powder processing and characterization), V. Schmitz (hot pressing and dilatometry), P. Schott (X-ray diffraction), and R. Coenen (ceramography and SEM/EDS), T. Goto, Sendai, and A. Momozawa, Tokyo, for SPS experiments. For the valuable microprobe analyses the author likes to thank W. Volkwein, M. Pröhl and G. von Richthofen, HDZ Aachen.