A new classification system with respect to the engineering geological characteristics of rock masses in different geological conditions were presented based on the authors’ experiences and observations. Rock mass composition (RMC), rock type (RT), clay-bearing content (CBC), unconfined compressive strength (UCS) and tunnel depth (TD) were found as the major factors affecting the tunnel inflow. In order to minimize judgmental bias and set up a basic database, data pertaining to these factors were compiled from 33 tunnels project with a total length of about 200km thoroughly excavated in sedimentary rocks. The classification factors were rated using a combination of the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and statistical methods. In order to cover all rock mass varieties and lessen the uncertainties, major factors were divided into categories of varying quality. Two statistical criteria were introduced to calculate the weighing of categories. The main advantage of this procedure is its capability of effectively predicting groundwater inflows in a vast variety of geological conditions especially from a single flow pathway such as a brittle fault zone to low permeable rock masses. The proposed classification was applied to the actual rock tunnels. It was revealed that the predicted values were in a good agreement with the actual field measurements and could provide quantitative measures of tunnel inflow. The proposed method could be more feasible for a reliable pre-assessment of groundwater inflows in the future tunnel construction projects under heterogeneous geological conditions. Furthermore, the most important factors as well as their combination are introduced for sedimentary rocks.Reliable estimates of groundwater inflow are required for design and construction of underground excavations in rock masses. However, tunnel inflow is not always correctly assessed prior to construction. This is effectively due to simplifications and inaccurate estimation of hydraulic conductivity of rock masses. Investigations so far such as analytical and empirical solutions consider only the homogeneous geological conditions. Whereas, rock mass as a natural product, forms a complex geological structure with strongly heterogeneous permeability distribution, whose hydraulic behavior is affected by many factors. Indeed, the present approaches study the role of each of these factors individually, keeping the others constant. Therefore, they cannot adequately estimate the rate of tunnel inflow in rock mass. Rock mass complexity (anisotropy and heterogeneity) is a main factor, which is not taken into account in present approaches. According to Since the first attempt by In this paper, a new classification system is presented to assess the tunnel inflow in various geological conditions. It is based on a quantitative and qualitative description allows the estimation of the range of tunnel inflow which can occur during tunneling, from dripping to severe water inrush. For this purpose, a database was constructed from tunneling projects in sedimentary rocks. The rock material property, tunnel depth together with visual assessment of the mass it forms, is used as direct inputs to predict the rock mass permeability and relevant tunnel inflow within sedimentary rocks. The parameters used for this system, are rock mass composition (RMC), rock type (RT), clay-bearing content (CBC), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and tunnel depth (TD). The main objective is to produce a classification system, utilized during pre-construction phase, and capable of reasonable estimating the expected inflow through various geological conditions. This system is based upon the rating of the tunnel inflow influence factors. For assessing the classification ratings, a systemic procedure by the analytic hierarchy process ( A fundamental step in understanding and predicting the tunnel inflow involves the identification and location of hydraulically significant fractures ( The permeability of fractured rock masses is strongly related to the geometry of conductive fracture network and fractures properties such as aperture, presence of infilling and persistence ( In this paper, the rock mass permeability has conceptually been considered by the sequential equations presented in As illustrated in This research deals with the estimate of inflow rate in rock tunneling with an emphasis on evaluating the hydraulic behavior of rock mass and presents a new scheme for a rational classification system. In particular, the classification is proposed essentially based on the combination of analytical hierarchy process (AHP) and statistical analysis of experience data. In order to find appropriate governing factors, a database was compiled and constructed from 336 inflow zones along more than 200 The second step is to determine the effect of governing factors on tunnel inflow, which is achieved through comparing measured inflow in different zones. Subsequently, governing factor weights and ratings are calculated by a combination of AHP and the statistical analysis of experience data measured during tunnel excavations. To minimize uncertainties, two indices are introduced based on statistical analysis of original data. Finally, a tunnel inflow classification (TIC) system is proposed based on abovementioned factors. To obtain the classification factors and their influences on tunnel inflow, a comprehensive database was constructed. This process was basically performed through a comprehensive site investigation, field measurements and laboratory test, which finally resulted in the preparation of realistic geological and hydrogeological models of interest tunnels. For this purpose, 33 Iranian long tunnels constructed in sedimentary rocks were selected. The database consists of reliable data of measured inflow rate, topography, lithology and engineering characteristics of rock masses with detail geological and hydrogeological setting of the tunnels. Although engineering classification systems are the methods in which the main important factors can be included, a system using all factors is practically tedious and inconvenient. Hence, an important task in a classification system is the selection of factors of the greatest influence ( The selection of the governing factors used in the present classification system was made considering their capability to credibly represent the hydraulic behavior of rock masses, geo-structural setting, and site specific conditions. The factors must be easily collected in the site investigation phase and be available in all design stages of the project without the need for implementing special investigation techniques. Given the above, and by the study of engineering geological data obtained from the site investigation and construction of 33 tunnels, the most important factors affecting groundwater inflow into rock tunnels are selected as follows: Rock mass composition. Rock type and/or lithology. Rock brittleness. Tunnel depth. Some of these factors have already been proposed as indicators of groundwater inflow and/or ground behavior in rock tunneling. For example, rock mass composition- first introduced by Due to the vast variety of the given factors, which are not equally important for tunnel inflow, and in order to cover all rock mass variety and lessen the uncertainties, governing factors should be divided into certain categories with similar properties, i.e. factor categories of varying quality. General categories of factors are illustrated in The composition or structure of rock masses surrounding a tunnel has a significant influence on inflow behavior of the ground. The rock mass composition is a representative combination of discontinuities and rock materials that reflects the geo-structural setting and geological history of the rock mass. In order to describe the rock mass composition, three main groups has been found ( Group I: General or overall rock mass composition. Group II: Faulted rock mass composition. Group III: Karstic or dissolution rock mass composition. General rock mass composition is defined as structures occurring between weakness zones and faults ( Faults are complex zones of deformation, having different hydraulic behaviors and the related tunnel inflows. The influence of faults on groundwater flow and tunnel inflow has intensively been studied during the two recent decades ( The structure of 46 fault zones was investigated in the given tunnels. Fault type and characteristic of surrounding rocks are of other influencing factors studied in this investigation. It has been found preferable to describe the fault zones in groups with greater emphasis on tunnel inflow ( In addition, a third group (III) which may be regarded as a subgroup to the others, involving rock with special properties, such as high solubility and high permeability, is introduced in this research. It has a great influence on hydraulic behavior of rock masses surrounded a tunnel and may occur in two other rock mass compositions described earlier. The karstic rock mass is a particular or even unique hydrogeological composition with complex and original characteristics ( Resulting in a great variety of three-dimensional patterns in rock masses, dissolution conduit systems are the most complex networks among all groundwater flow networks ( As previously shown by Brittleness is one of the important mechanical properties of rock which is closely related to fracture toughness ( Brittleness is more difficult to measure than standard mechanical and mineralogical rock properties. In civil engineering projects, rock strength and mineralogical composition are the properties of rock material that determine brittleness ( Rock material strength is one of the most important engineering properties of rocks, which determines rock brittleness and deformation behavior. Compressive strength has a reliable capability to describe rock behavior during the deformation. Under the same stress condition, strong rocks with high UCS will generally show a more brittle behavior than week rocks and tend to fracture sooner. In fact, the UCS can easily be measured in the field using Schmidt hammer and point load test. Hence, the UCS was as an evident factor in the TIC system. Since typical range of the compressive strength of sedimentary rocks is generally less than 100 Mineral composition can greatly affect the rock behavior. Some minerals, like quartz, olivine, and feldspars are very brittle whearas others like clay minerals, micas, and calcite is more ductile. This is due to the chemical bond types which hold them together. Therefore, the mineral composition of the rock will be a factor in determining the deformational behavior of the rock ( Clay-rich rocks can exhibit elasto-plastic behavior with self-sealing of any fractures at depth. Hence, clay-bearing content (CBC) of rock material can be a simple relevant factor in controlling rock fracture properties. In TIC system, clay bearing classification of pattons for carbonate rocks was used for classifying rocks (see The engineering properties of rock are governed by the physical properties of the materials of which it is composed and the manner in which they are bonded to each other ( Rock properties play an important role in the formation of fractures and in the structure of fracture zones. There are marked differences in the internal structures of fractures and fracture zones in different lithologic units. Rock type and lithology also influence fault zone formation and its hydraulic properties. In highly porous sandstones the permeability of a fault zone can be several orders of magnitude less than that of the surrounding sandstone ( Rock type and/or lithology are suitable factors of all mentioned properties of rock materials. Considering the importance of rock type in controlling engineering properties of rock material and related fracture properties, it is used as a relevant and influence factor in TIC system. The sedimentary rocks can be divided into two principle groups; the clastic rocks, which consist of detrital material, and chemical types such as crystalline carbonate rocks. As shown in Tunnel depth or overburden thickness has always been the most common parameter in the analysis of tunnel inflow. Depth, as a function of present in situ stress and rock mass condition surrounding the tunnels, control the hydraulic property of fractures such as its aperture. The effect of depth on tunnel inflow has been studied earlier by many researches such as In order to rate the five given factors, the total rate of rock mass considered to be 100 at most, which represents highest tunnel inflow. In TIC system, the most weights were rated for the worst condition (high inflow). For eliminating doubts, due to subjective judgments, the rating for different factors has been given a range in preference to a single value. According to the On the basis of measured inflow rate and its distribution, tunnel inflow was classified in six classes namely extremely high (80–100), very high (60–80), high (40–60), moderate (25–40), low (10–25) and very low (<10). They are shown in The method employed to evaluate the relative importance of the factors and their categories is based on AHP approach and statistical methods. Based on the relative priority of the factors, the relative and absolute weight of influence factors was determined. The major steps to determine the weights and ratings of influence factors and related categories proposed in an orderly manner are presented as follows: The rock mass composition was considered as a basis of classification. Hence, all data has been divided into three groups belonging to general rock mass composition, faulted rock mass composition and dissolution rock mass composition. Maximum rating for different rock mass compositions was considered based on related maximum inflows measured in the field ( In order to collect the inputs for a pair-wise comparison of main influence factors, twenty professors with a high degree of experience were invited to evaluate classification ratings according to the hierarchy process. For this purpose, a questionnaire was prepared and sends for decision makers and was received 14 complete answers. In order to consider opinions, the decision makers were aggregated into different grouped based on their expert and experiences. Then, the arithmetic means of these values are used to calculate the final pair-wise compassion. A pair-wise comparison matrix was developed to determine factor weights and ratings ( To determine the weight of categories a set of pair-wise comparison matrices are constructed for each influence factor. In this process, the comparison has been done on the basis of inflow rate measured through the related category. On the basis of the data obtained from the field measurements and engineering geological surveys of interest tunnels, construct a set of pair-wise comparison matrices for each category. To eliminate personal error in pair-wise comparisons, two indices were defined. a) Factor weights were calculated for each influence factor and their categories along the investigated tunnels. Finally, rock mass rating was calculated for each rock mass compositions proposed in this research ( The following steps are taken to classify and estimate water inflow into rock tunnels will be constructed in sedimentary rocks. Determine the rock mass composition, based in Use Determine general rock mass composition based on Find rock type(s) and related rating(s) in rock masses. Find the UCS, clay-bearing content as well as related rating(s) of rock materials. Find the tunnel depth and related rating. Sum up the ratings determined during in Steps 3–6 mentioned above. Find the tunnel class number and related tunnel inflow rate based on the total rating and the values mentioned in In this paper, Long Zagros water conveyance tunnel (lot 1-b) were selected as an example to make a tunnel inflow evaluation by the proposed TIC through a major fault zone, named Gorigor Fault zone. The geological condition of the tunnel is shown in Based on the above data, the tunnel inflow ratings for this fault zone are computed and presented in The approaches used so far to estimate tunnel inflow in rock masses generally assume homogeneous media with an equivalent permeability in which calculated inflow shows much difference from the measured one. In complex geological conditions such as fractured and/or faulted rock masses, recent analytical, empirical and numerical solutions are insufficient to predict groundwater inflow. One of the greatest defects of these approaches is their inadequate and impossible exploration in subsurface exploratory drilling. This paper discusses these issues and provides a simple classification system to estimate water inflow at different geological conditions. Rock mass permeability is the most important factor recently used to estimate water inflow in present approaches. Packer test is a common method to measure rock mass permeability. However, it is very difficult to measure a reliable permeability for heterogeneous rock messes especially at depth with traditional packer tests. It is one of the main reasons resulting in inaccurate estimation of tunnel inflow in complex geological conditions. In this research, the permeability is evaluated by applying effective factors such as rock type, rock strength and depth. These factors are used in the proposed tunnel inflow classification (TIC) system instead of applying direct permeability value. Fault zones have different hydraulic behaviors and are almost the main sources of tunnel inflow and consequent problems. The main difficulty to estimate tunnel inflow through fault zones using the present approaches, is their characterization by normal exploratory boring and packer test. Based on the fact that “hydraulic behavior of fault zone is related to fault zone architecture and host rock characteristics” the tunnel inflow is estimated by applying influence factors in proposed TIC system. Karst features are particular or even unique hydrogeological phenomena, making it very difficult to make a reliable estimate on their location and characteristics. The largest but the most infrequent water inflow which has been measured during the construction of investigated tunnels was through the karstic or dissolution rock mass compositions. Due to the lake of data in this composition, they were excluded from the scope of the proposed TIC system. However, the research revealed that tunnel inflow in dissolution rock mass composition is equal to or aboutwice as much as the faulted rock mass compositions. Proposed tunnel inflow classification (TIC) system considers a few factors affecting the hydraulic behavior of rock masses and groundwater flow into rock tunnels, and assigns quantitative values. The TIC provides a simple procedure to estimate tunnel inflow rate through complex geological conditions, which are more difficult to assess by present approaches. In the proposed Tunnel Inflow Classification (TIC) system, three following criteria were considered: (a) factors should be small in number (b) factors should be categorized into certain groups, and (3) the classification system should be applicable to the field. There are many factors such as rock mass composition, in situ stress and method of excavation, which can affect tunnel inflow rate. Any change in water inflow is the result of the comprehensive effect of all the factors. There is no single factor that can fully and quantitatively describe the rock mass permeability and tunnel inflow consequences. Hence, it is of paramount importance to develop a method considering all the factors at once. Moreover, determining hydraulic characteristics of complex geological features such as fault zone and dissolution cavities are much more difficult in tunneling design. Engineering classification systems are effective methods to estimate groundwater inflow into rock tunnels. The geological and hydrogeological uncertainties can be tackled effectively using a proper classification. In addition, the proposed TIC system can be successfully applied to estimate groundwater inflow for a wide range of geological conditions from homogeneous to heterogeneous grounds. The TIC system was validated by use of independent data measured during the construction of 4 discrete tunnel projects.TIC conclusions were found out to be in a good agreement with the measured values. The proposed classification system should be more feasible for estimation of high tunnel inflows prior to construction. Tunnel depth has a dual conflicting effect on water inflow. The rock mass permeability decreases over depth in general rock mass composition and, consequently, tunnel inflow will decrease drastically. This is observed along most of the investigated tunnels constructed below over a 500