The performance of new nano zero-valent iron (nZVI) particles produced by a promising new milling method in organic solvent was examined. The basic feature of the new process involves the addition of abrasive alumina particles having an average particle size of 5 μm during milling. The milled particles with alumina had a specific surface area exceeding 20 m2·g−1 as well as high percentages of Fe(0) content of 75–80%. The reactivity against Cr(VI), Trichloroethylene, and Tetrachloroethylene was determined and in all cases, the removal capacity of the milled particles was higher than that of commercial available nZVI particles. This high reactivity may be related to the absence of a thick and continuous oxide layer on the surface, the high disorder levels of the metallic structure and the large number of reaction sites. Sedimentation tests revealed very good suspension stability, while in mobility tests, the particles could be distributed throughout the column length. The results showed a low tendency to agglomerate in aqueous solution. This behaviour has been attributed to two factors related to the milling process: first, the high ζ-Potential found in the particles, which enhances electrostatic repulsion. The second factor is the significant decrease of saturation magnetization of the milled particles with alumina in comparison with the values of the commercial nZVI particles, leading to a reduction in magnetic interparticle interaction. This decrease may be related to the introduction of a significant carbon content in the iron particles (0.65–1.35%wt, depending on the sample) and the presence of a highly deformed nanostructure.Although it is a very promising technology in terms of remediating a wide range of contaminants The introduction of a straightforward method of nZVI production for remediation research on a laboratory scale was published in 1997 Unfortunately, the sodium borohydride reduction method cannot be scaled up for commercial applications, due to health and safety concerns involving the synthesis (and its cost) of sodium borohydride Thermal reduction is the main process through which commercial nZVI is produced. This method is based on the reduction of iron oxide nanoparticles, pentacarbonyl, or aqueous Fe(II) by thermal energy (350–600 °C) using different gaseous reducing agents (H High energetic ball milling of iron in water Of all of the mentioned methods, two of these have been successfully scaled up and commercialized for remediation in the European market: thermal reduction In order to break the iron flakes during the milling of pure iron in a protective organic solvent such as Mono Ethylene Glycol (MEG), a novel milling technique was presented in a previous publication It appears that this new procedure could combine the advantages of the milling approach (low cost and high throughput) with those of ZVI at the nanometric size (high reactivity and mobility). To achieve this, a greater reduction in particle size and further knowledge regarding the performance of the milled particles on key points of Three types of commercial nZVI particles were studied for direct comparison with the milled particles with alumina: pyrophoric25P, air-stable STAR but in the activated state NZVI particles were produced by milling in two steps. In the first step, conventional ball milling was conducted. Here, the iron particles were deformed and flattened, producing very thin flakes. In the second step, with the introduction of alumina in the milling, the flakes were broken and smaller iron particles were obtained In the first step, the vials were filled with 100 ml of MEG, 1.5 g of iron powder, and a 250 g grinding media load (low-carbon steels balls or high-carbon steel shots). The vials were purged with argon gas so as to create a protective atmosphere inside the vials. The rotating speed was 400 rpm and the milling cycle consisted of 30 min of attrition followed by 30 min of stand-by periods to allow the vial to cool down. The effective milling time was 24 h. In the second step, the vials were opened in a glove box and irregular alumina powder (Ref. 12015, PRESI GmbH) having an average diameter of 5 µm was introduced. The vials were once again purged and the milling was extended for 24 h under the same conditions as those described in the first step. Following the milling process, the slurry was sieved at 150 µm to remove the grinding medium. In order to determine the effect of the grinding media and the alumina content in the final size of the particles, two different milling media were used with an increasing alumina content. The first was low-carbon steel balls (AISI 1010, 0.08–0.13% wt% C) measuring 5 mm in diameter and the second was high-carbon steel shots (0.80–1.20% wt% C) (Ref. S110, Pometon) 0.5 mm in diameter. The variation of the final size of the iron particles for both grinding media with increasing amounts of alumina content is shown in The best samples for each of the grinding media were selected for extensive characterization: for low-carbon steel balls (0.08–0.13% wt% C) of 5 mm diameter, the sample with 53.6 g·l All of the particles included in the reactivity and mobility studies (25P, STAR, A01, NA64 and NA84) were extensively characterized. For a better characterization of the milled iron particles NA64 and NA84, they were separated from MEG and alumina in the following cases: determination of particle size, specific surface area and analyses with Transmission Electron Microscopy. The separation process was carried out by placing the slurry near a permanent magnet (720 g of NdFeB, Grade N42) to concentrate iron particles. Supernatant liquid was poured off and particles were re-suspended in pure ethanol. This procedure was repeated five times and the resulting samples were labelled NA64(5x) and NA84(5x). Subsequent analysis of alumina concentration showed that with this procedure, the total amount of remaining alumina in NA64(5x) and NA 84(5x) samples was approximately 40%, and that with successive washings of up to 15 times, a little more than 30% of alumina was still present in the milled samples ( Particle size distribution was determined using Laser Diffraction Particle Size Analysis (LD For electronic microscopy characterization, samples were prepared in a glove box, maintaining oxygen concentration below 5 ppm. Samples were re-suspended by mixing them vigorously in absolute ethanol. The morphology of the particles and elemental composition was examined with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Gemini ultra plus, Zeiss) equipped with Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) (X-MAX 50 mm The final carbon content of the milled particles was analysed with combustion infrared analysis (CS-200, LECO). Total iron concentration was assessed, firstly, by digesting the suspensions with 2:1 HNO For X-Ray Diffraction analysis (XRD), the solid samples (25P, STAR) or a drop of the suspension (A01, NA64 and NA84) were placed on a zero background silicon sample holder (pw1817/32) of a PANalytical X’Pert PRO MPD powder diffractometer, using Cu Kα radiation at 45 kV with a step size of 0.033° 2θ and measuring time of 100 s per step (15 repeated scans). Magnetic measurements were performed with a Quantum Design MPMS XL5 instrument with a superconducting interference device (SQUID) detector working at a temperature of 300 K under external magnetic fields ranging from −5 to +5 T. The experimental data were corrected for the diamagnetism of the sample holder and alumina. The ζ-Potential is the electrical potential difference between the dispersion medium and the last stationary layer attached to the dispersed particle. The ζ-Potential sign affects the electrostatic interaction of the particles and its absolute magnitude influences the stability of the particles suspended in a solution. Initially, the ζ-Potentials of the nZVI particles and the initial alumina powder samples were determined using electrophoretic light scattering (ZetaSizer Nano ZS, Malvern). The 1 g·l To compare the reactivity of the nZVI particles produced in this work with commercial particles, dose (different nZVI concentrations) – response (contaminant depletion) tests were set in batch mode using deionized water. In the tests, hermetic bottles of 250 ml with a very small headspace were used, and they were vertically rotated at 2 rpm (Reax 20, Heidolph) in order to prevent the particles from settling and sticking to the glass. The pH for initial water was 7.71 and the ORP 175 mV. For these reactivity experiments, three harmful substances, extensively reported for nZVI remediation, were selected: Cr(VI), Trichloroethylene (TCE) and Tetrachloroethylene (PCE). In the case of the reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III), an initial Cr(VI) concentration of 50 mg·l TCE, PCE, and their chlorinated transformation products (1,1-Dichloroethylene, cis-Dichloroethylene, trans-1,2-Dichloroethene and Vinyl Chloride) in aqueous phase were quantified by Head Space (HS 7694E, Agilent) – Gas Chromatography (HP6890, Hewlett Packard) – Electron Capture Detector (µECD G2397A, Agilent). The GC was equipped with a split/splitless injector operated at a 1:200 ratio and the column (DB-624, Agilent) was 25 m × 0.2 mm × 1.12 μm. The system was calibrated using a volatile halocarbon mix (48001, Sigma-Aldrich) with all analytes included. Concerning analyte volatilization, batches were sampled at 4 °C with a 1 ml gastight micro-syringe and were introduced into the bottom of a 20 ml vial containing 10 ml of cold water. The vial was immediately sealed with a PTFE/rubber septum. Dibromomethane (41097, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as an internal standard for all analyses. It is important to note that in all of the tests the milled nZVI particles were injected without removing the MEG or alumina as they are intended for use in field applications. In order to evaluate possible side effects of MEG and alumina such as an advantageous dispersant action, additional control tests with 25P nanoparticles were performed at 1 g·l Suspension stability was measured through the sedimentation rates using a (TurbiScan LAB, Quantachrome) at 1 g·l The migration tests were performed in a column with a length of 2 m and an inner diameter of 20 mm, filled with standard silica sand with an average grain size (d  The analyses of iron and carbon concentration in the final slurries helped to increase the understanding of the mechanisms involved in the particle production by milling. The final total iron concentration in both NA64 and NA84 samples was 96.7 g·l The analysis of carbon concentration also coincides with the idea of an abrasion mechanism, since the values found in the milled samples, 0.65%wt for NA64 and 1.35%wt for NA84, were higher than those of the initial iron (≤0.1%wt) and helps to explain the presence of a significant carbon signal in the EDS analysis. This final carbon content of the milled samples is closely related to the composition of the grinding medium: in the case of NA64, the final carbon content is lower since the carbon content of balls (AISI 1010 steel) is low and only the vials (AISI 1085 steel) have a larger carbon content. On the other hand, in the case of NA84, the final carbon content is clearly higher (1.35 wt% C) due to the higher level of carbon in the S110 balls (0.85–1.2% C). At this point, it should be noted that in both cases, the weight loss of the balls and vials after milling was measured and in the case of the NA84 samples, a substantial weight loss was detected in S110 balls, reinforcing the idea of their presence in milled particles. The possibility of producing metallic nanoparticles through the wear of balls in a powder-free ball milling process has been previously reported Size characterization is a significant feature since mobility and reactivity have a strong dependence on this parameter The different degrees of agglomeration of nanoparticles in liquid solution are reflected in the results obtained with LD studies. This effect is not very large for milled particles (1.01 μm for NA64(5x) and 0.52 μm for NA84(5x)), but when compared to the individual value, a significant increase in size is observed for 25P and STAR nanoparticles (2.35 μm for 25P and 3.31 μm for STAR). This may be understood by examining Regarding SSA, the milled particles show good results with 20.0 m TEM studies were carried out on NA64(5x) and NA84(5x) milled particles, which rendered similar results. The representative images for both milled particles are presented in Previous works have examined the presence and thickness of the external oxide layer in 25P and STAR nanoparticles in the activated state The XRD patterns of initial iron, alumina, NA64, NA84, A01, 25P and STAR are shown in As for commercial particles, the XRD pattern for A01 also shows a decrease in the relative intensity and a broadening of the diffraction peaks of iron, but to a lesser extent than in the NA84 and NA64 samples. Although all of these particles were produced by a ball milling process, in the case of A01 the flakes have been not broken ( According to the TEM and XRD results, there was no evidence of thick and continuous oxide layer on the surface of NA64 and NA84 particles, unlike 25P and STAR. The high deformation along with the high number of fractures and cold-welding processes in the powder particles during ball milling in MEG solution appear to be capable of destroying and detaching the initial oxide layer in many sites, in more efficient manner as the degree of milling increases. Furthermore, the solution seems to be able to control oxidation since the new oxide layers are difficult to identify by TEM observation. These issues have been examined in microscale ZVI (mZVI) aluminium, mechanochemically sulfidated mZVI iron (S-mZVI) and Fe-C composites The saturation magnetization (M In the case of A01, a small reduction of M The ζ-Potential values for the studied particles are shown in  The results of the reactivity tests with chlorinated compounds (TCE and PCE) are shown in All of these experiments concluded that the developed milled particles were effective in removing different pollutants and that in all the cases they performed better than all of the commercial products that were tested. The good reactivity of SSA and Fe(0) with normalized values may be related to certain special features of the milled products. One of these is the absence of a continuous and thick oxide layer in the particles. The presence of a thick oxide layer results in a drop in the reactivity against the present pollutants in contrast to particles with thinner oxide layer The first of these factors is the large number of irregularities found on the surface of the milled particles. It has been reported that an increase in the density or reactive sites on the surface will increase reactivity A second point is the large number of defects in the nanocrystalline structure of the milled particles. As seen in Another point deserving attention is the potential influence of alumina in the reactivity of the NA64 and NA84 milled samples, since some alumina particles seem to be closely connected with the nZVI particles ( The results of the mobility tests for the studied particles are shown in The Sedimentation Rates (SR) are also presented in The good performance of the milled particles with alumina in the mobility and stability tests reveals a significant resistance to aggregation in aqueous solution. In this case, due to the absence of surfactants and viscous liquids related to steric and shear-thinning stabilization Another important feature of nZVI particles that affects their dispersion stability is their high magnetic susceptibility. According to Phenrat et al. The reduction of magnetic attraction and the electrostatic repulsion between the milled nZVI NA64 and NA84 particles may explain the small tendency to aggregate that is observed and therefore, the good results of both samples in mobility tests.  The new milled nZVI particles are formed by milled iron and small fragments of vials and grinding balls as a result of the breakage of iron flakes and the abrasion produced by hard micronized alumina. The final particles have a very fine nanostructure in which the presence of alumina and some carbon contamination have been confirmed. The produced particles have shown an excellent reactivity against chromium, TCE, and PCE, being several times superior as compared to commercial ones. The absence of a continuous and thick oxide layer in the milled particles, the presence of a large number of irregularities in the surface, and the high density of defects in the highly-deformed nanostructure of the milled samples help to explain this high reactivity. Stability and mobility of the new particles were much higher than those of commercial ones. This behaviour appears to result from large ζ-Potential values and low saturation magnetization that result in a reduction of the interparticle attraction. These results suggest a very promising field mobility and enhance the potential of the milling process in the manufacture of nZVI particles for water remediation. This work was supported by the EU-project David Ribas is grateful for the grant awarded to him by the The authors would like to thank Pometon España and BASF GmbH for their donation of materials. Sedimentation rate tests were kindly performed by Dr. Vesna Micic Batka, V (University of Vienna). Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: