The present paper describes calcination of calcium phosphate ceramics (hydroxyapatite, HA) at 200, 400, 600, 800 and 1000 °C to observe the phase change using X-ray diffraction. HA phase was found to be stable up to 600 °C and later got dissociated into other non-stoichiometric phases like tricalcium phosphate (Ca3(PO4)2 [TCP]), calcium pyrophosphate (Ca2P2O7 [CPP]) and calcium hydrogen phosphate (CaHPO4 [CHP]). TCP was found to be the major phase above 1000 °C. FTIR spectra showed the presence of various PO4
                     3− and OH− groups present in the powder. Powders compacted and sintered at 900, 1000, 1100 and 1200 °C showed an increase in density from 2.11 to 2.95 g/cm3 while biaxial flexural strength (BFS) was found to be higher (48.7 MPa) when the samples were sintered at 1100 °C and it decreased with further increase in sintering temperature.Bioceramics are needed to alleviate pain and restore function of diseased body parts. Hydroxyapatite [Ca HA can be prepared by several synthetic routes which include hydrolysis, hydrothermal synthesis, hydrothermal exchange, solid processes from bovine bone, sol–gel processes, spray pyrolysis from natural coralline and wet chemical methods Literature revealed that the densification ratio (percent theoretical density) increased with increase in initial Ca/P molar ratio in the powders. It was concluded that presence of high amount of TCP was detrimental to the sintering of biphasic HA/TCP ceramics In the present study, we synthesize calcium phosphate ceramics by solution route. The thermal stability of the prepared powders was studied by calcining them at various temperatures. The effect of heat treatment on Ca/P ratio and phase content were investigated by XRD and EDS. Consolidation of these powders at various temperatures was carried out to observe the phase composition by XRD, elemental composition by EDS and functional group identification by FTIR. Sintered properties as well as mechanical behavior of the compacts were evaluated and the fractured surfaces were analyzed by environmental SEM. The hydroxyapatite ceramic powder was prepared by solution route using the analytical reagent grade calcium nitrate tetrahydrate [Ca(NO Based on the thermogravimetry results a calcination treatment was done at 400 °C for 1 h and the calcined powders were ball milled at 100 rpm to get fine powders. Calcined powders were compacted at 400 to 1200 MPa pressures into 15 mm diameter cylindrical samples. These were then sintered at 1100 °C and both green as well as sintered densities were measured. Further powders compacted at 600 MPa were sintered at 900 to 1200 °C (100 °C intervals) and later density, phase content and mechanical properties were evaluated. Powders calcined at different temperatures as well as sintered samples were characterized for phase content by X-ray diffraction in the scanning range of 2 In order to understand the variation in total calcium and phosphorous with increase in calcination temperature the samples were examined by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS) using FEI Quanta 200 (The Netherlands). The results were rationalized by computing the relative weight percent of the elements as per the relationship X-ray diffraction spectra of calcium phosphate powders calcined at different temperatures are shown in The results obtained in the present experiments suggested that dehydroxylation reaction of HA occurred leading to the formation of major amount of TCP and minor amount of CPP above 600 °C. With an increase in calcination temperature HA would have started losing hydroxyl groups forming various phosphates. This is in agreement with those reported earlier by Kutty Crystallographically, the end products seem apatitic because (i) the diffraction maxima of Ca According to Newesely and Osborn Literature indicates the formation of TCP and TTCP as well as CaO at 1100–1200 °C. The formation of CPP has not been indicated. It is well known that in several ceramic systems containing fine as well as nanocrystallites the surface as well as interfacial energy will be of considerable magnitude and opposes the phase transformations. In other words the surface energy will be much larger than the phase transformation energy. Typically in sol–gel processed zirconium oxide powders it was always found that the powders were initially amorphous. An increase in calcination temperature at first result in formation of metastable high temperature cubic phase. With further increase in temperature, the crystallite size increases with a resultant formation of metastable medium temperature tetragonal phase. Only after about 800 °C calcination, when the crystallite size had sufficiently increased, the room temperature stable monoclinic phase is found to form In order to understand whether the formation of TCP phase at as low temperature as 600 °C is related to the surface energy effect, the crystallite sizes of HA and TCP were computed from the half width at full maximum of XRD lines using Scherrer's formula (Eq.  In order to observe the elemental composition at each calcination temperature, EDS were carried out and the results are shown in It can be noticed that both calcium and phosphorous increased with increase in calcination temperature while oxygen decreased. Above 400 °C the increase in calcium was much more than that of phosphorous indicating an increase in Ca/P ratios on the surface of the samples with increase in calcination temperature. This could be due to the loss of oxygen in the form of hydroxyl group and moisture. Computed Ca/P ratios in powders calcined at different temperatures are plotted in A comparison with the observed results show that the powders are mixture of phases with Ca/P ratios varying between 1.26 and 1.29 at.% or 1.58 and 1.65 wt.%. Thus the powders were found to be sub-stoichiometric calcium deficient HA. Increase in calcination temperatures did not have much effect on Ca/P ratios. The Rir from XRD data indicated the presence of CPP and CHP [Ca/P ratio 1 at.%] phases along with HA and TCP [Ca/P ratios 1.67 and 1.5 at.%] respectively. Thus the observed Ca/P ratios of 1.26 to 1.29 at.% is most likely to represent the average of all these four phases. FTIR spectra of the powder calcined at various temperatures showed vibrational modes characteristic of PO Apatite powder mixed with 5 wt.% polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution was compacted at different pressures from 400 to 1000 MPa. The compacts were subsequently sintered at 1100 °C for 1 h in air. In order to remove the PVA, samples were held at 400 °C for 30 min in the furnace. The green (as compacted) and sintered densities of the samples were measured from dimensions and are shown in Biaxial flexural strength (BFS) of the samples was determined and the densities and BFS values of samples sintered at different temperatures are shown in The relative intensity ratios (Rir) of the X-ray lines corresponding to these phases were computed and are plotted as a function of sintering temperature in  The concentration of various elements present in sintered samples was determined by EDS. There was no significant change in elemental concentration on the surface of the samples sintered at various temperatures. This is to be expected as there was no significant change of Rir of various phases with an increase in sintering temperatures ( It was observed that HA in the powders was stable up to 600 °C calcination temperature, and, above this temperature it got dissociated into other phases like TCP, CPP and CHP. FTIR spectra showed the presence of various PO HA powders compacted at 600 MPa and sintered at temperatures 900–1200 °C for 1 h in air showed an increase in sintered density from 2.11 to 2.95 g/cm