The carbon dioxide gasification characteristics of three biomass char samples and bituminous coal char were investigated in a thermogravimetric analyser in the temperature range of 850–950 °C. Char SB exhibited higher reactivities (Ri, Rs, Rf) than chars SW and HW. Coal char gasification reactivities were observed to be lower than those of the three biomass chars. Correlations between the char reactivities and char characteristics were highlighted. The addition of 10% biomass had no significant impact on the coal char gasification reactivity. However, 20 and 30% biomass additions resulted in increased coal char gasification rate. During co-gasification, chars HW and SW caused increased coal char gasification reactivity at lower conversions, while char SB resulted in increased gasification rates throughout the entire conversion range. Experimental data from biomass char gasification and biomass-coal char co-gasification were well described by the MRPM, while coal char gasification was better described by the RPM.The use of biomass in energy applications has been receiving significant attention lately. Based on their chemical and structural characteristics, various biomass wastes and energy crops have been identified as possible feedstock for different energy applications ( In gasifiers, such as the fixed bed dry bottom (FBDB) gasifier, feedstock is processed at high temperatures and at pressures up to 30 bar where it is subjected to different reaction zones: drying, pyrolysis, gasification and combustion zones ( Some of the shortcomings of biomass conversion may be overcome by biomass-coal cogasification. Co-gasification of biomass and coal reduces the disadvantages of using the individual feedstock and exploits the advantages of the separate fuels ( The CO As the correlation of structural characteristics of biomass in relation to the gasification reactivity have not receive considerable attention, this forms the main motivation of this study. In this paper, the relationship between the biomass- and coal-char characteristics and R The vitrinite-rich coal used in this study was a seam 4 bituminous coal from the Witbank coalfields, and is a typical coal used in the coal to liquid process in South Africa. Woody biomass samples (softwood chips – SW and hardwood chips – HW) were sourced from the South African Pulp and Paper Industries (SAPPI) Limited. Sweet sorghum bagasse (SB) was supplied by the Agricultural Research Council (ARC). These biomass samples are the most abundantly available in South Africa and therefore show potential as possible co-feed material in the coal to liquid process. The preparation of the biomass samples was reported in a previous paper ( Conventional and advanced characterization techniques, including proximate and ultimate analysis, wide angle X-ray diffraction carbon fraction analyses (WA-XRD-CFA), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy and CO CO The random pore model (RPM) (Eq. The characteristics of biomass and coal char samples are presented in The CO The gasification reactivities, R The higher amounts of K in SW and HW char samples, in comparison to Si and Al, could be responsible for the observed maximums at higher conversion (X > 0.8) compared with SB and coal chars. Even though SB possessed the highest amount of K specie in the ash, the presence of relatively greater amounts of Si, Al and P species resulted in the observed decline in reactivity at higher conversions ( Graphical illustrations of the correlations between the char characteristics and the gasification reactivities (R The co-gasification of biomass and coal char samples is presented in SW and HW char samples had similar effect on the co-gasification reactivity, where an increase in the reactivity was observed at lower conversion, and beyond X = 0.4, the co-gasification reactivity was similar to the gasification reactivity of coal char ( The experimental and calculated biomass char gasification and biomass-coal chars co-gasification reactivity results are presented in The experimental data from coal gasification was well described by the RPM and this has been reported by other researchers ( Even though the co-gasification with SW and HW chars and coal char resulted in reactivity maximum at lower conversion, the MRPM with the condition, θ = c(1–X), fitted the experimental data. This was not the case for the co-gasification of corn stalk char with bituminous coal char (50:50% blend) reported by The findings from this investigation is important, since in previous studies in co-gasification of coal with alternative materials in a fixed bed gasifier, more carbon in ash was reported after co-feeding waste tyres with lignite due to the relative low reactivity of the blends ( Biomass gasification reactivities decreased in the order: SB > SW > HW and were greater than that of coal. Char characteristics such as H/C, AI The work presented in this paper is based on the research financially supported by the South African Research Chairs Initiative of the Department of Science and Technology ( Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 