Anodic oxidation was used to grow porous layers on titanium discs. Six different oxidation procedures were used producing six different surfaces. The implants were inserted in rat bone (tibia) for 7 days. After implant retrieval, mineralization (hydroxyapatite formation) on the implant surfaces was investigated using time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). Bone tissue around the implants was sectioned and stained. The amount of bone in close apposition to the implant was calculated. The porosity showed great variation between the surfaces. Hydroxyapatite was detected on all surfaces. A slight positive correlation between porosity and mineralization was found, although the most porous surface was not the best mineralized one. Bone had formed around all implants after 7 days. The bone-to-metal contact for the porous implants did not differ significantly from the non-porous control. Porosity is known to influence cellular events. The results indicate that porosity could have an initial, positive influence on bone integration of implants, by stimulating the mineralization process. The methods used were found to be suitable tools for investigation of initial healing around implants in bone.A clinically successful treatment of bone defects is to implant titanium in bone. The mechanism behind bone healing around implants is still not fully understood. Investigating the interaction between surface and tissue on new implant materials demands authentic and truthful visualization techniques, making TOF-SIMS a suitable tool. This method has mainly been used for the characterization of biomaterial surfaces Bone formation begins with synthesis and extracellular assembly of collagen type I fibrils, along with calcium phosphate crystal growth. The mineral portion is composed largely of hydroxyapatite, carbonate and non-apatitic calcium phosphate. Impurity ions like strontium, barium, magnesium, potassium, sodium, iron, hydroxide, chloride, bromide, carbonate and oxide may be included in the crystal One question, which this abstract deals with, is whether the implant surface is mineralized prior to the surrounding bone or the other way around. Another question, also dealt with here, is how implant porosity influence mineralization and bone formation. Bone mineralization was studied by imaging TOF-SIMS. Titanium discs (1.0 The discs were cleaned, heat sterilized and implanted in rat tibia for 1 week. The animals were then sacrificed and the discs were fixed in absolute ethanol at −20 Bone from the implant site was decalcified, histologically prepared and then investigated microscopically. To evaluate bone formation around the implants the bone-to-metal contact at the implant site was calculated using the Java based program ImageJ. The results showed that Ca In Porosity clearly influenced the mineralization process. Less porous surfaces showed similar ion distribution as the implanted control, while more porous surfaces had thicker HA coatings. Since the most porous surface only had the third highest HA coating other factors than porosity might influence the mineralization process. One such factor could be pore size. It is also possible that ions like fluoride, phosphor and sulphur, which are present in the acids used for anodization and etching, could become incorporated in the growing oxide and influence the mineralization process Bone formation around the porous implants did not differ significantly from the control. The bone-to-metal contact for the control was 56.4 In conclusion, the results show that after one implantation week implant porosity influences mineralization more than bone formation. A clear correlation between the two processes was not found, since the most mineralized surface was not the surface with the highest bone contact. The results indicate that bone forms in the tissue around the implant before the implant surface is mineralized. The methods used are suitable tools for investigation of initial healing around implant materials. Elos Medical AB, Timmersdala, Sweden is greatly acknowledged for their support.