Extraction of tin from tinned plates serves the double purpose of preparing steel scrap for re-melting and producing secondary tin. The best route to reach these goals is offered by hydrometallurgy. In order to compare the efficiency of chemical and electrochemical removal of tin coatings, the mechanisms of the principal processes were investigated. Laboratory analysis demonstrated that tin dissolution rates in oxygenated NaOH solutions are controlled by the oxygen transport to the reaction interface. Increased sodium hydroxide concentration (>0.1 M) has a negative effect on tin dissolution because of reduced oxygen diffusivity.
                  The efficiency of electrolysis in alkaline stannate/stannite electrolytes strongly depends on the applied current density and temperature. Under the applied experimental conditions, cathodic extraction of tin (in an appropriate spongy form) could be stabilised at current efficiencies higher than 80%. Measurement of the anode potential was found to yield a proper end-point indication for de-tinning tinned steel plate scrap in anode baskets. The results demonstrate the practical advantages of electrochemical processing in alkaline media.The most important secondary tin raw material is the scrap generated directly by tinned plate processing, where the amount of technological scrap amounts to 10–15% Tinned plate scrap from communal use generally contains 3–5% organic waste, and is coated with epoxy-amino-, or epoxy-phenol lacquers. The thickness of the steel substrate is usually in the range of 0.15–0.55 mm. As a result of improved coating technology, the tin content has gradually decreased to 0.3–0.4%. We have carried out preliminary experiments to determine the average thickness of the tin layer on food canning plates. The weight loss of the material, previously cleaned and de-lacquered in acetone, as a result of the chemical treatment in HCl+SbCl Possible industrial methods for removing tin from the surface of steel plates are: melting, mechanical removal, chlorination, chemical dissolution and electrolysis. Simple melting is incapable of efficiently removing thin layers (<1 μm) of tin currently applied. Mechanical de-tinning methods (sand blasting) are less economical, since tin extraction requires further physical and/or chemical steps. Removal of tin as volatile SnCl Selective chemical dissolution of the tin layer from the surface of steel plates can be effected in caustic solutions, in the presence of an oxidising agent. Tin can be subsequently extracted from the solution either by precipitation in the form of a compound of low solubility, or by electrowinning. Dissolution of tin in NaOH solutions is a heterogeneous reaction, where the material transport, adsorption and desorption steps can also play an important part. According to the mechanism proposed by Lee and Lawson In the actual system, NaOH is present abundantly, while the supply of oxygen may be limited, because the solubility ( A tin disc of 99.95% purity and 22 mm diameter was embedded in a polyacrylic disc of larger dimensions, exposing only the flat bottom surface of the specimen, freshly polished with 2 μm diamond paste and degreased immediately before each experiment. The speed of rotation was measured with a stroboscope. The closed top of the thermostatted reaction vessel was equipped with a condenser gas outlet, a polyamide (Bonamide) bearing for vibration-free rotation of the shaft, a gas inlet and a valve for solution sampling Stability of dissolved tin requires avoidance of very low NaOH concentrations. This is also a requirement for practical application when the lacquer layer also needs to be treated. Therefore, the range of 0.1–1.0 M NaOH was examined. Leaching time was 6 h in each case. Experimental results The assumed diffusion control over the dissolution mechanism proposed by Lee and Lawson Temperature was found to have a relatively weak effect on the rate of dissolution. The regression coefficients of the Arrhenius plots shown in When compact cathode deposits are required, alkaline stannite/stannate electrolytes are inferior to acid sulphate or halogen brine solutions in terms of electric energy consumption, productivity, cathode morphology and operating temperature. Further difficulties are caused by the SnO Tin is primarily dissolved from the anode as Sn(II): In an electrolyte containing 0.5 M Sn(IV), 0.05 M Sn(II) and 0.5 M NaOH, the Sn(II)/Sn electrode potential ( The cathodic processes are also governed by the stability conditions expressed in To study the cathode processes, the anode plates, made of 99.9% tin, were placed on both sides of the tinned plate cathode of 50 cm For studying the anodic dissolution of tin coatings, the samples were made of tinned plate cut into 1 cm The lower limit of the current density range is set by the practical reasons of productivity, and the need to counterbalance re-dissolution of the cathode. The higher limit is determined by hydrogen evolution (disintegrating the cathodic deposit) and anode passivation. The latter phenomenon practically excludes the use of electrolyte temperatures below about 50°C. The deposited tin sponge adhered strongly to the cathode, allowing sufficient washing for cathodic current efficiency determination, but it could be removed easily by scraping. Measured cathodic current efficiencies, given in In order to verify the re-dissolving effect of the Sn(IV) species, we have carried out equilibrating tests in closed bottles. The tin powder sample lost approximately 6–8% of its original mass (1 g) by contacting with de-aerated Na Current efficiency plots of Anodic current density of the basket electrode cannot be expressed directly, as the actual active anode surface is unknown. Therefore, we attempted to follow the operating conditions by the anode potential — anodic current density correlation determined previously on solid anodes. Anode potential increases steeply with current density when tin begins to dissolve as Sn(IV). This indicates (at constant current) that the effective tin surface in the basket has been drastically reduced. Removing the basket from the bath at this point (shown in Alkaline hydrometallurgical processing is suitable for the direct and selective removal of tin coating from steel plates. Efficiency of chemical processing strongly depends on the mass transport conditions governing the oxygen supply to the reaction interface. Dissolution rates could be strongly increased by increased agitation and oxygenation of the solution, while the effect of temperature was relatively weaker. The free NaOH concentration reduced the reaction rate because of the indirect effects on the oxygen transport. Electrochemical processing combines the anodic dissolution and the cathodic extraction of tin. The electrolyte must be heated to 60°C–80°C to avoid excessive gas evolution and anode passivation. In order to obtain suitable spongy cathode deposits, coinciding with favourable electric energy requirements, the Sn(II) concentration had to be kept above approx. 0.5 g dm