Activated carbon is an important material in many industrial processes having a wide range of applications in food, pharmaceutical, chemical, and nuclear industries as well as the treatment of drinking water, and industrial flue gases. “Activated Carbon Adsorption” provides an up-to-date unified review of the wide ranging applications of active carbons and associated theory. “Activated Carbon Adsorption” covers a wide range of topics over its eight chapters. Beginning with a detailed description of the physical and chemical structure of activated carbon, describing their classification, surface chemistry and state of the art analysis techniques. No book on adsorption would be complete without detailed discussion of adsorption theory and adsorption isotherm equations. “Activated Carbon Adsorption” does not disappoint, with the numerous isotherm equations and their applications clearly and critically assessed. With such a large proportion of active carbon used in the purification/separation of liquids it is important that the theory of adsorption from liquids is dealt with thoroughly, as is achieved in Chapter 3. Similarly the science and application of carbon molecular sieves are rightfully given their own chapter. The final four chapters are devoted to the discussion of the numerous applications of active carbons in both liquid and gas phase applications. Providing detailed descriptions of applications and associated theory of active carbons within medicinal, drinking and waste waters, through to gas and vapour phase removal from flue and car exhausts. The book provides an excellent reference and text book on the science of active carbon adsorption. The book contains clear text, diagrams and illustrations and would be an excellent text for both students and experts within the field developing new activated carbon adsorbents. Perhaps, all that is missing is a discussion of methods for the regeneration of active carbons, however, this is possibly another book unto itself.