The quality of recycled process water is an important issue in the flotation of Cu–Mo ores. Processing of Cu–Mo ores includes two steps: a bulk flotation where molybdenite is recovered together with Cu sulfides, and a subsequent selective flotation step where molybdenite is separated from depressed copper sulfides. Flocculants are usually employed in the middling thickeners in the copper plant, and in the Cu–Mo bulk concentrate ahead of the molybdenite plant. However, the floatability of molybdenite, similarly to other naturally hydrophobic minerals, is highly sensitive to the presence of both natural and synthetic polymers. In this work flotation tests demonstrate that conventional flocculants, high-molecular weight anionic polyacrylamides (PAM), are strong molybdenite depressants. Low-molecular weight shear degraded polyacrylamides in spite of losing flocculation efficiency maintain depressing ability for molybdenite. Also a non-ionic flocculant, polyethylene oxide (PEO), has been studied in this project. Our results indicate that PEO is an efficient flocculant for molybdenite suspensions in a wide pH range. However, similarly to polyacrylamides, the PEO flocculant also depresses molybdenite flotation.Modern processing plants must have closed water circuits in which process water is recycled back after removal of solids in the solid/liquid separation unit operations. With the present trend towards higher flocculant levels in the thickening (e.g. paste technology) and filtration dewatering the likelihood of flocculants build-up in recycle streams over time is very large. The possible presence of residual flocculants or degraded derivatives in water which is recycled back to a flotation process raises the question about the effect of flocculants on flotation of Cu–Mo ores, and in particular on flotation of molybdenite which is an inherently hydrophobic mineral. These effects were studied in coal flotation, and since coal along with graphite, molybdenite and talc belongs to the same group of inherently hydrophobic solids there is a lot of to learn from these results and to apply directly to the case of molybdenite flotation. In many flotation processes, for example in rejection of pyrite from coal, rejection of talc and graphite in the flotation of sulfide ores, polymeric agents are commonly applied as depressants. At one point, dextrin was implemented at the Utah concentrator as molybdenite depressant in the selective flotation of Cu sulfides from molybdenite ( In the Cu–Mo sulfide ore processing plants, the stage of bulk flotation of copper sulfides and molybdenite (and depression of pyrite) is followed by the second stage (moly plant) which includes selective flotation of molybdenite and depression of copper sulfides. It has been a common practice that the Cu–Mo bulk concentrate is stored in thickeners in which also flocculants can be applied to increase solids content in the feed to the moly plant. In doing so it is often assumed that the use of low molecular weight flocculants minimizes flocculation and so does not affect much flotation. However, The objective of this paper is to discuss the effect of anionic polyacrylamide flocculants and their degradation products – which are polymer segments of low-molecular weight – on the floatability of molybdenite. Polyethylene oxide (PEO), a non-ionic flocculant and its ability to depress molybdenite flotation has been studied, too. Various polymers – low molecular weight dispersants/depressants and high molecular weight flocculants – are utilized in mineral processing circuits. Since they must be water soluble, these polymers are highly hydrophilic macromolecules. Common examples in the former group are dextrins, low molecular weight polyacrylates (e.g. Cataflot, Dispex, etc.), polystyrene sulfonate (PSS10 used in coal–water slurries), and in the latter group polyacrylamides are the best known. Also starch is in the group of high molecular weight polymers used as flocculants (by the way starch in combination with lime was the first flocculant patented in 1928 for the clarification of a coal’s mine effluents ( Polyacrylamides, the most common commercial flocculants, as shown in The main function of flocculants used in solid/liquid unit operations is to produce large and strong flocs. It is generally accepted that polymers used as flocculants aggregate suspensions of fine particles by a bridging mechanism. The bridging is considered to be a consequence of the adsorption of the segments of the flocculant macromolecules onto the surfaces of more than one particle. The optimum flocculation occurs at flocculant dosages corresponding to a particle coverage that is significantly less than complete. Incomplete surface coverage ensures that there is sufficient unoccupied surface available on each particle for the adsorption of segments of the flocculant chains during collision of the particles. Thus, at low polymer coverage, the adsorbed polymer can destabilize the suspension by bridging flocculation, but since these macromolecules are hydrophilic the polymer adsorbed layers cause repulsion at a high coverage (high polymer dosage). These results in stabilization of the suspension, the phenomenon referred to as steric stabilization. There are many direct contact angle measurements which show that hydrophobic solids become less hydrophobic and loose floatability in aqueous solutions of water-soluble polymers. Klassen in his monograph on coal flotation ( Polymeric substances known as humic acids often appear in process waters (obtained from lakes or rivers). These are poorly defined anionic polymers with phenolic and carboxylic groups, which were shown to affect strongly wettability of graphite ( This important aspect of coal flotation has been extensively discussed in the book by Both flocculants were found to strongly depress coal flotation: the higher the flocculant dosage, the smaller the yield of the concentrate, higher its ash content, and lower ash content in the flotation tailings. These effects begin to be visible at a dosage of 1  As a result of this type of structure the surface charge on different sides of the molybdenite crystal (faces and edges), and in general surface properties of these sides, are different. The use of electrokinetic techniques to measure zeta-potential of the particles of anisotropic minerals, the particles which carry different charges on different sides, is not based on any sound science ( Since molybdenite is recovered by flotation, its surface properties have been widely studied. In such cases, wettability studies and the use of contact angle techniques face a severe problem associated with sample preparation. For example, as reported by As In addition to the conventional contact angle measurements, In the thermodynamic criterion of flotation  As these measurements demonstrate, the effect of dextrin is quite visible even at 1 The effect of commercial flocculants on the floatability of molybdenite has been studied by In these tests a commercial molybdenite flotation concentrate was classified in a Cyclosizer and the average particle size of these size fractions was determined using a Qantachrome Microscan Particle Size Analyzer. All the size fractions were purified by treating with diethyl ether to remove any organic contamination, with sulfuric acid to remove oxide layers, and with sodium cyanide to leach out surface metallic impurities. The procedure was followed by washing with distilled water. The flotation tests were carried out in a 1.5 The results clearly demonstrate the depressing effect a polyacrylamide-type flocculant has on the flotation of molybdenite. These results also indicate that this polymer has a more pronounced effect on the flotation of fine particles. Dissolution of high molecular weight flocculants is a slow process. At the beginning, stage (a), the solid powder swells to large gel-lumps ( Another change that the polymeric flocculants in the circuits of mineral processing plants may be subjected result from shear forces (either from pumping over long distances or from the high degree of turbulence experienced during mixing). Shear degradation of polyacrylamides is well documented ( In this work aqueous solutions of polyacrylamide-type flocculant (A-110 provided by Cytec-Chile) were subjected to shear degradation under a range of high-speed stirring conditions (  On shearing, the flocculant molecular weight decreases and this reduces its effectiveness as a flocculant, but this does not reduce the depressing effect of this polymer on molybdenite flotation. This implies that molybdenite is being made hydrophilic by PAM macromolecules, and that this phenomenon does not depend much on PAM molecular weight. It is worth pointing out that as Non-ionic polyethylene oxide flocculant ( Finally, in the copper–molybdenum industry, there are two new situations where the use of polymeric flocculants may affect Mo recovery in flotation circuits: (i) the increasing use of recycled water, where residual polymer molecules can accumulate; and (ii) the need for thickening pulps or Cu–Mo bulk concentrates before transportation through ducts that may be very long (e.g. between the grinding plant and the flotation plant or between the Cu concentrator and the moly plant). The flocs are easily broken under the strong agitation inside ducts and also polymer chains break into shorter molecular size segments. However, these residual low molecular weight chains can still actively adsorb onto molybdenite particles affecting their flotation properties. This also indicates that there is no reason to expect that the use of lower molecular weight polyacrylamides in dewatering unit operations will be beneficial for flotation of molybdenite.  Depression of molybdenite by polyacrylamide and polyethylene oxide flocculants is in a good agreement with the general behavior of other anisotropic inherenty hydrophobic minerals (e.g. talc and graphite) which are commonly depressed by hydrophilic macromolecules. Polyacrylamide flocculants are strong flotation depressants of fine particles of molybdenite and this effect increases as polymer concentration is increased. Shear degraded polyacrylamide products – shorter chain segments with low molecular weight– maintain a strong depressing effect on flotation of molybdenite, particularly at acid pH that is around the zero-point of charge of molybdenite faces. No direct relationship between flocculant effectiveness and its depressing effect on molybdenite flotation exists. The products of polyacrylamide shear degradation turned out to be effective molybdenite depressants. In spite of their much lower molecular weight, which made these products to be poor flocculants, they turned out to be still efficient molybdenite depressants. The use of flocculants in the Cu–Mo flotation process (in the middling and bulk Cu–Mo concentrate thickeners) must be limited because they and their degradation products exhibit a strong depressing effect on molybdenite flotation. Residual flocculants with high and low molecular weight present in recycled mill waters may become a severe problem for molybdenite recovery in plant practice.