In order to reduce milk fouling during heat treatment, several approaches have been evaluated and one of them, the modification of the surface properties of the stainless steel used in heat exchangers, is analysed in this work. Fouling behaviour of stainless steel surfaces (2R) and modified stainless steel-based surfaces obtained by TiN sputtering was analysed. The combined effect of β-lactoglobulin and the surface energy properties of the materials on the deposition behaviour of calcium phosphate was evaluated. The experiments were performed in turbulent flow regime in a heat flow cell where the fouling thermal resistance was continuously monitored. The presence of protein was responsible for changing the overall fouling curve independently of the surface nature, as well as for the appearance of two distinct growth periods. The second growth phase occurred after different delay times depending on the roughness, surface composition and surface energy values of the deposition material. The resistance to cleaning of the different deposits was also evaluated and it was proved to be dependent on the surface energy parameters, probably as a result of the formation of different deposit structures. The main conclusion is that when protein is present, the non-modified 2R surfaces present the lowest amount of deposit, but the higher energy surfaces are the ones to retain less amount of deposit after the cleaning process.overall heat transfer coefficient (W/m fouling resistance (m total solid surface energy (mJ/m Lifshitz–van der Waals component (mJ/m acid–base component (mJ/m electron donor component (mJ/m electron acceptor component (mJ/m simulated milk ultrafiltrate modified simulated milk ultrafiltrate titanium nitride The present work is focussed on the effect of whey proteins on the fouling behaviour of calcium phosphate under turbulent flow on different stainless steel modified surfaces. The importance of this study emerges from the fact that the deposition of activated proteins and calcium phosphate are the two major mechanisms of fouling during the heat treatment of milk, which results respectively from protein denaturation and from the decrease of calcium phosphate solubilization upon heating. Calcium ions, however, not only contribute to the process through calcium salts deposition but they also influence the denaturation and aggregation of the proteins prior to deposition, following a process not yet totally understood In the initial stages of milk processing, individual whey protein molecules are adsorbed onto the stainless steel heating surface covering most of the surface with a protein monolayer, after which the deposition of aggregates formed in the bulk, both as calcium phosphate and as whey protein particles, occurs The formation of the first protein deposition layer is known to be affected by several factors, related to both the nature of the heating surface and the bulk solution properties. The influence of surface characteristics on whey protein adsorption was studied by Santos et al. In the present work, flow equipment was used to evaluate the fouling process on the different surfaces in turbulent regime. The total setup is schematically presented in In the fouling experiments, the foulant solutions were pumped through the Flow Cell to generate fouling and returned to the tank. For the cleaning experiments, a similar procedure was followed but using water instead of the solutions. The 120 The flow cell cross-section is semi-circular with a diameter of 0.03 Deposit formation on a surface can be monitored by following the overall heat transfer coefficient ( As the fouling layer builds up, the fouling resistance ( The fouling process can then be represented by the evolution of When the flow rate is kept constant along a channel, the pressure drop across the fouled section tends to increase due to the deposit’s roughness. Both the fouling deposit and the friction factor can be estimated by simultaneously monitoring the heat transfer coefficient and the pressure drop across the measurement section Fouling experiments were made using SMUF (Simulated Milk Ultra Filtrate), which is an aqueous solution that has been used to study the deposition of calcium phosphate under milk simulating conditions. It was prepared according to Jenness and Koops Stainless steel is the most used material on food treatment equipment and consequently stainless steel-based surfaces will be tested as deposition supports for both solutions. Two types of surfaces were used: (1) non-modified 316 stainless steel surfaces with bright annealing, cold rolled finish (2R) and (2) modified 316 stainless steel surfaces obtained by reactive sputtering coating with TiN. Because this is a coating technique, all the surfaces became covered by an analogous layer of TiN which differed only on the surface energy from sample to sample. The surfaces were named TiN 1, TiN 2 and TiN 3. All surfaces had 15 Before each deposition experiment, as well as before the determination of the surface energy of each sample, all stainless steel samples were cleaned with a commercial detergent (RBS35 from RBS Chemical Products) according to the following procedure: (1) samples were immersed in a 2.0% w/v detergent (RBS35) solution in distilled water at 65 Contact angle values were measured by the sessile drop method in a contact angle meter (DataPhysics OCA15 Plus, Germany) using water, formamide and α-bromonaphthalene as reference liquids. The contact angles were measured automatically using an image analyzing system. Contact angle measurements were performed on every stainless steel sample. At least 15 measurements with each liquid were performed covering the whole sample surface. The surface energy values for each surface was determined according to van Oss The last one, The deposition experiments presented in this work can be divided into two stages: (1) evaluation of the overall heat transfer coefficient with the clean surface. This stage was performed with water at the deposition conditions (same temperature, heat flux and fluid velocity) and (2) monitoring the change in the overall heat transfer coefficient during the fouling process. All experiments were carried out at a constant temperature of 50 The solutions (SMUF and MOD-SMUF) were prepared in the tank and kept at a constant temperature and agitation throughout the whole experiment. The pH of both solutions was adjusted to 6.80 (WTW inolab pH level1) in the beginning of the experiments and was allowed to vary along the experiment as a consequence of the aggregates formation and/or transformation. Along the experiment, bulk liquid samples were collected and vacuum filtered using a 0.45 The cleanability of the different deposits was also assessed. The cleaning process was accomplished with water also at 50 After the cleaning steps, the flow cell was dismantled and the samples were removed. The amount of deposit formed on each sample was determined by weighing the samples using an analytical balance (AND GR-200, AND Engineering, California, USA), before and after a mild drying process in air, in order to obtain respectively, the deposit’s wet and dry mass. The distribution of the SMUF and MOD-SMUF deposits throughout the surface and their structure were characterized by scanning electron microscopy observation (JEOL JSM6301F, Japan) and their chemical composition was assessed by X-ray microanalysis (Noran Voyager, Noran Instruments Inc., USA). All the modified surfaces tested in this work were produced by using the same technique under varying operational parameters and consequently, the different TiN sputtered surfaces had a similar morphology and surface composition (although with varying proportions of Ti and N) but different surface energy properties. These surfaces could then be distinguished and characterized based on their surface energy values, more precisely its electron donor component ( To assess the repeatability of the fouling experiments and the reliability of the measuring method, three trials (2R 1, 2R 2 and 2R 3) were performed on 2R surfaces (three samples were used in each trial). The three obtained fouling curves (each one representing the average values for the three surfaces tested in each experiment) are presented in The two different stages of the cleaning process can be easily identified on the curves since the shift to a higher flow velocity caused a significant decrease in the The dry mass and the fouling resistance of the deposits after the cleaning process are presented in The deposition behaviour of the two different foulant solutions on non-modified 2R surfaces was followed and their deposition curves are presented in When only minerals are present in solution, the fouling curve increases smoothly during the whole time period considered here. When protein is present the fouling starts to be very similar to the one of SMUF but the fouling curve seems to stabilize after approximately 10 This diversity in behaviour enhanced the interest in analysing the fouling behaviour of the MOD-SMUF solution on the different TiN surfaces in order to evaluate how the surface energy of the deposition material could affect the type of deposit build-up and its resistance to cleaning. To better understand the differences in the deposits formed for SMUF and MOD-SMUF, both of them were observed under the scanning electron microscope ( Nevertheless, X-ray microanalyses from both aggregates showed that their composition was mainly calcium phosphate of similar type. The pH and the free calcium concentration in the bulk solution were monitored during the whole duration of the experiments ( The curves are visibly different from each other indicating differences in the bulk reactions occurring in each case. In the MOD-SMUF solution, the pH suffered two big increases, the first after around 5h of deposition and the second one after approximately 15 All the surfaces were subjected to fouling experiments with MOD-SMUF solutions and the correspondent deposit formation The experiment on the surface TiN 3 is only presented until around 18h of deposition since at that time, the heating system had a failure and consequently the results after that moment could not be considered for analysis. However, until that moment the surface was presenting a satisfactory behaviour and consequently is here considered for the evaluation of the initial deposition behaviour. The fouling behaviour of MOD-SMUF on the non-modified stainless steel surface (2R) can clearly be distinguished from the one of the modified TiN surfaces. On the 2R surface, the first stabilization value was lower than the one for the TiN surfaces and the second increase in fouling occured much later, with a second stabilization value for the The first stabilization value was achieved after approximately the same time for every surface. However, the second increase in deposit started at different moments depending on the surface. That second increase should mainly be caused by calcium phosphate deposit development which was delayed because of the presence of protein (to be explained later) and it will be called throughout this paper as “delay time”. For each surface, the “delay time” was determined as being the time at which the second growth period started, as presented for the 2R and TiN 2 surfaces on The values for the “delay times” and the The “delay time” for the lower surface energy TiN 2 ( The theory proposed to explain those curves can therefore be the following: whey protein starts spreading throughout the surface, in a parallel process with calcium phosphate nucleation, forming the first detectable fouling layer (corresponding to the first stage); subsequently, on top of this layer calcium phosphate will continue to grow as can be seen in The development of the first protein layer is dependent on the properties of the surfaces since the affinity of the proteins towards them is dependent on their surface energy and consequently the available space left for the development of calcium phosphate-based deposits will also be different from surface to surface. This will affect the amount of deposit which will be formed. Similar differences on the deposits developed from protein and calcium phosphate were previously found by the authors on other modified surfaces but under laminar regime These layers will differ not only on the amount of deposit but also on the deposit structure and probably on the arrangement of the proteins (even if the global aggregates distribution seemed similar macroscopically and under small amplifications). That would explain the different effect on the retardation of the second growth period and, consequently, the dependency of the “delay time” on the surface energy. The different structures developed on each surface can therefore explain the fact that the final amount of deposit was also dependent on the surface energy parameters of the supporting material. The cleaning behaviour of the deposits on the different surfaces is presented in Both the amount of deposit remaining on each surface and the behaviour during cleaning were different depending on the surface, which indicates that deposits with different structure were in fact formed. Deposits formed on TiN 1 surfaces were more sensitive to removal since the largest part of the deposit was immediately removed at the first stage of the cleaning process. Opposed to that, the deposit developed on the lower surface energy TiN 2 showed different removal resistance: only a small part of the deposit was removed at the first stage of cleaning and only a little more mass was removed afterwards (in the second stage with higher Reynolds number). As it happened during the deposition process, the 2R surface behaved differently also in the cleaning process. In this case, hardly any deposit was removed during the whole cleaning period. The effect of the presence of whey protein (β-lg) on the fouling behaviour of calcium phosphate from a milk simulating solution was evaluated in this work, mainly considering its dependence on the surface energy of different modified surfaces used as deposition materials. The deposition curves obtained in the presence and absence of protein were considerably different and two growth periods were observed at different times when the whey protein was present. The “delay time” after which the second growth period happened was proved to be dependent on the type of surface where fouling developed on, more precisely on its roughness, surface composition and surface energy values. The most striking difference was found for the non-modified 2R surface which presented the highest “delay time” when compared to all the other TiN surfaces. Within the TiN modified surfaces, however, the “delay time” was dependent on the energy of the surface: lower surface energies showed smaller “delay times” and higher energy surfaces showed bigger “delay times”. Also dependent on the surfaces were the amounts of deposit formed in the first and the second stage of deposition. As an outcome of those different dependences, different structures were formed depending on the surface energy, resulting into different resistance to removal (cleaning) of the different deposits. Consequently, after the cleaning process the higher energy surfaces were the ones to retain less amount of deposit. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the FCT (National Science Foundation) through the PhD Grant (SFRH/BD/13180/2003).