A summary of modern techniques used to characterize particle size distribution and surface properties is presented in this book of 18 independent chapters. Emphasis is placed on application to biological and drug delivery systems. Chapters 1–6 are dedicated to different particle size analysis techniques including multi angle photon correlation spectroscopy, laser light diffraction, polarization intensity differential scattering, and confocal laser scanning microscopy. Concise treatments of the fundamental principles governing these techniques are presented along with their limitations and useful data from applications of these methods. The basic light scattering theories of Rayleigh, Mie and Fraunhofer and their applicability to particle sizing are discussed. Confocal microscopy images are presented showing localization of liposomes in human and rat cells. Chapter 7 provides an introduction to the atomic force microscope (AFM) with application to lipid nano particles. The basic theory of scanning tunnel microscope (STM) and AFM are succinctly provided and some of the different modes of AFM are explained including contact, non-contact, constant force, constant height, lateral force microscopy and force distance measurements. Imaging of a dendrite soft lipid nano particle under different operational modes by AFM illustrated the effects of the different options for running AFM. The application of FTIR to surface characterization is covered in chapter 8. The FTIR can be operated in different ways to produce useful information regarding organic functional groups located at the surface. Details on the theory and representative examples are provided for transmission spectroscopy, external reflectance, attenuated total reflection (ATR) and diffuse reflection. In chapter 9, the analytical technique of circular dichroism, and the application to dissolved and adsorbed proteins is covered. The interaction of polarized light with chiral molecules results in elliptically polarized fight and circular dichroism (CD). This technique can also be applied to adsorbed layers at the fluid interface and can yield information on molecular configuration (helical, random coil) and responses to external fields. A review of techniques used to characterize lipid particles (lipid micelles, liposomes, lipospheres, and serum lipids) is presented in chapter 10. New non-invasive probes for fluorescent spectroscopy were used consisting of 9-anthryl-vinyl labeled phospholipids and glycolipids. The new probes orient themselves with the non-polar anthracene group shielded in the middle of lipid bilayers thereby reducing interference. The interaction of lipids with proteins is discussed for the relevance of the drug carrying capability of the lipid particles. The interaction of the lipid particle and cells is also reviewed for different drug release mechanisms. In chapters 11–13 the determination of the surface area of porous solids is reviewed in the context of modern instrumentation and recent adsorption isotherm theories. The degree of surface hydrophobicity is characterized in chapter 14 by use of Rose Bengal (RB) dye by adsorption methods. The hydrophobicity of many microorganisms will have a major impact on how they react with biological systems. Increasing, the hydrophobicity of particles can lead to increased phagocytosis in the blood and rapid removal of these particles. Reducing hydrophobicity can lead to improved residence time for drug carriers and improved efficacy. Characterization of hydrophobicity is achieved by measuring the amount of the hydrophobic RB dye that adsorbs to the particle surface. The hydrophobicity of particles can also be determined using hydrophobic interaction chromatography (HIC). The fundamental theory and experimental set up required for HIC are presented in chapters 15–17. Application of HIC to functionalized polystyrene latex particles, emulsions, liposomes, and iron oxides stabilized by different macromolecules are provided. Chapter 18 covers the topic of 2-dimensional poly acrylic gel electrophoresis (2-D PAGE) for the analysis of protein adsorption on surfaces. 2-D PAGE allows the separation of proteins based on charge and on molecular weight and can be used to follow adsorption kinetics. The adsorption of proteins on surfaces has many important applications including the preparation of biomedical compatible materials and the creation of effective drug carriers. This book is recommended as an excellent source of information for modern techniques in particle and surface characterization. The experimental results are presented in a meaningful way along with relevant theoretical aspects. While the focus of the material has been on biological systems, researchers in industry and graduate school from a wide range of disciplines including chemical engineering, biomedical science, surface chemistry, polymer chemistry, mineral engineering, and material science will benefit from this book.