A series of full-scale laboratory disc cutting tests was conducted with a single disc cutter (432mm diameter and a constant cross-section profile) and a single rock type (a coarse-grained red granite). Normal, rolling, and side forces were measured for a series of spacings and penetrations, from which other cutting parameters also were calculated. Although the increases of normal and rolling forces with increased spacing and penetration are as expected, the results illuminate additional aspects of performance prediction. Specific energy (SE) considerations indicate that a spacing of 76mm is close to optimum in this hard, brittle crystalline rock. At this spacing, penetration has very little effect on SE. These results show why spacings near 76mm are commonly found on tunnel boring machines operating in hard rock. The relationship of rolling force to normal force was close and consistent: A nearly linear rise of the ratio of rolling force to normal force with increased penetration, and, conversely, a nearly unchanged ratio with increases in spacing. The results tend to validate performance prediction methodologies based on normal force-penetration models.The original purpose of the test program was to conduct a detailed investigation of the cutting forces acting on a commercial disc cutter; they are presented here for the interest of other researchers. Upon reviewing the results, issues relating to performance prediction of tunnel boring machines became apparent. Predicting tunnel boring machine (TBM) performance can be relatively straightforward when the forces required on the disc cutters to fragment the rock are known. Predicting these cutting forces, however, is not necessarily straightforward. While disc cutter geometry, disc diameter, and tip radius obviously influence the performance of a TBM, cutting forces change also in response to cutter spacing and penetration. Although the rock itself heavily influences machine performance, the layout of the disc cutters on the cutterhead is very important. To study the relationship between cutting forces and cutter layout in hard rock, a series of full-scale laboratory disc cutting tests was conducted with a single 432 Many investigators have studied the forces on TBM disc cutters in the field and in the laboratory, and cutting forces on single disc cutters in the laboratory. In conjunction with this work, theoretical and empirical models have been proposed to predict disc cutter forces. Some models were derived from first principles and others were semi-empirical relationships. The goal was always to predict machine performance by predicting cutting forces. A review of the large corpus of past work is beyond the scope of this paper, but how the results of the cutting tests affect some of these models will be discussed. For in-depth literature surveys, see Of particular interest is the reaction of cutting forces to spacing between cuts and cutter penetration into the rock, because the TBM designer can match these parameters to specific rocks. The test series was designed to study the operation of a TBM as commonly practiced in the field. As such, cut spacing, cutter penetration, and the disc cutter design were selected to duplicate common field conditions. Hardrock TBMs tend to operate at spacings of about 76 The disc cutting tests were performed on the linear cutting machine ( From the measured cutting forces, several parameters were calculated that are commonly used in performance prediction and analysis. The cutting coefficient (CC) is the ratio of the rolling force to the normal force, expressed as a percent. This is considered an indicator of the amount of torque needed for a given amount of thrust; the higher the CC, the higher the torque needed by the tunnel boring machine. It also relates the rolling force to the normal force. The specific energy (SE) is the energy required to fragment a unit volume of rock Many performance prediction methodologies focus on predicting the cutting forces In 1965, Teale The role of cut spacing in the performance model was either included with some difficulty In addition to spacing issues, the models experience difficulty modeling and predicting the rolling force. They usually predict that rolling force increases with normal force. An increase in either spacing or penetration would thus increase the normal force and the rolling force would follow. The response of rolling force itself to spacing or penetration has been difficult to address. Further, the normal force-indentation models are quasi-static, but rolling force can only be dynamic. This discussion is confined to the reaction of normal forces, rolling forces, SE, CC, and normalized resultant force (NRF) to spacing and penetration. Other measurements are presented in the Normal force increases nearly linearly with penetration depth at all three cut spacings tested ( Like the normal force, the rolling force increases linearly with penetration ( Although the reactions of the normal and rolling forces to changes in cut spacing and cutter penetration are similar, the differences suggest that different cutting mechanisms exist in the normal and rolling directions. A disc cutter penetrating fresh rock in the normal direction does not damage the rock in quite the same way as the same cutter rolling ahead into unbroken rock. Since both mechanisms occur simultaneously during actual cutting, the total cutter force response is a complex summation of the two mechanisms that is controlled by the particular combination of spacing and penetration being experienced at that instant. The normal and rolling forces respond differently at the initial point of cutter engagement with the rock surface. Very small penetrations quickly cause the normal force to rise to a high level ( TBM thrust (a function of cutter normal force) reaches a high level as soon as the cutterhead engages the rock, then increases linearly, but more slowly, with penetration depth. TBM torque (a function of cutter rolling force) is essentially zero upon rock engagement; torque at shallow penetration is low, but increases linearly with depth of penetration. In general, the rolling direction consumes almost all of the cutting energy; the cutting energy expended in the normal direction is comparatively negligible Neglecting the impractically narrow 25 The focus on penetration in past investigations Because SE defines cutting efficiency, several investigators have attempted to determine cutting regimes or combinations of spacing and penetration that lower SE. For example, Ozdemir and Miller A practical minimum SE was not observed for the three test spacings in the red granite. At the 51 and 76 As penetration increases, the CC increases almost linearly ( The CC response to spacing is very different. At low penetrations, less than 3.8 CC has use in performance prediction, as it relates the rolling force to the normal force. If the relationship is consistent, knowing a rock's CC would allow performance models to readily predict rolling force after normal force is determined. Since some investigators start by predicting normal force, a predictable CC would be a means to predict the rolling force. Rostami's pressure model The NRF trends close to 0.5 ( A penetration of 3.8 The rolling force as a function of penetration becomes clearly differentiated by cut spacing ( CC stops increasing with spacing, and begins to decrease with spacing (i.e., above this penetration an increase in spacing causes a decrease in the relative amount of rolling force) ( The NRF reaches, then remains at, about 0.5 for all further increases in penetration. This occurs for the realistic spacings of 51 to 76 SE remains relatively constant ( The simplest explanation for this phenomenon is that, at low penetrations, the cutter action is different than at higher penetrations. Perhaps this is the penetration above which more consistent chip formation occurs, a desirable outcome. The results provide some insights into performance prediction for a TBM operating in hard and brittle crystalline rock of moderate strength. It may be likely that similar results may be characteristic of stronger crystalline rock; similar results in softer sedimentary rock seem less likely. TBMs usually operate in a relatively narrow range of cutting parameters. Most hard rock machines mount 43-cm (17 If the rolling force continues the accelerating increase with spacing that these test results indicate, SE reduction will slow and perhaps reverse as spacing increases beyond 76 The close correspondence between rolling and normal forces indicated by the CC simplifies TBM performance prediction, since many investigators start by predicting normal force and must derive rolling force from it. The nearly linear rise of CC with penetration, combined with the minimal effect of spacing, seems particularly significant. This relationship should be explored further. The change of cutting regime seen in several quantities (rolling force, CC, and NRF) at 3.8 In conclusion, although normal force and cutter penetration have been modeled more effectively than rolling force and cut spacing have been, SE is more sensitive to the latter pair. TBM performance prediction will be improved by a better understanding of how rolling force and spacing contribute to the cutting of moderate-strength brittle rock by disc cutters. For complete test results, see