Recruitment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to an injury site and their differentiation into the desired cell lineage are implicated in deficient bone regeneration. To date, there is no ideal structure that provides these conditions for bone regeneration. In the current study, we aim to develop a novel scaffold that induces MSC migration towards the defect site, followed by their differentiation into an osteogenic lineage. We have fabricated a gelatin/nano-hydroxyapatite (G/nHAp) scaffold that delivered cannabidiol (CBD)-loaded poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) microspheres to critical size radial bone defects in a rat model. The fabricated scaffolds were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and then analyzed for porosity and degradation rate. The release profile of CBD from the PLGA microsphere and CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp scaffold was analyzed by fluorescence spectroscopy. We performed an in vitro assessment of the effects of CBD on cellular behaviors of viability and osteogenic differentiation. Radiological evaluation, histomorphometry, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of all defects in the scaffold and control groups were conducted following transplantation into the radial bone defects. An in vitro migration assay showed that CBD considerably increased MSCs migration. qRT-PCR results showed upregulated expression of osteogenic markers in the presence of CBD. Histological and immunohistochemical findings confirmed new bone formation and reconstruction of the defect at 4 and 12 week post-surgery (WPS) in the CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp group. Immunofluorescent analysis revealed enhanced migration of MSCs into the defect areas in the CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp group in vivo. Based on the results of the current study, we concluded that CBD improved bone healing and showed a critical role for MSC migration in the bone regeneration process.Bone healing is a complicated biological process that consists of an initial inflammatory response followed by recruitment and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) [ MSCs have the capability to differentiate into an osteoblastic cell lineage. They release cytokines which modulate the inflammatory response and induce production of various growth factors [ Stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) is a chemokine protein encoded by the C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 12 ( In the current study, we fabricated a novel scaffold to recruit MSCs into large bone defects by using CBD-loaded microspheres incorporated into an osteoconductive scaffold. Next, we analyzed the short- and long-term osteogenic activities of CBD under in vitro and in vivo conditions by real-time PCR, histopathology, histomorphometry, immunohistochemistry (IHC), and micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) scan. CBD was obtained from Tocris Company (Tocris, Bio-Techne Corporation, USA). Poly (lactic- In order to fabricate the G/nHAp scaffold, we added 0.1 g nHAp to 20 ml of 5% w/v gelatin solution. The solution was stirred for 12 h at 37 °C. The resultant gel was maintained at −20 °C for 24 h, and then freeze-dried. EDC and NHS (in a 2:1 ratio) were dissolved in acetone [90% v/v in distilled water (DW)] and then added the freeze-dried gel to chemically crosslink the scaffolds. The scaffolds were washed in DW, freeze-dried, and sterilized in 70% ethanol and UV light for subsequent experiments. We used a single emulsion (O/W) solvent evaporation method to prepare PLGA microspheres that contained CBD. Briefly, 30 mg of polymer and 3 mg of CBD were dissolved in 2 ml of DCM. This oil phase was added to 5 ml of an aqueous solution of 1% w/v PVA that contained Tween 20, and homogenized for 3 min at 7000 rpm (Heidolph Silent Crusher M, Germany) in an ice bath. The emulsion was immediately added to 100 ml of an aqueous solution of PVA (0.1% The CBD-PLGA microsphere incorporated scaffold (CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp) was prepared using a previously described post-seeding technique [ We used the liquid displacement method to evaluate porosity of the fabricated scaffolds [ Each scaffold was analyzed in triplicate. Biodegradability of the G/nHAp scaffold was determined according to a previously described protocol [ The compressive strength and modulus of the composites were measured at room temperature. We tested the specimen (cylindrical disk: 6 mm thickness × 12 mm diameter) with a universal tensile machine (Santam, IRI) at a crosshead speed of 1 mm/min with a 1000 N load cell. We used a scanning electron microscope (Crossbeam®, 1540XB by Zeiss) to examine the surface and internal 3D architecture of the fabricated scaffolds. Pore sizes were measured in a minimum of 100 pores per scaffold. We used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to determine the mean particle size and microsphere distribution on the scaffold. We prepared a suspension of microspheres with a final concentration of 1 mg/ml in phosphate buffer saline (PBS, pH 7.4), which was subsequently incubated at 37 °C under constant agitation at 50 rpm. The released medium was entirely withdrawn at pre-determined time points followed by the addition of fresh PBS. The release of CBD from the CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp scaffold was carried out by immersing the scaffolds in PBS at 37 °C. The release medium was collected at the same time points as the microspheres. The concentration of CBD in the supernatants was determined by fluorescence spectroscopy at an excitation wavelength of 280 nm and an emission wavelength of 307 nm. The release profile was determined based on the following equation: We seeded the MSCs onto the scaffolds and allowed to incubate for 21 days. Total RNAwas extracted from the cells using the RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen, 74004). cDNA was synthesized by using the Revert Aid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas, Sankt Leon-Rot, Germany, k1632) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The qRT-PCR reaction was performed with the SYBR Green Master Mix (Origene, Rockville, MD, USA) using a real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems Life Technologies, Inc., ABI StepOnePlus) and analyzed with StepOne software (Applied Biosystems, version 2.1). Relative quantification was performed by the comparative CT method (2 A total of 40 adult male Wistar rats (200–250 g) were purchased from Razi Institute, Karaj, Iran. All animals were anesthetized by intramuscular (IM) injections of ketamine hydrochloride (2 mg/kg) and Xylazine (1 mg/kg). Next, we made a bilateral 3 cm incision over the rats' forearms and, subsequently, 5 mm of the radius diaphysis was ostectomized with an electrical bone saw (Strong Co., Seoul, South Korea) under normal saline irrigation. The ulnar bones were left intact as a natural protector of the defect site. The bone defects (20 defects/group) were untreated or treated with either an autograft (CBD-free G/nHAp scaffold) or CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp in the defect areas (2 × 2 × 5 mm We performed macroscopic evaluation for the presence of regeneration of the radial bone defects in each group. The results were blindly scored, as follows: 0 (non-union defects without instability), +1 (incomplete union with presence of fibrous connective tissue within the defect), +2 (incomplete union with presence of cartilage within the defect), and + 3 (complete union with presence of the bridging bone) [ Plain lateral X-rays (35 kV, 1.5 mA for 3 s) were taken of each radial bone at 4 and 12 WPS. Each radiograph was scored according to a previously described scoring system to evaluate the healing process of the radial bone defect [ The harvested radial bone samples were assessed by a Scanco micro-CT 35 scanner (Scanco, Wangen-Brüttisellen, Switzerland) at 70 kVP, 114 μA for 800 ms. We calculated bone volume (BV), total volume (TV), and the BV/TV ratio (%) based on the data obtained from the micro-CT scans. The bone tissues from all groups were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF) solution for 48 h and then decalcified with 14% EDTA (pH 7.4) for 28 days. The decalcified bone samples were subsequently embedded in paraffin and cut into 5 μm sections. Then, they were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The histological sections were examined by a light microscope (Olympus BX51; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and Evaluated by an independent pathologist who was blinded to the study groups. IHC was performed to detect osteogenic and angiogenic differentiation of the recruited cells at the defect site (12 WPS). Histological slides were incubated with citrate buffer (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) at 60 °C for heat-induced epitope retrieval and blocked with 1% hydrogen peroxide/methanol (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) for 30 min at room temperature. Subsequently, they were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies OCN (ab13420, Abcam, MA, USA), OPN (ab8448, Abcam, MA, USA), and collagen type I (ColI, sc-59772, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA). The color reaction was developed with ready-to-use 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (Dako Liquid DAB) color solution. The slides were counterstained with hematoxylin and visualized by a light microscope (Olympus BX51; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). We evaluated the migration of MSCs into the defect area. We did Immunofluorescence labeling of the bone sections (1 WPS) overnight at 4 °C with rat CD90 (ab225, Abcam) and CD29 (NBP2-16974, Novus Biologicals, San Diego, CA, USA) antibodies. After 3 washes with PBS, the sections were incubated with donkey anti-mouse AlexaFluor 488 (Abcam) and goat anti-mouse FITC (Abcam) secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. The labeled sections were then washed and mounted with 100 mM glycine in PBS. The sections were imaged on a fluorescence microscope (Olympus BX51; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The quantitative data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with subsequent Tukey post-hoc tests. Non-parametric ANOVA and the Kruskal-Wallis test were used for statistical analysis of the qualitative data obtained from the scored values. If the differences were significant ( SEM micrographs of the CBD-free G/nHAp revealed proper interconnectivity and large-sized pores in all fabricated scaffolds ( The presence of CBD in the PLGA microspheres was confirmed by fluorescence microscopy (Fig. S2). The PLGA microspheres did not emit fluorescence; however, the CBD-PLGA had a sharp fluorescence intensity. We immersed the G/nHAp scaffold in SBF solution at different time points to evaluate the biodegradation rates as percent of scaffold ( Fig. S4 shows the mechanical strength of the fabricated scaffolds. The compressive modulus results for the scaffolds were: 1.98 ± 0.06 (CBD-free G/nHAp) and 2.17 ± 0.48 (CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp). Isolated cells were characterized to cofirm their mesenchymal phentotype (Fig. S5). We conducted the MTT assay at 1, 3, and 7 days to confirm MSC viability in the presence of different concentrations of CBD (Fig. S6). Based on the MTT results, we did not find any changes in cell viability in the presence of different concentrations of CBD.  We used RT-PCR analysis to assess the level of osteogenic-related genes expressed by the MSCs seeded onto the fabricated scaffolds (CBD-free G/nHAp, CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp) after 21 days ( We evaluated gross views of the harvested radial bones after 4 and 12 WPS (  We conducted micro-CT scans to characterize the newly-formed tissues in the 3D images at 12 WPS ( Histological analysis of the radial bones from the experimental groups was performed at 4 (  We conducted IHC analysis to evaluate Col I, OCN, and OPN osteogenic related markers ( Table S2 lists the parameters of ultimate load (N), stress (N/mm Cannabinoids supposedly possess healing properties that are mediated through recruitment of regenerative cells into injury sites [ Analysis of physical properties of fabricated scaffolds revealed that incorporation of CBD-PLGA in G/nHAp scaffold led to a slight change in the scaffold microstructure (i.e. porosity and pore size) which was not statistically significant. Similarly, a comparison of CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp and G/nHAp scaffolds confirmed the comparable mechanical strength in the CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp scaffold according to the compressive stress-strain curve. Here, we used post-seeding method for incorporation of CBD-PLGA into G-nHAp Scaffold. Accordingly, we expect to see no significant changes in the mechanical and structural properties of G-nHAp scaffold by using this method. These findings are in agreement with Zhang et al. study that represented incorporation of BMP2-loaded PLGA microspheres into the porous nanofibrous scaffold via post-seeding technique did not change the mechanical properties of original scaffold [ The in vitro release profile of CBD showed that incorporation of CBD-PLGA into the G/nHAp scaffold decreased CBD release over 25 days. Therefore, we assumed that incorporation of CBD-PLGA into the G/nHAp scaffold controlled the CBD release in a sustainable manner. We assessed CBD biocompatibility under in vitro conditions. Based on the MTT results, different concentrations of CBD caused no significant changes in cell viability. A previous study reported that concentrations of 9 μM and greater of CBD caused significant increase in cell viability relative to the control [ The impact of CBD on osteogenic differentiation of MSCs was also investigated in vitro. In the current study, qRT-PCR analysis of three osteogenic markers indicated that the 21 day culture of MSCs on CBD-free G/nHAp and CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp scaffolds increased osteogenic activity of MSCs. Our findings agreed with previous studies that assessed CBD osteogenic activity [ Our histopathological and histomorphometric findings combined with imaging techniques (micro-CT and radiology) showed a specific CBD-induced enhancement in new bone formation via sustained release of CBD. The CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp treated group significantly improved bone healing compared to the CBD-free G/nHAp group. In our study, the bone healing process occurred through endochondral ossification, which was mainly related to the regenerative effect of CBD. An in vivo experimental study evaluated the effect of Our findings showed a significantly increased BV density (BV/TV) in the defect area of the CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp scaffold compared to the CBD-free G/nHAp scaffold and untreated defects. In contrast, another study reported that CBD affected the material properties of the newly formed bone bridge based on the absence of significant differences between the CBD-treated and control animals in terms of bone mineral density [ The biomechanical results also showed that controlled release of CBD significantly improved the biomechanical properties of the healed bone compared to the control group. Migration of numerous MSCs and their differentiation into the osteoblastic lineage due to CBD resulted in enhanced new bone formation and improved biomechanical properties of the defect area in this group. Another factor that might affect bone mechanical properties is the quality of the collagenous matrix. It has been shown that CBD increased expression of PLOD1, which indirectly increased the collagen crosslink ratio [ Overall, the present study showed that CBD was an effective small molecule for stimulation of MSCs migration and their differentiation into osteogenic lineages, which rendered the osteoinductivity for osteoconductive (e.g., G/nHAp) scaffolds. Controlled delivery of CBD could be utilized in the future in commercial bone tissue scaffolds to increase bone healing, particularly in critical-sized bone defects. Further investigations would be required to examine the optimal CBD concentration in a controlled delivery system for bone regeneration. We developed and evaluated of a novel scaffold for healing of large bone defects. The results indicated that this scaffold was reliable and had acceptable therapeutic efficacy. We observed migration of the BM-MSCs towards the injury site and their differentiation into osteoblasts, which indicated an appropriate biocompatibility and osteoinductivity of the fabricated scaffold. Controlled-release of CBD enhanced MSC recruitment and bone reconstruction, which were confirmed by various analyses. Based upon the in vitro and in vivo results, the CBD-PLGA-G/nHAp scaffold could be introduced as a promising alternative to conventional treatments. The results of the present study provided first-time in vivo evidence for induction of MSCs recruitment and their osteogenic differentiation by controlled local delivery of CBD. This work was supported by the Veterinary School of Medicine, The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at