Treatment with bisphosphonates can bring significant improvements when added to the traditional management of osteogenesis imperfecta by physiotherapy, rehabilitation and orthopedic surgery. Benefits include decreased pain, lower fracture incidence, and better mobility. Among the various bisphosphonates, intravenous pamidronate has been studied in most detail. It appears that oral bisphosphonates are less effective than intravenous pamidronate. As the effect of bisphosphonates on the skeleton is largest during growth, it appears logical to start bisphosphonate therapy as early as possible. Apart from pamidronate, a number of studies have evaluated the effect of other intravenously administered bisphosphonates, such as neridronate, ibandronate and zoledronate. As there are persistent uncertainties regarding the long-term treatment effects, bisphosphonates should be reserved for patients who have significant clinical involvement, such as vertebral compression fractures or long bone deformities. Medical therapies other than bisphosphonates, such as growth hormone and parathyroid hormone, play a minor role at present. Newer approaches based on antibodies against regulators of bone cell activity appear promising. Bisphosphonate therapy has been used widely for over 15 years in children with moderate to severe OI and is now considered the standard of care. More than a dozen bisphosphonates have been used in humans. The hypothesis initially underlying the use of an anti-osteoclast medication in an osteoblast disorder such as OI was that a decrease in the activity of the bone resorbing system might compensate for the weakness of the bone forming cells. The use of these drugs in OI and other pediatric disorders became widespread after the 1998 publication of a series of children and adolescents with OI who had been treated with cyclical intravenous pamidronate. Although the quality of the new bone that is formed remains unchanged, the bones benefit from greater mechanical strength due to overall increased bone mass. Traditionally intravenous pamidronate has been used in children. There is less information on intravenously administered bisphosphonates other than pamidronate. Cyclical intravenous pamidronate is currently the most widely used medical therapy for children with moderate to severe OI. Pamidronate is often given in cycles of 3 days. Bone resorption decreases immediately following the first infusion of pamidronate, and the level of Fracture rates in treated children can be difficult to assess as with increased mobility there may be a transient increase in fractures. However, a decrease in overall fracture rate has been demonstrated after therapy when compared to historical controls. Patients with OI types I, III and IV showed a significant improvement in height Z-scores after 4 years of pamidronate therapy. Muscle force measured by maximal isometric grip force of the non-dominant hand showed significant increases with pamidronate therapy that was maintained over 2 years. The effects of bisphosphonates seem to be amplified by the growth process, but do not appear to vary much with OI type. Even though OI types I, III and IV constitute the large majority of patients studied until now, responses to pamidronate treatment were observed also in OI types V to VII, even though fracture incidence remained relatively high in OI type VI. The greatest treatment effect is realized in the first 2 years with benefits in terms of density and possibly fracture reduction being maintained but not showing the same degree of improvement thereafter. A controlled trial on prepubertal OI patients who received intravenous neridronate, a bisphosphonate similar to pamidronate, yielded results that were comparable to those observed with pamidronate. Zoledronic acid is a bisphosphonate which has recently been the subject of an international multi-center drug trial comparing its efficacy and safety to that of pamidronate. The results of this trial have not yet been published. However, because zoledronic acid is an infusion given over 45 minutes for 1 day, its advantage in terms of duration of treatment may result in zoledronic acid becoming the bisphosphonate of choice. Some observational studies have found that intravenous zoledronic acid is an effective mode of treatment in children with OI. Oral medication has obvious practical advantages over intravenous infusions, at least in patients who are In a number of observational case series beneficial effects of oral alendronate treatment on bone density and fracture rates were reported. A double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 139 children and adolescents found that 2 years of oral alendronate significantly decreased bone turnover, increased spine bone mineral density and was generally well tolerated. In a study on children and adolescents with mild OI, oral risedronate treatment resulted in an increase in lumbar spine areal bone mineral density, but skeletal effects were weaker than those commonly observed with intravenous pamidronate treatment. Despite the many reports on positive bisphosphonate treatment effects, there still remain concerns about the effects of long-term treatment in growing children. The documented side effects associated with bisphosphonate treatment can be classified into acute and long-term adverse events. There is ample documentation of the acute phase reaction in children receiving the initial intravenous dose of bisphosphonate; this has been shown with pamidronate and zoledronic acid. The potent anti-resorptive properties of bisphosphonates inhibit the normal remodeling activity that acts to renew and repair bone. On the bone histological level, bisphosphonate treatment may lead to the appearance of unusually large osteoclasts. Bisphosphonate treatment during early childhood may delay tooth eruption. Although there is no evidence of delay in fracture healing, there is significant delay in the healing of osteotomy sites after surgery for intramedullary rod insertion and correction of deformities. Bisphosphonates are buried in the skeleton where they have a half-life of many years, so long-term side effects may still surface. Growth hormone has long been proposed as a possible treatment for OI. Parathyroid hormone is a potent bone anabolic agent and has been shown to reduce the fracture incidence in postmenopausal osteoporosis. Inhibitors of receptor activator of nuclear factor κB-ligand, a key molecule in osteoclastogenesis, and sclerostin inhibitors, an anabolic approach that neutralizes an inhibitor of bone formation and does not affect bone resorption, are new drugs that are currently undergoing clinical trials for the treatment of osteoporosis with promising preliminary results that can be applicable to the treatment of OI children in the near future. OI murine models are currently used to investigate gene and cell therapies with the aim of either replacing or silencing the mutant allele, thus transforming biochemically a severe form of OI into a mild form. OI patients require a multi-disciplinary treatment approach. Bisphosphonates can be useful to support other treatment modalities and are indicated in moderate to severe OI. Intravenous bisphosphonates are more effective than oral bisphosphonates. Intravenous bisphosphonates are