The influence of fine particles on the flotation separation of minerals is becoming increasingly important as new, fine grained deposits are exploited. Fine particles float poorly and less selectively under normal flotation conditions, having detrimental effects on recovery of other minerals. The reasons of this interacting effect are complex, which may be entrainment, pH variation, dissolved ions from mineral surfaces, aggregation/dispersion and coating behavior of particles or even the competitive adsorption effect. In this study, the influence of fine magnesite and dolomite on the flotation of quartz was investigated. It was found that at pH=9.2–9.5 and with DDA dosage of 8.6×10−4, the recovery of coarse (−100+65μm) quartz was reduced dramatically from 96.66% to 37.15% when the content of quartz was 5% in the flotation with fine (−5μm) magnesite, and when the content of fine dolomite was increased from 2.5% to 20%, the recovery of coarse quartz was reduced from 91.20% to 75.08%. To examine the reasons, zeta potential, zero point of charge and contact angles of magnesite, dolomite and quartz were measured in the absence and presence of dodecylamine (DDA). The interaction energies between particles were then calculated. Results showed that the aggregation behavior of mineral particles was likely to be the reason. Interaction energy calculated based on Extended-DLVO (Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek) theory predicted that in DDA surfactant solution, the interaction forces between magnesite and quartz, dolomite and quartz were attractive, between dolomite and magnesite was repulsive. The experimental results are in excellent agreement with the theoretically predicted results. The aggregation caused by interacting behavior explains the depressing effect of fine hydrophilic particles on magnesite reverse flotation.Hamaker constant (J) Effective hamaker constant of materials 1, 2 in medium 3 (J) Concentration (mol Electronic charge, 1.602 Minimum separation distance between two spheres (m) Liquid materials Avogadro number, 6.023 Boltzmann's constant, 1.3806 Parameter in Radius of particles 1 and 2 (m) Solid materials Temperature (K) Interaction energy due to Van der Waals forces (J) Interaction energy due to electrical double layer effects (J) Interaction energy due to hydration/hydrophobic effects (J) The acid-base free energy per unit area (J) Total interaction energy by DLVO theory (J) Total interaction energy by EDLVO theory (J) Valence The parameter of apolar (Lifshitz–van der Waals) component of surface tension of compound The parameter of polar component of the surface tension of compound The parameter of polar component of the surface tension of compound Contact angle Permittivity of free space, 8.854 Relative permittivity (for water Wavelength of intrinsic oscillations of atoms (m; Debye–Hückel parameter (m Zeta potential of particles 1 and 2 (V) Magnesite is the most important raw material utilized in the refractories industry for the manufacturing of basic refractories, having a high corrosion resistance in the presence of basic slags, dusts and fumes ( However, the influence of fine particles on the flotation separation of minerals is becoming increasingly important as new, fine grained deposits are exploited. Fine particles float poorly and less selectively under normal flotation conditions, having detrimental effects on recovery of other minerals. During flotation process, selectivity problem arises between magnesite and associated gangue minerals.   The surface hydrophobicity of magnesite and dolomite minerals was investigated by Nermin In the abovementioned research the positive interactive effect between mineral particles was utilized. However, the negative depressing effect has also influences on the flotation process and strongly decreased the efficiency of minerals processing. In this study, the negative interactive effect between mineral particles and its mechanism has been discussed. The micro-flotation tests of single mineral and artificial mixtures were conducted and analyzed with the theoretical predictions by Extended-DLVO theory base on Van Oss’s interaction energy calculation. Electrokinetic potential, zero point of charge and contact angles of pure magnesite, dolomite and quartz with and without surfactant Dodecylamine (DDA) were determined, in order to examine the particle interaction energy and its mechanisms in magnesite–dolomite–quartz cationic reverse flotation. The pure magnesite (MgCO In Eq. The minerals were stored in a desiccator with nitrogen atmosphere. The results of chemical analysis of the samples are listed in Single mineral and artificial minerals flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine, the procedure is shown in In order to measure the zeta-potential of magnesite, dolomite and quartz experiments were carried out using the micro-electrophoresis method. Electrophoretic mobility of dolomite, magnesite and quartz particles was measured with a Nano-ZS90 Micro-Electrophoresis Apparatus. 1.5 Magnesite, dolomite and quartz samples of high purity were used in this study. The high grade lump magnesite, dolomite and quartz ore was cut into slices about 20 The objective of this study was to investigate the interaction of fine magnesite/dolomite and quartz particles in the flotation process. The single mineral floatability of magnesite, dolomite and quartz with surfactant DDA acetic, and the influence of pH on their flotation were investigated at first. The single mineral flotation recovery of magnesite, dolomite and quartz with different DDA acetic dosage are shown in To avoid competitive adsorption, an adequate dosage of DDA 8.6 In the flotation of artificial mixture of fine dolomite and coarse quartz, similar results were presented in It can be concluded from the results above that the recovery of minerals can be influenced in the presence of other fine mineral particles in some condition. However the mechanism could be very complex because it is usually a combination of many causes, which includes the pH vibration, dissolved ions from mineral surface as well as entrainment effect ( The zeta potential of magnesite, dolomite and quartz in the absence and presence of DDA is given in In practice, the conditions under which contact angles are measured are far from ideal to meet the requirements of the Young's equation, which needs the solid surfaces to be chemically homogenous, smooth, flat, non-porous, insoluble, non-deformable and non-reactive quality ( The measured receding contact angle values at the magnesite, dolomite and quartz surfaces in distilled water and glycerin in the absence and presence of surfactant DDA are given in According to Van Oss et al.( Because most oxidized minerals have mono-polar surface, for which, Thus, by contact angle ( Hamaker constant can be determined by  The classical DLVO theory is a quantitative theory of the stability to aggregation or dispersions of charged colloidal particles, which was developed and published independently by Derjaguin and Landau in Russia in 1941, and by The classical DLVO theory only considering the electrostatic and van der Waals interaction fails when the surfaces are very hydrophilic or very hydrophobic, for which the contact angle of water is less than 15° (hydration forces) or greater than 64° (hydrophobic forces) ( In extended DLVO theory, the total interaction energy includes the following components: Van der Waals interaction, Electrical (Coulombic) interactions under constant potential, Hydrophobic or hydration interaction, The magnitude of the above interaction energies is calculated according to the following expressions. Van der Waals interaction, Based on Eqs. Electrical (Coulombic) interactions under constant potential, Based on Eqs. Polar interfacial interaction ( To calculate Based on Eqs. Based on Eqs. From the abovementioned, a proof for the depressing effect of fine hydrophilic particle on hydrophobic minerals together with the insight for its mechanisms has been provided. Some important original data including zeta-potential, contact angle and surface tension of magnesite, dolomite and quartz were provided in the presence and absence of DDA in this study, which can be referred by further research. The experiment results showed that at pH In addition to the traditional recognition that the recovery of minerals is determined by adsorption of collectors on minerals, the interacting effect between mineral particles should be paid attention. The depressing effect by fine hydrophilic mineral particles suggests effective dispersing methods to be invented to diminish the coating for more effective flotation in future research. It is interesting to note that the interfacial interaction energy determining the aggregating behavior was theoretically calculated and analyzed, having good agreements with the experimental results. Considering the components of interaction energy, some clues to dispersing measurements can be derived, including modification of surface potential, wettability and surface tension by controlling pH or adding dispersants, however the measure should be investigated case by case. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the