When it comes to biological samples, trace element (TE) determination has to cope with very low concentrations, sometimes even below the minimum detectable limit (MDL). This is why special sample preparation procedures have to be employed so that the TE concentration in the specimen is effectively enhanced in a known way. The aim of this study was the selection of a proper sample preparation procedure by determination of selected element concentrations in different types of biological samples. In this work several sample preparation procedures were applied in order to choose the best one for specific experimental needs. The methods included: (a) tissue sectioning method (if appropriate); (b) dry method without chemical treatment — the samples were dried, homogenized and pressed into pellet; (c) wet method with chemical treatment — the samples were mineralized. The analyses were performed with different analytical methods in order to confirm the results obtained and in order to determine the influence of target preparation procedure on the level of elemental concentrations determination. The measurements were done by means of SRIXE (synchrotron radiation induced X-ray emission), EDXRF (energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence), TR-XRF (total reflection X-ray fluorescence), and PIXE (proton-induced X-ray emission). The above methods are described and the analytical results discussed. The results of the elemental analyses performed with different techniques show a good agreement only for some elements. The mineralization process increases the sensitivity of elemental determination only for selected elements. In other cases one could observe decreasing of elemental concentration in respect to non mineralized samples. Selection of sample preparation procedure depends on analytical requirements.Trace elements (TE) play important role in all bio-medical systems. They take part in all metabolic processes, being components of different enzymes catalyzing chemical interactions in living cells Blood, kidney tissues, prostate tissues, and muscle samples were used in this investigation. In addition the IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency) standards were analyzed by following different preparation procedures Blood samples, preserved with a small amount of heparin, were obtained from the city butchers’ factory. Each sample was distributed into 100 tubes, each containing about 5 ml of blood. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 2000 rpm in order to separate erythrocytes and lymphocytes. The lymphocyte liquid from each tube was transferred onto a pre-weighed glass-dish, so as to enable the control of the sample mass. The samples were subsequently divided into two parts and dried with two different methods. The first part was kept at 50°C in a dryer for 10 h and then weighed. The second part was dried directly in a heater-equipped balance. The balance was connected to a PC that recorded the readouts of the weight. The temperature was also set to 50°C. The weight of the sample was recorded every 20 s until dry mass was achieved. The samples were assumed dry when the computer read the same mass three times in sequence. Dried samples were ground in a Fritsch agate mortar type 07.302 for about 10 min. When the fine powder was obtained, about 250 mg of each sample were pressed into 1-mm thick and 13-mm diameter pellets under a pressure of 1.5 MPa. Then the pellets were stuck to a scotch tape mounted on aluminum frames for later PIXE analyses. Blood samples were also analyzed in their original liquid state. In this case, 1 ml of blood sample was mixed with 1 ml of yttrium nitrate (Y(NO Kidney and prostate tissues were obtained from patients operated at the City Hospital in Cracow due to cancer. The samples were put in liquid nitrogen, immediately after removal from the patient. The frozen pieces of the samples were cut into 10–20-μm thick sections on a cryo-microtome and then placed on a 3-μm thick Mylar foil. The adjacent sections were put on a microscopic glass for histopathological examination. Then some of the cancerous and non-cancerous parts of the tissues were dried and pelletized in a similar way as described for blood. Commercial pork meat and fish served as muscle samples in this study. Commercial meat and fish as well as IAEA standards (MA-A-2 and MA-M-2/TM) were prepared in different ways. The samples were divided into two parts. Those from the first part were prepared as pellets following the procedure described above. The samples from the second part followed a wet procedure. The essential part of the wet procedure was mineralization. A Kjeldahl flask with reflux condenser was used for mineralization of the muscle samples. The mineralization procedure was based on the IAEA procedure TE measurements were performed on mineralized solution whose drops had been placed on quartz carrier (for TR-XRF) and on Millipore™ filters (for XRF and PIXE). The SRIXE measurements were done at the National Synchrotron Light Source in Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA, on the X26A beam line. The beam line was equipped with an XYZ stepper-motor-driven stage and samples were placed at 135° to the incident beam. During the measurements the samples were viewed through a TV camera attached to the microscope. Such an arrangement allowed proper selection of sample areas for two-dimensional (2D) scans. The samples were kept in natural atmosphere. The acquisition time was 300 s for single point analysis on the pellets and 5–10 s/pixel for 2D scans taken on tissue sections. All X-ray spectra were collected by a 5-mm thick Si(Li) detector with the energy resolution of 140 eV for 5.9-keV X-rays. In the case of single point analysis the beam size was 100×100 μm, while for 2D mapping the beam was cut down to 15×15 μm. The XRF and TR-XRF measurements were done in the International Atomic Energy Agency’s Laboratories in Seibersdorf, Austria. The experimental setup of XRF measurements consisted of a typical Mo X-ray tube operated at 50 kV and 20 mA, Si(Li) detector and secondary target excitation to allow the measurements with monoenergetic beam of primary X-rays. The TRXRF spectrometer was additionally equipped with perfectly flat and smooth surface cut-off quartz reflector (100×30×10 mm) that was used as a low energy pass filter. By changing the angle between the reflector and the incident X-ray beam, the cut-off energy could be controlled. A drop of a liquid sample (5±0.2 μl of dissolved sample) was put on the quartz carrier and dried under an infrared lamp. The plate was then placed almost parallel to the incident X-rays. Then the XRF and TR-XRF spectra were taken for 500 s live time. The PIXE measurements were performed at the Henryk Niewodniczanski Institute of Nuclear Physics in Cracow, Poland. The 2.5-MeV proton beam was delivered from the Van de Graaff accelerator. The beam passed through a thin aluminum foil that separated the highly evacuated proton guide from the analytical chamber. The backscattered protons were used for normalization of the characteristic X-ray spectra. The spectra were detected with a Si(Li) detector of energy resolution of 160 eV for 5.9-keV X-rays. All the spectra (characteristic X-rays and particle spectra) were registered with multi-channel buffer of Ortec series 919. The elemental concentrations, for all methods, were calculated with the use of external standards for solid samples. The IAEA standards such as: A-13 (animal blood), MA-A-2 (fish homogenate), MA-M-2 (animal mussels), and H-8 (horse kidney) were applied. For liquid samples the internal standard technique was applied. In this case both yttrium for PIXE and gallium for TR-XRF measurements were used.  The histogram in Cancerous and non-cancerous parts of kidney and prostate tissues were analyzed as pellets with the SRIXE method. The micro-beam system applied enabled the analysis of two-dimensional elemental distribution within tissue sections. An example of iron distribution in prostate tissue is shown in The third set of samples used for this study (muscles) was studied with different sample preparation procedures and different analyses. As shown in SRIXE technique is very powerful for trace element analysis. Since synchrotron delivers beam of high flux and brightness it seems that no pre-concentration procedure for samples is required for trace element analysis. While analyzing kidney and prostate tissue sections special attention was paid to iron and cadmium concentrations since iron plays an important role in all metabolic processes and cadmium is recognized as a toxic element. The results obtained in this study confirm the findings of the others The wet technique of sample preparation cannot be applied for analysis of all elements. Some of them such as K and Ca cannot be determined in suspension left on the filter because those elements do not form complexes with APDC. Calcium could be determined by treating the sample solution with (NH The TR-XRF technique is very sensitive and it allows to analyze a wide spectrum of elements but the disadvantage of this method is sample destruction. The same disadvantage is found in the wet technique with APDC. In addition the wet technique with APDC does not allow to analyze sulfur. However, this technique is important since it enables the analysis of elemental concentrations for the metals of III analytical group that exist at low concentration levels in the sample. The results obtained indicate that in the case of biological samples, one has to use different sample preparation procedures as well as different analytical methods in order to obtain reliable results for TE concentration. The authors wish to thank the X26a beam line team at the NSLS for their assistance during the SRIXE measurements. Special thanks are given to Dr. Andrzej Markowicz from International Atomic Energy Agency’s Laboratories in Seibersdorf and his co-workers for their help in XFR and TR-XRF measurements and for work put into the sample preparation procedure at Seibersdorf. All comments on the manuscript made by Dr. Wojciech Zaja̧c are highly appreciated. This work has been supported by State Committee for Scientific Research (KBN), Poland, Grant No. 8 T11E 017 16 and the National Synchrotron Light Source, USA, General User Grant No. 3680.