An innovative powder metallurgy based technique has been investigated to fabricate multilayer tapes having configurations Ni/Ni–5at.% W and Ni/Ni–5at.% W/Ni for use as mechanically strong and textured substrates for coated superconductor applications. Development of cube texture ({001}〈100〉) following heavy cold rolling (∼95%) and annealing has been studied in the Ni side(s) of these multilayer tapes and this has been compared to a monolithic Ni tape. The deformation textures in the Ni side(s) of the tapes are found to be quite similar to that of monolithic Ni strained to similar level of deformation. However, the cube texture upon annealing has been found to be significantly stronger in the Ni side(s) of the multilayer tapes as compared to the monolithic Ni tape after different annealing treatments. Cross-sectional EDS analyses in form of X-ray area mapping of the multilayer tapes reveal significant diffusion of W from the alloy side to the Ni side(s). All these facts amply demonstrate the beneficial role of the alloying element W on the development of cube texture in Ni. Finally, the mechanical properties of the multilayer tapes have been evaluated to ascertain their suitability in the actual application scenario.The rolling assisted biaxially textured substrates (RABiTS™) method developed at ORNL, USA is a very promising route for making highly cube textured ({0 Pure Ni received the initial attention for use as a substrate material due to the possibility of developing a sharp cube texture after heavy cold rolling and annealing However, the addition of alloying elements and impurities in general are considered detrimental to the development of sharp cube texture. Therefore, the choice of alloying elements should be such that they do not impair the possibility of developing a sharp cube texture in the substrate. Ni base alloys such as Ni–W and Ni–Mo have previously been suggested which can develop sharp cube texture after cold deformation and annealing and these alloys also have sufficient mechanical strength at the deposition temperatures of the buffer and superconducting layers A novel approach to improve the sharpness of cube texture and mechanical strength simultaneously is to design substrates with laminated or multilayer architecture. The advantage of this approach is that the different constituent layers can serve different purposes. Recently, tapes with such multilayer architecture have been reported with sharp cube texture intensity, good oxidation resistance and mechanical strength In contrast, the current work explores the possibility of employing an innovative powder metallurgy based technique to prepare multilayer substrates having configurations Ni/Ni–5 Elemental powders of Ni and (∼99.99% purity), W (∼99.6% purity) were used as the starting materials. The important characteristics of the powders have been given elsewhere Microtextures and bulk textures of the samples were measured on the Ni side(s) only as this would only act as the template for the epitaxial growth of the buffer and superconducting layers. The bulk textures of the samples were measured with a Siemens D5000 texture goniometer using Co Kα (    In all cases, the interface(s) between the constituent layers are very sharp and continuous as may be clearly seen from these microstructures indicating that during the deformation process the individual layers have maintained their identity. Evidently, excellent bond strength between the constituent layers is achieved after sintering and delamination of the layers does not occur. The deformation textures measured on the Ni side(s) of the multilayer tapes in all cases are found to be quite similar to the deformation texture that of a stand-alone monolithic pure Ni tape (prepared using the same Ni powder and strained to similar level of deformation by cold rolling) showing typical pure metal or ‘Cu type’ deformation texture  The (1 In order to have a clearer idea of the development of cube texture and the grain boundary character distributions in all the annealed materials, each of them was subjected to a thorough EBSD study. The volume fractions of the cube component and its twin ({2  Similar crystal orientation maps from the Ni side of the tri-layer tapes in the three annealed states have been shown in However, the most striking point is the enhancement of cube texture on the Ni side(s) of these multilayer tapes as compared to a similarly deformed and recrystallized monolithic pure Ni tape prepared from the same Ni powder. Earlier studies on the development of deformation and recrystallization textures on pure Ni and Ni–5 Coming back to the present situation, the cross-sectional EDS analyses in form of X-ray area mapping of the double as well as triple layer compacts in the sintered condition clearly reveal the diffusion of W from the alloy side to pure Ni side(s) (see Apart from the requirement of sharp cube texture another important consideration is the mechanical strength of the substrate materials. Thus, room temperature tensile properties of the annealed multilayer tapes were determined and compared to a monolithic Ni tape with similar average grain size. The possibility of development of sharp cube texture and improved mechanical properties of these tapes opens up new opportunities for preparing multilayer substrate tapes through this simple powder metallurgy based technique investigated in the current study. One such possibility could be using an outer layer(s) more rich in W content (e.g. a Ni–5  A simple powder metallurgy based technique has been developed which can successfully be employed to fabricate multilayer tapes for use as substrate for coated superconductor applications. The cube texture in the Ni layer(s) of the multilayer tapes is found to be much stronger than monolithic pure Ni tapes although the deformation texture appears to be similar. The cross-sectional EDS analyses in form of X-ray area mapping of the as-sintered compacts reveal considerable diffusion of W from the alloy side to the Ni side(s) which elucidates the beneficial role of W in enhancing the cube volume fraction in Ni, amply corroborating the earlier observation by the present authors. The yield strength of the derived tapes shows significant improvement as compared to monolithic pure Ni tape although the tensile elongation drops. The authors are grateful to Professor Francis Wagner, Director, LETAM, University of Metz, France, for kindly providing laboratory facilities for the bulk texture measurement of a number of samples.