Sub-micrometer Tb-doped Y2O3 luminescent powders were prepared from nitrate precursors using the polyol method. Just after precipitation, the powders consist of agglomerates with a spherical shape and a size ranging between 400 and 500nm. Each agglomerate is composed of ultra-small crystallites (from 3 to 6nm) of a bcc oxide phase whose luminescence presents original features in comparison with bulk materials. Powders were further calcinated at different temperatures and for annealing below 900°C, highly crystalline samples with the classical green 5D4→7F5 luminescent transitions of Tb3+ ions are obtained. For optimized annealing temperatures, sintering between the agglomerates is avoided and a sub-micrometric powder with a narrow size distribution and a high luminescence is obtained.The remarkable properties of lanthanide ions render them extremely interesting in a large number of applications as varied as fluorescent lighting, color television, computer monitors, X-ray imaging, or amplifiers for fiber-optics communications The polyol method is based on the direct precipitation in a high boiling alcohol, here the diethylene glycol (DEG). It has been successfully used to prepare a large variety of materials including oxides Stoichiometric mixtures of Y(NO At the end of the annealing, water was completely removed in order to avoid further transformation to hydroxide of the oxide formed. The size of the agglomerates can be varied in a broad range going from 20 The reaction yield is almost 100%. It is significantly higher than that obtained when starting from chlorides which is around 30%. It is then possible to avoid the operation of dialysis indispensable to achieve the purification of the colloids obtained with the use of chlorides. Direct measurements of the size distribution of the aggregates suspended in the polyol medium were obtained by Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (PCS) using a Zetasizer 3000 HS. For all samples, the crystalline structures of the powders were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a SIEMENS D-5000 diffractometer with the Cu High-resolution transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) was performed using a JEOL 2010 microscope operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 Thermogravimetric analysis experiments (TGA) have been perfomed in a SETARAM Tag 24 balance upon ≈20 Optical spectra were obtained using a 450 SEM observations show that the powder obtained after precipitation consists of large aggregates (>10 The powder obtained just after synthesis is crystalline as inferred from the (222) planes visible on the MET micrograph, the electron diffraction patterns recorded on some fragments of the grains and the X-ray diffraction diagram recorded on the powder ( We already mentioned the necessity of thermal annealing for elimination of the alcohol and optimization of the optical properties. For annealing under air below 1000 The evolution with annealing of the structure and of the morphology of the agglomerates has been followed by X-ray diffraction ( With increasing the annealing temperature the diffraction patterns become progressively narrower which corresponds to a simultaneous increase of the crystallite size and to a decrease of the defect content. Size and defect content are given in The morphology of the agglomerates was also followed by laser measurements with the aim to characterize their intra- and inter-sintering. Intra-sintering can be evidenced by a size decrease of the agglomerates, inter-sintering by an increase. For this purpose, the powders annealed were re-dispersed in three different solvents, DEG, water and ethanol by ultra sonication for 15  Above 500 With the objective of determining the more appropriate annealing for obtaining a highly luminescent powder with a narrow size distribution in the sub-micrometric range, the temperature of 700  Re-dispersible sub-micrometric powders of Tb-doped Y For crystallite sizes lower than 35 The authors are grateful to CONACyT-SFERE Program 2001 for M.A. F.-G. Mexican scholarship.