Sodium stannate is widely used in the electroplating and tin alloy industries. The traditional sodium stannate production processes suffer a variety of disadvantages including long flowsheet, high production cost and strict requirements for the equipment. In this study, a novel process for preparing sodium stannate is developed by roasting tin dioxide and sodium carbonate in CO/CO2 mixed gas followed by leaching the intermediate products in a diluted sodium hydroxide solution. The effects of roasting and leaching parameters on the leaching efficiency of Sn were investigated. The Sn leaching efficiency reaches 85.6% under the optimal experimental conditions: roasting temperature of 875°C, CO content of 15%, roasting time of 15min, Na2CO3/SnO2 mole ratio of 1.5, liquid-to-solid ratio of 4cm3/g, leaching temperature of 40°C, leaching time of 60min, and stirring speed of 300rpm. Sodium stannate trihydrate (Na2SnO3
                     ·3H2O) having a purity of 95.8% is successfully produced from cassiterite concentrates with a SnO2 content of 76.4% through the new process, which is superior to the traditional approach for producing the industrial first-grade stannate.Sodium stannate trihydrate (Na Sodium stannate, as reported, has readily been generated by hydrothermal reactions in concentrated sodium hydroxide solutions using tin as the raw material. Sodium nitrate ( Several attempts were made to prepare sodium stannate using cassiterite concentrates as raw materials ( Some secondary tin-containing resources, including tin plating slag, stanniferous alloy, steel scrap and electronic waste, have also been used for preparing sodium stannate ( In most cases, cassiterite concentrates seldom react with sodium carbonate under air atmosphere ( Based on the above analysis, an exploratory experiment on the preparation of sodium stannate from cassiterite concentrates and sodium carbonate by controlling the roasting atmosphere has been carried out. The application of sodium carbonate was designed to replace sodium hydroxide, aiming at reducing the production cost and the security risks for the present sodium stannate production processes. It has showed that in a weakly reducing atmosphere stannic oxide reacted with sodium carbonate, forming sodium stannate ( In the present work, high-quality sodium stannate is prepared by reduction roasting of chemically pure tin dioxide and sodium carbonate under CO/CO Stannic oxide and sodium carbonate used in the study were analytical grade reagents with more than 99.5% purity. The cassiterite concentrates used were taken from Yunnan, China. They were roasted at 900 The tested samples were pre-ground to a particle size passing through a 200 The experimental flowsheet is shown in The dried briquettes were placed in a porcelain crucible and loaded into a heat resistant quartz glass tube. The samples were pushed to the roasting zone in an electrically heated horizontal tube furnace. Beforehand, the furnace was heated to a preset temperature. The roasting temperature was measured with a Pt–Rh thermocouple and controlled using a KSY Intelligent Temperature Controller (accuracy The preliminary research indicated that sodium stannate was generated during the roasting. It is inferred that the major chemical reaction involved in the roasting process is expressed as follows: In each leaching test, 10.0 Sodium stannate is water-soluble, while tin oxide or metallic tin is insoluble ( However, during the process the hydrolysis of sodium stannate may take place ( Generally, a leaching solvent with a pH greater than 10.0 is preferred for the prevention of stannate hydrolysis ( After leaching, the filtrate was put into a beaker and heated in a water bath. After water evaporation, the filtrate was concentrated and the primary sodium stannate was separated by crystallization and filtration. Then, the primary products were redissolved in distilled water and the above process was repeated twice. Finally, the recrystallized products were obtained. The recrystallized products were dried in a drying oven at 110 The conversion efficiency of the tin oxide into the form of leachable stannate is indicated by the leaching efficiency of Sn, which is calculated according to the following equation: The effects of roasting parameters including CO content, Na CO content refers to the CO volume concentration in the CO–CO As observed from  It is noteworthy to mention that the diffraction peaks of metallic tin appear when the CO content exceeds 25%. It indicates that a small amount of stannic oxide is reduced to metallic tin when the CO content is higher than 20% ( The influence of CO/CO The effect of Na  To optimize the roasting time required for the reaction, the experiments were carried out in the range of 10–45 The effects of leaching temperature, liquid-to-solid ratio, leaching time and stirring rate on the Sn leaching efficiency were studied to determine the conversion efficiency of tin oxide into the soluble stannate. The roasting conditions were selected according to the optimal parameters mentioned above: roasting temperature of 875 A temperature range of 30–60 The effect of liquid-to-solid ratio on the leaching efficiency of Sn was investigated by varying the value from 2 to 6  The effect of leaching time on leaching efficiency of Sn was studied by varying it in the range of 15 to 75 In further experiments, the cassiterite concentrate was used to replace chemically pure stannic oxide for producing sodium stannate. The pretreated cassiterite concentrate and sodium carbonate were roasted and leached under the aforementioned optimal roasting and leaching conditions. Pure sodium stannate trihydrate (Na As presented in The XRD pattern of the crystallized product is presented in A novel process for preparing sodium stannate from stannic oxide and sodium carbonate is developed in this study by roasting the materials in CO/CO By using cassiterite concentrate as the raw material for the new soda roasting–leaching process, the trihydrate sodium stannate (Na The authors would like to express their gratitude to the