This paper aimed to investigate propagation characteristics of the pressure wave in gas flow through pipes and the potential application of the pressure wave propagation theory in the early detection of gas influxes due to encountering gas-bearing fractures in gas drilling. In this work, a simpler and reliable analytical model characterizing the propagation and attenuation of the pressure wave in gas flow through pipes with the effects of wall shear stress and viscous dissipation was proposed by performing the perturbation method, and the model was validated against experimental results. A parametric study was also performed, and the results indicate that the static pressure, angular frequency, gas mass flow rate and temperature have obvious influences on the propagation characteristics. In general, the factors above have more serious effects on the attenuation factor than the wave speed. Lower angular frequency, gas flow rate, temperature and higher static pressure tend to reduce the attenuation of the pressure wave traveling in the pipes. Based on observed characteristics of the pressure wave, a rapid and reliable technique was proposed for the early detection of the unexpected gas influxes induced by encountering gas-bearing fractures in gas drilling. The concern about the proposed detection method stems from the fact that the speed of the pressure wave propagating in drill strings is much higher than that of the produced gas travels in the annulus. Field test results indicate that the technique has a shorter detection time than traditional methods.Gas drilling technology using air or nitrogen as the circulating fluid has been widely used in oil and gas industry with conspicuous technical superiorities over the conventional drilling, such as higher penetration rate, less formation damage, lower drilling cost and longer drill bit life ( Significant amount of work have been carried out on the pressure wave propagation in a rigid pipe containing compressible gas flow. In the present work, a simpler and reliable analytical model for simulating the propagation and attenuation of the pressure wave in gas flow through pipes is developed, taking the effects of the viscous dissipation and wall shear stress into account. Perturbation method, a traditional linearization technique, is performed to deduce the new analytical formulas. Experiments are conducted to measure the pressure wave propagation speed and attenuation factor, and the test data is compared with the theoretical results. The effects of the system pressure, angular frequency, gas flow velocity and temperature on the propagation characteristics of the pressure wave are also analyzed. Moreover, an interesting and valuable application of the pressure wave theory in the early detection of gas influxes in gas drilling is presented and discussed. A one-dimensional mathematical model describing the propagation and attenuation of the pressure wave in gas flow through pipes was developed, and by performing the perturbation method, we derived the analytical formulas for the wave speed and attenuation factor. To define the propagation and attenuation behavior of the pressure wave while it transmits through the gas pipes, the following basic assumptions were introduced: The gas flow is treated as one-dimensional, The propagation of the pressure wave is considered in an irreversible adiabatic process, wave distortion and nonlinear effects are neglected, The elasticity of the pipe is neglected. In the proposed model, the effects of wall shear stress and viscous dissipation on the pressure wave were taken into consideration. The traditional models for one-dimensional inviscid flow of the ideal gas in pipes cannot be used in gas drilling as the drill strings are such long that the wall shear stress cannot be neglected. In contrast to the model of inviscid flow, Fanno model ( Perturbation method was applied in the derivation of the governing equations of oscillatory motions. It is assumed that the state variables Substituting Eqs. With regard to the system situation of the pressure wave propagation, where the pressure and temperature are higher than that in standard conditions, the effect of the viscous dissipation on the propagation and attenuation of the pressure wave should be considered. In this study, the dissipation effect was taken into account by adding a ‘quasi-steady’ frictional resistance term to the momentum equation according to the theory of sound. Thus, the revised momentum equation becomes: Thus far, a complete set of equations describing the pressure wave propagation in a gas pipe has been developed, with the wall shear stress and viscous dissipation taken into account. The pressure wave is assumed to travel along the Substituting the perturbed variables in Eq. The above three equations form a system of linear first-order equations with three unknowns, By multiplying the above Matrix The two roots of the wave number have the same value but opposite signs. Using the two roots of the wave number, the wave speed and attenuation factor are given by: Hereunto, the analytical formulas for the wave speed and attenuation factor of the traveling wave in the gas pipe have been derived. In the proposed model, the effects of the wall shear stress and viscous dissipation were taken into consideration. It can be used to predict the pressure wave propagation behavior in drill strings. Propagation characteristics of the pressure wave in drill strings require the determination of the values for friction coefficients. The procedure first requires an evaluation of whether the gas flow in drill strings is laminar or turbulent. For laminar flow, the Reynolds number is less than 2100, which is defined as: The corresponding friction factor is: For turbulent flow, the effect of the roughness on the friction coefficient has to be considered because the inside wall of the drill strings is not smooth. It is known that the wall roughness relies on both the Reynolds number and relative roughness. The approximated correlation for friction coefficient in fully rough wall pipe proposed by It is also important to determine the gas viscosity as it directly related to the calculation of the wall shear stress and viscous dissipation. Gas viscosity is a function of the gas composition, pressure and temperature. To investigate the propagation characteristics of the pressure wave in drill strings, it is necessary to determine the temperature of the gas flow in the wellbore, as it affects the density and viscosity of the gas. In order to validate the analytical model proposed in this study, experiments were conducted to measure the pressure wave speed and attenuation factor.  The accuracy of the monitored pressure depends on characteristics of the pressure transducers. The pressure transducers used herein have a frequency response of 0.1–1000 Hz and a maximum full scale output error of 0.75% FSO. Pressure wave signals from each transducer were synchronized in a LabVIEW The wave speed and attenuation factor of the pressure wave traveling in a horizontal pipe under different static pressures were tested. The tested data were compared with theoretical results obtained with the proposed analytical formulas as shown in Based on the above established analytical model, the propagation behaviors of the pressure wave in the compressible gas flow through pipes were analyzed to ascertain the parameters affecting of the wave speed and attenuation factor. The inner diameter of the pipe considered here is 0.075 m and the circulation gas is nitrogen. In the analysis, the static pressure is 0.11 MPa, the angular frequency is 10 rad, the temperature is 50 °C and the mass flow rate is 0.286 kg s The experiments have shown that the static pressure is an important parameter affecting the wave speed and attenuation factor. However, the knowledge is limited as the largest static pressure in the experiments was 0.55 MPa. Analysis was conducted to further discuss its effect in this section. The wave speed and attenuation factor for different angular frequencies are plotted in The gas mass flow rate also has important influence on the wave speed and attenuation factor as indicated in As the wellbore temperature is higher than the surface ambient and varies along the well depth in gas drilling, it is important to examine the effect of the temperature on the wave speed and attenuation factor. A mathematical model for predicting the propagation characteristics of the pressure wave in gas flow through pipes has been proposed. The model was validated and the parametric sensitivity analysis was also run. In this section, the application of the pressure wave propagation theory to the early detection of gas influxes in gas drilling is presented, which is due to gas –bearing fractures being unexpectedly penetrated. The application of the pressure wave method to the early detection of gas influxes in gas drilling is now presented, based on the pressure measurements in the standpipe. When encountering the gas-bearing fractures in gas drilling, gas will enter into the wellbore from fractures and flow in the annulus. In the meantime, the flow field in the bottom hole is disturbed by gas influxes, resulting in a positive pressure wave propagating along the annulus and the drill strings. In traditional method, the gas influxes are detected by monitoring the total hydrocarbon content of the gas fluid in clearance pipelines. By way of contrast, the pressure wave method proposed herein detects the gas influxes by monitoring the positive pressure wave in the standpipe using a data monitoring system, which consists of a pressure transducer, data processing terminal and alarm system. The early detection technique proposed in this paper has been applied successfully in several wells to detect the gas influxes induced by encountering the gas-bearing fractures in gas drilling. An example is presented herein to show the performance of the pressure wave method for gas influxes early detection. In the example, a vertical well being drilled in depth from 4878 m to 5000 m using gas drilling with nitrogen as the circulating fluid. The formation dealt with here is the tight sand with formation pressure coefficient of 1.58. At nearly the depth of 4976 m during drilling, a visible positive pressure wave was captured by the transducer installed on the standpipe at 6:6:48 in The wave speed and attenuation of the pressure wave induced by unexpected gas influxes propagating in drill strings and the annulus are analyzed using the proposed analytical model and the results are shown in This paper focused on the propagation behavior of the pressure wave in drill strings and the application of the pressure wave theory to the early detection of the gas influxes induced by the gas-bearing fractures being unexpectedly penetrated in gas drilling. A simple and reliable theoretical model was developed to estimate the wave speed and attenuation factor of the pressure wave propagating in gas flow through pipes. In the mathematical model, the wall shear stress and the viscous dissipation were taken into account. In order to validate the model, experiments were conducted to measure the wave speed and attenuation factor of the pressure wave propagating in a horizontal pipe with air flow. The results indicate that the predicted wave speed and attenuation factor are in good agreement with the experimental data. Based on the theoretical model, the propagation behavior of the pressure wave has been analyzed to ascertain important parameters affecting the wave speed and attenuation factor. It is observed that the static pressure, angular frequency, gas mass flow rate and temperature have critical influence on the pressure wave propagation. It is observed that the static pressure has more serious effect on attenuation factor than wave speed. With increasing angular frequency, the wave speed and attenuation factor first increases and then approaches a constant. Higher attenuation factor and lower wave speed are observed when mass flow rate increases. With increasing temperature, the wave speed first increases and then decreases with increasing temperature, while the attenuation factor increases monotonically. A pressure wave method for the early detection of gas influxes due to gas-bearing fractures being unexpectedly penetrated in gas drilling has been proposed. The concern about the detection technique stems from the fact that the speed of the pressure wave induced by gas influxes propagating in drill strings is much higher than that of the produced gas traveling in the annulus. The results of field tests indicate that the pressure wave method might detect the unexpected gas influxes immediately after it occurs. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article. The authors are grateful for the support of the