This study offers innovative perspectives for optimizing of scaffolds based on correlation structure–function aimed the regenerative medicine. Thus, we evaluated in vitro performance of stabilized porous chitosan (SPCHTs) associated with activated platelet-rich plasma (aP-PRP) as a composite scaffold for the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (h-AdMSCs). The porous structure of chitosan (PCHT) was prepared similarly to solid sponges by controlled freezing (−20°C) and lyophilization of a 3% (w/v) chitosan solution. Stabilization was performed by treating the PCHT with sodium hydroxide (TNaOH), an ethanol series (TEtOH) or by crosslinking with tripolyphosphate (CTPP). The aP-PRP was obtained from the controlled centrifugation of whole blood and activated with autologous serum and calcium. Imaging of the structures showed fibrin networks inside and on the surface of SPCHTs as a consequence of electrostatic interactions. SPCHTs were non-cytotoxic, and the porosity, pore size and Young's modulus were approximately 96%, 145μm and 1.5MPa for TNaOH and TEtOH and 94%, 110μm and 1.8MPa for CTPP, respectively. Stabilization maintained the integrity of the SPCHTs for at least 10days of cultivation. SPCHTs showed controlled release of the growth factors TGF-β1 and PDGF-AB. Although generating different patterns, all of the stabilization treatments improved the proliferation of seeded h-AdMSCs on the composite scaffold compared to aP-PRP alone, and differentiation of the composite scaffold treated with TEtOH was significantly higher than for non-stabilized PCHT. We conclude that the composite scaffolds improved the in vitro performance of PRP and have potential in regenerative medicine.Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is an autologous product from whole blood (WB) comprised primarily of a high concentration of platelets dispersed in plasma (P-PRP) but that can also include concentrated leukocytes (L-PRP) Activated PRP ( Preparation of PRP first involves the separation of red blood cells and the concentration of platelets and other components of WB. Usually, separation is performed by centrifugation, and activation is promoted by thrombin and calcium. Adequate centrifugation conditions and multiple spins must be used to obtain a high yield of platelets and preserve integrity Crane and Everts In regenerative PRP therapies, we would consider first generation therapies to be PRP alone, followed by the second generation of PRP associated with bone marrow cells, and finally a third generation using PRP and h-AdMSCs. However, the performance of the fibrin network as a scaffold in regeneration requires further attention. Structural stability is an important issue because MSCs needs the maintenance of a 3-dimensional fibrin architecture for proliferation, migration and differentiation. Some of the available literature suggests that the association of PRP with chitosan is beneficial to osteogenic regeneration In our previous studies, we observed that the association of Porous chitosan scaffolds are produced primarily by a freezing process, which provides the nucleation of ice crystals from solution and further growth along the lines of thermal gradients. Exclusion of the chitosan acetate salt from the ice crystal phase and subsequent ice removal by lyophilization generates a porous material. After freeze-drying, the acetate molecules are in solid form in the scaffold cavities as ions bound to the cationic amine groups in the chitosan. When the acetate is not removed or neutralized, the scaffold will swell rapidly and ultimately dissolve upon rehydration in a neutral aqueous medium, requiring stabilization of the scaffold. Stabilization using multiple methods has been studied, including rehydration and/or crosslinking Stabilization with an ethanol series occurs because CHT decreases in solubility as the polarity of mixed solvents decreases, and affects not only the solubility of CHT but also the elasticity of the hydrogel Cationic chitosan can be crosslinked by multivalent counterions such as tripolyphosphate to form an intermolecular and/or intramolecular network structure. The reactions occurs through the ionic interaction between the NH In this work, we extended previous findings by studying the effects of PCHT stabilization on the performance of the composite scaffold Chitosan (average molecular weight [Mw] PCHT was prepared from a chitosan solution 3% ( PCHT was stabilized by treatment with dilute NaOH (TNaOH), an ethanol series (TEtOH) or by crosslinking with tripolyphosphate (CTPP) Infrared spectrometry (FT-IR) was used to identify the chemical modifications in the SPCHT scaffolds. Infrared spectra of PCHTs were obtained using an Infrared Spectrometer Fourier Transform (FT-IR) Thermo Scientific Nicolet Model 6700 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in the spectral range of 4000–675 The morphology of the PCHTs was evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a LEO 440i Electron Microscopy/Oxford (Cambridge, England) operated at 5 The swelling profile of the PCHTs was determined by swelling freeze-dried scaffolds of known weight in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (LB Laborclin, Pinhais, PR, Brazil) at pH in which w Porosity (ε) of the PCHTs was measured according to the protocol used by Wang in which V Mechanical compression tests of the PCHTs (n Degradation of PCHTs was examined by the weight loss of previously weighed PCHTs (w The compatibility of the PCHTs was performed by exposing h-AdMSCs to PCHTs followed by cultivation at 37 P-PRP, which is rich in platelets and poor in leukocytes, was prepared according to Perez   Human subcutaneous adipose tissue initially acquired from liposuction surgery was washed with sterile PBS, separated into 10 The pre-cultured h-AdMSCs were trypsinized and resuspended in P-PRP to a final cell concentration of 1 The release of platelet-derived growth factor AB (PDGF-AB) and transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) was assessed after 1 The images of cell-seeded composite scaffolds were obtained by scanning electron microscopy after 5 The cultivation of h-AdMSCs was performed in 24-well tissue culture plates by adding 1 h-AdMSCs-seeded in the composite scaffolds were induced to differentiate into the osteogenic lineage by providing osteogenic medium containing DMEM-LG supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% β-glycerol-phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 1% The level of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity in h-AdMSCs was determined on day 14. The supernatant (200 Each experiment was performed in triplicate unless otherwise specified. All of the results are presented as the mean The FTIR spectra of the SPCHTs from the various treatments are shown in FTIR spectra of SPCHTs/TNaOH and SPCHTs/TEtOH showed no significant modification of the chemical structure of chitosan compared to the NTPCHTs, which showed peaks at 1550 The formation of an intermolecular complex between the NH Thus, the stabilized scaffolds prepared in this work show chemical surfaces favorable for cell processes required for tissue regeneration as well as being suitable for the adhesion and support of the fibrin network from PRP, which has a negative charge. In addition to surface chemistry, physicochemical and mechanical properties such as porous structure, Young's modulus, swelling and degradation over time play important roles in the performance of scaffolds. It is known that the microstructural characteristics such as pore size and distribution, porosity and pore shape have prominent influences on cell intrusion, proliferation and function in tissue engineering The micrographs obtained by SEM ( The Young's modulus values ( Regardless of the type of treatment, the mean pore diameter ( The pore sizes of SPCHT/TNaOH (139 The smallest pores from TPP treatment are from crosslinking and entanglement of the chains of chitosan. According to Ma According to León y León (1998), porosity is defined as the percentage of void space in a solid Although, the porosity and the pore size are important aspects of cell adhesion, migration and proliferation, guiding and promoting the formation of new tissue, they must be evaluated in accordance to the application and degradation rate of materials According to Liu and Ma Porosity was similar for SPCHT/TNaOH and NTPCHT. A significant reduction in porosity and pore size was observed after rehydration and new lyophilization for SPCHT/TEtOH and SPCHT/CTPP. Final porosities were in the range of 93–97% ( Moreover, we observed a porosity (93.4%) much lower for the scaffold treated with TPP due to crosslinking, which also contributed for the improvement of its mechanical properties. The water uptake property of the raw materials primarily influences the maintenance of the chitosan scaffolds' shape. Deformations in the structure affect cell proliferation and migration. The SPCHTs/TNaOH and SPCHTs/TEtOH ( The swelling was stabilized after 7.5 Degradation profiles were similar over 30 Both processes, degradation and swelling, occur simultaneously and compete with them. No large differences among physicochemical and mechanical properties were observed between the SPCHTs. The freeze-drying technique limits the pores to medium sizes and the mechanical properties of the porous structures even after cross-linking Therefore, the physicochemical characterization suggests that the SPCHTs might be useful for bone regeneration. Stabilization provided pore sizes in the range of 100–150 SEM characterization ( Despite not having a further physicochemical characterization, from the images we can infer that: the fibrin network greatly increases the surface area of the scaffold, so favoring cell adhesion and decreases the pore size of the composite scaffolds preventing losses of cells during implantation into the site of application favoring the proliferation and differentiation processes. The cell compatibility, as assayed by MTT, of h-AdMSCs cultured in the presence of SPCHTs is shown in The cell number per well as a function time for The curves of The ALP activity of h-AdMSCs assayed after 14 The osteoblastic differentiation is controlled by a series of hormones, cytokines, growth factors and multiple transcription factors. Since the osteogenic cells initiate cell differentiation and maturation, they begin to express specific markers for osteoblasts including genes as runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2), osterix (OSX) and related protein mineralization process, such as collagen type I, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone sialoprotein (BSP), osteocalcin (OC) and osteopontin (OPN) The ALP activity of the cells cultured on Thus, alkaline phosphatase expression indicated that the scaffolds of ALP activity determined in the culture medium and thus did not include the concentrations inside the gels is worth mentioning. This may have also contributed to the lower values of ALP activities of the composite scaffolds compared with Composite scaffolds of stabilized porous chitosan and activated P-PRP were prepared and characterized. The stabilization of the porous chitosan was accomplished by using various treatments. In general, the composite scaffolds controlled the release of growth factors and improved proliferation of h-AdMSCs that were seeded compared to activate P-PRP. Osteogenic differentiation evaluated by ALP maker was favored by the stabilization provided by the ethanol series treatment only. These findings are important for optimizing composite scaffolds for applications in regenerative medicine. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Council of Technological and Scientific Development ( The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at