Ankle arthritis is a debilitating condition. Primary ankle joint osteoarthritis is much rarer than hip or knee arthritis. The majority of cases are post-traumatic secondary to previous articular trauma or ligamentous instability. Treatment methods available are guided by disease severity and the patient's functional demands. Weight loss, activity modification, the wearing of an ankle brace or high-topped lace-up boots and orthoses should be the first line of treatment. Joint-sparing procedures such as arthroscopic debridement, supramalleolar osteotomy and distraction arthroplasty have been trialled with low levels of supporting evidence. The demand for joint preservation has led to the development of total ankle allografting procedures, but these have fallen out of favour. Despite advancements, the gold standard for end-stage arthritis remains arthrodesis, although evidence for total ankle arthroplasty in certain groups of patients is increasing. The current third-generation implants have improved survivorship although their results remain inferior to arthroplasty of the hip and knee. There is currently a UK randomized control trial of ankle replacement versus arthrodesis under way as well as several national joint registries, which will hopefully better define those patients who will gain most benefit from replacement as opposed to fusion. Disruption or alteration of the matrix macromolecular framework associated with an increase in water concentration, caused by high levels of contact stress. At first, the type 11 collagen concentration remains unchanged, but the collagen meshwork may be damaged and the concentration of aggrecan and the degree of proteoglycan aggregation decrease.  When chrondrocytes detect a disruption or alteration of their matrix they respond by increasing matrix synthesis and degradation and by proliferating. Their response may restore the tissue, maintain the tissue in an altered state, or increase cartilage volume. They may sustain an increased level of activity for years.  Failure of the chondrocyte response to restore or maintain the tissue leads to loss of articular cartilage accompanied or preceded by a decline in the chrondrocytic response. The causes for the decline in chrondrocytic response poorly understood, but it may be the result of mechanical damage to the tissue with injury to chrondrocytes and a down regulation of the chrondocytic response to anabolic cytokines. The incidence of ankle osteoarthritis (OA) in the UK has recently been estimated to be 47.7 per 100,000. Of the 29,000 symptomatic cases referred to specialist surgeons in the UK each year, approximately 10% undergo arthrodesis or arthroplasty. The ankle's bony anatomy confers a high degree of stability and congruence when it is loaded. It is composed of three articulations: the tibiotalar, fibulotalar, and tibiofibular joints. The talar body has a convex dome which is wider anteriorly than posteriorly. When the talus is plantarflexed, its narrowest portion occupies the ankle mortise and allows for rotation between the talus and mortise. However, when the talus is maximally dorsiflexed, the tibiofibular syndesmosis accommodates the wider portion of the talus in the ankle mortise, allowing little or no rotation to occur and stabilizing it. The talus is a frustum of a cone with its apex oriented medially, therefore the ankle joint changes direction and position throughout the range of ankle motion. Accordingly its motion is coupled, with external rotation and eversion occurring with dorsiflexion and internal rotation and inversion with plantarflexion. It has been estimated that ankle degeneration is one-ninth as common as hip or knee osteoarthritis, despite the ankle being the most frequently injured weight-bearing joint. The reason for this is uncertain, although ankle cartilage differs from that of the hip and knee. The relative rarity of primary ankle OA may be a consequence of its ability to sustain higher peak contact stresses, resulting in a more favorable linear age-related decline. Specifically, ankle articular cartilage tensile fracture stress and tensile stiffness have been shown to deteriorate less rapidly with age than hip articular cartilage. Buckwalter and Saltzman hypothesized that post-traumatic ankle OA is the result of excessive articular surface contact stress resulting from post-traumatic joint incongruity and instability, such that the cartilage's capacity to repair is exceeded. Their contention is that post-traumatic ankle OA progresses through three stages ( Tibial plafond fractures, malleolar fractures, fracture dislocations of the ankle, inadequate fracture reduction and ligamentous injury have been consistently implicated in the development of ankle OA. In pilon fractures the energy of the injury, articular comminution and displacement are associated with poorer outcomes. The malleolar fracture pattern associated with the highest incidence of OA is a Weber C fracture associated with a medial malleolar fracture. More than one-third of patients developed advanced radiographic degenerative changes in a long-term, retrospective review of 102 ankle fractures, at 18 years. Osteochrondral injuries are also linked to the development of OA. Although, the risk of developing OA following an osteochondral injury may be associated with the depth and location of cartilage damage at the time of injury. In a recent 13-year follow-up study of 109 patients, lesions on the anterolateral talar dome, posteromedial tibia and medial malleolus had the worst long-term outcomes, both radiographically and clinically. Chronic lateral ligamentous instability of the ankle does seem to be instrumental in the development of medial compartment degeneration. Harrington performed a radiographic review of 36 patients with chronic lateral ankle instability, at a minimum of 10 years. The patients complained of increasing ankle pain, with degenerative change of the medial talar and tibial surfaces of the ankle. These changes were observed radiographically and confirmed arthroscopically. He went on to suggest that restoration of lateral ligament stability may prevent or slow progression. The minimum radiographic series to assess the ankle is a weight-bearing mortise view and a lateral weight-bearing radiograph of the foot and ankle. A mortise view is taken in 15–20° of internal rotation, so that the intermalleolar axis is perpendicular to the X-ray beam. Plain X-rays are the main method used to detect ankle OA for epidemiological purposes. Several radiographic grading systems currently exist. The Kellgren and Lawrence scale and its modified form are not specific to the ankle, but have been widely used. There are five grades, with advanced OA grades 3 and 4. Recently COFAS (the Canadian Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society) introduced a validated classification system for end-stage ankle arthritis Advanced imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computerized tomography (CT), can be helpful. MRI or CT can be coupled with an arthrogram to give more detail of focal cartilage lesions. More recently, weight-bearing CT has been used as an adjunct in the assessment of hindfoot arthritis. Weight-bearing scans may potentially give more information on joint alignment under load. Shoe modification and foot orthoses are central to the non-surgical management of ankle arthritis. A shoe with a rigid sole with a rocker is the most commonly prescribed external shoe modification. Alternatively, many recommend the use of high-topped lace-up boots, which are broadly similar to the Arizona Brace ( Evidence supporting intra-articular steroids in treating ankle OA is limited with only short-term relief being achieved, and less efficacy in advanced disease. The role of hyaluronic acid (HA), commonly known as ‘viscosupplementation,’ in the ankle remains controversial. It is thought HA contributes to the viscoelastic properties of synovial fluid, as HA is believed to be in a lower concentration and of a lower molecular weight in osteoarthritic joints than in healthy ones. Exogenous HA is thought to favorably enhance endogenous chondrocyte HA and proteoglycan synthesis. HA exists in either high- or low-molecular-weight preparations, and can be used as a single injection, or as a course. In comparing these two preparations there is some evidence favouring the use of high-molecular-weight HA in the ankle joint. A prospective multicentre study of 55 patients with symptomatic ankle OA treated with high-molecular-weight HA and followed up for 6–9 months showed a statistically significant decrease in the mean visual analogue score (VAS) from 68mm at baseline to 34mm at 3 months (P<0.001). The secondary endpoints were the change from baseline in: the total ankle OA score, the patients' global OA assessment VAS, the physicians’ global OA assessment VAS and the SF-36. All of these endpoints were statistically significant improvement by the HA. In comparison three published randomized control trials investigating low-molecular-weight, non-cross-linked HA demonstrated equivocal outcomes when compared with intra-articular saline, both as a single injection or as a course of five weekly injections.  It is important to distinguish between anterior ankle impingement and ankle OA. Impingement presents clinically with anterior ankle pain as a result of bony and/or soft tissue impingement between the tibia and talar neck. Radiologically it presents with anterior osteophytes in the absence of joint space narrowing. A level II prospective cohort study compared outcomes following arthroscopic debridement in patients with isolated anterior impingement with and without joint space narrowing on preoperative weight-bearing radiographs. Ninety percent of patients without joint space narrowing had good or excellent results, whereas only 50% of patients with joint space narrowing had good or excellent results. Furthermore pain relief at 2 years after surgery was significantly improved in the pure anterior impingement group, but not the group with joint space narrowing.  Overall the consensus from systematic reviews remains unfavorable, highlighting methodological flaws in studies with small patient cohorts and variable numbers of adjunctive procedures being randomly performed. These include open or arthroscopic joint debridement, Achilles tendon lengthening and supramalleolar osteotomy. A long-term (10 ± 2.5 years following DA) follow-up of 22 patients (mean age 37 ± 11 years) suggested that significant clinical improvement occurred in 72%, which was maintained for a minimum of 7 years, with six treatment failures (requiring ankle arthrodesis).  Supramalleolar osteotomies (SMO) in the asymmetrical ankle are proposed to work by transferring weight-bearing to the unaffected side of the joint, with intact articular cartilage. A correlation has been observed between good radiographic correction and favorable patient outcomes. The primary indication reported for supramalleolar osteotomies is asymmetric ankle OA, with at least 50 % preserved tibiotalar joint surface. To correct a varus deformity a supramalleolar osteotomy can either be a medial opening or lateral closing wedge. The medial opening wedge is the more commonly performed, with its primary advantages being ease of bone cuts and maintenance of length. Alternatively, in the case of a valgus ankle a medial closing wedge with the addition of a fibular osteotomy is more commonly performed. The advantage of a closing wedge lies with its inherent stability with no graft, this allows early weight-bearing and favourably affects soft tissue tension. In reality it is the easier surgical access to the tibia which dictates the type of wedge undertaken and this may be influenced by previous incisions and other soft tissue considerations. The largest prospective study of supramalleolar deformity of the ankle complicated by ankle arthritis studied 94 ankles at a mean follow-up of 43 months. It was concluded that supramalleolar osteotomy was an effective treatment of early and mid-stage asymmetric arthritis of the ankle. However, the risk factors for failure of supramalleolar osteotomy were osseous imbalance, for example a non-corrected fibula, ligamentous insufficiency and varus ankle arthritis with loss of the joint space between the medial malleolus and the talus. Ten patients were converted to total ankle replacement or ankle arthrodesis within the follow-up period. Remaining studies detailing realignment osteotomies are limited to small patient cohorts with various aetiologies. This has been highlighted in a recent systematic review which suggests that the available evidence is either level III or IV and provides insufficient support for supramalleolar osteotomies in the treatment of mild to moderate ankle arthritis. On the other hand, there is good evidence to show that post-fracture tibial malalignment of more than 5° predisposes to ankle arthritis.  Ankle arthrodesis can be performed with a multitude of implants and approaches. Mann popularized an open transfibular lateral approach, utilising the internervous plane between the sural nerve and the lateral branch of the superficial peroneal nerve. The fibula is excised, and can be morcellized to be used as bone graft. Two 6.5 mm compression screws are passed retrograde from inferolaterally in the talus to superomedially in the tibia, achieving rigid compression. The first screw is placed just above the lateral talar process and the second screw is placed anterior to this. The ideal position for fusion is plantigrade with the hindfoot 0–5° of valgus and 5–10° of external rotation. Fusion is being increasingly undertaken arthroscopically with union rates of over 90% and a comparable time to union, compared to open techniques. The main benefits of the arthroscopic technique are minimized soft tissue trauma and reduced hospital stay. The ideal patient for an arthroscopic arthrodesis has minimal deformity. The technique varies, but we prefer non-invasive ankle distraction through a sterile ankle strap placed around the heel and midfoot. The joint is inflated with normal saline and access gained using anteromedial and anterolateral portals. Routine joint examination can be performed using a 4.0 mm arthroscope, followed by debridement and preparation of the articular surfaces to bleeding subchondral bone using a selection of curettes, arthroscopic shavers and burrs. Care must be exercised to maintain the normal bony contours of the talus and tibia. Two large fragment compression screws are passed from the proximal posteromedial tibia into the talar body and talar neck ( Postoperatively the ankle has been traditionally immobilized in a cast for 3 months, the first 6 weeks being non-weight-bearing. However, in both arthroscopic and open ankle arthrodesis early weight-bearing at 2 weeks has been shown not to reduce union rates. Thus we use early weight-bearing after both techniques, providing the fixation is stable. In the longer term there is a concern that functional deterioration may occur, principally as a result of the development of arthritis in the adjacent joints. Gait studies of arthrodesed ankles have shown increased dorsiflexion stresses in the joints located between the ankle and the metatarsal heads. Two frequently cited long-term radiographic and clinical follow-up studies at more than 20 years have implicated ankle arthrodesis in the later development of OA in the subtalar and midtarsal joints.  One of the major considerations in undertaking TAR is patient selection, the indications and contraindications are still being defined. The optimal patient is older with end-stage ankle OA, minimal deformity, low bodyweight and low functional demand. The exact indications vary hugely from surgeon to surgeon, and there is no absolute consensus as to the limits of patients suitable for ankle arthroplasty. Historically, the first TAR implants were simple hinges which failed early as a result of the small amount of rotation in the ankle. Today improved understanding of ankle joint biomechanics has meant that the majority of current replacements, outside the USA, are three component mobile bearings, with a flat articulation between the superior aspect of the polyethylene bearing and the tibial component to allow rotation. However, two component designs remain on the market. A recent randomized trial found no statistically or clinically meaningful differences between fixed and mobile bearing implants when examining gait and pain at one year. Whilst patient selection is important, questions remain around prosthesis design. Recently implants, such as the Mobility and AES ( The cumulative annual failure rate in the UK for ankle replacements has been reported as being as low as 1.9% per annum. Five-year survivorship data from other national joint registries are: New Zealand: 93%; Sweden: 81%; Finland: 83%; Norway: 89% and 4-year survivorship in the Australian registry at 90%. Ten-year survivorship from Sweden is 69% and from Norway is 76%.  On occasions, it is possible to simply fuse the ankle joint, although this relies on there being enough talar bone stock to achieve this. If the talus has been irretrievably damaged by osteolysis or infection, it may be necessary to undertake a tibio-talo-calcaneal fusion in which the os calcis is fused to the distal tibia, incorporating as much of the talar bone stock as remains and is viable. Fixation may be with screws, a transcalcaneal hindfoot nail or a plate. In the presence of infection an Ilizarov frame may be needed. Maintenance of leg length with massive allografts to replace the bone loss is sometimes needed, for example a femoral head allograft can be transfixed by a transcalcaneal nail. It has been suggested that cancellous allografts should be used in combination with autograft or bone marrow. It may be possible to revise the TAR. In the simplest case, this may involve replacement of a fractured polyethylene bearing, but more commonly a complex revision may be required. The use of stemmed implants, custom-made components, trabecular metal, cement augmentation and autologous structural iliac crest in instances of excessive bone loss, appear scattered through the literature. The current body of evidence on salvage procedures for failed ankle replacement is sparse, with the choice of the revision technique dependent on the cause of failure, residual bone, bone quality, and surgical expertise. Excluding published studies with less than ten participants, arthrodesis as a salvage procedure has union rates of between 61% and 94%. Two-stage salvage protocols have been advocated for treating infected cases. The first stage comprises extensive debridement of all nonviable and infected tissues with removal of the prosthetic components. Multiple tissue samples including joint capsule and the component–bone interface. Following this a gentamicin impregnated polymethylmethacrylate cement spacer is implanted. Six weeks of antibiotic therapy is typically completed with monitoring of C-reactive protein levels before definitive fixation is contemplated. Following this a circular external fixator is used to fuse the ankle.  The decision to offer the patient either ankle arthrodesis or replacement is made on an individual patient basis according to the surgeon's indications. The older, less demanding patient is more likely to undergo TAR and the younger more active patient arthrodesis. Patients with complex ankle deformities are also more likely to be offered arthrodesis. These influences have the potential to unfavorably affect complication rates as well as survivorship in the raw data from outcome studies. An objective in the treatment of end-stage arthritis is the normalization of gait. Researchers have compared gait analyses of TAR with ankle arthrodesis, noting significant improvement in gait parameters compared to preoperative function, however, neither cohort appears to demonstrate overall superiority. In the current healthcare climate, the cost benefit analysis of TAR and arthrodesis is also an important consideration. Analysis of the direct and indirect costs associated with either intervention, concluded that total ankle replacement was more cost effective. Thus arthrodesis remains the gold standard in the treatment of end stage ankle arthritis providing predictable results. Nevertheless, there is a definite place for TAR in a selected groups of patients – the next few years will hopefully allow us to better define the group of individuals who will benefit most from TAR.   Allografts are typically size-matched using a radiographic or CT protocol. Either an anterior longitudinal approach or a lateral approach incorporating a mini open anteromedial arthrotomy have been described. Cutting jigs are used to resect the arthritic ankle as well to prepare the donor graft for implantation. Methods of fixation include multiple headless compression screws, as well as bioabsorbable pins. Neither tissue matching nor immunosuppressive therapy postoperatively are used. Postoperative protocols vary, although early range of motion, non-weightbearing for 3–4 months, progressing to partial then full weight-bearing, typically at 6 months is the norm. A recent systematic review of the literature identified 15 allograft transplantation studies, with the majority of studies originating from three academic centres located in Italy and the USA. The evidence for replacement of the ankle with total allograft is limited and is primarily of case series with significant heterogeneity of study design, grafting procedure and fixation methods. Reported graft failure has ranged from 19% to 69% at 24 months with the largest published series to date (88 ankles, mean follow-up 5 years) reporting a 29% failure rate. Ten patients required revision allografting, seven arthrodesis, six conversions to total ankle arthroplasty and two below knee amputations. In UK orthopaedic practice there are difficulties with the availability and accessibility of allografts, in association with a lack of reproducibility outside of specialty centres raises genuine concerns regarding its implementation. Post-traumatic arthritis is the most common form of ankle osteoarthritis. Non-operative management should be the initial treatment for all patients. Viscosupplementation although controversial, may yet play a role in second line management. Consensus regarding the optimal surgical management of ankle arthritis has not yet been reached. The difficulty in developing an evidence-based treatment model for ankle arthritis, is that the majority of the evidence is from level III or IV studies with short and intermediate term results. The number of prospective, long-term follow-up studies is significantly limited. It is important to recognize the bimodal age distribution of ankle OA. With the functional demands of the typically younger, post-traumatic OA patient strikingly different from the older patient with end-stage disease. From the available evidence arthroscopic debridement is beneficial for those with anterior impingement pain without joint space narrowing. Realignment procedures in the presence of tibial malalignment are useful to treat focal arthritic change. The case for distraction arthroplasty remains unclear, with evidence lacking and support waning. Total ankle replacement with a bipolar allograft is also falling out of favour. In cases of advanced ankle arthritis the gold standard treatment is fusion, whether it is undertaken open or arthroscopically. TAR is now an established technique, with good long-term results reported. At the current time our preference is to only offer TAR to patients aged over 60 years, who are low demand and have a deformity of less than 10°. The prospective RCT's of ankle replacement versus fusion should help to clarify which patients will benefit from arthroplasty, as opposed to arthrodesis.