The present paper describes fundamentals, advantages and limitations of the Box-Behnken design (BBD) for the optimization of analytical methods. It establishes also a comparison between this design and composite central, three-level full factorial and Doehlert designs. A detailed study on factors and responses involved during the optimization of analytical systems is also presented. Functions developed for calculation of multiple responses are discussed, including the desirability function, which was proposed by Derringer and Suich in 1980. Concept and evaluation of robustness of analytical methods are also discussed. Finally, descriptions of applications of this technique for optimization of analytical methods are presented.In recent years, chemometric tools have been frequently applied to the optimization of analytical methods, considering their advantages such as a reduction in the number of experiments that need be executed resulting in lower reagent consumption and considerably less laboratory work. Furthermore these methods allow the development of mathematical models that permit assessment of the relevance as well as statistical significance of the factor effects being studied as well as evaluate the interaction effects between the factors. If there significant interaction effects between factors the optimal conditions indicated by the univariate studies will be different from the correct results of the multivariate optimization. The larger the interaction effects the greater the difference that will be found using univariate and multivariate optimization strategies. So the univariate procedure may fail since the effect of one variable can be dependent on the level of the others involved in the optimization. That is why multivariate optimization schemes involve designs for which the levels of all the variables are changed simultaneously. The first step of multivariate optimization is accomplished screening the factors studied (full factorial or fractional factorial design) in order to obtain the significant effects of the analytical system. After determining the significant factors, the optimum operation conditions are attained by using more complex experimental designs such as Doehlert matrix (DM), central composite designs (CCD) and three-level designs such as the Box-Behnken design (BBD) In analytical chemistry, multivariate techniques have been applied to the optimization of chemical factors during the development of analytical strategies involving pre-concentration systems using solid phase extraction During the multivariate optimization procedure, there are two types of variables: the responses and the factors. The responses are the dependent variables. Their values depend on the levels of the factors, which can be classified as qualitative or quantitative. In an optimization of a digestion process of lubricating oil samples using focused-microwave assistance for determination of several metals employing ICP OES, the factors could be: type of acid mixture (qualitative factor), amount of acid mixture, power applied and digestion time (quantitative factors). In the same study, several responses could be evaluated: (a) residual acidity after digestion (this response is important considering the inconvenience of using very acidic solutions for quantification using ICP OES); (b) residual carbon (this parameter reflects directly the efficiency of the mineralization process of the organic matrix); (c) quantification of the metals using ICP OES (this response can be evaluated by recoveries for each metal and shows the efficiency of the digestion process, without considering the residual acidity and residual carbon). If one knows the natures of the relationships between the responses and the factors, i.e. the response surfaces, the optimal values of the factors can be determined. The optimization can be performed in two ways. Response surfaces can be determined for each response and these surfaces can be analyzed simultaneously. Or a model for a single composite function that takes into account all three responses can be determined to obtain a single response surface. The advantages of each approach are still being investigated. Another question that should be addressed is whether the different responses suffer similar effects on changing the factor levels. During the optimization of an analytical procedure involving a multielement technique (ICP OES, ICP-MS and chromatography) generally the composite response will be resultant of several single responses with similar effects. However, the digestion process described for quantification of metals in oil samples clearly exemplifies a situation where the individual responses have different effects. This aspect should be considered during the establishment of an appropriate optimization strategy. An increasingly popular form for treating multiple responses makes use of a desirability function Other multi-response functions have been also proposed but these are not based on the Derringer–Suich desirability function In validation studies multivariate optimization techniques are also used for determination of robustness, which is defined as the capacity of an analytical method to reproduce results when the procedure is performed under small changes in the nominal values of the experimental factors established in the optimization step Box-Behnken designs (BBD) A cube that consists of the central point and the middle points of the edges, as can be observed in A figure of three interlocking 2 The number of experiments ( A comparison between the BBD and other response surface designs (central composite, Doehlert matrix and three-level full factorial design) has demonstrated that the BBD and Doehlert matrix are slightly more efficient than the central composite design but much more efficient than the three-level full factorial designs where the efficiency of one experimental design is defined as the number of coefficients in the estimated model divided by the number of experiments. Another advantage of the BBD is that it does not contain combinations for which all factors are simultaneously at their highest or lowest levels. So these designs are useful in avoiding experiments performed under extreme conditions, for which unsatisfactory results might occur. Conversely, they are not indicated for situations in which we would like to know the responses at the extremes, that is, at the vertices of the cube. BBD for four and five factors can be arranged in orthogonal blocks, as shown in Korn and de Oliveira used BBD during the optimization of a sequential injection analysis method proposed for the determination of sulphate in ethanol automotive fuel employing molecular absorption spectrophotometry (MAS) Carasek and coworkers optimized a microextraction process for the determination of 2,4,6-trichloroanisole and 2,4,6-tribromoanisole in wine samples employing BBD Gong and coworkers compared response surfaces based on complementary three-level Box-Behnken, face-centered central composite and full factorial designs during the optimization of procedures employing capillary electrophoresis (CE) for the determination of tamsulosin enantiomers BBD has not been used for the optimization of electroanalytical methods. Only a procedure employing adsorption stripping voltammetry for the determination of nalidxic acid and 7-hydroximethylanalidxic acid in urine samples was established using this design Kannan et al. proposed the use of straw carbon for the adsorption of the copper(II), cadmium(II) and nickel(II) metal ions. The optimization step was carried out using BBD Matthews et al. used BBD for the optimization of an enzymatic procedure for the determination of arsenic in aqueous solutions Silva and coworkers developed a study in order to detect the most important factors that effect the formation of the four trihalomethanes (THM) (chloroform, bromodichloromethane, chlorodibromomethane and bromoform) in water disinfection processes using chlorine. BBD was used during the optimization step Petz and Lamar developed a receptor protein microplate assay for the detection and determination of penicillins and cephalosporins with intact beta-lactam in milk, bovine and porcine muscle juice, honey and egg samples. The optimization step was performed using BBD Wu and coworkers developed a photoelectrocatalytic oxidation system using a Ti/TiO BBD was employed for the optimization of an electrochemical process using reticulated vitreous carbon-supported-on-polyaniline cathodes for the reduction of hexavalent chromium of industrial wastewater samples Rajkumar et al. investigated the electrochemical oxidation process of phenol using a Ti/TiO The Box-Behnken is a good design for response surface methodology because it permits: (i) estimation of the parameters of the quadratic model; (ii) building of sequential designs; (iii) detection of lack of fit of the model; and (iv) use of blocks. A comparison between the Box-Behnken design and other response surface designs (central composite, Doehlert matrix and three-level full factorial design) has demonstrated that the Box-Behnken design and Doehlert matrix are slightly more efficient than the central composite design but much more efficient than the three-level full factorial designs. The application of Box-Behnken designs for optimization of analytical methods still is limited, but different applications of these designs in the optimization of procedures involving several analytical techniques are presented in this paper. The authors are grateful for Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal do Ensino Superior (CAPES), and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado da Bahia (FAPESB) for financial support.