The recognition of multivariate geochemical anomalies is important for mineral exploration. Big data analytics, which involves the whole data and variables, is an alternative manner to delineate multivariate geochemical anomalies in support of machine learning algorithms due to their strong ability to capture the complex intrinsic and diverse links between geochemical characteristics and mineralization. However, this method faces the issue of data redundancy and calculation complexity, and high-dimensional problems raise great challenges for anomaly detection. This is the curse of dimensionality problem, which hinders the development of a variety of techniques for anomaly detection. In this study, a hybrid model that combines unsupervised deep belief networks (DBNs) and one-class support vector machine (OCSVM) is adopted to address the high-dimensional geochemical anomalies detection problem. In this model, the relevant features first extracted through the DBN are used as the input of the OCSVM. The decision function values of the hybrid method are employed to map the geochemical patterns related to iron mineralization. The comparative results on the performance of the hybrid model and the other three anomaly detection models (deep autoencoder model, OCSVM, and hybrid model with principal component analysis and OCSVM) in terms of the area under curve(AUC) values, suggest that the hybrid method of the DBN and OCSVM can efficiently recognize the geochemical anomalies related to iron mineralization. The DBN can extract the geochemical information, reduce the redundant features, and further enhance the scalability of the OCSVM for processing high-dimensional geochemical data. The extracted geochemical anomalies, which show a close spatial relationship with the Yanshanian intrusions, can provide significant guidance for the next round of mineral exploration.Over the past several decades, geochemical anomalies have shown an increasingly important role in the fields of both exploration ( Methods for the recognition of geochemical anomalies range from traditional methods, such as mean ± 2 standard deviations ( Owing to their ability to learn complex and high-level features from data ( The recent development of data acquisition technologies, such as satellites and sensors, have enabled great progress in the collection of big data. Such datasets often hold large numbers of samples (inputs), large varieties of classes (outputs), and high dimensionality (features) ( This paper presents a hybrid model for geochemical anomaly recognition with high-dimensional data through a case study conducted in the southwestern Fujian District (China). This architecture is different from that of the single nonlinear method (e.g., OCSVM) for multivariate geochemical anomaly detection, it provides the advantages of both DBNs ( A new unsupervised hybrid model, combining DBN and OCSVM ( Deep belief network (DBN) is a type of deep neural network involving multiple layers of latent variables with interconnections between but not within each hidden layer. The DBN can be used for both unsupervised training on a set of examples to learn representational features and perform non-linear dimensionality reduction, as well as supervised classification based on the extracted features ( The second part on the right of the equation ( Update the hidden units in parallel given the visible units: Update the visible units in parallel given the hidden units: Perform the weight update: Here, Once the training of an RBM is completed, another RBM is “stacked” on the top of it, taking its input from the output of the previous RBM. The new RBM is then trained with the procedure outlined above until the desired stopping criterion is reached. The stacking RBMs of exhibits a strong ability to generate non-linear feature detectors at different levels denoting increasingly and more representative features of the data. Thus, the weights of the multi-layer neural network are initialized by the weights of the stacked RBMs instead of the traditional method of random initialization weights. This network can be adopted for dimensionality reduction, fine-tuning by back-propagation or classification by the addition of a logistic regression layer. For the second step of the DBN + OCSVM architecture, the detected features of the DBN are fed to the OCSVM for geochemical anomaly detection. An SVM is a promising supervised learning algorithm that is highly effective for both regression and classification tasks. The SVM solves the issues of linear inseparability by constructing a discriminant function in a high-dimensional domain with nonlinear inner product kernel functions, and aims to find a hyperplane with the maximum boundary from a different class dataset ( Here The Lagrange multipliers changed the quadratic optimization problem to the dual problem which is expressed as follows: Thus, the decision function In multivariate geochemical anomaly recognition, this decision function can be regarded as an index to determine whether a sample, The southwestern Fujian district (SFD) ( In addition, skarn alterations, which are direct evidence for skarn-type deposits, can be reflected by geochemical anomalies detected from exploration geochemical data. These data were collected at a 2 km × 2 km grid ( The selection of appropriate model parameters is critical to the performance of the hybrid method of DBN + OCSVM. According to the big data idea of The performance of OCSVM is directly determined by the appropriate parameters: Another critical step for modelling SVMs is to select a suitable kernel function from the four widely used kernel functions, such as linear, polynomial, RBF and sigmoid. The multivariate geochemical anomaly maps extracted by RBF kernels have the largest AUC value, followed by the polynomial kernels ( According to the selected appropriate model parameters, the decision function values corresponding to each cell in the study area could be calculated by the DBN + OCSVM model. The geochemical samples on each cell with positive decision function values are distinguished as background; while those with negative decision function values are distinguished as anomalies. The extracted geochemical anomalies show a close spatial correlation with the discovered iron deposits ( To further evaluate the validity of the model for high-dimensional geochemical anomaly recognition, a comparative study of the four multivariate geochemical anomaly detection models was conducted involving a deep autoencoder network (DAE), OCSVM, DBN + OCSVM, and PCA + OCSVM. Among these four models, DAE, as a variation of DBN, comprises of an encoder and a decoder that is trained by minimizing the difference between the input and reconstructed output ( The AUC values of the anomalies extracted by the different models are 0.921 (DBN + OCSVM), 0.900 (DAE), 0.900 (PCA + OCSVM), and 0.867 (OCSVM), respectively ( From a geological point, most geochemical anomalies obtained in this study are distributed in the Yanshanian intrusions, such as the area numbered No.1, No.2 and No.3, or around the boundaries of the Yanshanian intrusions, such as the area numbered No.4 and No.5. This observation is consistent with the conclusions that Yanshaian intrusions are the heat and fluid sources for the formation of Fe mineralization, and the contact zones of the granites are the appropriate positions for the Fe mineral deposits in this district ( In this study, an unsupervised anomaly detection algorithm for high-dimensional data was adopted for identifying geochemical anomalies that might indicate iron polymetallic mineralization in SFD. The algorithm is a hybrid architecture of DBN and OCSVM, where the DBN was used for dimensionality reduction and feature extraction to transform the geochemical data into a lower dimensional set of features, which were further used as input for the training of OCSVM. The hybrid DBN + OCSVM model employs the strong abilities of the DBN in extracting data representations, and effectively solves the problems that limit OCSVM when dealing with complex high-dimensional data. The other classical anomaly detection methods, besides the hybrid DBN + OCSVM, such as the DAE, OCSVM, and hybrid PCA + OCSVM models were adopted for recognizing the multivariate geochemical anomalies in SFD. The extracted geochemical anomalies of these four architectures exhibited similar spatial patterns, and a close spatial relationship with the known deposits. The comparative results of the hybrid and stand along methods (DAE, OCSVM, and hybrid PCA + OCSVM) suggest that the DBN can extract geochemical information from deeper levels and better reduce the number of redundant features. This enhances the scalability of the OCSVM for processing the geochemical data containing high-dimensional records. The contribution of each author: Yihui Xiong and Renguang Zuo collaborated to finish the design of the hybrid model. Yihui Xiong wrote the code to carry out the model and wrote the paper. Renguang Zuo revised the paper. The codes based on MATLAB platform for the hybrid of DBN and OCSVM are accessible at The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists. Thanks due to two anonymous reviewers' comments and suggestions which help us improve this study. This research was jointed supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at