Stereological bias, which defines the overestimated degree of phase liberation in 2D measurements, is an important phenomenon in liberation evaluations of breakage products and yet remains insufficiently clarified. A proper liberation-evaluation method would greatly advance the field of mining. Here, we develop a novel numerical simulation using the Discrete Element Method (DEM), which models particles with random texture, including the mixed-phase and phase-liberated particles, and quantifies the stereological bias by comparing the cross-sectional measurement of the granular sample with the 3D information. The stereological bias was found to be affected by fractal dimension of the image intensity of particle sectional texture, which is easily obtained via 2D measurements and following image analysis of the cutting plane of the sample. Therefore, this factor is a potentially useful indicator in stereological bias modeling.One of the main purposes of comminution in mineral processing is to achieve valuable mineral liberation at the coarsest particle size possible. This enables us to avoid overgrinding, thereby reducing the cost and energy required in the comminution process. It is also important to accurately assess the degree of liberation of comminuted products to ensure the feedback of correct information and develop the strategy of the entire mineral processing method. 3D information on particle texture can be directly obtained through X-ray computed tomography (CT) and the subsequent image processing Stereological bias has been investigated in a number of past studies. To the authors' knowledge, stereological bias was first mentioned by Gaudin in 1939. He proposed a simple model that estimates the practical degree of liberation using an empirical coefficient called the locking factor, which is derived from the 2D apparent degree of liberation Numerical simulation is effective for constructing a versatile model of stereological bias because it enables flexible parameter setting and rapid and accurate calculation. For example, Miller and Lin numerically modeled particles as small rectangles with individually specified textures Our numerical simulation proceeds in three steps: particle-packing by DEM, random modeling of the simple textures of binary particles, and serial cross-sectional measurement of the particle assembly. By correlating the 2D measured values with the 3D information, we identified a useful index for stereological bias modeling; namely, fractal dimension of the image intensity of particle sectional texture. Particle packing simulation was conducted by the free DEM software ESyS-Particle We modeled binary particles with a relatively simple texture, which reportedly exhibit great stereological bias Serial cross-sectional information in the vertical direction was geometrically calculated as shown in For a statistical treatment of the 2D and 3D information, we define the areal fraction 2D parameters: 3D parameters: To quantify the overestimated degree of liberation in the 2D measurements caused by stereological bias, we denote the gap between the degrees of liberation in 2D and in 3D for phases  Several parameters in the proposed numerical method, such as height of the cross-sectional measurement, interval and number of cross-sections, and the cross-sectional area of the samples, statistically affect the analysis. Proper parameter values were determined in preliminary simulations and discussed elsewhere The integrity of the 2D measurement depends on the height In preliminary simulations, the 2D data were stably measured at cross-section intervals below one-fifth of the smallest particle diameter. In this study, the cross-section interval was set to one-twentieth of the smallest particle diameter. Similarly, the dispersion decreased with increasing number of cross-sections, and the average values were stably obtained when the number of cross-sections exceeded 150. Therefore, we analyzed 600 cross-sections in the present study. As the width Using the modeling process shown in  Subsequently, we evaluated the overestimated degree of liberation in the 2D measurements.   In this chapter, 2D parameter that has a correlation with the stereological bias is investigated. We assume that the complexity of the particle cross-sectional texture has a certain correlation with the stereological bias, because it has been reported that the stereological bias is great on the particles of simple texture comprising grains whose size is comparable to the particles, whereas it is limited on the particles of complex texture It is well known that many natural textures has self-similar feature called We applied Kaneko's method for the quantification of the complexity of particle cross-sectional texture.  Overestimated ratio of liberation for phase In a series of numerical simulations, we investigated the overestimated degree of liberation in 2D measurements, namely, the stereological bias, by the following steps: Spherical particles with a specified size dispersion were randomly generated and freely fallen into a sample cell. This procedure was implemented by a Discrete Element Method. Independent of the particles, core phase elements (phase Binary particle texture was randomly modeled by superposing the particles and phase Serial cross-sectional information was obtained in the height direction of the sample cell. The following conclusions were drawn from the analysis: The proposed method successfully modeled mixed-phase and phase The degrees of phase The degrees of phase When the overestimated degree of liberation of phase