A new metal complexes of potassium 2-(trimethylglycyl) hydrazine -1-carbodithioate chloride [KHdGT] with Cu(II), Ni(II), Co(II), Mn(II), Zn(II), Cd(II) and U(VI)O2 were prepared and characterized using spectroscopic IR, UV-Vis., ESR, 1H NMR and TG analysis. The IR records proved that the ligand behaved as mononegative tridentate SSO with Co(II), binegative tetradentate SNNO with Cu(II), Zn(II), Cd(II) and U(VI)O2, mononegative SNNO in Ni(II) and Mn(II) complexes. Computational DFT were performed for [KHdGT] by (B3LYP) function together utilizing “6-311++G(d,p)” basis set while semi-empirical method was utilized for its Co(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) chelates to infer the entire geometry stabilization and ordinary-style examination for separated chelates. The electronic parameters, for example frontier molecular orbitals, dipole moments and infrared intensities were ascertained. In addition, the prepared chelate used for the separation of Cu(II), Cd(II), Ni(II) and Pb(II) ions from aqueous solution by the inexpensive, simple and rapid flotation technique. The cytotoxic, antioxidant and SOD-like activities were studied for KHdGT and its complexes.Since a long time, Girard's reagents have been used intensely in analytical and coordination chemistry for the preparation of water soluble sulfur compounds which is often used as efficient ligands Ion flotation is considered as an easy, rapid and important separating technique recognized since 1960s, and can be used effectively for the recovery and elimination of ionic species from diluted aqueous solutions ( In continuation of our previous work Throughout the experiments, all chemicals and solvents used were pure and used as received. Chemicals: Girard's (GT), carbon disulfide (CS 0.42 All studied metal complexes were synthesized by mixing 0.4 The prepared ligand and complexes were analyzed using different spectroscopic instruments. A Perkin-Elmer FT-IR Spectrometer 2000 was used in recording the IR spectra over a wavenumber range 4000–370 The fundamental goal for the theoretical studies is to decide the most stable geometry of the ligand and its metal chelates. Computational DFT were performed for [KHdGT] by (B3LYP) function together utilizing “6-311 DFT studies have been utilized to ascertain the dipole moment, mean polarizability and first static hyperpolarizability into account the constrained field ideology. The basic and spectroscopic portrayal of an unfaltering molecule was done utilizing Gaussian 09 program bundle on the private PC An appropriate amount containing a definite quantity of Cu(II), Cd(II), Ni(II) and Pb(II) ions quantified for every single experiment, is mixed with the ligand. The pH of solution desired for each experiment was adjusted using HNO The removal percentage (R %) of each M(II) was calculated using the following relation: The biological activities of free ligand and its complexes were checked in cell growth inhibition experiments. The experiments were applied on human lung fibroblast cell line (WI-38) gotten from ATCC through VACSERA Company for vaccines and biological products, Cairo, Egypt. All reagents used in the experiment were obtained from Sigma company, USA (RPMI-1640 medium, Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 5-fluorouracil and MTT), but Fetal Bovine serum was obtained from GIBCO, UK. 5-fluorouracil is an anticancer drug and it was used as a standard to make comparison with obtained results. KHdGT and its solid complexes were utilized to test the inhibition of cell growth on the cell line stated previously via MTT test The antioxidant activity test was done by adding 2 In this test; the positive control sample is made of the standard anti-oxidant vitamin C (Ascorbic acid). In blank sample; MeOH/phosphate buffer (1:1) used instead of sample without adding ABTS. Also; MeOH/phosphate buffer (1:1) used in negative control sample instead of tested compounds. Bridges and Salin technique KHdGT and its complexes were isolated and the physical properties were verified. It was found that; they are stable in air can be dissolved easily in water, dimethyl formamide DMF and/or DMSO. Thermal analysis proved that all complexes decompose thermally above 300 The position of IR bands for both KHdGT ligand and its complexes are collected in  KHdGT coordinates in a mononegative tridentate manner via CSS and C The type of chelation is a binegative tetradentate in [Cu  Moreover, KHdGT also behaved as mononegative tetradentate in [Ni(HdGT)Cl(H The existence of hydrated and coordinated water molecules in metal complexes proved by the bands appeared at 3450–3353, 1630–1600 and 980–950 The calculated ligand field factors, magnetic moments and the detected band position in Nujol are listed in For Cu(II) complex, the electronic spectrum revealed a wide band at 14285 In case of the green [Co In the electronic spectrum of octahedral Ni(II) complex; two main bands appeared at ca. 15015 and ca. 24,510 While in Mn(II) chelate; both In U(VI)O The ESR spectrum of [Cu G is the exchange interaction factor and it was found to be 6.09. As reported previously by Hathaway In the coordination sphere of Cu(II); the tetrahedral distortion increased as a result of decreasing A The molecular orbital coefficients (α β λ As stated before According to the resulted α TG analysis was carried out to ensure the suggested formulae and structure of prepared ligand and its complexes. The analysis was done under conditions of nitrogen flow within a temperature range from 25 up to 800 The resulted data presented in Fig. S5 support the proposed structures strongly. According to the obtained curves; all coordinated water molecules lost in one step within the temperature range of 195 to 306 Frequency estimation was done to earn the spectroscopic mark of [KHdGT]. There are little contrasts amongst hypothetical and exploratory vibrational wavenumbers as appeared in  It is important to assure the energies of frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) because they are an essential criterion in quantum estimations ( The Gutmann's variation principle, “the bond strength increases as the neighboring bonds get to be weaker” which proved by Linert et al. KHdGT is characterized by small energy showing that charge move fluently in it. This factor affects the biological behavior of KHdGT For the discussion of optimized molecular geometry; the following points can dedicated: The optimized C O In Zn(II) and Cu(II) complexes; C In KHdGT ligand; the bond angles around the coordination sites reduced or increased slightly upon coordination. The coordination of N atom in Co(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) complexes produces elongation in N The HOMO level of the ligand is largely localized on the O, N and S atoms ( The activity of KHdGT as a chelating agent in the separation of toxic metal ions from aqueous solutions have been tested using the simple and fast flotation technique under various parameters (pH, effect of different metal ion concentrations, effect of different concentrations of KHdGT and varying the concentration of HOL). In flotation technique; pH has been always considered as an essential parameter affecting the flotation process. Where; pH is controlling the ionization degree of metal ions, surfactants and chelating compounds. Moreover; the speciation of heavy metal ions in aqueous solution depends on pH, since various insoluble hydrolysis products are formed due to the change in pH It is important to detect the highest concentration of studied metal ions that can be separated from aqueous solutions using KHdGT via flotation method. In this experiment; various concentrations of Cu(II), Cd(II), Ni(II) and Pb(II) ions were floated using KHdGT (4 To investigate the collecting ability of ligand towards studied metal ions; the concentration of ligand varied from (1–5 Different concentrations of HOL were tested to float 2 The incomplete flotation of Cu(II), Cd(II), Ni(II) and Pb(II) ions at higher surfactant concentration is owing to forming a stable, hydrated envelope of surfactant on the surface of air bubbles. Therefore, the hydrophobicity of the formed complex was not suitable for flotation procedure Briefly; according to the obtained results presented in KHdGT and its complexes are used to hinder the growth of cancer cells against Human lung fibroblast cell line (WI-38). In this study, the concentration of compounds that causes 50% of cell death (IC50) is determined. The cytotoxicity check of free KHdGT, its metal complexes as well as Fluorouracil (5-FU) was estimated under the same experimental conditions for comparison purposes and the data present in ( Anti-oxidant activity screening using ABTS method is given in As shown in This study includes the preparation of [KHdGT] and its metal complexes. The isolated ligand and its metal complexes are characterized using IR, UV–Vis.,  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at