The current paper describes the effect of key operating variables (i.e. pH, presence of sodium sulfate, boric acid and sodium lauryl sulfate – SLS) on important features of nickel deposits by means of morphologic and surface roughness analyses and indentation hardness tests. Two substrates (cathodes) were used: 316L stainless steel (SS) or titanium (grade 2). Only changes of pH and additions of Na2SO4 and SLS to the electrolyte largely affected the morphology of the deposits, regardless of substrate type. At pH3, a condition in which relatively high values of current efficiencies were obtained, the addition of 155.9g L−1 of Na2SO4 or 10mg L−1 of SLS to the electrolyte lead to the production of Ni deposits with few hydrogen pits on the surface and regular edges. However, the presence of 155.9g L−1 of Na2SO4 in the electrolyte caused an increase of the average roughness of the deposits in the order of 27 and 54% when 316L SS or Ti cathodes were used, respectively. By adding 10mg L−1 of SLS to electrolyte containing 155.9g·L−1 of Na2SO4 and 8g L−1 of H3BO3, the surface roughness decreased about 24 and 17% when 316L SS or Ti cathodes were used, respectively, without any effect on the materials' microhardness. The results of this work suggest that only the replacement of 316L SS blank cathodes by Ti may not represent significant benefits in terms of product quality.Nickel cathode is priced according to its purity and also surface quality. It is well-known that the deposit's surface quality is affected by many variables, such as applied current density, temperature, pH and concentration of nickel in the sulfate electrolyte ( It is important to recognize that in order to produce nickel cathodes with the desired characteristics a detailed assessment of roughness and hardness is extremely important, which are key properties to distinguish the product value and its performance during the stripping and cutting stages. As the deposits are bent during stripping and cut to produce small sheets, coins or loops for nickel starter sheets, measurements of hardness are relevant. What has not been reported yet is how these operating variables may affect the morphology, roughness and mechanical property of the metal deposit by using not only the conventional stainless steel blank cathodes but also titanium cathodes. In the industrial practice, 316 In this context, the current paper describes the effect of some operating variables, such as pH, presence of sodium sulfate (Na Synthetic electrolytes (1 The electrowinning experiments were conducted in duplicate using electrochemical cell consisting of three cathodes (316 In this experimental set up, it is expected that cathode bags are not required, since a small total deposition area was used within a large volume of electrolyte under stirring. In industrial operations, the competing hydrogen evolution is minimized by controlling the interfacial cathode pH using bags that restrict the diffusion of the protons (H After electrowinning, the nickel deposits were manually stripped from the cathodes, thoroughly rinsed with deionized water and dried in a furnace at 100 Electrochemical measurements by cyclic voltammetry were conducted for better understanding specific trends observed during the electrowinning. The measurements were carried out in a conventional three-electrode cell using an Autolab® (PGSTAT 20) potentiostat controlled by NOVA software (version 1.5). The working electrode and counter-electrode consisted of the same 316 The morphology of selected Ni deposits (disks with diameter of 10 The surface roughness of the Ni deposits was evaluated by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a XE-70 (Park Systems CO.) atomic force microscopy. A silicon cantilever (PPP – NCHR, f The crystal structure of the Ni deposits was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD), using a PANalytical (Empyrean) X-ray diffractometer, with Cu Kα1 (λ The hardness of the Ni deposits was measured by nanoindentation testing, using a Berkovich diamond tip and a Shimadzu (DUH-211S) nanoindenter. The maximum load applied was 50   The presence of 155.9 The simultaneous addition of Na     It is well-known that the replacement of 316 The AFM images were used here to make a visual and qualitative observation of surface roughness as a function of the substrate type and electrolyte's characteristics. The images showed in  By adding 10 Only peaks ascribed to Ni crystals with a face centred cubic (FCC) lattice (ICCD 04-0850) were detected for all the analyzed samples, as expected. The preferred orientation detected for the samples produced under different experimental conditions, using different types of substrates, is the (200) direction. The orientations (111), (311) and (220) were also detected in all analyzed samples with low relative intensities.   The reported increase of the Ni hardness when boric acid was added to the electrolyte may cause a decrease in the deposit's ductility. Under industrial conditions, the cathodes and starter sheets produced during longer plating times will be much thicker, which is expected to affect the surface roughness and the property measured here. Nevertheless, an increase of the Ni hardness may cause operational problems if critical values are attained. The decrease in the material ductility may affect the bending behavior of the deposit thus reducing the effectiveness of stripping stage and preparation of loops due to eventual fractures. An increase in hardness may also reduce the performance of the cutting machines used to make small Ni sheets or Ni coins, which are typical commercial products. The current paper described the effect of pH, sodium sulfate, boric acid and sodium lauryl sulfate on important characteristics of nickel deposits, which were produced on 316 The authors would like to thank Votorantim Metais – Nickel and Anglo American Platinum for providing technical support. D. Majuste thanks the sponsoring companies of the