Radial head fractures require careful assessment and appropriate treatment to prevent disability from stiffness, deformity, post-traumatic arthritis, or other serious complications. Most undisplaced fractures are treated non-surgically, the main emphasis being focussed on early mobilization in order to achieve good results. The treatment of more complex radial head fractures associated with, or without, elbow instability remains controversial with the surgical choices ranging between open reduction and internal fixation and radial head excision – either early or late, with the option of radial head replacement to be considered. Simple, early excision of the radial head has more recently been reported to result in an unfavourable outcome in a significant number of cases. The Mason classification is widely used and guides the treatment plan. Understanding the mechanisms of normal elbow function and practising good surgical technique are crucial in the management of these injuries. This article discusses the aetiology, mechanism of injury, classification and management of radial head fractures.The elbow consists of three articulations: the radio-capitellar, the ulno-humeral or ulno-trochlear and the proximal radio-ulnar joints. While the ulno-trochlear articulation is constrained and allows only flexion–extension, the radio-capitellar joint is less constrained and allows forearm rotation in addition to flexion-extension. The proximal radio-ulnar joint, between the radial head and lesser sigmoid notch of the ulna, is minimally constrained and allows forearm rotation, while the radio-ulnar interosseous membrane and the distal radio-ulnar joint are important in retaining the axial alignment of the radial head in relation to the proximal ulna. The ligamentous structures around the elbow are vital in providing elbow stability. On the medial side the ligaments are well defined, with anterior, posterior and transverse bands of the medial collateral ligament (MCL). On the lateral side they are less distinct and consist of the radial collateral, lateral ulnar collateral and the accessory radial collateral ligaments. The annular ligament stabilizes the radial head onto its proximal radioulnar articulation. The radial head is a disc-shaped structure with a flattened, slightly concave end, which articulates with the capitellum of the humerus. The margins of the radial head forms the wall of a cylinder of slightly elliptical cross-section, most of which contributes to the proximal radio-ulnar joint. These articulating surfaces are covered with thick hyaline cartilage, whereas the anterolateral portion of the radial head, which does not come into contact with the sigmoid fossa in rotation is covered by thinner, yellowish cartilage. The intra-articular nature of the radial head means that there are no soft-tissue attachments to the most proximal portion of the radial head, which is covered by hyaline cartilage, therefore its blood supply runs within the medullary cavity from the radial neck and becomes tenuous when radial neck fracture occurs. The major function of the radial head is to act as a spacer, hence patients can get good functional results even if avascular necrosis occurs. Anatomical reduction of displaced fractures is necessary to prevent incongruity that can later develop into post-traumatic arthritis. The radial head stabilizes the elbow and forearm in two ways. Firstly, the articulation between the radius and capitellum resists valgus forces applied to the elbow. Second, it participates in axial load transfer in activities involving pushing and gripping. Displaced radial head fractures reduce the surface area available for load transfer as a result of the loss of congruity between the radial head and capitellum The radial head, working with the lateral ligament complex, stabilizes the elbow against valgus forces. Hence, if the radial head support is lacking, disruption of the lateral collateral ligaments, or a combination of both, instability will occur. In the presence of an intact medial collateral ligament, the radial head contributes 30 percent to the valgus stability of the elbow, whereas in medial ligament deficiency, the radial head becomes the main constraint, contributing 60 percent to valgus stability. The radio-capitellar articulation bears more than half of the load transmitted across the elbow. Morrey et al. These fractures account for only 1% of all childhood fractures, but are the most common of the proximal forearm injuries in children. The Chambers and Wilkins  Valgus fractures (most common, Type A Salter-Harris type I and II injuries of the proximal radial physis Type B Salter-Harris type IV injuries of the proximal radial physis Type C Fractures involving only the proximal radial metaphysis Fractures associated with elbow dislocation Type D Reduction injuries Type E Dislocation injuries  Angular injuries (Monteggia type III variant) Torsional injuries  Osteochondritis dissecans of the radial head Physeal injuries with neck angulation Head displacement is the most common injury pattern and is usually produced by a valgus force, and less commonly in association with shear forces in elbow dislocations. Neck displacement occurs by torsional or angular forces. Valgus injuries of the radial neck, which are the most common injuries, occur as a result of falls onto the outstretched hand with the elbow in extension. The radial head is mostly cartilaginous and well protected. However, the forces transmitted to the physis or metaphysis, which are the weakest areas, result in the fracture occurring in these areas. The head can be angulated, translated or completely displaced. Associated injuries occur up to 60% of the time with valgus injuries and should be looked out for. These include olecranon fractures and medial epicondyle avulsions. Radial head fractures can also occur as a result of a shear mechanism in association with elbow dislocation. The head is often completely displaced and it, or large parts of it, may be found anteriorly or posteriorly, depending on whether the head fracture occurred during spontaneous relocation of the elbow or during the dislocation. The treatment of these fractures depends on the amount of angulation and displacement. The guidelines for head and neck displacement vary slightly in different texts and between authors; however, the guidelines below have become accepted standards. Fractures with less than 30° of angulation and less than 5 mm of displacement do not require reduction. They can be treated symptomatically in a sling initially with early mobilization. Some authors suggest closed manipulation for patients nearing skeletal maturity for fractures with greater than 15° angulation. In fractures with angulation between 30 and 60°, closed reduction should be attempted. If less than 45° of angulation is achieved with minimal translation and 60° of pronation/supination are obtained, then reduction can be deemed acceptable. The stiffness incurred when an open procedure is carried out does not justify any potential gains obtained by improved accuracy of reduction. Fractures that are angulated more than 60° and with more than 5 mm of translation are not likely to be reducible by manipulation alone therefore surgical intervention is justified. However, closed manipulation should still be attempted once in the operating room prior to an open surgical intervention.   Radial head fracture is the most common elbow fracture in adults. Radial head fractures are commoner than radial neck fractures in adults in contrast to the opposite relative incidence in children. These fractures account for 33% of all elbow fractures and 1.5–4% of all fractures. The patient usually presents having fallen onto the outstretched hand. There is localized pain, swelling and decreased elbow motion. The wrist, especially the distal radio-ulnar joint, may be damaged simultaneously and the presence of wrist pain, grinding, or swelling should be determined. The wrist should be examined for stability of the distal radio-ulnar joint. The presence of bleeding, even through small puncture wounds, should alert the examiner to the possibility of an open injury. Neurovascular symptoms of numbness, tingling, or loss of sensation should be identified to help rule out nerve or arterial injury. Radial nerve function is particularly important to assess, with emphasis on the posterior interosseous nerve. Damage to this nerve results in weakness or paralysis of the finger extensor muscles. The presence of severe pain should alert the examiner to the possibility of compartment syndrome and if in doubt compartment pressures need monitoring. Elbow stability has to be assessed even in seemingly undisplaced fractures. The integrity of the medial collateral ligament can be assessed with valgus load with the elbow in 30° of flexion. The examination may also include an assessment of any limitation of elbow extension due to elbow joint haematoma, which can be confirmed with the anterior sharks fin or fat pad sign on lateral view radiographs due to displacement of the anterior fat pad, which can be improved by aspirating the haematoma and injecting local anaesthetic. This in turn can facilitate subsequent assessment of the range of flexion–extension and pronation/supination. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the elbow should be obtained. A Greenspan view may help in delineating the fracture: this is a modified lateral view, taken with the beam angled 45° towards the radial head. It allows visualization of the radial head without overlap of the coronoid process. Computerized Tomography (CT) may help in identifying the fracture pattern, assessing comminution, identifying associated injuries and in planning surgical management. It can also to identify fractures not visualized or appreciated on plain radiographs. Associated injuries are commonly encountered with comminuted radial head fractures. The Mason classification ( Minimally displaced fractures with no mechanical block to motion should be treated non-operatively with symptomatic treatment and early mobilization. Patients who present with radial head fractures should undergo evaluation for any block to elbow extension and elbow instability as described above. Aspiration of the elbow joint and an injection of local anaesthetic can dramatically improve pain and then permits a better evaluation of the range of movements and the degree of stability. A collar and cuff or sling should be used initially for comfort – but only for a couple of days. Early mobilization from day 3 onwards in order to maintain and improve the range of movements is very important. Regular follow-up with repeat radiographs is essential to ensure that delayed displacement of the fracture is not missed. Displaced and comminuted fractures of the radial head should alert the surgeon to the possibility of associated injuries which, if missed, can result in functional impairment and adverse outcomes. Coronoid fractures and ligamentous injuries can be associated with comminuted radial head fractures. As the radial head is crucial to stability of the elbow, acute excision of the radial head without replacement in these circumstances has fallen out of favour. In general, elbow stability will be restored with radial head fixation or replacement and Medial Collateral Ligament (MCL) reconstruction. If the elbow joint continues to be unstable in spite of bony reconstruction and ligament repair, a hinged external fixator may be necessary. The surgical option for managing displaced or comminuted radial head fractures consist of excision (early or late), internal fixation or radial head replacement. The surgical approaches most often used are the lateral (Kocher's) approach or the Global extensile approach. The incision for the Kocher approach begins over the lateral epicondyle and extends distally towards the ulna. It utilizes the interval between the anconeus and the extensor carpi ulnaris (ECU). The fascia at this level is incised and the muscles retracted to expose the LCL complex. Further dissection is kept anterior to the LCL and an anterior capsular flap may be raised from the lateral epicondyle to allow exposure of the joint and the radial head. Injury to the posterior interosseous nerve can be avoided by keeping the forearm pronated to move the posterior interosseous nerve away from the field, dissection should be kept proximal to the bicipital tuberosity and retractors should be placed with care around the proximal radius. If further distal exposure of the radial neck is required, the annular ligament can be incised and repaired after reduction and fixation. The Global approach consists of a midline posterior incision with flaps lifted on either side. The same intermuscular interval is exploited as in the Kocher's approach, between the anconeous and ECU. The advantage of the global approach is the ability to access the medial and lateral aspects of the joint and direct access for fixation of an associated proximal ulna fracture. The disadvantage is that a long incision is required with large flaps on either side for exposure. In severely comminuted radial head fractures, radial head excision may be an option. This is technically easier than attempting internal fixation. There are conflicting reports about the outcome of radial head excision in the acute setting. It is certainly contra-indicated in presence of an injury to the MCL or the interosseous membrane. Even in the absence of ligamentous injury, excision has been associated with delayed complications including pain, joint instability, decreased strength, cubitus valgus and osteoarthritis. Internal fixation of the radial head is the preferred treatment if it can be achieved. It is technically demanding surgery and the surgeon should always have radial head replacements available in case the radial head is not reconstructable. The tendency is for the fracture to mal-reduce into a shortened and valgus position. It is important to differentiate between a partial articular fracture where a part of the articular surface is still connected to the radial shaft and a complete articular fractures where there is a complete separation of the head from the shaft with comminution of the head fragment. The options for fixation are – mini-fragment screws and plates, headless Herbert-type compression screws and pre-contoured plates. Temporary fixation is usually achieved with K wires and definitive fixation is carried out using 1.5 or 2 mm mini-fragment screws. Subchondral bone gives the best purchase for screws and counter-sinking the screw heads is essential to avoid impingement. If the fracture extends into the radial neck, a T- or L-shaped plate may be required. The bicipital tuberosity is the most distal extent for placement of the plate, as dissecting further distally risks injury to the posterior interosseous nerve. It is important to visualize the articular surface, either under vision or under image guidance, to make sure the articular surface is reduced properly. If a plate is being used, it is important to place this in the safe zone. This is the arc of the radial head that is non-articular, hence metalwork in this zone will not interfere with forearm rotation. Several methods have been described to ascertain the safe-zone, however a simple method is one described by Caputo et al. Radial head replacement arthroplasty is considered when the fracture is displaced, comminuted and stable internal fixation is not possible. It is also considered when the fracture involves more than one third of the radial head. Radial head replacement is particularly indicated for fractures with associated ligamentous injury (elbow dislocation or distal radio-ulnar joint disruption) and coronoid or olecranon fractures which are displaced or unstable. The difficulty is deciding which of the radial head fractures meet these criteria. The radial head prosthesis may be a pyrocarbon or a metallic implant. Silicone rubber prostheses are no longer used, as they are not sufficiently rigid and are prone to fragmentation, causing late inflammatory reactive synovitis. Radial head fractures are fairly common injuries presenting to the orthopaedic surgeon. There have been many studies reporting the outcomes of various methods of treatment for acute and chronic radial head fractures. Charalambous et al. Radial head fracture fixation is a technically demanding procedure. Studies have shown better outcomes with fixation when compared to excision. Radial head replacement arthroplasty is used in cases of severe comminution, when the radial head is considered un-reconstructable. Silastic radial head replacements are no longer used as they are not rigid enough to provide resistance against valgus loading and also are prone to fragmentation and the development of inflammatory synovitis. Radial head fractures are the most common of elbow fractures. The spectrum of radial head injuries ranges from simple undisplaced fractures to comminuted fractures associated with other osseous and/or ligamentous injuries. The presence of a displaced or comminuted fracture should alert the surgeon to the possibility of an associated ligamentous or bony injury and this should be sought. The most common associated injuries affect the coronoid, proximal ulna, the medial and lateral collateral ligaments and the longitudinal radio-ulnar interosseous ligament. The wrist should also be assessed to rule out an associated Essex-Lopresti injury. Undisplaced fractures are managed non-surgically, with symptomatic treatment and early mobilization. Radial head excision is to be avoided if possible in the acute setting, except in elderly and low demand individuals without any associated osseous or ligamentous injuries. Comminuted fractures in younger patients with larger fragments should be fixed if possible, with the understanding that they may require a further operation for metalwork removal. The use of low-profile implants in the safe-zone is encouraged. If the fracture fragments are small and if fixation is not possible in the safe-zone, or in the presence of significant metaphyseal comminution, a replacement arthroplasty is advocated. Metallic implants are preferred to silastic prostheses. There are no randomized studies currently, which compare radial head fixation with radial head replacement. An algorithm for the management of radial head fractures has been provided in