Arylsulphatase activity on two substrates, p-nitrocatechol sulphate (pNCS) and p-nitrophenyl sulphate (pNPS), in milk and commercial rennet from different sources was measured. Cows’ and sheep's milk contained arylsulphatase active on pNCS, and batch pasteurization reduced the activity. Rennets from animal sources, including calf, kid and lamb, exhibited arylsulphatase activity with different substrate specificities. A fermentation-produced chymosin from a genetically engineered microorganism did not exhibit detectable arylsulphatase activity. A commercial rennet paste showed arylsulphatase activity after dialysis.Arylsulphatase (E.C. 3.1.6.1) is a widely distributed enzyme in mammalian, bacterial, fungal and mollusk species. Arylsulphatases have been classified as type I and II according to their substrate specificity and sensitivity to inhibitors ( Sulfation is one of the primary routes for conjugation of phenolic compounds in ruminants ( Arylsulphatase activity has been reported to be present in raw cows’ milk ( This study was undertaken to explore the role of arylsulphatase in the release of species-related alkylphenols from their conjugates and in flavour development in cheese. Cows’ and sheep's milk and rennet from different sources were analyzed for arylsulphatase activity. Two substrates commonly used for the assay of arylsulphatase, Raw sheep's milk was obtained from the Spooner Agricultural Research Station, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Milk was received frozen and kept at −40 Calf, kid and lamb rennets, fermentation-produced chymosin and raw and pasteurized (63 Arylsulphatase activity in the samples was measured by the method of The enzyme assay was modified for samples of rennet paste by using 1 Both cows’ and sheep's milk contained low activity on The activity of type I arylsulphatases on natural simple phenol sulphate conjugates has been reported by Calf rennet contained arylsulphatase activity on The low levels of arylsulphatase activity in animal rennets could play a role in the hydrolysis of conjugates in cheese during a long ripening period of 2–6 Historically, rennet paste produced from stomach tissues and contents of the fourth stomach from kid, goat, lamb or calf was used in the manufacture of Italian cheeses, primarily for its lipase activity ( It was found that the flavour of Provolone cheese was improved by the use of kid rennet paste compared with calf rennet paste ( Low levels of arylsulphatase activity were found in milk and various rennets. Thus, arylsulphatase could play a role in the hydrolysis of conjugated alkylphenols during manufacture and ripening of cheese and contribute to the complex flavour-producing enzymatic reactions that occur in the cheese. Further studies are needed to clarify the role of arylsulphatases in the flavour development in cheese.