The extraction of uranium from sulfuric acid media using trioctylamine (TOA) impregnated activated carbon has been studied. The latter was prepared by direct adsorption of the extractant onto the solid phase (dry method) and its analysis by the Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) and the Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) proved that TOA has successfully been grafted to the surface of the activated carbon with a loading capacity of 0.67g TOA per 1g activated carbon. Parameters affecting uranium extraction by the TOA impregnated activated carbon such as the contact time, the pH of the uranium solution, the initial uranium ion concentration, the volume of aqueous solution to the weight of the impregnated activated carbon ratio as well as the extraction temperature were investigated by batch experiments. Loaded uranium was eluted using 0.1mol/l hydrochloric acid. The experimental results have been studied by both kinetic and sorption isotherm models.As is the case with the most common radionuclides, uranium is considered to be not only an irreplaceable raw material for nuclear energy, but also a serious long-term potential environmental hazard because of its long half-life as well as its high radiological and biological toxicity ( In view of the above, the current paper has focused on the uptake behavior of uranium from sulfuric acid media by solid phase extraction using activated carbon (AC) as a supporting material anchored with TOA. The extraction behavior of the uranium on the applied TOA impregnated activated carbon was studied under varying experimental conditions using batch operation mode in order to determine the optimum loading conditions. In the mean time, the latter was interpreted via sorption kinetic and adsorption isotherm modelings. The working activated carbon has been provided by Sigma Aldrich of Germany as untreated powder of 100–400 mesh size while the working trioctylamine solvent (d For uranium from sulfate media, another extraction mechanism has been shown to operate; namely the extraction of a neutral uranium sulfate species in an adduct type of mechanism: For the preparation of the working material, TOA in benzene solution was impregnated onto activated carbon by dry method technique which is widely used ( The above impregnation steps are summarized as follows:  Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM): the SEM model Philips XL 30 ESEM is considered as the most reliable and convenient tool for the study of physical structure of solvent impregnated resin beads ( Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR): the FTIR model Thermo Scientific Nicolet IS10, Germany is used for evaluating the interaction between the extractant and the beads of the activated carbon. Several batch experiments were performed to study the different relevant adsorption factors. Except otherwise cited, each experiment was performed by shaking 1 The amount of metal ion loaded on the impregnated activated carbon was calculated using the following equation: The removal percent of ions from the aqueous phase is calculated from the relation: Uranium concentration in the different aqueous stream solutions was measured via its arsenazo (III) complex using SP-8001 UV-VIS spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 655 It has been reported that Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) is the most reliable and convenient tool for the study of physical structure of solvent impregnated resin beads ( Evaluation of the interaction between the extractant and the beads of the activated carbon has been characterized by Fourier Transform Infrared spectrometer. FTIR has been applied to the activated carbon before and after impregnation. The IR spectra for activated carbon are given in We have investigated the parameters which affect uranium sorption, such as contact time, pH, initial metal ion concentration, solution volume to TOA impregnated AC mass (v/m ratio), and temperature.  According to Accordingly, the most important parameter that would control uranium extraction is the pH of the loading sulfate solution. In order to obtain the optimum pH value for uranium extraction from sulfate media, several batch tests were performed at different pH values ranging from 0.50 The effect of initial uranium concentration on its extraction upon TOA impregnated AC was studied by contacting a fixed mass of the working adsorbant (1 The effect of uranium solution volume to TOA impregnated AC mass ratio (v/m) on uranium extraction from sulfuric acid solution was then studied. For this purpose, a series of adsorption experiments was performed using different volumes of a uranium solution (25–800 The effect of temperature on uranium adsorption upon the working TOA impregnated AC was studied from 25 to 70 Summing up, it can be mentioned from the above data that stirring a volume of 100 According to According to Plotting Eq. The obtained kinetic data were thus analyzed using the pseudo second-order model with the form: The common sorption isotherm models indicating those of Freundlich, Langmuir and Dubinin–Radushkviech (D–R) were used to study the fitness of the obtained isotherm data. Freundlich equation was derived to model the multilayer sorption and for the sorption on heterogeneous surfaces. In the logarithmic form of the Freundlich equation K Langmuir sorption isotherm models the monolayer coverage of the sorption surfaces and assumes that sorption occurs on a structurally homogeneous adsorbent and all the sorption sites are energetically identical. The linearized form of the Langmuir equation is given by: A plot of C The Langmuir parameters given in The Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) isotherm is more general than the Langmuir isotherm because it does not assume a homogeneous surface or constant sorption potential but it is concerned with studying the nature of the sorption process ( A trioctylamine (TOA) impregnated activated carbon has properly been prepared and applied for uranium extraction from synthetic sulfuric acid media. The studied optimum conditions for uranium loading upon 1 Both the kinetic and the sorption isotherm modeling have been applied upon the obtained data. Thus, it was found that the uranium sorption obeys a pseudo-second order reaction while the Langmuir sorption isotherm model is most suitable to describe the studied sorption reaction.