Fractures of the distal humerus are often managed surgically, particularly displaced patterns involving the articular surface. Injury assessment and treatment strategy formulation are reviewed, along with controversies regarding indications, surgical approach, and primary arthroplasty. Details for positioning, various anatomic approaches, and stabilization are covered in chronological order along with associated pitfalls and controversies. The technical details are supported in concluding discussion of postoperative regimen, complications, and outcomes supported by selected annotated recent articles. Displaced fractures of the distal humeral articular surface Displaced extraarticular fractures in which alignment cannot be maintained with external splinting techniques Open intra- or extraarticular fractures Fractures with associated vascular injury  Fractures limited to the capitellum (AO type B3.1) or lateral condyle of the distal humerus (AO type B1) can be managed with an isolated lateral approach, avoiding the need for triceps reflection or olecranon osteotomy. Fractures involving the capitellum and lateral trochlear ridge as a single fragment.  In isolated distal lateral column and capitellar fractures, if the fracture pattern involves the medial column or has more complex involvement of the trochlea, a lateral approach will be insufficient.  Reasonable function and motion can be achieved with functional bracing for extraarticular distal third fractures. Plate fixation, while possessing some risk for infection or iatrogenic nerve injury, offers more predictable alignment and quicker return of function. The “bag of bones” method of nonsurgical splint management of comminuted patterns should be reserved for minimal-demand, medically unfit patients with the goal being a minimally painful, functional pseudarthrosis. Very distal or comminuted fracture patterns in osteoporotic bone may be better managed with either total elbow or distal humeral hemiarthroplasty instead of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) (  For distal humerus fractures Splint immobilization ORIF Primary total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) Distal humeral hemiarthroplasty For isolated distal lateral column and capitellar fractures ORIF for displaced or unstable patterns Fragment excision Nonoperative management (temporary immobilization followed by protected motion at a 3- to 4-week window) for nondisplaced fractures  As many of these injuries result from high-energy mechanisms, circumferential inspection of the elbow is required. The proximal shaft fragment is especially prone to penetrate the triceps and posterior soft tissues. Associated ipsilateral injuries (wrist, hand) are easy to miss due to pain and deformity at the elbow. Anterior displacement of the proximal fragment should raise concern about injury to the brachial artery and/or median or radial nerves. The ulnar nerve is more vulnerable to injury with the more common posterior displacement of the proximal fragment and in more comminuted patterns. Quality of distal pulses and sensorimotor function of the ulnar, median, and radial nerve groups must be determined and documented. Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographic views are routine.  Overlapping fragments may obscure visualization in comminuted patterns, and traction views under anesthesia may help in determining fracture pattern and fixation strategy. Computed tomography (CT) is unlikely to affect surgical decision making in most complex patterns, as the same approach will be used in most such cases. However, a capitellar fracture with significant medial involvement of the trochlea may not be adequately exposed and managed through a lateral approach. If the pattern appears limited to the lateral articular surface (isolated distal lateral column or capitellar fractures), CT scanning may offer pertinent detail regarding the displacement, comminution, and medial extent of fracture involvement. Although extension of capitellar fractures into the lateral trochlea can be visualized on lateral elbow radiographs (the “double-arc” sign, showing displaced anterior capitellar cortex outlining cortex of lateral trochlear ridge), apparent isolated capitellar fractures should be reviewed by CT scan for verification. In In  Trochlea The medial and lateral eminences (medial is larger) are separated by an intervening sulcus or groove. The trochlea has an articular arc of 270 degrees. The coronoid and olecranon fossae reside at the terminations of the groove anteriorly and posteriorly, respectively. Ulnotrochlear articulation The guiding ridge of the proximal ulna’s semilunar notch glides within the ulnar groove. The ulnohumeral contribution to varus/valgus stability increases with compromise of the medial collateral ligament (MCL) or radiocapitellar articulation. Anteriorly, the contact of the coronoid process against the trochlea resists posterior subluxation of the joint. Therefore, every effort should be made to restore at least the anterior portion of the trochlea. Radiocapitellar joint This joint is the platform for forearm rotation. Although described as a “secondary stabilizer,” the radial head is critical for valgus stability if the MCL or lateral trochlea is deficient. If the coronoid process of the ulna is compromised, an intact radiocapitellar articulation will resist posterior subluxation. Medial and lateral metaphyseal “columns” (see These columns straddle the olecranon and coronoid fossae to provide a distal platform for the articular bearing. The medial column terminates as the medial epicondyle, which is nonarticular and is a useful platform for medial fixation. The lateral column ends at the capitellum, whose nonarticular posterior surface allows for more distal posterior hardware placement. Keeping the fossae for the coronoid, olecranon, and radial head clear of hardware or displaced bone is essential for normal elbow motion. Lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex originates just anterior and distal to the lateral epicondyle, along the axis of rotation. If detached, it must be repaired at the conclusion of the procedure. It consists of the following: Annular ligament LCL Lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) This ligament is a critical stabilizer for posterolateral stability and must be preserved. It originates from the central portion of the capitellum along the axis of elbow rotation and inserts along the crista supinatoris (supinator crest) of the proximal ulna. Consider the LUCL as a “sling” for the radial head, limiting posterolateral subluxation of the proximal forearm. MCL This ligament originates from the lateral inferior portion of the medial epicondyle. It is composed of anterior, posterior, and transverse bands. The anterior band contributes to valgus stability and inserts along the sublime tubercle of the proximal ulna. It is critical for valgus stability if the radiocapitellar articulation is compromised. Ulnar nerve The ulnar nerve pierces the medial intermuscular septum to enter the posterior compartment of the brachium about 8 cm from the medial epicondyle. It enters the cubital tunnel along the dorsal aspect of the medial epicondyle and then passes superficial to the posteromedial ulnohumeral joint capsule and the posterior band of the MCL. Mobilization and anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve is often recommended with hardware placement along the medial epicondyle. Radial nerve The radial nerve runs with the profunda brachii artery along the posterior portion of the humeral diaphysis in the groove between the medial and lateral heads of the triceps muscle. It pierces the lateral intermuscular septum about 10 cm proximal to the lateral epicondyle, continuing distally between the brachialis and brachioradialis.  Fractures limited to the capitellum articular surface (AO type B3.1) and the lateral portion of the trochlea (some B3.3 patterns) can be stabilized with screws placed in either an anterior-to-posterior or a posterior-to anterior orientation. Isolated lateral column fractures (AO types B1.1 and B1.2) can be managed with either direct lag screw placement or single lateral column plating, depending on the pattern.  Optimal positioning depends on the desired approach. For lateral approaches (used in management of isolated lateral condyle or capitellum fractures), supine position with the elbow flexed on an armboard is usually sufficient. Most bicolumnar distal humerus fracture patterns will require a posterior approach, which may be performed with the patient in either the supine or lateral decubitus position.  Supine positioning The injured arm is across the chest. A bump behind the ipsilateral scapula will help keep the arm across the chest while allowing more “working room” for elbow flexion. If iliac crest bone grafting will be necessary, a bump is placed behind the desired hip. The surgical team is on the side of the injured arm. Tilting the operating table slightly away from the surgical team will assist in maintaining arm position across the chest and minimizes the shoulder falling back into extension. Supine positioning also allows for easier airway access for the anesthesia team. Lateral decubitus positioning The lateral decubitus position allows for easy visibility along the posterior humerus. The arm may be draped over an armholder or bolster, which offers some stability for the brachium during surgery. The use of a beanbag with an axillary roll and appropriate protection for the contralateral peroneal nerve is preferred. In all but the most distal patterns, the use of a sterile tourniquet that may be removed to accommodate proximal exposure is advised over nonsterile tourniquets. Adequate access to the airway for the anesthesiologist must be ensured before draping.  Supine positioning with an armboard is sufficient for exposure and fixation of the ISOLATED lateral column or capitellum fracture. If there is medial column or trochlear involvement, however, a separate medial approach or olecranon osteotomy with the arm across the chest is advised.  Prior to prepping and draping, verify adequate fluoroscopic visualization of the humeral shaft and elbow with current patient position. A sterile draped Mayo stand from the contralateral side may be used to stabilize the forearm across the chest. A wrapped forearm sleeve clamped to the stand with a nonpenetrating clamp can stabilize the limb onto the tray. Alternatively, a gauze roll wrapped around the wrist and stabilized with traction weights on the contralateral side of the stand can also be used. A magnetic strip, adhesive pouch, or stable platform on the patient can be used for placement of instruments during the surgery, which usually requires a high volume of instrument passage.  Insufficient protection of the contralateral axilla and peroneal nerve. Inadequate access for fluoroscopic visualization, which may be more difficult in the lateral decubitus position. Lateral positioning with an armboard may impede elbow hyperflexion, limiting access to more anterior articular fragments.  Beanbag, axillary roll, and armholder or bolster for the lateral position. Towel bump, sterile Mayo stand for supine position. Possible ipsilateral armboard for supine position. For isolated distal lateral column and capitellar fractures, a short armboard provides support of the elbow while allowing both surgeons access to the elbow.  The “universal” approach for elbow fracture or instability management is through a posterior skin incision with full-thickness skin flaps to allow for circumferential access. The plane of elevation is deep to the cutaneous nerves along the brachium, so potential painful neuromas can be avoided. Potential disadvantages are dead space, hematomas, and seromas created with such large flaps. Furthermore, access to medial, lateral, or anterior elements may require significant retraction efforts, particularly in obese patients or with the elbow in extension. Separate medial and/or lateral incisions may be used for focal medial or lateral pathology, respectively. Although this avoids the creation of such large skin flaps, full articular access through either the triceps-reflecting or olecranon osteotomy pathways (see later) will be hindered.  Posterior approaches differ based on how they navigate around the extensor mechanism. Each technique offers different levels of articular exposure and potential postoperative drawbacks. Common methods include: Olecranon osteotomy Triceps-splitting approach Triceps-reflecting approach (Bryan-Morrey) Triceps-reflecting anconeus pedicle (TRAP) flap Paratricipital (triceps-sparing) approach The initial skin and subcutaneous approach is similar among all posterior approaches. A posterior midline skin incision is made over the triceps to the tip of the olecranon, at which point it is carried either just medial or lateral to it. Distally, the incision passes along the proximal ulnar subcutaneous border. Full-thickness flaps are developed deep to the triceps fascia proximally and along the forearm fascia distally. The ulnar nerve can be palpated along the medial edge of the triceps, posterior to the medial septum, where it can be visualized following release of the superficial fascia ( If the nerve is to be transposed (recommended for posteromedial capsulotomy or placement of hardware along the medial epicondyle), it should be mobilized from the cubital tunnel. The fascia overlying the cubital tunnel (often referred to as Osborne bands) is divided along with the aponeurosis between the two heads of the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) distally. Proximal-to-distal dissection and mobilization of the nerve will allow identification of the motor branch to the FCU, which should be preserved. Short, articular branches entering the posteromedial joint capsule (see The distal portion of the medial intermuscular septum is excised, as it will tether or compress the anteriorly transposed nerve. A full-thickness subcutaneous plane over the medial flexor-pronator origin is developed for placement of the transposed ulnar nerve at the conclusion of the procedure. The medial and lateral borders of the triceps are visualized, and the distal portion is sharply elevated from the posterior humeral cortex. The muscle can be elevated from the bone proximally, leaving it tethered distally at its olecranon insertion ( Olecranon osteotomy The olecranon osteotomy offers the widest exposure for both fracture reduction and hardware placement. Full access to the humeral metadiaphysis and all but the most anterior portion of the articular surface is available through this approach ( Potential drawbacks include olecranon nonunion and compromise of ulnar component placement in subsequent TEA, if necessary. Furthermore, hardware used for fixation of the osteotomy is frequently symptomatic, requiring removal. Following the previously described posterior approach and ulnar nerve mobilization, a posterior capsulotomy is completed on the medial and ulnar aspects of the ulnohumeral joint, exposing the central “bare area” of the ulnar sigmoid notch. The osteotomy is to broach the articular surface at this level. Before actually performing the osteotomy, it is useful to temporarily apply whatever fixation method is preferred: Kirschner wires (K-wires), intramedullary compression screws, or a posterior plate. This allows the fixation device to assist with anatomic reduction at the time of closure. However, account for the bone loss associated with the kerf of the oscillating blade if pre-positioning a posterior plate for fixation. An osteotomy is performed with a thin oscillating saw blade in either a transverse or an apex-distal chevron configuration through the posterior cortex, stopping short of penetrating the articular surface ( The osteotomy is completed with osteotome leverage, fracturing through the remaining subchondral bone and cartilage at the level of the bare area (see The proximal fragment, with the triceps still attached, is reflected to expose the posterior articular surface and humeral cortex. The TRAP variation of this approach involves inclusion of the anconeus with the proximal fragment and triceps, thus avoiding denervation of this dynamic stabilizing muscle. Following posterior capsulotomy, the fascia is divided between the anconeus and extensor carpi ulnaris to the level of the anconeus insertion on the ulna ( The anconeus is separated from its ulnar insertion, leaving the proximal origin intact, just proximal to the level of the osteotomy (see After muscle detachment from the ulna and underlying joint capsule, the osteotomy is completed, and the muscle is reflected proximally with the triceps and proximal ulnar fragment (see Exposure and access for fixation of anterior articular surface fragments may require release of the collateral ligament (medial or lateral; Triceps-splitting approach This approach is a full-thickness, midline split of the triceps tendon down to the ulnar insertion, allowing adequate exposure of the posterior capsule and proximal ulna. The muscle is divided proximally to expose the posterior humeral cortex, but the proximal extension of this approach is limited by the radial nerve. Distally, the tendinous split is extended over the proximal ulna, elevating both sleeves subperiosteally. The ulnar nerve must be identified and protected as the medial sleeve is reflected. Any ligamentous detachment from the epicondylar fragments to improve articular exposure mandates anatomic repair with bone tunnels or suture anchors with nonabsorbable suture (#0 or #2) upon closure. The proximal 1 cm of the olecranon tip can be resected to improve articular surface visualization. The split triceps tendon is repaired with nonabsorbable suture at the end of the procedure. Traversing drill tunnels for suture placement (#2 nonabsorbable) through the proximal ulna may help stabilize the repair onto the ulna. Postoperatively, the patient will need to refrain from elbow hyperflexion (>90 degrees) or resisted extension for at least 6 weeks. Triceps-reflecting approach This approach entails reflection of the entire extensor mechanism from the proximal ulna following the medial capsulotomy. Following ulnar nerve mobilization and reflection of the distal triceps from the posterior humeral cortex, the triceps tendon, ulnar periosteum, and forearm fascia are sharply reflected from the olecranon as a contiguous sleeve from the proximal ulna with the fascia along the ulnar forearm in a medial-to-lateral direction ( Alternatively, a thin wafer of bone from the olecranon tip may be elevated with the tendon to minimize the likelihood of inadvertent perforation and enhance the subsequent repair by allowing bone-to-bone healing. Detachment of collateral ligament origins may be required to reflect the proximal ulna and enhance articular exposure. Again, the collateral ligament origin must be repaired upon closure. Following fracture fixation, the tendon is repaired to the proximal ulna with nonabsorbable suture passed through ulnar drill tunnels created with a 2-mm drill bit. The repair must be protected against resisted elbow extension or hyperflexion for at least 6 weeks. Paratricipital approach Aside from elevation of the medial and lateral aspects of the muscle from the posterior humeral cortex, the triceps is left undisturbed. The central portion of the muscle may be elevated proximally off the humerus, taking care to avoid injury to the radial nerve. Although this approach avoids the potential disadvantages of triceps insufficiency, osteotomy nonunion, or symptomatic posterior ulnar hardware, visualization of the articular surface is significantly limited. This approach is indicated for the most simple fracture patterns, such as an extraarticular or simple intercondylar split configuration. Collateral ligament origin detachment will allow for reflection of the triceps-forearm unit and exposure of the humeral metaphysis and articular surface, if necessary. Alternatively, conversion to olecranon osteotomy is quite simple. Anatomic repair of the collateral ligament origin and subsequent protection of repair are required at the conclusion of the procedure.  For isolated fracture patterns of the lateral condyle or capitellum, lateral incision and joint exposure with any necessary extension up the lateral humeral column should provide adequate access for lateral articular hardware and lateral column plate placement.  The interval for the Kocher approach is between the extensor carpi ulnaris and the anconeus ( To avoid disruption of the LUCL origin ( Forearm pronation will maximize the distance between the scalpel and the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN), lying between the bellies of the supinator muscle along the radial neck. The lateral portion of the anterior joint capsule can be sharply reflected from the lateral humerus to expose the lateral articular surface. Further access to the lateral column can be obtained by extending the incision proximally along the lateral supracondylar ridge.  The Kaplan approach offers an exposure to the lateral epicondyle and articular surface similar to that of the Kocher approach but splits the extensor musculature more anterior, providing greater exposure of the radial neck than the Kocher interval, if needed ( The skin incision is made from the lateral epicondyle toward Lister’s tubercle with the forearm in neutral rotation for a distance of 4 cm. The incision basically bisects the radiocapitellar joint but (unlike the Kocher interval) uses the interval between the extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL) and the extensor digitorum communis (EDC). This interval can be identified by the muscular ECRL originating from the supracondylar ridge and the more tendinous EDC just posterior. The extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) is just deep to this interval, overlying the joint capsule (see The interval may be incised as one layer down through the joint capsule, keeping the forearm pronated to avoid injury to the PIN. Distally, divide the annular ligament for exposure of the radial neck. The supinator may also be divided, but be aware of the PIN, which can usually be palpated within the muscle. As with the Kocher interval, the Kaplan approach may be extended proximally up the lateral supracondylar ridge to provide proximal exposure of the lateral column.  Tourniquet use is helpful during the approach and fracture exposure, particularly for dissection and mobilization of the ulnar nerve. It may then be deflated for more proximal exposure or fracture fixation work. Comparisons between olecranon osteotomy and triceps-splitting or sparing approaches for extraarticular or more simple intraarticular fracture patterns suggest equal functional outcomes while potentially avoiding osteotomy complications such as nonunion or subsequent need for hardware removal. However, olecranon osteotomy negates the diverging “wedge” effect of the intact proximal ulna on the trochlear groove, thus facilitating reapproximation of the medial and lateral fragments. If an assistant or device can support the forearm to eliminate the pressure on the ulna on the trochlear groove in articular split patterns, avoiding osteotomy may be reasonable. Alternatively, collateral ligament detachment (with subsequent repair) with proximal ulnar reflection can provide articular exposure. Bottom line: if adequate reduction can be achieved in a timely manner without osteotomy, proceed with triceps splitting or preserving approach. Furthermore, there are times when the decision to proceed with ORIF versus TEA will be made intraoperatively. Osteotomy obviously complicates TEA and preservation of the extensor mechanism. However, do not compromise the articular reduction or construct stability to avoid osteotomy complications. The radial nerve may also be located posterolaterally by following the lateral brachial cutaneous nerve, which branches from the radial nerve and emerges on the posterior aspect of the lateral intermuscular septum. If greater access to the articular surface is required for an isolated distal lateral column or capitellar fracture, sharp detachment of the LUCL origin may be beneficial. The ligament origin will need to be anatomically restored with #2 braided suture either through drill tunnels or with a suture anchor at the conclusion of the procedure.  Allowing a thick oscillating saw blade with a wide kerf to penetrate the articular surface may result in bone loss at the osteotomy site. Upon repair, this may result in narrowing of the ulnar sigmoid notch and incongruity of the ulnohumeral articulation. In isolated distal lateral column and capitellar fractures, avoid inadvertent detachment of the LUCL origin just anterior and distal to the lateral epicondyle unless it is deemed necessary for greater medial articular access.  Thin oscillating saw blade, osteotomes for olecranon osteotomy Hardware for eventual osteotomy repair: 6.5- or 7.3-mm cannulated screw with washer, 18-gauge tension band wire, 0.045-inch K-wires, or precontoured olecranon plate 2.0-mm drill bit, looped suture passer, and #2 or #5 nonabsorbable suture for triceps tendon reattachment or collateral ligament repair Possible suture anchor with #0 or #2 nonabsorbable suture for collateral ligament repair  The repair strategy for distal humerus fractures is restoration and stabilization of articular congruity with stable proximal fixation to the medial and lateral columns that allows for early motion. Historically, distal comminution, osteoporotic bone, and limited fixation options have made this a difficult objective. Fixation failure usually occurs at the supracondylar level where the bone is thinner and stable distal fixation is difficult to obtain. Prolonged immobilization to protect marginal fixation leads to joint contracture. The most common strategy for fracture management entails initial assembly and provisional fixation of the distal platform and then “docking” of the articular platform to the humeral metadiaphysis with definitive distal fixation and compression columnar plating.  Every screw engaging the distal fragments should pass through a plate. Screws should engage a fragment on the opposite side that is also fixed to a plate. As many screws as possible should be placed through plates into the distal fragments. Each screw should be as long as possible. Each screw should engage as many articular fragments as possible. Screws in the distal fragments should interdigitate from each side. Columnar plates should be used to achieve compression fixation of the articular segment at the supracondylar level. Plates must be strong enough to resist failure prior to fracture union. The remaining description of the repair technique assumes posterior exposure of bicolumnar patterns through one of the posterior approaches described previously. For more complex patterns, the olecranon osteotomy approach will provide the most versatile exposure.  Plain radiographs often underestimate the degree of articular comminution. The surgeon must avoid the temptation to immediately remove the loose fragments and begin reassembling them on the back table. Before mobilizing (or removing) the fragments, their relationship in situ to the other fragments and columns should be noted. A dental pick or small curette is used with irrigation to debride hematoma from the joint and among articular fragments. Provisional K-wires are used to assemble fragments in their native anatomic position relative to each other and to the epicondyles. Following olecranon osteotomy (if used), the forearm pulls the medial and lateral epicondylar fragments apart through the collateral ligaments as it falls away from the humerus. This force may need to be neutralized by an assistant or by temporarily securing the forearm to the Mayo stand until the joint platform is provisionally reassembled. In situations of severe comminution, every effort should be made to restore at least the anterior articular surface. Smaller or thin osteochondral fragments that cannot eventually be captured by screw fixation through plates may require fixation through countersunk threaded pins or compression screws. However, these should be applied sparingly, as excessive permanent hardware in the distal platform will obscure the passage of vital screws placed through the distal portions of the columnar plates to stabilize the articular block to the proximal fragments. Either headless or standard compression screws, in particular, have a larger profile that may hinder subsequent screw placement. If possible, it is better to delay such countersunk hardware placement until after distal screws have been placed through plates. For exceedingly small or thin osteochondral fragments that cannot be captured by screws placed through columnar plates, countersunk threaded pins may be used as permanent fixation. Use of 0.045-inch or 0.062-inch K-wires is generally preferred. While the fragment is held in place, the pin is drilled antegrade through the articular surface at such an angle that it will exit outside of the joint cavity and not under a plate ( When the pin exits the opposite cortex, it is drilled retrograde (recall that the pin driver must be switched to the “reverse” setting for threaded pins) until it is well seated under the articular surface while still maintaining purchase of the thin subchondral articular bone fragment (see The pin is then cut, leaving enough length exposed to allow instrument purchase for eventual removal, if necessary (see In situations with articular comminution, avoid altering the medial-lateral joint dimensions with compression fixation ( Bone loss or comminution of the trochlear groove may require structural bone grafting to preserve the medial-lateral dimensions. A narrow “spool” or segment of corticocancellous graft that does not contact the ulna can be used as a strut, as long as the capitellum and medial trochlear ridge are still present.  As inadequate distal fixation is a commonly cited reason for failure, modern precontoured distal humerus plates available from a variety of implant manufacturers offer more distal screw holes, both locking and nonlocking, in parallel and perpendicular configurations ( If such plates are not available, 3.5-mm recon plates can be contoured along the medial and lateral columns. However, they do not usually offer as many distal fixation holes.  Parallel and perpendicular precontoured plate systems that offer adequate distal fixation are widely available. In biomechanical studies using a gap model to simulate metaphyseal comminution, parallel plate orientation was stronger. However, superiority of one orientation over the other has not consistently been shown clinically. Often, exposure/working angle limitations and fragment orientation will be the determining factor for posterior or parallel orientation of the lateral column plate. It should be noted that, while some systems offer posteriorly positioned lateral column plates, the distal locking screw holes are oriented to provide obliquely oriented rigid fixation. While many experts recommend locking screws in comminuted or osteoporotic bone, their superiority over nonlocking constructs has yet to be established in clinical trials.  Following articular surface restoration and provisional fixation, the distal segment is “docked” to the proximal metadiaphysis. This entails selecting, contouring, and positioning plates so that they will support as many traversing screws as possible in the distal segment while compressing it to the proximal columns. If there is significant metaphyseal comminution, the repair should proceed from proximal to distal using smaller lag screws and perhaps temporary smooth K-wires to create a metaphyseal platform. Metadiaphyseal bone loss is not uncommon in open metadiaphyseal high-energy injuries in which the proximal bone penetrates the posterior soft tissues and strikes the pavement. In these situations, primary shortening can be used to close the gap and provide compression of the remaining shaft to the distal segment (up to 2 cm shortening has negligible effect on the soft tissue sleeve and elbow mechanics). This is preferred over primary bone grafting to maintain length, as union will be slower, and such injuries are more prone to infection. Avoid distortion of the olecranon fossa in such situations. If needed, resect a portion of the olecranon tip to avoid impingement with extension. Preoperative radiographs of such an open injury ( Postoperative radiographs following a subsequent bone-grafting procedure at a later date (see The distal segment can be either held in the reduced position by an assistant or provisionally secured with 0.062-inch smooth pins placed down the medial and lateral columns. Even with the pins, someone usually needs to neutralize the weight of the forearm, which is pulling the distal segment anteriorly through the collateral ligaments. Columnar plates are selected that: Provide the maximum number of holes for fixation in the distal segment (preferably three from each side). Provide at least three holes for purchase in a stable, noncomminuted metaphysis or diaphysis proximally. Contact the distal segments. This is especially important if nonlocking fixation is to be used, as it will pull the distal fragment to the plate, potentially displacing it. Some plate contouring may be necessary. Preferably do not end at the same level proximally, which would theoretically create a stress riser at that level. The plates are then provisionally applied to the distal and proximal segments, employing either temporary pin holes in some systems, screws placed in slotted holes in the proximal or distal fragments, or clamps holding the plates onto the bone. The medial column plate should be oriented more in the coronal plane, reaching distally to the inferior portion of the medial epicondyle. The lateral column plate can be placed posterolaterally so that the distal screws project distally, anteriorly, and medially across the lateral condyle, capturing trochlear components ( The distal screws are placed in an alternating sequence (medial, lateral) to ensure that at least some screws from each side are able to traverse to the far side of the distal fragment to obtain optimal stability before the trochlear intersection gets too crowded. Recall that, ideally, each screw should pass through a plate, be as long and traverse as many fragments as possible, and capture a fragment on the opposite side that is also attached to a plate. Verify that no screws traverse or obstruct the coronoid, olecranon, or radial head fossae of the distal humerus. The columnar plates are then definitively fixed to the proximal fragment with at least three bicortical nonlocking or three unicortical locking screws in each. If possible, the surgeon should work to place at least one nonlocking screw in compression mode through each plate to promote union at the supracondylar level.  Avoid use of traversing lag screw fixation across comminuted articular fragments, as this may compress and alter the anatomic contours of the joint surface (do not narrow the articular groove; see Avoid using screw fixation for initial reassembly of the articular surface. Distal screws that are not placed through columnar plates potentially impede space for placement of essential fixation components later.  Temporary smooth or permanent threaded 0.035-inch or 0.045-inch pins Small countersunk or headless compression screws (to be placed after screws from columnar plates, if necessary)  The wound is irrigated, removing articular debris. The olecranon osteotomy, if performed, is repaired. Interdigitations along the articular surface are used to verify rotational orientation of fragments. If an intramedullary compression screw has been predrilled and preplaced prior to the osteotomy, the screw (with a washer) is placed back into the fragments and tightening is stopped just before contact with the triceps tendon. This may be supplemented with a tension band ( For tension band wire passage, a transverse bone tunnel is drilled with a 1.5- to 2.0-mm drill bit in the dorsal half of the proximal ulna, distal to the osteotomy site. The distance of the drill tunnel from the osteotomy should equal the distance from the osteotomy to the tip of the olecranon. The 18-gauge wire is placed through the tunnel, crossing each limb of the wire over the osteotomy site, and passing one arm under the shaft of the screw, distal to the washer. As the screw is tightened, the surfaces of the osteotomy site should align and compressed. The ends of the wire are twisted together while a loop is twisted into the other arm of the wire to create a double-twist configuration to the tension band. Both An alternative to intramedullary screw fixation is the use of two parallel K-wires crossing the osteotomy site as the proximal anchor point for the tension band wiring. However, the K-wires should not be directed down the medullary canal. They should obtain purchase in the anterior ulnar cortex along the base of the coronoid process, as seen in the transverse olecranon fracture pattern in Precontoured olecranon plates may also be used for osteotomy repair. The joint is flexed, extended, supinated, and pronated to verify that there is no crepitus or hardware protruding into the articular surface. Fracture, olecranon articular congruity, and hardware position are verified with fluoroscopy or plain radiographs before proceeding further. If a triceps-reflecting approach was used, 2.0-mm drill tunnels are placed in a cruciate manner for reattachment of the triceps to the olecranon with #2 nonabsorbable suture. A transverse drill tunnel just distal to the cruciate holes is placed to supplement the repair with a separate #2 suture. Triceps-splitting approaches are repaired with #2 nonabsorbable suture in figure-of-eight fashion. Two transverse tunnels in the proximal ulna can be used to further anchor the repair to the bone with nonabsorbable suture. The medial and lateral joint capsule can be repaired with #0 Vicryl suture. If used, the tourniquet should be deflated to verify hemostasis prior to further closure. The surgeon should not hesitate to place a drain if there is significant oozing of the wound. The ulnar nerve is placed in the previously prepared subcutaneous pocket anterior to the medial epicondyle. The nerve may be secured anteriorly with a fascial sling elevated and sutured to the subcutaneous tissue or by a direct suture from the subcutaneous tissue to the medial epicondyle. Prior to placing the stitch in the medial subcutaneous layer, the surgeon must verify that it is not being passed through or around the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve. Following suture placement, the nerve is subjected to a gentle proximal-distal “glide” test to verify that it is not incarcerated. The subcutaneous layers are closed with absorbable suture. Nylon or staples can be safely used for skin, but I prefer mattress 4-0 nylon directly over the thinner layer at the olecranon, as staples may apply more tension than is needed for skin edge approximation at that level. A sterile padded dressing is applied and the arm is splinted in either extension or 90 degrees of flexion (see Controversies). An antecubital splint may be more effective in obese patients.  Medial and lateral columnar plates with the maximum number of distal screw holes for purchase of the articular platform  There is currently insufficient evidence to recommend routine ulnar nerve transposition following distal humeral fracture fixation in the absence of preoperative deficits or symptoms of compression. In my opinion, this only invites problems. The surgical manipulation of the nerve and subsequent swelling alone can induce postoperative sensory or motor changes, which are usually transient. Leaving the nerve in the groove not only subjects the surgeon to significant self-reproach; it may also result in a return to the operating room for a transposition. Also, the pain from flexion-induced traction on the nerve left in the groove can significantly hamper motion exercises. Inadequate length of olecranon osteotomy intramedullary screw fixation can result in failure. It is safer to at least have thread contact with the endosteum of the ulnar canal (usually 85–100 mm). Supplementation with an 18-gauge wire tension band construct is advised. Excessively long K-wires used as an alternative to intramedullary screw fixation risk injury to the anterior interosseous nerve.  Postoperative splinting of the elbow in extension may help with hemostasis and also help the patient in regaining extension postoperatively. Extension splinting also minimizes tension along the olecranon incision line and should be considered if posterior flap perfusion appears tenuous.  The surgical approach is as described earlier for either the Kaplan or Kocher interval with or without proximal extension. The fracture site is cleared of hematoma and smaller articular fragments with irrigation and a dental pick. Smaller, free fragments that cannot be captured with hardware may need to be excised. The fragment(s) are reduced with a dental pick or small reduction clamp. Smooth 0.035-inch or 0.045-inch K-wires are used for provisional fixation (  Carefully scrutinize the reduction, verifying its relation to the lateral trochlear ridge. For capitellar fractures, the articular fragment must not be fixed with any proximal displacement, which would obstruct the radial head during elbow flexion. Anterior articular surface fractures ( More complex patterns may be involved in the lateral epicondyle and posterior aspect of the lateral column. This posterior involvement may include the posterior Fractures involving the entire lateral condyle may be better stabilized with a lateral column plate. The capitellar fracture seen in Either precontoured lateral column plates or a manually contoured recon plate can be applied. For optimal stability, three screws in the proximal fragment and as many as possible in the distal fragment are advised. Smaller, 2.7-mm screws in the distal fragment may allow for a greater number of screws to be placed at variable angles. If possible, distal fragment screws should pass through the plate, the lateral condylar fragment, and into the stable medial column.  There is conflicting evidence as to whether anterior-to-posterior or posterior-to-anterior screw fixation is superior for the capitellum. Screws placed from the posterior aspect avoid disruption of the anterior articular surface, but stripping of the posterior soft tissues potentially strips the capitellar vascular supply. Nonetheless, clinically significant avascular necrosis has not been shown to occur consistently with posterior hardware. If countersunk headless screws are placed through the articular surface, verify that they would not protrude if slight settling or subsidence of the capitellum did occur. With either orientation, at least two screws placed at divergent angles is recommended.  Along with verifying reduction and hardware placement with fluoroscopy, the joint should be passively ranged through flexion, extension, supination, and pronation. If the capitellum is severely comminuted and cannot be anatomically restored, excision is an option If necessary, the LCL origin is repaired. This may be accomplished with either suture anchors or drill tunnels exiting the posterior lateral condylar cortex. With either technique, the suture must enter the bone at the anatomic origin of the LCL. Placement posterior to that results in posterolateral subluxation.  The wound is irrigated, and the common extensor origin and capsule are reapproximated as a single layer with #0 absorbable suture. Subcutaneous and skin closure is performed with 3-0 absorbable and 4-0 nylon sutures, respectively.  In capitellar fragments with only a thin rim of subchondral bone attached (such as in the Kocher-Lorenz-type fragment), there is little room for screw thread purchase. Avoid screw overpenetration. If purchase of such a thin fragment is impossible, fragment excision can be considered (see text). Avoid hardware protrusion into the olecranon fossa.  Headless, cannulated compression screws or 2.0-mm screws to be used with countersink for management of isolated articular surface fractures. Either 3.5-mm recon or precontoured lateral column plates for management of isolated lateral column fractures. If reattachment of LUCL origin is needed, suture anchors with #0 or #2 braided suture are useful.  The wound should be checked within the first few days, and any hematoma that may be compromising posterior skin flaps should be evacuated. Postoperative mobilization depends on stability of fracture fixation. A recognized advantage of rigid, stable fixation of these fractures is early pursuit of motion with hopes of avoiding debilitating stiffness. Therefore, we strive to have these patients working in a supervised therapy program on flexion and extension within 5–10 days.  Professional therapist supervision and guidance are essential during the early postoperative phases. Pain, swelling, and uncertainty regarding appropriate level of discomfort during exercises complicate the early motion recovery initiative. Patients also need to be directed to maintain motion and function of surrounding joints (digits, shoulder). Swelling is an omnipresent foe in the early and middle phases of recovery, hindering efforts at motion and placing significant tension on the wound. Therefore, I prefer to leave the sutures/staples in for about 3 weeks. The patient has enough difficulty maintaining motion without the added concern of wound dehiscence following early suture removal. Weekly radiographic follow-up is advised in the first 2–3 weeks, especially if the patient is in an aggressive motion regimen.  Fixation failure or nonunion averages 6% with modern methods. Risk factors include more distal fracture patterns and inadequate fixation (1⁄3 tubular plates, K-wires, or screws to fix columns). This may be less common with better bicolumnar plate options using multiple distal locking and nonlocking screw holes. It can be minimized by following the principles mentioned above for bicolumnar patterns. Malunion: mild degrees of extraarticular procurvatum, recurvatum, and varus or valgus deformity are usually well tolerated. Infection: Superficial infections can be difficult to distinguish from mild wound hematoma or erythema, and usually subside with oral antibiotics. Deep wound infections, if detected early, require prompt surgical debridement with retention of hardware. Intravenous antibiotic therapy is also recommended. At times, suppressive therapy until fracture union is required, at which point hardware can be removed. Nerve complications: The ulnar nerve is most commonly injured, both upon injury and during surgery. Most injuries are transient and can be followed expectantly if the nerve was transposed. If the nerve was left in situ, reexploration and transposition may need to be considered. While the ulnar nerve is more at risk with triceps-reflecting approaches, the radial nerve is more vulnerable during triceps-splitting exposures. Olecranon osteotomy complications: Prominent, symptomatic hardware is common and may necessitate removal. A 6% nonunion rate that requires treatment has been reported. Stiffness: Some motion loss is virtually inevitable following fractures with articular involvement. More than 30 degrees flexion contracture or flexion restriction beyond 120 degrees may result in significant impairment. Risk factors for stiffness include advanced age, more severe soft tissue or bone injury, delayed surgery, and prolonged Degenerative arthritis may result from failure to restore articular anatomy, osteonecrosis from free bone fragments, loose fragments, or hardware protruding into the joint. Salvage with linked (vs. unlinked) TEA is a reasonable measure in older patients. However, younger individuals undergoing TEA for posttraumatic osteoarthritis have more problems, particularly early loosening.  The published literature on distal humerus fractures is mostly composed of Level III–IV studies, often underpowered, with heterogeneous fracture patterns and patient populations. For example, the results of extraarticular or noncomminuted patterns are likely to differ considerably from those of more complicated patterns. Also, different outcome measurement tools with varying scoring weights on specific domains (motion, pain, activities of daily living) permeate the reports to date. While earlier series used fewer of the modern fixation options available today (precontoured plates with a greater number of distal fixation points, locking hardware), we are now seeing more reports demonstrating relative success with these implants. Despite difficulties in making direct comparisons among studies, patterns do emerge that can help guide treatment and patient expectations: Despite acknowledged complications from surgery, rigid ORIF of bicolumnar distal fracture patterns is superior to nonoperative treatment in medically competent individuals. Functional outcomes of 84%–100% ratings of good/excellent using the Mayo elbow performance score (MEPS) and recovery of 70%–75% flexion/extension strength of the uninjured have been reported. Moderate range-of-motion deficits (flexion contractures of 20–30 degrees can be expected. Age is a significant variable when comparing treatment outcomes for comminuted or very distal fracture patterns. With modern implants, ORIF has been successful in the elderly population with osteoporotic bone; there is evidence supporting the use of primary TEA over ORIF, but controversy persists. TEA advantages of faster rehabilitation and earlier motion must be tempered against a lifetime weight-bearing restriction and complications associated with component wear, loosening. There is limited data for comparison of TEA versus ORIF, but early results suggest TEA as a safe, effective method for in management of distal humerus fractures in the elderly population with similar functional outcome scores and range of motion. The major complication (need for return to surgery or failure of the intended treatment with recommendation for further surgery) rate following ORIF was slightly higher (9.4% vs. 5.7%) in a recent meta-analysis. Distal humeral hemiarthroplasty avoids the risk of nonunion and fixation loss associated with ORIF along with polyethylene wear and weight bearing restrictions associated with TEA. Olecranon osteotomy does not complicate the intraoperative conversion from ORIF to TEA. Currently, one recent series of 26 patients (mean age 62, range 29–92 years) with mean follow-up of 7.5 years (range 2–11 years) suggested similar early functional outcomes as that seen with ORIF and TEA. Radiographic ulnar wear correlated more with time after surgery rather than patient age and was linked with lesser clinical results (higher pain score, lower satisfaction). In addition, four patients were eventually revised to hemiarthroplasty for component loosening or periprosthetic fracture. Recovery of flexion is usually more rapid than extension. Greater recovery occurs in the first 6 months, although modest gains may continue through 2 years. Nonoperative management of displaced, unstable patterns is reserved for those unable to safely undergo anesthesia or with advanced dementia. Patients with advanced age (>75 years old) fare better with operative management in the form of ORIF or arthroplasty.  Early, active postoperative motion is the ideal. However, this effort must be tempered by fracture and ligament stability. In cases of significant osteoporosis or marginal fixation, motion may need to be delayed for 3–4 weeks while the elbow is protected with a splint. The most common complication following ORIF of capitellar fractures is stiffness from capsular contracture. Intraarticular incongruity and hardware impingement are less common causes. Settling or separation of fracture fragments may occur as a result of osteonecrosis, at times requiring delayed fragment excision. Delayed osteoarthrosis has been described, but this is not always progressively symptomatic and may not require further intervention. Results following ORIF are based on a number of smaller clinical series, but in general reflect good functional outcomes. Excision of irreparable capitellar fractures usually produces satisfactory short-term results, but delayed stiffness or instability is common. Verification of MCL and trochlear integrity is critical before capitellar fragment excision.  Final range of motion may not be determined for months. Many patients quietly make significant gains once swelling subsides, although they may have seemed to have plateaued beforehand. Maintain motion of joints proximal and distal to the elbow. Shoulder pain and stiffness are frequent problems for patients who keep the limb at their side during elbow surgery convalescence.  Any postoperative motion regimen must be tempered by the stability of fracture fixation. Delaying aggressive motion work, especially passive stretching modalities, may be necessary in cases of marginal distal fixation. Protect triceps repair by avoiding resisted extension in the first 6 weeks following triceps-splitting or -reflecting approaches.  Static progressive splinting may be a useful adjunct to motion work in the early stages, alternating between phases of flexion and extension. 