An optimization of the binary GdCl3–ACl (A=Na,K,Rb,Cs) systems has been carried out using the CALPHAD technique. The new modified quasi-chemical model in the pair-approximation for short-range ordering was used to describe the Gibbs energies of the liquid phase in these systems. Based on the measured phase equilibrium data and experimental thermochemical properties, the GdCl3–ACl phase diagrams were optimized and calculated. A set of thermodynamic functions has been optimized based on an interactive computer-assisted analysis. The calculations based on the obtained descriptions show good agreement with experimental phase diagrams and thermodynamic values.As is well known, molten salt electrolysis has been widely used for the production of rare earth metals and their alloys. Phase diagrams are the most important data for fused electrolytes. A few papers have been published that deal with the binary phase diagrams relating to rare earth chlorides. As one of the systematic studies on the measurement and calculation of phase diagrams involving rare earth chlorides The phase diagrams of the GdCl All thermodynamic data of pure components come from the FACTBASE and USERBASE Substituting the thermodynamic properties for solid and liquid state into following Eqs. The integral enthalpies of mixing of gadolinium chlorides with alkali chloride have not yet been determined by experiment. Due to the chemical similarity of the lanthanide chlorides, the thermodynamic are expected to be very close to each other. For this reason, we calculate the mixing enthalpy at 1150 K by using thermodynamic model and list them in In order to optimize the phase diagram with short-range ordering, a modification of the quasi-chemical theory of Guggenheim The Gibbs energy of the solution is given by For Eqs. All collected data, including phase diagram data, thermodynamic properties of pure components and intermediate compounds, are used together to optimize the thermodynamic properties and phase diagrams by using the SAD optimizer. The liquid phases of the GdCl In the new approach, the molar energy of The expression for the Gibbs energy of formation of the intermediate compound According to the thermodynamic data optimized above, the GdCl Comparing the calculated values with experimental data of the four GdCl In the GdCl In all phase diagrams it can be seen that the stoichiometric compounds show solid–solid phase transformations. Because the transformations occurred below the liquid phase line, this software cannot optimize these transformations; this is its defect. According to experimental phase diagram, we also show these transformation lines by dotted lines, just like the intermediate compound, 2RbCl⋅GdCl The integral enthalpies of mixing of GdCl The optimized interaction coefficients Using the software SAD, the phase diagram and thermodynamic data available in the system were critically assessed. In general, the calculated phase boundaries agree well with the experimental data. The thermodynamic properties of the immediate compounds were estimated. The optimized thermodynamic parameters were used to calculate phase diagram and the calculated and experimental phase diagrams are thermodynamically self-consistent. The project is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, Foundation of Natural Science of Anhui Education Committee, and Youth Foundation of Anhui Normal University. The authors are grateful to the Canadian Science Foundation and Professor A.D. Pelton’s research group in Montreal University for their financial support and software offering.