Bubbles in flowing foams deform, coalesce, and rupture. The bubble size, however, determines to a great extent the functionality and mechanical properties of the foam. Often it is not possible to measure directly the bubble size in a flowing foam, either because the system or the foam itself is not transparent. In order to determine the average bubble size in a flowing foam, a novel approach to estimate the average bubble size was developed, based upon the overflowing foam liquid content and conductivity measurements.
                  A flowing foam column with variable orifice diameters was designed and experiments were performed with different gas flowrates, orifice diameters and surfactant (Sodium dodecyl sulphate) concentrations. Image analysis was used to measure directly the bubble size in the foam. When progressively smaller orifices were inserted, more coalescence was observed, as well as a decrease in the overflowing liquid content and the foam conductivity. Estimating the bubble size from these measurements showed close agreement with the directly measured bubble sizes.Foams are both a useful and problematic phase ( When foams are a desired phase, the foam bubble size determines to a large degree the effectiveness of the separation, as this is related to the liquid content. The bubble coalescence rate in the foam determines the stability or persistence, and can be estimated from changes in bubble size. A sudden change in the flow area or flow direction can alter the foam liquid hold-up and foam homogeneity, and hence affect flow upstream and downstream of the fitting ( Measuring the average, bulk bubble size of flowing foam is difficult, as both foams and their containing vessels are usually not transparent. Average bubble size has been measured directly using image-processing ( In this study, a novel method for estimating the average bubble size in a flowing foam from other, more convenient measurements will be derived. An experimental system was designed that allows controlled degrees of coalescence to be applied to flowing foams. This system was used specifically to test the size estimation method. A series of experiments were performed in which the surfactant concentration, the gas flowrate and the degree of coalescence were varied. The bubble size was measured both directly using image analysis, and estimated using the proposed method. It will be shown that, following calibration of the method, very close agreement between the directly measured and estimated bubble size is achieved. The conductive properties of foams are well established.  When foam continuously overflows from a vertical column, the liquid flowrate ( Using the standard foam drainage equation ( For dry foams, Also, In practice, the overflowing foam liquid content, For The velocity of a foam and its liquid content are generally interlinked; faster flowing foams usually being wetter than slower flowing foams. Recent theory ( The equations presented above are based on dry foam drainage theory and is only strictly applicable for liquid contents up to about 3–5%. It is possible, using recent extensions to the drainage theory (e.g., A Gas from an air cylinder was bubbled through a metal sparger (hole diameter At the top of column is a collector to catch the overflowing foam and return it to the large A digital video camera was installed The surfactant used was sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), at concentrations of 0.7 and Automated image analysis has been used previously to measure bubble size ( Images of the foam under different experimental conditions are shown in  While the increase in the average bubble size appears small (<20%), the average number of coalescence events that a bubble experiences to produce the observed size is more significant. The number of coalescence events, It can be seen that, for a gas flowrate of The overflowing foam liquid content is calculated as the ratio of the overflow liquid flowrate and the gas flow rate. In Conductivity sensors were used to measure the average voltage, at a constant applied current, of the flowing foams. In these experiments, each data point was obtained by the average of 10 sets of conductivity measurements. In The average bubble size measured when the foam flowed through the column without an orifice inserted was used to estimate the values of A linear regression was performed using the form of For the CMC, the values of The voltages measured for foam are approximately 3 orders of magnitude greater than that inferred for a column containing liquid alone ( The data shown in In   A new approach for the estimation of average bubble size in a vertical flowing foam has been developed, based on foam conductivity and liquid content. A flowing foam column that allows the foam flow to be disturbed by insertion of orifices of variable sizes was constructed and used to validate the approach. The average bubble size has been calculated from the overflow liquid content and the conductivity measurements for foams of the different concentrations of SDS. This approach to calculate average bubble size based upon the conductivity of the foams, compared favourably to the results obtained from image processing. Optical methods provide surface information for the foams, while the conductivity method provided information for the bulk of the foams. While the image-processing algorithm cannot be used for opaque systems, the conductivity method described here can be applied.