The gas permeability of coalbeds is of critical significance to gas exploitation and recovery in coal seams. These properties are affected by bedding plane orientation. In this paper, the influence of different bedding angles in coal on mechanical properties, and gas permeability behavior in a complete stress–strain process is investigated. Experimental results reveal that with an increase in the bedding angle, the number of channels was found to increase along with the initial permeability. The increased bedding angle also caused the compression strengths of the coal sample to decrease initially and then increase. The corresponding compression strength was highest at a bedding angle of 0° followed by a bedding angle of 90°. Under these two conditions, the failure surface of coal was usually due to tensile splitting. The coal strength was lowest at a bedding angle of 60°, where the coal mass experienced shear failure during the bedding plane. The coal sample at a bedding angle of 30° exhibited compound split-shear failure.The bedding structure is an important component of the petrographic composition of coal in sedimentary rock. During ore-forming processes, different layers of coal, material particle size, and cementing in coal are reflected in bedding features ( Unfortunately, the influence of the bedding angle on these coal mass properties has yet to be systematically investigated. To the best of our knowledge, previous studies have focused primarily on homogeneous coal masses in terms of the mechanical and gas permeability properties of coal ( The purpose of this paper is to investigate the influences of bedding plane orientation on the mechanical and gas permeability behavior of coal. This study was implemented by triaxial permeability tests. These observations and measurements should prove helpful in the design of hazard detection and mitigation measures during the coal mining process. In this study, a coal block was taken from the #7 coal seam in the Dabaoding coal mine in Sichuan Province, China, where the seam has a relatively clear bedding structure. The coal samples were categorized based on the included angle The dimensions of the samples were Ф 50 mm × 100 mm ± 0.25 mm. To minimize processing errors and the effects of differences in the inner structure of the samples, photographs, visual observations, and statistics were used to eliminate samples with surface cracks and voids that might influence the permeability experiment. Coal is a heterogeneous material; repetitive tests were performed with each of the bedding structures to reduce the influence of rock heterogeneity on the test results. Silicon rubber was evenly coated on the coal specimen to prevent gas leakage from the coal wall. The specimen was set up between top and bottom pressure shafts in the triaxial chamber after the silicone rubber was fully dry. A thermal shrunken pipe was jacketed to the specimen and both ends of the pressure shafts. We used the “Triaxial Stress Thermal–hydrological–mechanical Coal Gas Permeameter” that was independently developed by Chongqing University to conduct a series of experimental studies. Experiment gas used nearly pure methane (concentration of 99.99%). The samples were then placed in the triaxial cell and subjected to a preliminary compression stage by increasing the isotropic stress to 3 MPa. Gas was allowed to enter the samples under a pressure of 2 MPa, which was maintained for 2 h with stable gas flux. If the injecting pressure does not decrease in next 2 h, the coal is regarded to fully adsorb the gas. After the coal fully adsorbed the gas, the axial stress was continuously applied by stress control at a speed of 0.05 MPa/s until coal specimen failure. After failure, the stress control shifted to displacement control at a speed of 0.1 mm/min until the residual strength of the samples remained stable. The stress–strain–permeability complete process was measured during this loading of axial stress. The gas permeability Because the sample wall was covered with seepage-proof silicon rubber, surface capillary cracks could not be examined; however, the type of damage based on the extension of major cracks can be described. Many geotechnical engineering practices and experimental results have demonstrated that coal permeability is closely related to its stability and failure mode. During the process of becoming unstable (i.e., as cracks develop and failure occurs), the degree of extension of the original joint crack and its ongoing development determine the seepage features of gas in coalbeds. The existence of bedding joints has been shown to greatly influence the mechanical properties of coal samples ( The compression experiment of samples with different angles demonstrated the stress-strain relationship and corresponding permeability-strain relationship, the forms of which were fundamentally consistent. After considering the relationship of these two curves, Elastic deformation stage: Due to higher loading, the existing pores and cracks inside the coal sample continued closing; this change decreased the gas seepage channels and resulted in reduced permeability. Strain-hardening stage: This stage is the stable extension stage of cracks; as the strain increased, shear and tension cracks developed rapidly, leading to irreversible deformation. By this time, the permeability curve has reached its minimum and has begun to increase gradually. Strain-softening stage: after the bearing capacity of the coal sample reached peak strength, the inner structure was damaged, but the sample retained its overall shape. Tension and shear failure developed quickly, macroscopic fractures appeared on the surface, the sample became unstable, and failure occurred. The gas permeability increased substantially due to the creation of new cracks that provided seepage channels for the gas. Residual strength stage: the deformation of the sample consisted of slippage along the mass of macroscopic fractures; stress decreased and stabilized as strain increased. This pattern indicates that the damage and cracks due to compression increased, additional gas channels were created, and gas permeability continued to rise. Compression strength is closely related to the bedding angle. Under conditions of loading and gas seepage, an increase in the bedding plane angle resulted in an initial decrease in the compressive strength of the sample followed by an increase. Compressive strength was largest at 11.5 MPa when As shown in  These results indicate that the influence of bedding plane to the mechanical and permeability properties of coal seam is related to the vertical (perpendicular to the bedding plane) cracks. The cracks in the coal sample involved the number of pores and cracks in the seam. If gas-containing coal samples possessed the same porosity, the degree to which fractures developed influenced the mechanical properties and seepage properties of the coal mass. As the gas permeability increased in line with the bedding angle, the number of seepage channels increased as well. With an increase in axial strain, the pores in the coal mass were compressed and gas seepage channels were hindered, causing permeability to decline with an increase in stress. As a result, shear stress and tensile stress were apparently concentrated near the cracks in the interior of the sample, and the stress eventually extended to the surrounding area. The compression of pores and crack extension occurred simultaneously. Once axial stress increased to a certain value, the influence of the gas seepage channel extension became greater than that of the compression of cracks on permeability. After gas permeability reached its minimum, it turned to increase as stress increased. Strong anisotropy was observed in the mechanical properties and seepage behaviors of samples with different bedding angles. The inclination of beddings induced shear stress near the plane; therefore, the bedding plane was the most probable location of crack initiation and propagation. Cracks occurred more easily along the surface of the bedding and then extended further before finally resulting in total failure of the entire specimen; as a result, the bedding plane could form the most likely seepage channels favorable to gas permeation. As such, the bedding plane should be considered when determining permeability. As more cracks developed and extended, the effective area of the bedding contact surface increased. As the angle of the coal sample increased and gas permeability decreased to the minimum, the strain capacity was reduced; however, the compressive capacity of the coal sample at a 90° angle was apparently larger than that of the sample at the 60° angle. The coal samples experienced the highest loading values under peak stress, and cracks developed continuously during the loading process; the critical point of failure was reached at peak stress. After that, localized microcracks coalesced and propagated to form a fracture. The fracture occurred along the main crack in the coal sample, after which point the stress declined sharply. Due to local through-going cracks and stress release following from pore compression in the matrix, effective stress was reduced and gas seepage channels were extended at the same time. Therefore, gas permeability demonstrated a dramatic increase. The bedding angle affected the macroscopic failure of coal samples as well as crack distributions, resulting in large differences in the failure mode and permeability of different samples. The following responses were observed. (1) When The bedding inclination caused some differences in the deformation and fracture properties, stimulating more complexity in the stress state along the bedding planes. The final failure mode of the sample reflected the influence of the bedding angle and was directly related to ultimate permeability. When Strong anisotropy was observed in the mechanical properties and seepage behaviors of samples with different bedding angles. The inclination of beddings induced shear stress near the plane; therefore, the bedding plane was the most probable location of crack initiation and propagation. Cracks occurred more easily along the surface of the bedding and then extended further before finally resulting in total failure of the entire specimen; as a result, the bedding plane could form the most likely percolation channels to influence permeability. As such, the bedding plane should be considered when determining permeability. In this section, the difference in permeability induced by the bedding angle was analyzed based on the plate fluid theory. The Hagen-Poiseuille equation ( Darcy's law expresses the permeability as Substituting Eq. When the sample deforms under stress, the radius Substituting Eq. Eq. Permeability is parabolically related to radial strain. The permeability–radial strain data of coal samples with different bedding angles were fitted using the parabolic equation as shown in Regarding the influence of the bedding angle in coal on compression strength, and permeability, the following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results: The larger the angle of the bedding plane in the sample, the larger the number of effective channels available for gas seepage and the larger the initial permeability. The evolution of permeability varied across different stress–strain stages. Permeability declined with an increase in stress at the initial compaction and elastic deformation stages before increasing in line with stress during the strain-hardening, softening, and residual strength stages. Permeability was also found to be parabolically related to radial strain. The compression strength of the samples initially decreased and then rose with an increased bedding angle. Compression strength was largest at a bedding angle of 0°, followed by the compression strength when the bedding angle was 90°. Under these circumstances, splitting failure occurred in the samples. When the bedding angle was 60°, the compression strength of the samples was smallest, resulting in sliding failure along the bedding plane. The sample with a bedding angle of 30° exhibited compound splitting and shear failure. This study was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at