Background
                  Fifth metacarpal neck fractures (boxer's fractures) are common injuries that contribute 20% of all hand fractures. Divergent percutaneous pinning (bouquet fixation) as described by Foucher has gained popularity but is challenging and at times arduous, as it requires the insertion of several slender K-wires into a narrow medullary canal. Here, we report on a simplified technique in which a single thick K-wire is inserted.
               
                  Technique
                  An 18/10 K-wire is bent at one end then mounted on a drill chuck. The incision is performed and the entry hole created using the K-wire, which is then advanced along the medullary canal. After reduction of the metacarpal head using the Jahss manoeuvre, the K-wire is inserted across the fracture site into the subchondral bone. Any persistent rotational malalignment is corrected by rotating the metacarpal around the K-wire. Immobilisation is by buddy taping covered by a resin guard.
               
                  Methods
                  We collected follow-up data for 30 patients treated using our technique, at a mean age of 32 years.
               
                  Results
                  90 days after surgery, the fracture was healed in all patients. No patients had rotational malalignment. Mean operative time was 14minutes. No complications were recorded.
               
                  Discussion
                  The use of a single thick K-wire proved simple, effective, reproducible, and rapid. No rotational malalignment occurred. This technique is faster and easier to perform than divergent pinning with multiple K-wires.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This technique can be used to treat fifth metacarpal neck fractures.Fifth metacarpal neck fractures (FMNFs) or boxer's fractures are common injuries that contribute nearly 20% of all hand fractures These difficulties have prompted the development of alternative surgical techniques such as double L-shaped pinning The objective of this study was to assess the outcomes of this original technique in a prospective cohort of 30 patients. Consecutive patients presenting with an isolated FMNF with more than 30 The patient was supine on a table with an arm rest. A pneumatic tourniquet was placed at the root of the upper limb. An image intensifier (Orthoscan FD OR) was used. One end of an 18/10 K-wire was bent at a 10–20° angle ( Operative time, radiation dose, and intra-operative difficulties and complications were recorded. All 30 patients attended visits 21, 45, and 90 days after surgery. At each visit, antero-posterior, lateral, and three-quarters oblique radiographs of the hand were obtained. At the day-21 and day-45 visits, the patients were examined for infectious complications, secondary displacement, and K-wire migration. At the day-90 visit, clinical evidence of nerve injury, infection, and rotational malalignment was sought. Fracture healing was assessed on the radiographs, which were assessed for signs of secondary displacement or malunion. EXCEL software version 15.19 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) for Mac OSX was used to determine means, standard deviations, medians, and ranges. Statistical tests were run on GraphPad Prism version 6.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) for Prism 6 Mac. Values of The study included 30 patients, 25 males and 5 females, with a mean age of 32 years (range, 19–55 years). The injury was on the dominant side in all patients. The mechanism was a punch in 24 (79%) patients. The internal fixation technique described in this study proved reliable and reproducible. Speed and simplicity are its main advantages and make it accessible to junior surgeons. Despite the use of a single K-wire, no rotational displacements were noted at last follow-up. No complications occurred with this surgical technique. This technique has several advantages. First, the rigidity of the thick 18/10 K-wire limits the risk of bending or inappropriate trajectory that occurs with slender K-wires. In addition, the technique is well-suited to the small diameter of the medullary canal in females. Although most patients were male, no technical difficulties occurred in the 5 females. Thus, the 18/10 K-wire size is appropriate for both males and females. However, 15/10 K-wires may be suitable when the medullary canal is narrow, although this possibility was not assessed in our study. A second advantage of this technique is the use of a single K-wire, which decreases the operative time to a mean of 14 Bending the end of the K-wire and routinely adding buddy taping seems to limit the risk of secondary displacement and rotational malalignment. Neither of these complications occurred in any of our patients. The K-wires were to be removed under local anaesthesia during a follow-up visit. However, 6 (20%) patients required K-wire removal in the operating room, because the wire had been cut too short. To facilitate K-wire removal, thereby minimizing the risk of injury to the sensory branch of the ulnar nerve, the end of the wire should be long enough to protrude under the skin. The use of a resin hand guard leaving full range of motion at the wrist and MCP joint has the advantages of protecting the surgical site and dissuading these often young and impulsive patients from repeating harmful behaviours Intramedullary pinning has several limitations. Major dorsal comminution or presence of a third fragment may make the procedure more challenging and increase the operative time. In this situation, the risk of inappropriate K-wire trajectory in the medullary canal is greater. However, using a single K-wire is less difficult than using several K-wires. Thus, posterior comminution or a third fragment may create technical challenges but does not modify our treatment policy. Pinning is usually deemed preferable over plate fixation for the treatment of FMNFs Internal fixation of FMNFs using a single thick intramedullary K-wire is simple and reproducible. Compared to other techniques, it substantially decreases the operative time and produces satisfactory clinical outcomes without inducing rotational malalignment. It can be used routinely in clinical practice. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 