The drainage of thin liquid films between colliding bubbles is strongly influenced by the boundary conditions at the air–liquid interface. Theoretically, the interface should not resist any tangential stress (fully mobile) in a clean water system, resulting in very fast film drainage and coalescence between bubbles within milliseconds. In reality, under most experimental and industrial conditions, the presence of impurities or surfactants can immobilize the interface and significantly hinder bubble coalescence by several orders of magnitude. In this opinion, we introduce the recent progress on understanding the boundary conditions at the air–water interface, and how they may affect the outcome of bubble collisions. The transition from mobile to immobile boundary conditions in the presence of contaminations is discussed. Despite the considerable recent progress, there are still experimental and theoretical challenges remaining on this topic, for example, finding the mechanism for hindered bubble coalescence by high salt concentrations.Bubbles are important in many natural processes such as the aeration of oceans and rivers. When bubbles burst at the air–liquid interface, they shoot up small aerosol drops into the atmosphere [ In addition to its importance to nature and engineering, bubble–bubble interaction has also been a very appealing topic of research because of features relevant to many disciplines. Researchers in fluid dynamics care about the effect of bubbles on the fluid flow and the boundary conditions at a large scale. Physicists are interested in providing modelling and governing equations, whereas mathematicians want to find approximate and numerical solutions to those equations. Chemists look into the properties at the air–liquid interface and how different water solutions affect its behaviour, whereas colloid and interface scientists improve theories on surface forces and how they influence bubble coalescence and attachment with particles. Finally, engineers transform this knowledge to improve applications of industrial systems. Although this explanation can be seen as a simplistic generalization, it is undeniable that considerable progress has been achieved by having researchers of different disciplines come together to tackle this multiscale physical problem from all aspects. In this field, theory and experiment have moved together over decades and excellent agreement can usually be obtained when the assumptions are satisfied. Experiments were performed to validate theories, and theory was used to explain experiments and infer experimental features such as the interface boundary conditions. Owing to the multiscale nature of bubble–bubble interaction, there is not one experimental or theoretical technique that can tackle the entire system at once and different techniques and mathematical formulations have been adapted depending on the length scale or application. When bubbles encounter each other, or collide with solid surfaces, the coalescence or attachment behaviour is strongly influenced by the thin film drainage at the nanometre scale. In this opinion, we focus on the boundary conditions at the air–liquid interface and its implications on bubble velocity, bubble coalescence and bubble solid interaction. We start by summarizing results for bubbles rising in bulk, followed by bubbles impacting each other or surfaces. The governing equations for mobile and immobile boundary conditions are described and compared with experimental data. A final discussion of new findings using perfluorocarbon systems and the effect of high salt concentration and water–alcohol mixtures are also provided. A bubble rising in a liquid is a phenomenon that has interested researchers in different fields. Depending on the liquid solution conditions, bubbles behave very differently, and can, for example, affect our sensations when drinking beer, soda drinks, and especially the aroma of champagne from tiny droplets hitting our nose from the bursting of bubbles [ When defining boundary conditions at the air–liquid interface, the original textbook assumption was that it could not resist any shear, which means that the tangential velocity at the interface should be the same as the velocity of liquid flow right beside it. This boundary condition is defined as ‘tangentially mobile’ ( Here, we note that both tangentially mobile and immobile are examples of the no-slip boundary condition, that means, continuity of velocity across the interface. By ‘slip boundary condition’, we refer to the jump in velocity at the interface. The slip condition can be a good approximation for the flow near rough and hydrophobic surfaces [ For rising bubbles, the theory for mobile and immobile boundary conditions is now well established and has been summarized recently [ The bubble rise and impact with liquid and solid surfaces has been a topic of systematic research because of its strong relevance to mineral extraction using froth flotation [ In a very thorough review of bubble coalescence, a map was provided for the coalescence of bubbles as a function of approach speed and NaCl concentration [ From In this section, we summarize the equations that are used for bubbles approaching each other with boundary conditions as defined in When deriving equations for the drainage of the liquid film between the bubbles, it can be assumed that both surfaces are immobile, one is mobile and the other immobile or that both surfaces are mobile. For the case of two mobile bubbles, the theoretical development is complicated, as the flow inside the bubbles needs to be taken into account and the viscosity ratio plays a role. The drainage rate can be written as one partial differential equation of the form [ The tangential velocity of the interface can be assumed to depend on the competition between shear stress ( In clean systems, the bubbles have mobile interfaces and constant interfacial tension From the above discussion, strong shear stress is needed to clean the interface of minute contaminants in aqueous solutions. In most experimental conditions, Experiments using the AFM are typically concerned with very small bubbles and drops in the range of 50–100 microns in size, making it an ideal tool to study surface forces between different components [ For decades, many experiments on the drainage rate of liquid films were performed using the well-known Scheludko–Exerowa cell [ Dynamic force apparatus (DFA; see Some recent experimental results obtained by DFA are also reported in Our results also provided a clear interpretation of early experimental data that only looked at the bubble coalescence time. We showed that for clean surfaces with the mobile boundary condition, the thin film drains with almost no resistance and bubble coalescence happens within a few milliseconds. The addition of a minor quantity of surfactants in the order of In the above discussion, the boundary condition at the air–liquid interface was simplified into mobile and immobile. Here, we note that the boundary condition is determined by the dynamic competition between shear stress and Marangoni stress, both of which are evolving dynamically during the film thinning process [ Both coalescence and colloidal stability of interacting bubbles have been reported in systems containing anionic surfactants [ We finalize this section with a very brief description about the interaction between bubbles and solid surfaces, as it has been a topic of great interest [ In practical applications, bubbles move in a liquid and impact each other. The typical interaction time lasts for a few milliseconds to about 100 ms depending on size and flow conditions. During this period, they can either coalesce or bounce away [ The adsorption of surfactant at the air–water interface is a dynamic process that has been extensively studied for decades [ Recent experimental data for tangentially mobile air–water interfaces were modelled successfully using the theory developed decades ago [ To avoid contamination, Vakarelski et al. [ In a recent work [ Altering the boundary conditions on demand is an interesting topic that may benefit numerous fields, especially those with highly confined flows such as microfluidics and nanofluidics [ Another unresolved question is related with salt, which has been intensively studied for several decades (e.g. see Refs. [ Experimental and theoretical advances in understanding the collision between bubbles have been discussed and put into perspective. Recent improvements in technology allowed the observation of physical features in the thin liquid film that existed over small length scales (micro to nanometres) and very short (micro to milliseconds) timescales. Complementing early results using Scheludko–Exerowa cell, AFM and SFA, newly developed DFA was used to capture the drainage rates of mobile bubbles in water by driving larger millimetre-sized bubbles towards each other at mm/s speeds. The acquired knowledge allowed us to move one step further to study the milliseconds adsorption of surfactant on bubble coalescence, and link the results with industrial applications. The mobility at the air–water interface has shown the same response to contamination in both rising bubbles or between colliding bubbles, although the difference in outcome is much more pronounced for colliding bubbles. This knowledge can be applied in fields where the air–water interface mobility is required and used [ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the