A systematic study on wet grinding of barium sulfate to produce nanoparticles (<50nm) was performed in a stirred media mill. The suspension stabilization by pH adjustment and dispersants addition were investigated using zeta potential measurement and the multiple light scattering methods. It was found that particle size reduction requires use of dispersant (sodium salt of polyacrylic acid). The optimum amount of dispersant concentration was determined to be 2% by weight. Further, the influence of pin-length was found to improve the performance. The influence of solids mass fraction, grinding media diameter on pH variation and final size were evaluated.The small size of nanoparticles imparts unusual structural, electronic, optical, magnetic and chemical properties leading to many important applications such as catalysts, electro-optical devices, and precursor phases to advanced ceramics Garcia et al. Previously, alumina and silica nanoparticles were produced by electrostatic stabilization by maintaining constant pH (pH In this work the possibility of producing barium sulfate nanoparticles in stirred media mill by electrostatic stabilization was explored. Further, the effects of dispersant concentration, pin length, grinding media diameter and solid mass fractions on the production of barium sulfate nanoparticles in stirred media mill were studied. The grinding results are represented by three parameters, viz. specific energy ( Barium sulfate (BaSO Grinding experiments were carried out in a vertical laboratory stirred media mill in batch mode. Sample volume of around 2–3 The particle size distribution of the sample was measured by the dynamic light scattering (DLS) technique (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90, UK) in dilute aqueous suspensions. The instrument has the capability of measuring sizes in the range 3 TEM images were obtained with a Philips Tecnai-20 (The Netherlands), which at 200 Barium sulfate feed particle size distribution was measured and is shown in The effects of pH control and dispersant addition on the performance of wet grinding of barium sulfate were investigated by conducting experiments at solid mass fraction ( To elucidate the effect of dispersant on the grinding results we continued the grinding experiment for the first two conditions. For the first experiment grinding was continued up to 150 The effectiveness of dispersant can further be substantiated by conducting suspension stability study of barium sulfate nanoparticles. The stability of BaSO Similarly, Turbiscan results for the samples collected at 30, 60, and 180 In the previous section significance of dispersant was clearly established with respect to the smallest particle size achievable as well as the stability of the final product suspension. To study the effect of dispersant concentration on the grinding performance and to determine optimum amount of dispersant, experiments were carried out with different PAA–Na concentration of 1, 2 and 3% by weight of feed material, since selecting optimum amount of dispersant is very important to minimize dispersant effect on the final product quality and process economy. It can be clearly seen from This confirms the effectiveness of optimum amount of dispersant concentration in terms of the finer particle size achievable and energy efficiency. The 2 The effect of pin length of three different sizes (102, 108 and 114 It was found that with increase in pin length solids and media are displaced more effectively and stagnant layer formation is greatly delayed, which is clearly reflected in the decrease in mean particle size. These results clearly suggest that performance of wet grinding process greatly improves with increase in the length of pin on account of better media/slurry flow patterns and delayed stagnant layer formation; thus, longer pin should be used for better comminution results. Further, effectiveness of longer length pin is evident from the results of change in surface area and energy efficiency ( After establishing the significance of dispersant, all the experiments were carried out in presence of dispersant to investigate the effects of operating variables on wet grinding of barium sulfate in stirred media mill. The particle size distribution (PSD) was measured as a function of grinding time. Wet grinding of barium sulfate was carried out in stirred media mill with operating variables mentioned in the previous section. The decrease in volume mean particle size with grinding time for two types of media is shown in The effectiveness of smaller media can further be explained by conducting the pH variation study. Though pH control was not found to be effective for BaSO To study the effect of solid mass fraction ( It is clear that pH change is very high during the initial period of grinding and then it gradually decreases for all solid mass fractions ( The effects of operating variables, viz., grinding time, solid mass fraction, grinding media diameter, pin length of stirrer, dispersant concentration, on wet grinding of barium sulfate to nanoparticles were investigated. The importance of dispersant addition in wet grinding was established by conducting experiments with and without dispersant addition. It was clearly shown that electrostatic stabilization of barium sulfate nanoparticles by the control of pH during wet grinding was not effective, as reported for some materials like alumina and silica, and the use of dispersant is necessary to reduce the size and for the higher stability of barium sulfate nanoparticles. The optimum amount of dispersant was found to be 2 The authors thank M/s. 20 Microns Pvt. Ltd., Vadodara, India, for providing barium sulfate sample.