Low-rank/oxidized coals respond poorly to oil agglomeration. Emulsification of kerosene in the presence of surfactants dramatically reduces the size of the kerosene droplets, lowering the consumption of kerosene needed to agglomerate oil down to 0.25–0.5%. Surfactants can also entirely change the interaction between oil droplets and coal particles. Consequently, kerosene cationic emulsions can efficiently agglomerate oxidized coal particles. The agglomerates obtained in such a process can still be recovered by screening.In oil-assisted separation processes, a water-insoluble oil is utilized to either improve the attachment of hydrophobic particles to bubbles (emulsion flotation), to improve flotation of very fine particles by increasing their size (agglomerate flotation), or to increase the size of fine particles to an extent which allows for the separation of the agglomerates by screening (oil agglomeration) ( As with emulsion flotation, oil agglomeration of coal relies on the differences in the surface properties of hydrophobic coal particles and hydrophilic inorganic gangue. In this process, oil droplets attach to the hydrophobic particles and when such particles collide with each other, the oil droplets attached to hydrophobic particles merge and bridge the particles into larger agglomerates. Of course, this is only possible if the hydrocarbons that are utilized (oil) are immiscible with water and if they selectively wet the treated (hydrophobic) particles. The most important operating parameters in this process are the amount of oil, intensity of agitation, oil characteristics, as well as the surface properties of coal samples used. As It is known that hydrophilic quartz particles cannot be floated with oil ( Whereas light oils were reported to agglomerate bituminous coals, lower-rank coals could only be agglomerated with heavy oils ( For saturated liquid hydrocarbons (e.g., As available data indicate, addition of given surfactants to oil may provide a better solution to agglomeration of less hydrophobic, lower-rank coals, and the experiments described in this contribution were set to prove this point. Two bituminous coals from Fording mine in British Columbia, widely differing in wettability, were selected for the experiments discussed in this paper. Proximate analyses of the samples pre-cleaned by tabling are given in Crushing and wet grinding were utilized to produce fine coal samples (below 0.5 mm), and ultrafine coal samples (below 0.045 mm). Several flocculants were used in our tests: polyacrylamide (PAM) with a molecular weight of 6 million (Polysciences) and polyethylene oxide (PEO) with a molecular weight of 4 million (Aldrich), and totally hydrophobic latices (FR-7A and UBC-1). The FR-7A latex provided by Calgon was tested and described by The oil agglomeration tests were carried out with kerosene, or kerosene emulsified with 1% addition of either DDA or sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The kerosene was emulsified in a high-speed blender; the median size of the kerosene droplets emulsified without surfactants was 20 μm, while those with addition of surfactants were, in all cases, below 2 μm. Droplet size was determined with the use of ELZONE 280 particle size analyser. For each oil agglomeration test, 18 g batches of coal were mixed with water to make 900 ml of suspension. Following an addition of a predetermined amount of the emulsified kerosene, the slurry was conditioned at 20,000 rpm for 30 s in a high-speed blender. The mixing was then reduced to 1000 rpm for another 30 s to allow the agglomerates to grow. In the adopted procedure, the agglomerated slurry was transferred onto a 400-mesh screen with agglomerates being retained on the screen. In the tests in which the agglomeration was characterized by filtration tests, the agglomerated slurry was transferred to a funnel-type filter (50 mm in diameter) and was subjected to filtration under vacuum (710 mm Hg). Both filtration rate and cake moisture content were determined; the suction was continued for 3 min more when the last water drops disappeared from the cake, and the cake was weighed prior to and following drying in an oven at 110°C. In the aggregation tests with either common flocculants or latex-type agglomerants, low-intensity conditioning was applied ( The electrokinetic potential of coal particles and emulsified oil droplets was measured using a Rank Brother Mark II micro-electrophoretic apparatus. The zeta potential values were calculated from the measured electrophoretic mobility via Smoluchowski'e equation.    Electrophoretic experiments revealed that the particles of both studied latices (FR-7A and UBC-1) were negatively charged over the entire pH range. The effect of surfactants on zeta potential of coal has been extensively studied by many researchers. The results adapted from   The reported results are entirely in line with previously published ones on the effect of coal surface properties on flocculation ( It is of interest to point out the effect of coal particle size. Oil agglomeration has a very beneficial effect on both the filtration rate and the cake moisture content in the case of fine coal (−0.5 mm). However, as seen from the filtration tests with ultrafine coal, whenever strong aggregates were formed and consequently filtration rate was improved, the cake moisture content also increased as a result of water entrapment in such aggregates ( As it is known (