Understanding the impact of weather on travel behavior provides insight into building a reliable and resilient transport system. This study uses a survey on residents and subway ridership data from 2014 to 2018 in Beijing to explore the relationship between weather and travel behavior. The results indicate that extreme weather events can affect recreational travel greatly, reduce travel demand, and change travel modes as well. The respondents are inclined to choose subway or cars rather than buses and bicycles under inclement weather days. The analysis of subway ridership confirms that weekends’ trips are more sensitive to weather conditions. Monthly temperature change shows a bigger effect on ridership than daily temperature change. A one-degree increase in effective temperature increases ridership by about 0.5% on weekends, while heavy rain reduces ridership by about 8%. Wind speed and air pollution show significantly negative but small effects on ridership on weekends. Besides, there is a non-linear relationship between temperature and ridership on weekends. These findings suggest that subway is less vulnerable to inclement weather and can be complementary to other travel modes. However, prevention measures are necessary for the subway system to face threats from heavy rain.The impact of weather on the transport sector has received significant attention with increasingly severe weather conditions, including infrastructure construction and maintenance, traffic safety, road congestion, and travel behavior ( The impact of weather on travel behavior is different among travel modes. Specifically, non-motorized and unsheltered travel modes are more vulnerable than car travelers and sheltered travel modes ( In China, continued economic development has resulted in increasing travel demand. Except for the rising of private cars, the ownership of electric bikes and motorcycles have also continued to rise ( The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The impact of weather on travel behavior changes with different indicators. For example, warm, cold, and snowy days have been shown to influence travel time changes and trip cancellations significantly, and travel mode choice is primarily affected by fog and storms ( The other branch of research uses recorded or smart card data to analyze the relationship between weather and the use of bicycles or public transits. For example, Previous studies are mostly analyzed by survey data or ridership data. Few studies have combined both types of data, which can facilitate a more comprehensive approach for analysis. Besides, while several studies have explored the relationship between weather and travel behavior in China, little focus on travel mode changes ( An online survey was first conducted to understand how extreme weather affects personal travel behavior. The survey content includes to what degree extreme weather affects travel purposes, how people respond to extreme weather events, and what is the differences and changes between travel modes (the questionnaire is shown in the Beijing, as a populous megacity, has a population size of 21.7 million, inducing enormous travel demand. In 2018, the total number of weekday trips in urban areas was 39.24 million, and the mode share is shown in The ridership data was obtained from the Beijing subway website, which provides total daily ridership of each line operated by Beijing Metro Corporation Beijing is located in the Northeast of China and belongs to the continental monsoon climate, which climate is characterized by a short spring and fall but long summer and winter. The average temperature is around 18℃. Weather data was obtained from the National Meteorological Information Center based on ground observation stations, including temperature, relative humidity, maximum wind speed, and precipitation. In this paper, four stations located in the North, South, East, and West of Beijing are used to represent the weather information of Beijing. Daily weather variables are used to match with the daily ridership data. Temperature is indicated by the maximum daily value, which is often used in other studies ( Previous studies use two approaches to represent ridership – absolute values or relative values. When using absolute values, the variation of ridership and weather conditions can be interpreted as actual effects of weather indicators ( This paper uses absolute values in estimation. Data on holidays, policy changes, service disruptions, weekend shifts, and odd-and-even days are explicitly considered to control other factors’ effects on ridership. Besides, this study controls different levels of time fixed effects (year, month, day) to control temporal travel trends and reduce omitted variables bias. The left-hand is the log ridership of line Except using maximum temperature in modeling, previous studies indicate that human thermal comfort indices can better capture the thermal impact on human, like heat index (HI), physiological equivalent temperature (PET), and effective temperature (ET) index ( On the other hand, the relationship between weather and ridership can be induced by either seasonal variation or daily variation, especially for temperature. We cited the work of The model is first used for all days in the sample period. Then separate models on weekdays and weekends are estimated to explore the different effects confirmed in previous studies ( The impact of weather on travel behavior depends on what kinds of travel purposes. When extreme weather events happen, people can respond by canceling trips, shortening travel time, changing travel modes, and staying at home ( The impact of extreme weather varies with travel modes as people incline to more comfortable travel modes. The relationship between weather and subway ridership is modeled in this sub-section. The results are presented in Other variables play essential roles in subway ridership. Subway ridership on weekdays is about 33% more than that on weekends, and 22% more than that on holidays. The increase in fare induces a 17% reduction in ridership on weekdays, but insignificant on weekends.  With adverse weather occurs frequently, it is important to understand how weather affects individual travel behavior. Previous research is usually conducted by using survey data to provide a comprehensive analysis or archive data to explore the relationship between weather variations and one specific travel mode. This paper uses both survey and subway ridership data to explore the effects of weather conditions on travel behavior in Beijing. First, leisure trips are more affected by extreme weather compare to inelastic trips (work or study). Also, weather indicators do show larger effects on subway ridership on weekends compared with weekdays, which is consistent with previous studies (  One thing to note is that the ridership data is measured on the total value of each line per day rather than every station or every hour, which limits our research to a nicety. Considering each line spread and across the city on a large scale, we used average weather information in our model. However, it may lack representativeness to use the averaged weather data for each line. Instead, we use aggregated ridership to verify our results in the whole sample (the results are in Survey data exhibits the advantages of different types of measurement, direct phenomena, and detailed information. Nevertheless, it is difficult to measure the impact of adverse weather on different aspects of travel behavior as the results depend on personal travel habits, personal experiences, and trip characteristics (purposes, time, and importance). Besides, there is a high requirement placed on sample size targets, survey design, and data quality. Therefore, the survey results provide a profile of how weather affects travel mode choice. A more detailed analysis should consider specific contexts of travel behavior or use travel diary data. Besides, the ridership data used in this paper is aggregated to daily values, which produces difficulties in conducting a more detail analysis, such as hourly-based or station-based. On the other hand, data availability restricts this analysis to focus solely on subway ridership, neglecting the substitution effects between travel modes. Future research can employ data on other travel modes, such as bus ridership, taxi, or DiDi ridership data together to explore the substitution effects. Nevertheless, our analysis adds evidence on the reliability and supportability of subway system under extreme weather by survey data and subway ridership data, and both results are mutual support. Our paper investigated how people change their travel modes, and the important role that subway plays under extreme weather in Beijing. First, a survey on the impact of extreme weather on travel behavior is conducted with a focus on travel mode changes. Then it uses a subway ridership from Beijing to extend this research. From the survey results, it shows that the impact of extreme weather on travel behavior depends on travel purposes, and leisure-related trips are the most affected. Under extreme weather days, respondents would cancel trips, reduce travel time, and change travel modes. We found that people travel by subway and cars are less vulnerable to extreme weather, while people travel by other modes on the contrary. Besides, people tend to change from bus and bicycle to subway and cars when extreme weather happens. Moreover, the survey results are further confirmed by the analysis of the relationship between weather conditions and subway ridership. We found that warm weather induces more travel, while windy, heavy rain and air pollution reduce trips. One-degree effective temperature increase correlates 0.1%, and 0.5% ridership rises on weekdays and weekends, respectively. Both monthly temperature variation and daily temperature have significant effects on subway ridership, and the effect of monthly variation is bigger. Heavy rain reduces ridership by 4% on weekdays but 8% on weekends. Air quality index produces a negative effect with an elasticity of around 0.02%. Weather indicators are negligible on weekdays’ ridership but substantial and significant on weekends’ ridership. Besides, we found a non-linear relationship between weather indicators and subway ridership. Those findings confirm that extremely hot weather does negatively affect travel demand, and the subway is a reliable substitute for other modes under inclement weather. However, the subway system does face threats from heavy rain, preventive and remedial measures are critical to reducing the impact of heavy rain.  This study is supported by National Key R& D Program of China (2016YFA0602801, 2016YFA0602603), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 71925008, 71950007, 71673026, and 71521002), the Joint Development Program of Beijing Municipal Commission of Education, and China Scholarship Council. We appreciate the constructive comments from the anonymous reviewers and language assistance from Patrick Loa. The views expressed in this paper are solely the authors’ own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the supporting agencies and authors’ affiliations. The authors alone are responsible for any remaining deficiencies. See Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: