Alloyed nanostructures of AuCu in varying compositions were synthesized by wet chemistry routes. Synthetic products in all the compositions are FCC solid solutions of AuCu with slightly varying lattice parameter. Variation in shape, size, and nature of attachment has been studied through electron microscopy and localized surface plasmon resonance measurements. FCC solid solutions upon heat-treatment at ~400 °C for 1 h under N2 atmosphere, transform to orthorhombic AuCu (oP8) and many superlattice structures based on it. Nano-beam electron diffraction reveals multiplication of periodicities along [3
                        
                           1
                           ¯
                        
                     0], [210] and [201] directions, mostly originating due to the chemical or vacancy ordering. Symmetry breaking transitions of orthorhombic AuCu (oP8) from Pbam to P21212 has been observed. The phase with P21212 space group also shows polymorphic transition to P21221. All these transitions have been confirmed through nano-beam electron diffraction coupled with computed diffraction patterns based on Wyckoff positions. Commonly observed orthorhombic (oI40) AuCu upon heat-treatment has not been found. The multiplication of lattice periodicity along certain crystallographic directions, symmetry breaking transition and polymorphism in the same sub-group are important findings of this work. These might have far-reaching implications in electron transport properties of such nanostructures.The control of shape, size, chemistry, and structure, in conjunction with its stability at nanoscale, is of paramount importance in connection with its behavior in plasmonics, electronics, and in catalysis [ The Au The UV–Vis absorption spectra of Au  The STEM-EDS results show the composition of Au in Au  In the NBD pattern shown in The original oP8 cell (S.G.#55) has got an atomic density of 0.07 atoms/Å One of the possible ways to outline such a transformation may be resulting out of reconstructive transformation that proceeds by nucleation and growth. It is important to note that change in occupancies of Cu and Au in the transformed unit cell (P2 As noted earlier, all the reflections of NBD shown in The structural transformation from FCC Au The complexity of the Au The orthorhombic oP8 AuCu with space group symmetry Pbam has been found to be present with its own subgroup symmetry as P2 The equilibrium phase diagram for a nano-sized system should have a three-dimensional construct even for the binary system at constant pressure. We know that the equilibrium phase diagram has a two-dimensional composition (abscissa) versus temperature (ordinate) plot. For dealing with structural phase transformation and phase stability at the nanoscale, one has to take care of the size as an additional axis. This finding suggests that defects in the interior of the nano-sized domain can give additionalities of phase transformations at nano-scale. Some of the primary concerns to be stated below deserves attention of researchers in the area of nanostructured materials before these are found suitable for electronic applications. Let us look at the salient features of this work. We have given heat-treatment of nanostructured Au The conclusions drawn from this work can be summarized as follows: A series of one-dimensional superlattice structures have been observed based on ordered orthorhombic AuCu (oP8) phase after heat-treatment. The orderings are along [3 The structural transformation from Pbam to P2 These structural transformations are understood by invoking the presence of vacancies as well as chemical ordering within of the NPs. The ability of this system to modulate the structure locally explains partially the presence of dotted phase boundaries in the phase diagram. Existence of such local variations of structures may influence electron transport properties. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. Authors would like to thank Prof. S. Lele and Prof. N.K Mukhopadhyay for stimulating discussions on various occasions.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at