The integration of flotation columns into existing flotation circuits of conventional mechanical cells is becoming increasingly common in industry. Nevertheless, the study of column circuit configuration is scarce and problems relating to the selection of the appropriate circuit have not been addressed.
                  Various column circuits for flotation of coal fines have been experimentally examined and theoretically analyzed in the present study to reveal the effect of circuit configuration on the overall circuit performance evaluated using separation efficiency and separation curves. The flotation circuits examined in this study included single–stage (SS), rougher–scavenger (RS), rougher–cleaner (RC), rougher–scavenger–scavenger cleaner (RSSC), rougher–scavenger–cleaner (RSC), and rougher–cleaner–recleaner (RCRC). The flotation tests were carried out with the Pittsburgh No. 8, Illinois No. 6 and Upper Freeport coal samples that were precleaned using conventional flotation. It has been demonstrated that the overall separation efficiency of the column flotation system was rather insensitive to circuit arrangements due to the unique characteristics of the unit flotation column distinguished from the conventional flotation cell. The flotation separation efficiency changed with ash or sulfur rejection and the Pittsburgh No. 8 and Illinois No. 6 coal samples showed a stronger dependence of separation efficiency on ash rejection than the Upper Freeport coal sample. The experimental results were shown to be in good agreement with theoretical circuit analysis conclusions.Mineral processing and coal cleaning operations are usually accomplished in a number of similar units which are arranged into banks connected in some way Flotation circuits for mineral processing are generally composed of a combination of rougher, cleaner(s) and scavenger(s) Numerical methods have been widely used to determine the best circuit configuration and optimal residence time distribution of particles in individual cells. Although coal flotation circuits commonly use a single stage, i.e., rougher, there are a number of alternative circuits in practice using more than a single cell bank, especially in the treatment of metallurgical coking coal The uniqueness of a flotation column mainly results from the addition of wash water to the froth phase, which essentially eliminates the nonselective recovery of particles due to hydraulic entrainment that can seriously affect the selectivity of the flotation process Little work has been done on the column flotation circuit to provide criterion for selection of optimum configuration although the combination of columns into existing flotation circuits are rapidly becoming common The circuit tests were carried out using samples obtained from the Pittsburgh No. 8, Illinois No. 6 and Upper Freeport coal seams. These coal samples were pre-cleaned by Babcock & Wilcox using conventional, sub-aeration cells and shipped in slurry form to the laboratory in several 55-gal drums. Grab samples indicated that the components of each drum were highly variable and that blending would be required to obtain representative samples for testing. The homogenization of the sample was performed in several steps. First, the content of each drum was thoroughly agitated using a low-speed drum mixer to redisperse coarse particles which had settled to the bottom of the drum during shipment. The slurry in each drum was then transferred to a 500-gal sump equipped with a propeller-type mixer and pumping circuit which continuously recirculated the slurry. After emptying all drums for a given coal, representative samples of the well-mixed slurry were pumped from the sump into individual 5-gal containers. Each container was flooded with nitrogen and sealed prior to storage. Flotation samples were prepared by grinding each coal sample using a Union Process stirred ball mill. Samples were ground at 30% solids using 3.2-mm-diameter stainless steel grinding media. The Pittsburgh No. 8 sample was ground to a nominal size of −325 mesh using a grinding time of approximately 4 min. The Illinois No. 6 and Upper Freeport samples were each ground to a nominal −200 mesh product size in a period of 1.5 min. Three identical flotation column cells were constructed for use in the evaluation of various circuit configurations. Each 152-cm (60-in.) high column was made from clear, cylindrical Plexiglas tubing having an inside diameter of 5 cm. Feed slurry was injected into the flotation column at a distance of approximately 35 cm below the product overflow lip using a variable-speed pump. Wash water was added into the column through a spider-type distributor mounted in the middle of the froth zone. Pulp level was maintained approximately 30 cm below the product overflow lip through the use of a simple overflow weir connected to the reject line. Air sparging was accomplished by pumping a portion of the flotation slurry through an in-line static mixer into which compressed air was injected. Three different experimental circuit configurations were assembled and tested using each of the three column cells. The first set-up was the traditional flotation circuit used in most mineral processing operations. In this set-up, feed was pumped to a rougher column which produced a primary clean coal concentrate and primary tailings. The rougher tailings were pumped to a scavenger column which produced the final reject stream and intermediate clean coal product. The clean coal products from the rougher and scavenger columns were combined and fed to a cleaner column which produced the final clean coal concentrate. This configuration allowed SS, RS and RSC circuits to be evaluated with a minimum number of experimental runs. The second experimental set-up was the grab-and-run circuit configuration. This configuration was similar to the traditional configuration described above except that the rougher concentrate was taken as the final product without recleaning. This type of circuit, which was originally promoted by The final configuration was the basic cleaner circuit. This configuration was designed to produce the cleanest possible product by repeated cleaning of the flotation concentrate. A standard test procedure was employed throughout the flotation circuit test program. In each series of tests, the ground coal was placed into a well-agitated 8-gal sump and diluted to 5% solids using tap water. Kerosene was added directly as the collector to the coal slurry in the feed sump at a constant dosage of 0.225 kg/ton of feed solids for all tests. The collector was allowed to condition for about 5 min before being fed into the column. Dowfroth M-1012 frother was injected directly into the bubble generator of the column at a concentration of 0.05% by volume. Frother dosages varied from 0.45–1.3 kg/ton of feed solids, depending on the given feed slurry flow rate and circuit arrangement. Proper frother addition rates were determined by observing the size of bubbles in the cell, along with a measurement of the air hold-up in the column as determined by pressure transducers. The superficial aeration rate was held constant during testing at 76 cm/min (corresponding flow rate is 1500 ml/min) and a superficial wash water rate of at least 20 cm/min was maintained in all tests. After the initial start-up of the column, feed slurry was injected into the column using a variable speed peristaltic pump. The column operation was allowed to come to the steady state, which required a period of time roughly equivalent to two to three times the mean slurry retention time. Throughout the period of operation, a small amount of spray water was added to the froth overflow launder to ensure that the froth product would overflow uniformly. After the column reached steady state, froth product and tailings were collected in separate sumps to be used as feed to the next stages of flotation. Timed sampling of the froth product and tailings were performed simultaneously to obtain representative specimens for analysis. After collecting the sufficient quantity of samples from each column, the column operating conditions were changed and the same procedure was repeated until the predetermined number of data points were obtained. The volumetric flow rate of feed slurry was the primary operating parameter varied in most tests. Feed rates of 100, 200, and 300 ml/min (superficial rates of 5, 10, and 15 cm/min) were tested for each coal sample. Overall feed samples were collected from the feed stream for comparison with the recombined product analyses from each test. This procedure provided a check on the laboratory analyses and an indication of the reliability of the test results. All collected samples were filtered, dried, weighed and analyzed according to ASTM standards. In order to obtain consistent sets of results, the experimental data obtained in each test on column flotation circuit were adjusted using the BILMAT material balance program developed by Canada Center for Mineral and Energy Technology. This program uses the weighted least-square method to correct all measured data to produce best estimates of all variables (measured and unmeasured) for a mineral processing circuit. Material balance calculations were performed for each coal as a function of circuit configuration and feed flow rate. In most cases, only minor adjustments were required to obtain a suitable balance. In addition to the column circuit tests, a timed release analysis study Release analysis The results of the release analysis tests for all of the three coal samples are shown in This coal sample had 9.8% ash, 3.63% sulfur and 1.25% pyritic sulfur. The results of the circuit tests are summarized in According to the results shown in  Circuit performance results similar to those shown in A comparison between the release analysis data shown in  Circuit analysis, as introduced by There are two parameters employed in circuit analysis to describe separation process: selectivity function,  From The order of unit capacity is as follows, There are numerous versions of definition of separation efficiency that are used to describe the effectiveness of a separation process 1. RSC and RSSC circuits showed slightly better separation efficiency than other circuits in most cases. However, there are some exceptions, particularly for the Upper Freeport coal sample (not shown). This is possibly due to the well-known fact that flotation column performance is determined by numerous physical and chemical parameters 2. Improvement in metallurgical performance of column flotation by varying circuit configuration, however, can only be considered marginal. In order to obtain truly optimum circuit performance, operating parameters should be considered simultaneously with the circuit configuration. Feed rates, aeration rates, reagent type and dosage, and residence time are some of the important operating parameters in the flotation process The release analysis consists of several consecutive flotation tests in which the froth product of a preceding test is used as the feed of the subsequent flotation test followed by the final test in which froth products representing coal of different hydrophobicity are obtained under gradually intensified flotation conditions The lower sulfur rejection than ash rejection, as shown in The results obtained in the present work suggest that factors other than simple metallurgical performance should be considered in the selection of an appropriate column flotation circuit for coal cleaning. For example, the use of multiple column circuits may be desirable from an operational point of view since additional columns provide safeguards in the event that one of the columns is not operating properly. In cases where high recovery is required (as in the treatment of gold ores), RSC or RSSC circuits will be more favorable than the single stage since the scavenger provides other opportunities for particles to be recovered if they are unexpectedly lost in the rougher tailings. In other cases where high grade is more important, circuits such as RC and RCRC would be better than the single stage because of their ability to reject unwanted material in cleaner(s). However, multiple-stage flotation circuits will inevitably cause higher capital cost and operating expenses. As a result, the selection of column circuit arrangements which are most capable of meeting individual requirements needs to be made on a case-by-case basis. A similar approach should be adopted when columns are to be included in conjunction with existing mechanical flotation circuits. What columns are to be used as rougher, cleaner or scavenger not only depends on technical requirements for product grade and recovery, but also on economical and operational factors. For example, Various flotation circuit configurations commonly encountered in mineral processing and coal-preparation plants were experimentally examined using microbubble flotation columns. These circuits included single–stage (SS), rougher–scavenger (RS), rougher–cleaner (RC), rougher–scavenger–scavenger–cleaner (RSSC), rougher–scavenger–cleaner (RSC), and rougher–cleaner–recleaner (RCRC). The circuit configuration showed only marginal effects on circuit performance evaluated by separation efficiency and separation curves. Data produced from various circuits appeared to be on the same energy recovery–ash rejection (or sulfur rejection) curve, implying that a single–stage column flotation was able to achieve almost the same metallurgical performance as a three-stage flotation process. The insensitivity of the circuit performance to circuit configuration was attributed to the addition of wash water which essentially eliminated the hydraulic entrainment and selectively rejected less hydrophobic particles. It has been shown that a single column could accomplish the best possible separation of particles by flotation usually achieved by the release analysis. From an operational point of view, it is suggested that cleaner(s) be used to guarantee the product quality and scavenger(s) to safeguard the recovery. Three different coal samples from the Pittsburgh No. 8, Illinois No. 6, and Upper Freeport coal seams precleaned by Babcock & Wilcox using conventional sub-aeration flotation showed different coal floatability and pyrite removability. The Pittsburgh No. 8 coal sample possessed the highest potential for ash rejection, while the Upper Freeport showed the lowest. The pyritic sulfur in all three coal samples was shown to be more difficult to reject than ash, which could be attributed to the oxidation-induced hydrophobicity and finer dissemination size of pyrite. Multistage column flotation showed marginal improvement in pyrite rejection. The separation efficiency of column flotation was demonstrated to be a function of ash rejection. The maximum separation efficiency occurred at ash rejection values near 70% for the Pittsburgh No. 8 coal, 60% for the Illinois No. 6 coal, and 50% for the Upper Freeport coal. An energy recovery of 90% produced ash and sulfur rejections of 70% and 26% for the Pittsburgh No. 8 coal, of 63% and 19% for the Illinois No. 6 coal, and of 45% and 25% for the Upper Freeport coal, respectively. The sulfur rejection was approximately 15% lower than ash rejection at the same energy recovery.