The application of imidazolium, ammonium, and pyridinium based ionic liquids (ILs) as the flotation collectors of quartz has been investigated. The flotation studies have been carried out for pure quartz, quartz-hematite synthetic mixture and a low grade banded hematite quartzite (BHQ) ore while the trend of floatabilities has been explained in terms of the structural differences of the ILs. The flotation of pure quartz using the ammonium and pyridinium based IL collectors has exhibited an excellent performance; where about 100% quartz could be floated at a collector concentration of 5∗10−5
                     M. The results are found better compared to the imidazolium ILs and conventional quartz collectors like dodecylamine (DDA) and cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB). The ammonium and pyridinium based collectors also show better iron grade and recovery compared to the imidazolium collectors during the reverse flotation of the synthetic hematite-quartz mixture and BHQ ore. Using these collectors, an iron ore concentrate of ∼62% Fe at ∼75% recovery could be obtained from the BHQ ore containing ∼38% Fe. In the Fourier Transform Infra Red spectroscopy (FTIR), the peak intensity at 2900cm−1 due to the presence of alkyl groups signifies the extent of adsorption of the collectors on quartz. The N/Si ratio and CC peak area as determined by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results show the relative adsorption of the IL collectors. The pyridinium based IL collector show better adsorption strength compared to all others ILs under study. The better flotation results in the case of the ammonium and pyridinium collector are attributed to the presence of higher alkyl chain length inducing better hydrophobicity.Quartz is one of the most common impurities associated in most of the natural occurring ores. It needs to be removed in order to achieve a suitable concentrate for the economic extraction of the metal values. It is often found that the lower grade ores have complex mineralogical textures and the mineral values are liberated at finer sizes. Froth flotation is one of the best methods for the selective separation of desired minerals that are liberated at the finer sizes. In this technique, the collector plays an important role in enriching the quality of the desired mineral species. In this context, new engineering innovations are introduced in the flotation methodologies while new collectors are being developed for obtaining improved outcomes. In iron ore, where quartz is the major impurity, reverse flotation is preferred for the concentration of iron values. Several cationic collectors such as dodecylamine chloride (DDA), cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), ether or ester amines, and quaternary ammonium salts are used as the flotation collector of quartz. The interaction of amines with quartz has been established through several characterization techniques such as FTIR and XPS ( Ionic liquids which posses low volatility and high ionization temperature, have several applications in varied fields. They are used as phase-transfer catalysts, solvents, lubricants, gas capturing agents, coating materials, or chemical sensors ( In continuation of the work related to the ILs as flotation collectors, the present paper explores the application of ionic liquids with functional groups such as imidazolium, pyridinium and organic group attached to the quaternary nitrogen atom in the flotation of quartz. The intention is to study the effect of functional groups other than the alkyl ammonium head group as covered earlier ( The quartz samples assaying 98.3% SiO All the ionic liquids and starch were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as such without any purification. The chemical structures, molecular weights, and abbreviations as used in this manuscript are given in Quartz, synthetic mixture, and BHQ ore were subjected to flotation studies in a Denver D-12 sub-aeration flotation machine having a 1L capacity cell. Different ILs as mentioned in For FTIR and XPS studies, the sample of pure quartz was further ground to below 5 The FTIR results of pure quartz and quartz treated with ionic liquids are shown in The XPS spectra peak positions of quartz and quartz treated with ionic liquids are shown in The C (1S) peak curve splitting shown in The results of the flotation of pure quartz using different ionic liquids and with DDA and CTAB at a natural pH of 7–8 are shown in The application of ionic liquids was then extended to the flotation of the hematite-quartz synthetic mixture having a weight ratio of 1:1. The results of the flotation studies at a natural pH of 7–8 are presented in After quartz and synthetic mixture, attempts were made to test the collecting ability of these ILs in the case of the naturally occurring BHQ ore while maintaining similar experimental conditions. In the case of CPA and BDTA, it was possible to achieve an iron grade of 62% with 75% recovery at a collector concentration of 3 The extent of adsorption as determined by the N/Si ratio and C The trend obtained from froth flotation experiments follows the order CPA Flotation studies of quartz with ionic liquids containing ammonium, pyridinium, and imidazolium groups have been attempted. It was possible to float 100% quartz by using 5.2