This paper describes the study of the coating powder leaching from computer monitors scraps with the view to obtain a liquor which can be treated by hydrometallurgical techniques to purify the metals studied. The technological development observed in recent years has stimulated the application of rare earth (RE) elements. TV tubes and computer monitors present as coating a powder containing some rare earth elements, mainly europium and yttrium. The recovery of the RE elements from electronics scraps is extremely important as the economic and environmental issues are concerned. The results of this study indicated the technical viability of the recovery of the metals. After the leaching process optimization, the europium and yttrium recovery was over 97% and a liquor containing 16.5g/LY, 0.55g/LEu, 59.0g/LZn, 0.20g/LFe, 131g/L
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 SO
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 2
                                 -
                              
                           
                        
                     , 0.20g/LCa and 2.50g/LAl was obtained.The rare earths (RE) are a moderately abundant group of 17 elements composed of lanthanides, scandium and yttrium. Amongst the RE, promethium (Pm) is extremely rare, however several of the RE elements are not very rare and occur dispersed in a variety of forms ( The innumerable applications of the RE elements are based on their particular properties, mainly their spectroscopic and magnetic properties ( The technological development of the last decades in the various sectors of the electronic industry has stimulated the replacement of obsolete gadgets. As a result, there is a growing disposal of obsolete computers and other electronic equipments into landfill sites throughout the world. Tubes of colour TV sets and computer monitor present as coating, a powder containing a mixture of oxides and sulphides containing RE, mainly europium and yttrium. Despite the low amount recovered, the high commercial value of europium makes it worthwhile. The recovery of the RE from electronics scraps (e-scraps) and other metals is extremely important as the economic and environmental issues are concerned and also it leads to the recovery of other metals, e.g. lead, zinc, strontium, zirconium and indium, which are also present in computer monitor and TV screen coating powders.   This work describes the study of the coating powder leaching from e-scraps aiming at obtaining a liquor which can be treated through metallurgical techniques to purify the metals. The parameters investigated were: leaching agent, acid/sample ratio, time of acid leaching, solids percentage and temperature of leaching. The coating powder used in this study was obtained by manually scraping the inner surfaces of computer monitor – on average 300 monitors are necessary to provide 1 The sample was characterized by energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (Kevex system) ( The leaching experiments were carried out in beakers of 150 As shown in The influence of the leaching agent, acid/sample ratio, time of leaching, solids percentage and the temperature in the dissolution of the RE from the powder were investigated. The dissolution of Eu and Y was very similar as the parameters investigated are concerned. Thus, in the discussion of the results they were regarded as a single element. Preliminary leaching experiments were carried out using hydrochloric and sulphuric acids. The experiments were carried out under the same critical conditions. Sulphuric acid proved to be far more efficient and selective than hydrochloric acid in the dissolution of yttrium and europium, thus becoming the leaching agent chosen. At 90 The influence of the acid/sample ratio on the RE leaching was investigated in the interval between 750 and 2000 The influence of the leaching time on the solubilisation of Eu and Y was investigated in the interval between 0.5 and 3 The influence of the temperature on Eu and Y dissolution was investigated at the interval between 25 It was also seen that when the solids percentage was reduced to 20%, no significant effect of temperature on the Eu and Y dissolution was observed. At room temperature (25 The influence of solids percentage on the solubilisation of Eu and Y was investigated at the interval between 10% and 40% at 90 After investigating the leaching variables, the conditions selected were: 1.5 In similar reputable works The characterization of the main constituents of the sulphuric liquor obtained after the optimization of the leaching process is shown in In order to obtain pure Y and Eu, the following steps of the process will address the purification of the metal through solvent extraction technique, followed by the precipitation of the metals as hydroxide or oxalate and calcination of the precipitate in order to obtain Y and Eu oxides. The separation of Eu and Y by solvent extraction is viable as Y presents similar behaviour to the heavy RE group while the Eu belongs to the medium RE group, thus, its chemical behaviour is slightly different. Therefore the separation of the elements individually can be carried out with the use of an organophosphorus extractant such as D2EHPA (di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid), which extracts preferentially Y rather than Eu ( In a solvent extraction circuit, Y is extracted by the solvent and stripped by the stripping solution while Eu remains in the raffinate alongside other elements such as Zn, Fe, Ca and Al. The separation of Eu can be carried out through selective precipitation or by solvent extraction. By the solvent extraction technique, Fe (III) will be reduced to Fe (II) through addition of metallic zinc. The coating powder sample collected from computer monitors shows significant amounts of europium and yttrium oxide, thus it can be considered a secondary source of the elements. The study showed that sulphuric acid can be used as leaching agent in order to dissolve the RE metals. The efficiency of the Eu and Y dissolution depends mainly on the acid/sample ratio and the solids percentage. The experiments in this work showed that in 1.5 The pregnant liquor obtained in the leaching step, containing 16.5 This work leads to substantial economy, as time and energy are concerned, thus making the metals recovery a rewarding process. Sincere thanks to CNPq and FAPEMIG for financial support. The authors are also thankful to the CDTN’s technicians who were involved in this work, mainly José dos Santos Jorge Pereira.