Highly technological applications of rare earth (RE) metals and scarcity of supply have become an incentive to recover the REs from various resources, which include high grade and low grade ores, as well as recycled waste materials. The co-existence of RE and non-RE minerals and their different reactivities with acids affects the leaching behaviour of metal ions highlighting the importance of detailed studies using different types of ores/concentrates in different acids to compare and contrast the leaching behaviour of RE and non-RE metal ions. A natural fluorapatite (FAP) sample from Harts Range, Northern Territory, Australia was assayed and characterised using standard techniques which indicated the presence of 33.8% Ca, 12.6% P, 0.32% Sr, 0.22% Fe, 0.19% Na, 0.09% Si and 0.01–0.24% RE (0.24% Ce, 0.11% La, 0.10% Nd, 0.03% Pr, 0.02% Sm, 0.02% Gd, 0.02% Y, 0.01% Dy). The XRD patterns identified the presence of FAP (Ca5(PO4)3F), carbonate-FAP (Ca5(PO4,CO3)3F), calcite (CaCO3) and traces of some RE minerals, namely cheralite ((Ca,Ce)(Th,Ce)(PO4)2), monazite ((Ce,La,Th,Nd,Y)PO4), britholite ((Na,Ce,Ca)5(OH, F)((P,Si)O4)3) and kainosite (Ca2(Ce,Y)2(SiO4)3CO3·H2O). It is possible that the FAP contains part of the RE within the lattice and the balance as ultrafine inclusions of RE minerals which affect the leaching behaviour of RE incorporated in FAP. The leaching in perchloric, hydrochloric, nitric, and phosphoric acid solutions (2.28 or 3.25mol/L) at 95°C was conducted using particles of size range of 150–180μm, 5% (w/w) solids and a stirring rate of 1100rpm. The similarities and differences in leaching efficiencies of metal ions are rationalised on the basis of proton activity of acids and the participation of anions due to complexation with metal ions. The leaching efficiency of calcium, phosphate, fluoride, sodium and strontium reached 80–100% after 5–10min in hydrochloric, perchloric and nitric acids compared to lower leaching efficiencies (<40%) in phosphoric acid. Despite the low solubility products of phosphates of iron(III) and calcium (pKSP
                     ≈24, 31), the higher pH, and lower proton activity of phosphoric acid, the higher leaching efficiencies of calcium and iron (≥80%) suggest the formation of complex species of these metal ions with phosphate ions. The leaching efficiencies of lanthanum, cerium and neodymium were low in all acids and showed a descending order: HClO4 (54–63%)>HCl (21–13%)>HNO3 (5–7%). The RE leaching efficiency in HClO4 remained relatively unaffected with time, but the low leaching efficiencies in other acids after 30min (<20%) indicate the precipitation of RE-phosphates and prospect of selective leaching of FAP. The slope of linear correlation of leaching efficiency of REs was close to unity in HClO4, HCl and HNO3 indicating similar behaviour. A higher slope for La–Ce leaching efficiency correlation of 1.8 compared to 0.9 for Nd–Ce in H3PO4 warrants further studies.The elements in the lanthanide series, yttrium and scandium are considered as rare earth (RE) elements and they have similar chemical properties. Most of the RE deposits exist in China, America, India, Middle Asian nations, South Africa, Australia, and Canada ( The RE phosphate minerals ( Depending upon the mineralogy, gravity-flotation, magnetic-flotation, and desliming-flotation have been the most commonly used techniques for concentrating RE minerals prior to extraction of REs ( Complex mineralogy due to the co-existence of RE and non-RE minerals and their reactivity with different lixiviants affects the leaching behaviour of metal ions from low grade and high grade ores. This highlights the importance of detailed studies using both types of ores/concentrates. Despite the difficulty of the mineralogical identification of RE minerals associated with FAP, due to low grades, the direct leaching of FAP in different acids can shed light on the dissolution behaviour of RE and other metal ions associated with FAP. This work aims to briefly review the relevant literature and investigate the effect of HClO The FAP leaching in different acid systems such as H Selective leaching of REs from FAP is unsuccessful with sulphuric acid as calcium tends to precipitate as hemihydrates or dihydrates. Only 20–30% leaching of REs and yttrium can be achieved from phosphate minerals with sulphuric acid in the presence of FAP ( A bulk fluorapatite sample from Harts Range, Northern Territory, Australia was subjected to crushing in a pulverising ring mill, homogenising and screening. Further grinding and sieving produced a sample of FAP with a particle size range of 150–180 The leaching experiments were conducted at 5% (w/w) solids using a reactor described in previous publications ( The results listed in The presence of FAP, carbonate-FAP, calcite and a trace amount of some RE minerals, namely cheralite, monazite, britholite and kainosite (RE silicate and carbonate,   Unlike the three strong mono-protic acids HCl, HNO Based on the pK  The possible effect of the complexation of anions such as chloride can be examined by comparing the association constants of the dissolving cation with the anion (  According to these models, the chemical reaction at the particle surface (Eq. The mass percentages ( Unlike calcium, strontium shows a low leaching efficiency in H Despite the low composition of RE in the FAP sample (0.10–0.24% La, Ce and Nd), the leaching behaviour is sensitive to the type of acid. As shown in The behaviour of all three REs in HClO A comparative leaching study of natural fluorapatite of low RE content in HClO