Process sampling is involved in grade control in all parts of the production value chain in mineral processing. Reliable sampling and assaying is essential to ensure final product quality, but the need for representative sampling is not always taken into account. By continuous control of the variability of sampling systems, a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between the sampling and process variability can lower the risk for overcorrections of process parameters due to sampling variability rather than process changes. Variographic characterization of process sampling makes it possible to assess all combined sampling and analytical errors from only 40–60 routine analytical values. The objective of this study is to evaluate total sampling variability in relation to process variability in the concentrating and pelletizing process sampling at LKAB. The results from the variographic analyses will form a basis for suggestions of possible improvements. The results show that variographic analysis is a powerful tool to evaluate both process variations and the variability of the sampling systems employed. The extensive access to time series data allow variographic characterization (quality control) of all critical measurement systems and locations. At the same time, periodicity and small changes in process variation can be detected and counteracted early, minimizing the risk for producing products out of specification.Process sampling is used for grade control in all parts of the production value chain in the minerals industry. Samples are extracted from slurry pipes, blender tanks, conveyor belts, stock piles and more, not always taking into account the need for representative sampling however. The process of sampling and assaying in all stages of sorting, concentrating and pelletizing is essential to ensure correct quality of the final product. One important aspect to reach correct quality within customer specifications is to be able to control the production process without overcorrecting for variability that derives from the sampling system rather than the process. The risk for this rises as the specification limits closes in on the variability of the sampling system itself. By continuous control of sampling systems, through variographic analysis, a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between the sampling - and process variability can lower the risk for overcorrections leading to unnecessary process changes ( There is no possibility to assess if a particular sample is representative by only looking at the sample itself (DS 3077, 2013), only the sampling process can be graded as representative or not. For one dimensional lots, i.e. process streams ( Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara limited company (LKAB) is a state owned mining company in the north of Sweden. The core business is producing high quality iron ore pellets for blast furnace and direct reduction steel making. Quality control in all parts of the concentrating and pelletizing process is important and continuous sampling and analysis is performed at all important process steps. Important quality characteristics for process control include iron and silica grade, moisture content and pellet size distribution. The objective of this study is to evaluate TSE in the concentrating and pelletizing process sampling at LKAB with variographic characterization, see The main processes of LKAB is described by Variography is a powerful tool for the study of serial datasets. With the use of the relative semi-variogram all forms of heterogeneity fluctuations or variability present in the data can be quantified, short range (random discontinuous term), long range (trend term) and periodic (cyclic term) variabilities ( A telling aspect of the variogram is the ratio between the nugget effect and the sill, expressing the fraction of the observable process variability made up by the measurement system error ( The method of variographic characterization of sequential data, including calculation of relative semi-variograms has been described in numerous reference publications, see e.g. In this study, relative variograms have been calculated for existing process control data with the purpose of evaluating precision of the sampling systems in concentrating and pelletizing plants at LKAB and to assess the possibilities to control the process with the use of current sampling systems. Possible improvements or necessary further variographic experiments will be suggested, together with a general methodology for continuous verification of sampling systems. This paper does not discuss the specific iron ore concentrating and pelletizing processes in detail, nor which analytic parameters are important or how they are used, as these are proprietary matters for LKAB. The variographic characterization has been applied to all sampling systems in one of the concentrating and pelletizing plants at LKAB. The selected sampling points evaluated are presented in In this paper, a selection of four typical variographic characterizations will be presented. The variograms are typical for the specific sampling point. Note that for all evaluated sampling points, several variograms have been prepared to ascertain that the results are similar for consecutive time periods (not shown here). A variogram for iron grade after primary milling in the concentrating plant is presented in Manual grab sampling from a large slurry flow generates several correct and incorrect sampling errors which is clearly visible in the variographic characterization. The result is that the analytical results have a large uncertainty with respect to the moving slurry stream. When used for reconciliation purposes in the concentrating plant, this leads to calculations strongly affected by the sampling variability and bias. At this sampling point, there are alternative possibilities to extract a sample through round pumping from a distribution box (significantly larger primary sample). Even though this would not completely TOS correct, the increased mass would lead to a decrease in TSE, compared to the current sampling approach. When implementation of this sampling method is in place, a renewed variographic experiment would be appropriate to determine suitable sampling interval and evaluate the improved sampling performance.  The low nugget to sill ratio of 3–5% shows that the sampling system has an acceptable precision for the purpose of iron grade analysis. The sampling system is not TOS compliant as it does not collect a complete cross section of the moving slurry stream, inducing a increment delimitation error (IDE) as well as a increment extraction error (IEE). As incorrect sampling errors are never constant (DS 3077, 2013, For some time periods the variograms are exhibiting a clear periodicity of 8–10 A variogram for moisture content of filtered slurry is presented in The moisture sample is extracted using manual grab sampling leading to a high nugget effect to sill ratio. The sampling method collects material from the top of the conveyor belt and not from the complete cross section of material, which can never be representative. This means that the observable variation is lower than the actual variability present in the material from all filters. By applying alternative sampling methods based on TOS correct procedures, there are many possibilities to avoid incorrect sampling errors (ISE) and thus to lower the nugget to sill ratio, notably by employing composite sampling or a process analytical technology (PAT) sensor solution. A variogram for size distribution analysis results for 9.0–12.5 The sampling procedure is a state-of-the art automated linear sampler with an automated sieving analysis. The sampling system including analysis has been validated according to The variographic characterization of sampling system is powerful to evaluate the performance of process sampling systems. Since process data is generated at regular time intervals the amount of data to evaluate is abundantly available on-line. This enables one to apply variographic characterization with regular intervals to evaluate and control the performance of sampling systems with any degree of resolution. If variographic analysis is continuously applied to process data, changes in process and sampling system variability can be easily detected and with early detection, and there is then a greater possibility to find quick solution to the problem at hand. To further evaluate the sources of variability collected in the nugget effect, methods like replication experiments ( The sampling system evaluations presented in this paper range from TOS correct automated samplers to non-representative grab-sampling. As expected, the grab sampling methods show high nugget effect and large nugget to sill ratio, in contrast to the automated representative approaches. The diversity of sampling methods analysed here clearly indicates that sampling representativity has a strong manifestation through the nugget effect magnitude. TOS correct sampling systems will have a low contribution to the nugget effect. Any deviation in performance or variability in either sampling or process can be identified by applying variographic analysis at a regular basis. Quality control methods in iron ore processing are often lacking assessment of sampling system performance, which often rely solely on visual inspections. Regular application of variographic analysis would remedy this issue. This would serve as a complement to regular statistical process control and laboratory QA/QC programs. Evaluation with the combination of these three control methods will achieve faster problem solving of deviating process control data, by giving a clear picture of where the problem has occurred: in the process, in the sampling system or in the laboratory. To successfully implement this combined quality control to all parts of the production, sampling and laboratory systems, good communication between process engineers, quality control engineers and laboratory engineers are essential. Application of variographic analysis to process data in LKAB iron ore concentrating and pelletizing enabled characterization of sampling systems through the entire value chain (not all sampling system evaluations are shown here). Sampling and analysis variability components were quantified and opportunities for possible improvements of sampling systems was identified. Important true process variations and periodicities could be identified. Variographics could successfully decompose the total variability observed, as either stemming from the process or from imperfections in the sampling system. An interesting conclusion from the present study is that empirical variographic characterization is always necessary; one example actually transgressed conventional wisdom in that a shark fin sampler was found to have an acceptable nugget to sill ratio. However, we are well aware of the danger of generalizing such singular findings. Extensive access to time series process data makes it possible to apply variographic characterization regularly, providing up to date control of process and sampling variability with any desired frequency. This would make specific experiments for precision evaluation of sampling systems redundant, resulting in substantial savings in money and resources ( When variographic analysis is applied to process data at a regular basis, one obtains process variability characterisation as well as an evaluation the specific sampling and measurement system in use. The current study strongly supports previous suggestions that significant benefits can be obtained when applying variographic analysis to continuous industrial processes.