The relative infrequency and complexity of acetabular fractures provide a challenge for trauma surgeons. In young patients, the management may be complicated by other injuries. The aim of treatment is to maintain a stable congruent joint. Although there is a role for non-operative treatment the hip joint tolerates instability and incongruity poorly. Operative treatment is complex due to the limitations of the surgical approaches, and the complex three-dimensional anatomy. The relative merit of each surgical option must be considered, and the decision is often a compromise of exposure vs. complications. In the older patients, achieving a stable congruent hip, with open reduction and internal fixation, may not be possible due to poor bone quality. Total hip replacement may be considered a better option. Outcome of acetabular fractures is dependent on the quality of surgical reduction and fixation, in turn this has been related to the experience of the surgeon.Treatment of fractures of the acetabulum is a challenge for orthopaedic surgeons for several reasons: There are two distinct groups that make up the majority of acetabular fracture patients. High energy trauma in young active patients, frequently associated with poly-trauma. Older patients with poor bone stock who frequently present with complex fracture patterns. Irreversible damage to the articular surface. Comprehension of fracture patterns requires a detailed understanding of complex three-dimensional pathoanatomy. Difficult surgical access. Prolonged rehabilitation. Significant potential post-operative complications. The acetabulum is formed by the ilium, pubis and ischium and during development they are linked together to form the triradiate cartilage. The triradiate cartilage has its apex in the floor of the acetabulum and fuses between 18 and 23 years of age. For the purposes of fracture description the nomenclature described by Letournel and Judet Key to the management of acetabular fractures is the nerves and blood vessels that supply the muscles around the hip and the blood supply of the femoral head and acetabulum ( Acetabular fractures are commonly classified using the Letournel–Judet system. A column fracture describes a fracture that has separated all or part of the column from the axial skeleton. T-shaped and transverse fractures involve fracture lines extending through the acetabular part of both columns; however, the superior part of the columns remains in continuity with the axial skeleton. A T-shaped fracture differs from a transverse fracture as it also has an extension which runs through the inferior part of the acetabulum and splits the rami. A both columns fracture can be considered a ‘high’ T-shaped fracture where both columns have been separated from the sciatic buttress. Approximately 50% of acetabular fractures are either posterior wall or both columns. Motor vehicle accidents are the most common cause of acetabular fractures and the type of fracture has been shown to correlate with direction of impact. In the majority of cases, the acetabular fracture will result from impact transmitted to the acetabulum through the femoral shaft or greater trochanter. All acetabular fractures should be assessed in accordance with ATLS Dislocation of the femoral head is reported in 32–39% Labral tears and avulsions are a constant feature of some fractures. This problem is seen particularly with transverse fractures and it has been recommended that these lesions may require resection or repair. The X-ray assessment of acetabular fractures is well described using the AP and Judet views (iliac and obturator obliques). Each view allows an optimum view of different aspects of the anatomy relevant to acetabular fractures. On the AP view the ilio-pectineal and ilio-ischial lines represent outlines of the anterior and posterior columns, respectively ( AP and Judet views also allow the roof arcs, as described by Matta and Merritt, CT allows the fracture pattern to be assessed in more detail and provides valuable information with regard to comminution, marginal impaction (in wall fractures) and intra-articular fragments. Clues to the fracture pattern can be determined by observing the direction of the fracture lines on the CT. On the axial views, splits in the coronal plane often represent column fractures. Sagittal splits, in the roof of the acetabulum, are seen commonly with transverse or T-shaped fractures. Oblique fractures that do not extend into the quadrilateral plate are seen with wall fractures. CT scans can help differentiate multi-fragmentary T-shaped from both column fractures. T-shaped fractures have at least one part of the acetabulum attached to the sacrum via the sciatic buttress. Acetabular fractures are frequently associated with dislocation. It is important to perform and maintain a reduction as soon as possible. Persistent dislocation has the potential to influence long-term outcome. A dislocated femoral head is susceptible to cartilage necrosis secondary to point loading, and avascular necrosis (AVN) as the result of a compromised blood supply. Overlying neurovascular bundles may also be compromised; the sciatic nerve is particularly at risk with posterior dislocation. Reduction will require conscious sedation or general anaesthetic. The use of muscle relaxants is preferable to facilitate an atraumatic reduction. Following reduction a dynamic assessment of stability should be made as this may influence management if non-operative treatment is being considered. Reduction can be maintained with skin or skeletal traction. Traction also helps to prevent shortening and minimise difficulty in reduction, especially when reduction is delayed. Careful radiological assessment must be made to ensure a congruent reduction. If there is an incongruent reduction on the AP pelvis X-ray, or the patient is being considered for non-operative treatment then a fine cut (⩽3 Pelvic and acetabular fractures are both associated with significant risk of venous thrombo-embolism (VTE). There remains significant controversy over appropriate VTE prophylaxis. Chemical prophylaxis should not be considered until the patient has been shown to be haemodynamically stable. It is believed mechanical prophylaxis has some benefit, and can be considered immediately. Patients who experience a significant delay in operative treatment or who have not received optimal prophylaxis should be considered for further investigation and, where proximal clot is identified, an inferior vena caval (IVC) filter. Venography remains the gold standard technique as newer techniques, MRI and CT venography, have demonstrated high false positive rates and unnecessary use of IVC filters should be avoided. A recent survey For non-operative treatment to be considered, the hip has to be stable, and the femoral head contained within sufficient congruent weight bearing acetabulum. Displaced fractures involving the columns or walls have the potential to cause loss of congruence between the femoral head and acetabulum. If the fracture occurs within the superior part of the acetabulum it will both reduce the surface area involved in weight bearing and cause instability. In single column fractures, significant displacement within the weight bearing dome will always result in incongruity as the intact column remains attached to the axial skeleton. Wall fractures do not usually significantly affect the weight bearing surface area but can cause instability. Both instability and reduced weight bearing surface area are poorly tolerated by the hip and predispose to early degenerative change. When considering column fractures there has been some debate over the criteria used for consideration of non-operative management. Matta and Merritt In both column fractures, the columns are detached from the axial skeleton but are constrained by the remaining soft tissue attachments. The soft tissue has the potential to hold the fracture fragments and maintain congruity despite displacement within the weight bearing dome. This situation is described as secondary congruence and has the potential to be treated non-operatively. Fractures of the acetabular walls should be considered separately. Olson and Matta It would therefore be acceptable to make a radiological assessment (plain X-rays and CT) of stability using the described roof angles as a guide. In those patients that are considered appropriate candidates for non-operative treatment an EUA should be considered to allow confirmation. In summary, non-operative management should be considered in the following circumstances: Co-morbities limiting physiological reserve. Insufficient bone stock to allow adequate fixation. A hip joint that is congruent within a sufficient superior acetabular dome to allow it to be stable under physiological loads. Undisplaced column fractures. Displaced column fractures that involve the inferior part of the acetabulum. Wall fractures with sufficient intact wall to maintain hip stability. Congruent both column fractures. If non-operative management is chosen then the patient must be kept non-weight bearing for 4–8 weeks. Traction through a tibial pin may be appropriate to prevent further displacement. When implemented appropriately, good results are achievable. ORIF is the treatment of choice in those fractures that fail to fulfil criteria for non-operative treatment in patients who have sufficient physiological reserve. The timing for operative intervention has been shown to be important with several studies reporting poorer results when ORIF is attempted at greater than 3 weeks post-injury. With progressive delays reduction becomes harder to achieve. When possible, ORIF should take place at 2–5 days to avoid the increased bleeding seen in the first 48 Reduction of an associated dislocation of the femoral head cannot be maintained. Retained intra-articular fragments. Closed reduction has not been possible. Closed reduction has resulted in a new onset neurological deficit. Open fracture. As for all trauma surgery every attempt should be made to optimise the patient medically. The patient should be cross matched for 6 units of blood as blood loss of 1–2 The appropriate pelvic instrumentation with specialised reduction aids are required in addition to a radiolucent table and image intensifier. Some fractures will benefit from intraoperative traction either using the table attachments or a femoral distractor. Intraoperative nerve monitoring has been described but is not routinely used in most centres. The patient should then be positioned on a radiolucent operating table, and the image intensifier is then used to check that satisfactory AP, Judet's, inlet and outlet pelvic views can be achieved. These views can be obscured by bowel gas or contrast within the GI tract. Prior to surgery the patient will require prophylactic antibiotics. The anaesthetist must be made aware that muscle relaxants may be required and that the use of nitrous oxide should be avoided to minimise bowel gas. The primary aim is to achieve reduction and usually the approach that allows reduction will also be sufficient to place adequate fixation. The surgical approach is usually based on the pattern of displacement. The surgical approach used should allow adequate visualisation for direct reduction and fixation techniques. A useful feature of any approach is the indirect access that can be achieved through palpation. This allows an assessment of reduction and facilitates indirect techniques. There are three main approaches which are used in the majority of acetabular fractures (Kocher-Langenbeck, ilio-inguinal and extended ilio-femoral, EIF) and numerous reported modifications. In Matta's This standard approach involves and incision centred on the greater trochanter with a distal limb along the axis of the femur and a proximal limb directed towards the posterior superior iliac spine (PSIS) ( All of the standard approaches that allow access to the outer table of the pelvis have the potential to allow visualisation, to a varying degree, of the acetabular surface using a capsulotomy and dislocation or distraction of the femoral head. A surgical hip dislocation can be performed as part of the Kocher-Langenbeck and allows direct access to the entire articular surface of the femur and acetabulum. This is particularly useful when addressing large femoral head fractures. This approach preserves the deep branch of the MCFA and involves a trochanteric flip osteotomy that includes the insertion of gluteus medius and the origin of vastus lateralis. The trochanter is retracted anteriorly, a capsulotomy is performed and the hip is dislocated. The blood supply to the femoral head via the deep branch of the medial femoral circumflex is at risk. Care must be taken when releasing the short external rotators. A cuff of 1.5 The inner table of the anterior column is accessed through an approach which detaches the abdominal wall from the iliac crest and opens the inguinal canal. Iliacus is then stripped from the inner table of the acetabulum. It requires the mobilisation of the contents of the inguinal canal and the femoral neurovascular bundle ( Many modifications have been described for this approach. Most of these approaches aim to allow additional access to the outer table of the anterior column. One approach involves a longitudinal extension of the ilio-inguinal incision based on the ASIS. This approach is derived from the ilio-femoral approach described by Smith Peterson and extends posteriorly along the iliac crest ( In general, extensile approaches (EIF and triradiate) are avoided and a single column approach (Kocher-Langenbeck or ilio-inguinal) is used when possible. If a single column approach is used it is usually directed at the column with the greatest displacement. If both columns are involved reduction of the least displaced fracture can often be performed indirectly. If this is not possible it may be possible to extend the standard approach using one of the numerous modifications. Double incision approaches (Kocher-Langenbeck and ilio-inguinal), either simultaneous or staged, have been described to allow direct access to both columns. The decision on the approach used will depend on experience and training. Helfet and Schmeling Traction can be applied through the leg or directly to the pelvis and femur. This will allow reduction in those situations where soft tissue connection has been maintained. In certain fractures, there is a significant rotational component to the fracture displacement. In these situations, Schantz pins can be placed directly or under image intensifier control and can be used as joysticks to manipulate the fracture fragments. Many direct techniques are used to achieve reduction of these complex fractures. Specific fracture reduction forceps are invaluable. The reduction clamps are varied in their size, angle and offset to accommodate the wide variety of fracture patterns. Temporary screws can be used in conjunction with three hole plates or forceps to help temporarily manipulate and stabilise the fracture. These fractures are often associated with impaction ( The same principles are used as for intra-articular fractures elsewhere in the body. The aim is to achieve a stable anatomical reduction, with compression, that allows early mobilisation. This is best achieved with lag screw fixation and a plate in the neutralisation or buttress mode ( If possible these fractures are fixed through a single column approach that allows sufficient access to lag and plate one column. As long as reduction is achieved the other column can be stabilised, indirectly, with a column screw ( These fractures are difficult to treat as visualisation and access for instrumentation is limited. One useful technique is to use a spring/buttress plate that prevents the fracture displacing and does not rely on direct fixation. ORIF is not recommended in older patients, especially if there is evidence of impaction or osteoporosis. In these circumstances, a limited reconstruction and total hip replacement can be considered. Total hip replacement in the acute setting can be associated with significant complications. However, in older patients, it can provide a satisfactory alternative to definitive ORIF. A knee immobiliser during the immediate post-operative period is useful to protect fixation of the posterior column and wall by preventing hip flexion during recovery. The neurological and vascular status of the limb should be checked and recorded frequently in the initial post-operative period. The patient should receive a short course of prophylactic intravenous antibiotics. Immediate weight bearing of 20–30 It is important to review the patient clinically and radiologically at 2 weeks to assess for loss of fixation. If displacement occurs this is best dealt with within the first 3 weeks. It is well established that there is a high incidence of heterotopic ossification (HO) following acetabular surgery. Although patient factors are relevant, this complication is particularly related to the approach. Stripping and trauma to the gluteal muscles predisposes to HO formation. Consequently, EIF and triradiate approaches have a high reported incidence, 35–57% and 86%, respectively, There is ongoing controversy in the literature with regard to the efficacy of prophylaxis against HO. Indomethacin and radiation have both been used for prophylaxis and both have been reported as providing benefit. In comparative prospective randomised trials, radiation has been shown to be equivalent to indomethacin as a method of HO prophylaxis. An additional consideration is the established detrimental effect of indomethacin on long bone healing in poly-trauma. Single dose or fractionated radiation administered within 72 Not all patients with radiologically determined HO have functional limitation. At present there are no good guidelines for HO prophylaxis. The argument for using prophylaxis is stronger in the presence of certain risk factors: an extensile approach, The incidence of distal deep venous thrombosis (DVT) is poorly documented in the large studies but an incidence of 3–6% In centres involved with treating large numbers of acetabular fractures, the overall infection rate is reported at 3–5%. The most significant iatrogenic nerve injury following treatment of acetabular fractures involves the sciatic nerve, 3–11%. Femoral nerve injury has been reported rarely (1%) following the ilio-inguinal approach. Hip abductor weakness has been noted to be a significant problem in posterior approaches, and this has been partly attributed to damage to the gluteal nerves during retraction. The femoral cutaneous nerve of thigh is frequently damaged during ilio-inguinal and EIF approaches but is associated with little significant morbidity. Femoral vessel injury is reported in 0.8–2% of ilio-inguinal exposures. The superior gluteal artery can be damaged with the consequence of significant bleeding and the potential for gluteal muscle necrosis. This complication has not been demonstrated clinically. AVN is most commonly seen in fractures associated with dislocation. The incidence varies between studies, 3–10%. This problem is reported infrequently but can result in post-traumatic arthrosis and every effort should be taken to avoid this complication by ensuring good intraoperative imaging. The spherical shape of the acetabulum means that each screw only needs to be identified as being out of the joint on one view to confirm its extra-articular position. A useful technique in this situation is to use the image intensifier to look down the long axis of the screw. Post-operative CT can confirm screw position In the large reported series, failure of fixation is reported with a frequency of 1–3%. Very low rates of non-union have been reported This is reported by most outcome studies and is attributed to cartilage necrosis, articular incongruity and instability. Cartilage necrosis can be related to irreversible damage to the articular surface at the time of injury. Femoral head damage identified intraoperatively has been shown to be predictive of a worse prognosis. This may explain why one study Articular incongruity (secondary to intra-articular metal work and mal-reduction) and instability both predispose to osteoarthritis as a result of abnormal loading of the articular surface. Studies published from large centres with experience in acetabular trauma report good to excellent results in approximately 80% of cases. Despite the potential limitations of the scoring systems used, several factors have been identified which correlate with outcome. It has been established that the surgeon has a large influence on outcome. The most frequently associated factor with outcome is the quality of the reduction. Approximately 10% of hips will be expected to fail within 2 years.