In this article, different population contributions of quartz powders to chemical reactivity in pozzolanic reaction were studied. Deconvolution software was used to show the different particle populations of each product. Reaction of quartz powder with lime in the pozzolanic reaction at 20°C shows that reactivity of each powder population depends on its particle size. Adsorbed fine particles on coarse particle surfaces have a significant role in the first term of the reaction. In a second term, the micropowders react. The mesopowders react only in the last reaction terms. Until now, the reactivity of adsorbed powder has been attributed to amorphization of the particle surface.The pozzolanic reaction is a secondary reaction in concrete taking place between products of a principal reaction, namely lime (a hydraulic product) and products of a silicoaluminous nature ( The aim of this article is to study the influence of particle dimension in a real matrix which is closed and static, during the pozzolanic reaction of quartz powders. A large quantity of lime (80% of the mass of the mixture) and a temperature of 20 As for the role of particle dimension in agitated milieus, it became necessary to work with two classes of powders as shown in Powder with small dimensions and monodisperse granulometric distributions (P700 and E600), Powder with larger dimensions consisting of several populations of particles (E450 and E10). The products E600, E450 and E10 are commercialized by SIFRACO Company ( A granulometric analysis of the whole range of products was undertaken using the BECKMAN COULTER LS 230 laser granulometer with water. The values of the mass areas are obtained with the aid of particle size distribution curves, by conversion of the volume percentage into surface percentages using the knowledge of the volume masses of the products. The granulometric volume curves for P700 and E600 are monomodal, reflecting their monodisperse distribution. The modal diameter of P700 and E600 are 1.1 and 2.5 The decomposition in more detail of the granulometric distributions of products E10 or E450 with a PEAKSOLVES deconvolution software ( A probabilistic deconvolution allows not ony subjective choice of the modal diameter but also other parameters (intensity, asymmetricity, etc.). The algorithm must converge to a minimum to reach a solution. A semi-deterministic deconvolution allows fixing one or different parameters (intensity, asymmetricity, etc.) before starting the iterations. Coupling the granulometric and electronic microscopical techniques (FEI Quanta 200 FEG ESEM), permits certain semi-deterministic deconvolutions. This methodology can be used when microscopic techniques yield valuable information on particles size. While populations 2 and 3 were already shown for the pozzolanic reaction of quartz powders in an open dynamic milieu at 100 An area percentage curve can be calculated from a volume percentage curve with the hypothesis that the particles are spherical, just by dividing the volume percentage values by the particle radius. These results show that 20–40% of the area of population 1 is developed by only 5–9% of the particles ( This calculation shows that populations 2 and 3 are developed by around 50 and 20% respectively of the total area of the product ( For P700 and E600, deconvolution with two populations is possible. The presence of the population numbered 1 provides proof that some adsorbs exist on these particles as on E450 and E10, which is confirmed by the scanning electron microscope picture ( For products having different granulometric distributions (P700 and E600), a step decrease of 1 The existence of three populations of powders for E450 and E10 has been demonstrated to correspond to three specific granulometric areas, of which a large portion of the specific granulometric area is given by the adsorb population, which has the lowest modal diameter. The presence of these three populations is explained by the industrial process to obtain quartz powders: By comminution for E450 and E10 products ( By selection either in the laboratory or industrially for P700 and E600 products. To test the reactivity of quartz powders with lime (in a closed and static milieu) these reactants were mixed in the weight ratio of 1:4 ( The quantity of lime consumed during the pozzolanic reaction of the quartz powders in closed and static milieus was estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (STA 409 NETZSCH) using precise knowledge of the quantities of lime introduced. The variation of the loss of mass between 700 and 900 The progression of the reaction in this milieu at 20  The progress of the pozzolanic reaction for quartz powders in this milieu at 2 and 7 days are all low (below 10%) whatever the product. At 28 and 90 days, progress for E450 is identical to that for E600. There are absorbs of about 2 The study of the reactivities of these two groups of particles proceeds independently: P700 and E600 on one hand, and E450 and E10 on the other, as described below.   Long reaction time, e.g. 120 days, is necessary to acquire sufficient mesopowder reaction at 20 The reactivity of quartz powders, measured in a milieu which is thermally “non-activated” (the test was carried out at 20 Low temperature studies have shown the contribution of 10 The adsorbs population – generally <1 The micronized powders derived from fragmentation of quartz particles with diameters between 1 and 10 The global reactivity of quartz powder less than 10