Biological iron oxidation results in both soluble and precipitated ferric iron, dependent on pH conditions, ionic strength and solution chemistry. Soluble ferric iron plays a well-documented role in hydrometallurgical processing. Ferric iron precipitation, however, plays a vital role in the removal of various soluble elements from solution via co-precipitation. This removal process reduces the soluble concentration of elements that may otherwise inhibit bioleaching microorganisms. Hydrometallurgical process solutions often contain various contaminant elements due to the dissolution of gangue minerals during ore processing. In this work, the effect of a combination of often-encountered potentially inhibitory contaminants (5 g L−1 Mg, 2 g L−1 Al, 0.4 g L−1 Mn, 0.2 g L−1 Co, 0.05 g L−1 F and 0.05 g L−1 As) on ferrous iron oxidation activity at room temperature as well as the fate of these contaminants was evaluated using a synthetic pregnant leach liquor that contained 1.5 g L−1 Cu and Ni and 15 g L−1 Fe2+. The solution analysis results showed notable removal of F (54%) and As (17%), the two main elements with known severe inhibitory effects on bioleaching bacteria growth and activity. Other contaminant elements were removed to a lesser extent; 12% of Mg and <1% of Al, Cl, Co and Mn. The combined presence of these contaminants caused a modest decrease in biological iron oxidation rate (from 1.1 to 0.9 g L−1 h−1) and extent (from 99 to 98%) and increased the extent of iron precipitation (from 16 to 23%) at an influent Fe2+ concentration of 13–14 g L−1 and a hydraulic retention time of 13–15 h.Ferric iron (Fe The precipitation of Fe  Contaminants can detrimentally impact the growth and activity of bioleaching microorganisms, the tolerance of which to impurities depends on species and strain ( The aim of this study was to determine the effect and fate of selected contaminants in a two-stage biological iron oxidation and jarosite precipitation process operated at room temperature. The contaminants (Al, As, Co, F, Mg and Mn) are typical for nickel limonite processing effluents and mineral sulfide bioleaching scenarios. The performance of the system was evaluated based on iron oxidation and precipitation rate and efficiency, solution pH, redox, total suspended solids and cell numbers in the absence and presence of contaminants. The precipitates formed in the system were characterised for their elemental and mineralogical composition as well as for settling characteristics. The fate of contaminants was determined based on solution and solids analyses. Microbial communities were characterised using molecular methods and scanning electron microscopy. The insight into the influence and fate of contaminants helps to optimise Fe The inocula for the experiments without and with contaminants were cultivated in stirred tank reactors (1.5 L liquid volume) operated in batch mode at room temperature (20–25 °C) using the media, shown in Iron oxidation and precipitation experiments were conducted in a CSTR system that consisted of two CSTRs and two settlers as shown in The bioreactors were operated at room temperature (20–25 °C) with an air flow of 4.5 L min The influent and effluents from the two CSTRs were sampled for pH, redox potential, Fe Solution pH was measured using a TPS smart-CHEM meter (with pH — TPS, plastic body pH sensor, double junction with porous Teflon BNC plug, part # 121207) after removing precipitates by centrifugation at 21,800 g for 2 min and filtration of the sample through PALL Acrodisc PSF GxF/GHP 0.2 μm syringe filter. Redox potential (mV) was measured with a TPSMC−80 m and IONODE ORP comb electrode, model PRFO, serial No. 0910–063971 (Ag/AgCl reference). The redox potentials have been reported against Ag/AgCl reference. Dissolved oxygen was measured using a HACH LDO™ HQ10 meter with HACH LDO™ probe. Samples for the analysis of Fe Precipitates collected from the settlers were centrifuged at 25,000 × The mineralogy of the dried precipitates was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) by the Analytical Services of CSIRO Mineral Resources at Clayton, Victoria, Australia. The XRD traces were obtained after addition of calcium fluoride as an internal standard at 10 %w/w. A PANalytical Empyrean Series 2 diffractometer or PANalytical X'Pert Pro diffractometer with X'Celerator detector and Co Kα radiation (40 kV and 40 mA) scanning from 3 to 140° 2θ was used for the analysis. Quantitative X-ray diffraction (QXRD) analysis was performed using the Rietveld method and commercially available TOPAS (version 4.2) software (Bruker Advanced X-ray Solutions). The proportions of potassium (K The equations used for calculating flow rates, HRT, loading, oxidation and precipitation rates, oxidation and precipitation efficiencies, and bleed of precipitated Fe, S, Cu and Ni in the two-stage CSTR system are presented in Settling characteristics of the sludge removed from the settlers were determined by sludge volume index (SVI) using the standard method 2710 D ( Cell counting on bioreactor samples was conducted by phase contrast microscopy (Leica DM−4000) using a Helber bacteria counting chamber (Thoma ruling). Before counting, cells were detached from precipitates by sonicating the samples five times for 1 min (with 10 s pause between each sonication) in a Grant Ultrasonic Bath XUBA3 with an ultrasonic power of 35 W. The cells were counted in the supernatant after removing the precipitates by centrifuging at 855 g for 1 min. Microbial cells in bioreactor samples were visualised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a filtration method ( Microbial communities in the CSTRs were analysed by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) of bacterial and archaeal 16S rRNA genes followed by sequencing as previously described by The reactor system was operated for a total of 260 days using various process conditions. A summary of the process performance of the CSTR system operated in the absence and presence of contaminants in the influent at an HRT of 6–7 h in the first CSTR and an overall HRT of 13–15 h is shown in Iron and sulfate precipitation efficiencies and rates in the CSTR as calculated based on solution analysis, without and with contaminants in the influent, are shown in The contents of selected elements in the precipitates removed from the settlers are shown in The contents of the elements in the solids and TSS concentrations were used to estimate the percent of influent Fe, Cu, Ni and S removed as precipitates in the bleed from the settlers of the CSTR system. The percent removal of Fe, Cu and Ni increased after the contaminants were introduced into the effluent, whereas the percent removal of S decreased ( A summary of the mineralogy of the precipitates as determined using X-ray diffraction spectra and QXRD fits are shown in With respect to jarosite (AFe The contents of contaminants in the precipitates of the CSTR system after the contaminants were added into the influent are presented in Fluoride has been reported to sorb to jarosite in substantial amounts, increasing with pH and fluoride concentrations ( In addition to jarosite, also schwertmannite and goethite have been reported to remove arsenic from acidic solutions ( Mass balances for the two-stage CSTR system in the absence and presence of contaminants are shown in Settling characteristics of the sludge removed from the CSTR settlers were studied by determining the sludge volume index (SVI). A summary of the results is given in Examples of SEM images for microorganisms obtained from the CSTRs are shown in Bacterial 16S rRNA genes were successfully amplified from the extracted DNA, but no archaeal PCR products were obtained for these samples indicating that the role of archaea in the bioreactors was insignificant. A summary of the bacterial species detected by DGGE in the inocula and CSTR system operated without and with contaminants is given in Laboratory-scale experiments were conducted to evaluate the effect and fate of contaminants in a biological iron oxidation and precipitation process operated at room temperature. The contaminants slightly decreased iron oxidation rate and efficiency and increased iron precipitation. Solution pH and cell concentration in the reactors were not notably affected by the contaminants. The presence of contaminants only marginally increased the co-precipitation of Cu and Ni with Fe which mainly precipitated as jarosite. Of the contaminants, F, As and Mg were partially removed in the process, whereas the removal of Al, Cl, Co and Mn was very low. The fact that valuable base metals, Cu, Ni and Co did not appreciably co-precipitate is an important feature relevant to base metal processing circuits and is in contrast to that observed for chemically induced goethite precipitation, typical in nickel laterite hydrometallurgical processing. The relatively low SVI values as compared to typical activated sludge processes indicated relatively good settling properties. Financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: