In this study, bottom-up type powder processing and top-down type SPD (severe plastic deformation) approaches were combined in order to achieve full density of 1vol.% carbon nanotube (CNT)-metal matrix composites with superior mechanical properties by improved particle bonding and least grain growth, which were considered as a bottle neck of the bottom-up method using the conventional powder metallurgy of compaction and sintering. ECAP (equal channel angular pressing), the most promising method in SPD, was used for the CNT-Cu powder consolidation. The powder ECAP processing with one, two, four and eight route C passes was conducted at room temperature. It was found by mechanical testing of the consolidated 1vol.% CNT-Cu that high mechanical strength could be achieved effectively as a result of the Cu matrix strengthening and improved particle bonding during ECAP. The ECAP processing of powders is a viable method to achieve fully density CNT-Cu nanocomposites.Since the discoveries of C60, fullerene It is well known that heavy cold deformation can result in significant refinement of the microstructure of metallic materials In this paper we investigated the powder ECAP processing and mechanical properties of powder ECAP processed 1 Atomized commercial purity copper powders of 2–3 The copper sheath containing powder mixtures of CNT and Cu were finally cold ECAP processed. The die parameters used in ECAP, Instrumented indenting with a spherical indenter tip was performed. The Vickers microhardness was measured using an Akashi HM0-122 tester by applying a load of 100 Examining the powder ECAP processed CNT-Cu samples by various repeating (4–8 route C) passes, no defects such as cracks or blisters on the outside surface and internal parts were found. Almost full densification of CNT-Cu composite powders over 97% of relative density was accomplished. Agglomerates of CNTs and pores were found in many places after one pass, and the separations of the CNT agglomerates and the homogeneous distribution of CNTs were achieved with the number of ECAP passes, due to the combined effect of (i) hydrostatic pressure inside the entry channel and (ii) shear deformation between the entry and exit channels. The grain size of the Cu matrix decreases mainly during the first two ECAP passes and is almost steady during further processes, similar to the saturating strain-hardening behavior with the number of passes in general ECAP data, although not shown here. The decreases in matrix grain size and inter-particle spacing due to particle redistributions increase strength and strain hardening of the composite by decreasing dislocation mean free paths.   Bulk CNT-Cu nanocomposites from powder mixtures were processed by room temperature ECAP up to eight passes using route C to achieve densification and sound bulk formation without grain growth. It was found by the microhardness tests and instrumented indenting tests that effective densification, homogeneous microstructure and high mechanical strength could be achieved effectively as a result of the severe plastic deformation of ECAP and the well bonded powder contact surface during powder ECAP. The SPD processing of powders is a viable method to achieve both fully density and good particle bonding in CNT-metal matrix composites. The effects of CNT-matrix interface and CNT alignment will be the focus of our future work. This research was supported by a grant (code #: 06K1501-00511) from ‘Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology’ under ‘21st Century Frontier R&D Programs’ of the Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea. The authors thank the Changsung Co. for supporting copper powders and ILJIN Nanotech. Co. for supporting their CNTs.