Traditionally, Lisfranc fracture dislocations have been treated with transarticular screw fixation. A more recent development has been the use of dorsal bridging plates. The aim of the present study was to compare the radiologic outcomes for these 2 methods. Currently, no data comparing the outcomes of these 2 treatment options have been reported. A total of 62 patients were treated for Lisfranc fracture dislocations during a 6-year period. The inclusion criteria included ≥6 months of follow-up data available. Each fracture was classified using the Hardcastle classification system. Each fracture was also allocated into 1 of 4 groups: transarticular screw fixation, dorsal plating, a combination of plate and screw fixation, and nonoperative management. The outcome measures included the Kellgren-Lawrence grading of osteoarthritis and the Wilppula classification of anatomic reduction. In terms of results, radiologic osteoarthritis is not associated with the type of injury according to the Hardcastle classification nor with having an open or closed fracture. The Hardcastle classification is not associated with the type of fixation used. Fractures fixed with a combination of plates and screws had a 3.01 (95% confidence interval 1.036 to 8.74) increased risk of having stage 3 or 4 radiologic osteoarthritis compared with being fixed solely with bridging plates (p = .009). Multivariate analysis revealed that this increased risk of osteoarthritis was dependent on the quality of reduction, with good reductions having a 18.2 (95% confidence interval 15.9 to 21.8) times decreased risk of severe osteoarthritis compared with fair or poor reductions, independent of the type of fixation used (p < .0001). No radiologic benefits were found when comparing plate or screw fixation for Lisfranc fracture dislocations (although screw fixation might be associated with a less planus foot and fewer complications). Instead, a good anatomic reduction was the only predictor of the radiologic outcome, and the Hardcastle classification of fractures did not predict the surgery type or radiologic outcome. Finally, treatment with combination plates and screws resulted in worse radiologic outcomes, possibly owing to more complex fracture patterns.Lisfranc fractures—or fracture/dislocations of the tarsometatarsal joint (TMTJ)—can leave patients with significant functional deficits. Mechanisms causing Lisfranc injuries range from low-energy twisting injuries to high-velocity trauma For many years, transarticular screw fixation was the recommended method of fixation for Lisfranc fracture dislocations A cohort of 142 patients with Lisfranc fracture-dislocation were treated at our level 1 trauma center from January 1, 2006 to August 31, 2013. All cases with <6 months of radiologic follow-up data were excluded. We then retrospectively reviewed all cases to collect data such as the mechanism of injury, surgical treatment options, pre- and postoperative radiologic findings, and postoperative complications. Three patients were excluded because of incomplete data, leaving 62 eligible fracture/dislocations identified for inclusion. The institution's human research ethics committee provided ethical approval for the present study. The preoperative radiologic imaging studies were reviewed to determine the fracture type, using the Hardcastle classification system Meary's angle was used to measure dorsal and plantarflexion pre- and postoperatively. A blinded post-fellowship orthopedic surgeon reviewed the pre- and postoperative radiologic studies to ensure interobserver reliability for our Hardcastle classification and outcome measures. This yielded kappa coefficients with good agreement. Finally, the postoperative complications were assessed by a review of the outpatient clinic notes and divided into 4 groups: Soft tissue complications, including infections and soft tissue deficits Malfixation, including broken screws Pain requiring more than standard investigations and treatment such as corticosteroid injections and computed tomography scans Non- or malunion Cases necessitating a return to the operating room were also noted, including those for removal of metalware, and these were incorporated as a part of the present analysis. A total of 62 Lisfranc fracture dislocations (32 right and 30 left) were included in the present study. Of the 62 patients, 41 were male and 21 were female. The mean follow-up period was 1 year, 2 months (range 6 months to 4 years, 6 months), and the mean age was 38.77 (range 17 to 73) years. Motor vehicle accidents were the most common mechanism of injury, with 36 incidents (58%), followed by falls (11 [18%]), inversion/eversion injuries (5 [8%]), and crush injuries (4 [6%]). Using the Hardcastle classification system, 3 (5%) were type A (medial), 9 were (15%) type A (lateral), 12 (19%) type B (medial), 34 (55%) type B (lateral), and 4 (6%) type C (partial) Lisfranc fractures. Of the 62 fractures, 6 (10%) were open and 56 (90%) were closed. The mean preoperative Meary's angle was 8.5° ± 7.57° of plantarflexion. Of the 62 patients, 14 (23%) underwent fixation with transarticular screws alone, 17 (27%) with dorsal locking plates alone, and 29 (47%) with a combination of plate and screw fixation; 2 patients (3%) were treated nonoperatively. The Hardcastle classification did not correlate with the choice of surgical fixation ( Of the 14 fractures treated with transarticular screw fixation alone, 10 (71%) demonstrated a postoperative Kellgren-Lawrence grade of 1 or 2. Similarly, in the 17 fractures treated with dorsal plating alone, 12 (76%) had a grade of 1 or 2. However, in the 29 fractures treated with a combination of transarticular screw and dorsal plating, 13 (45%) had a Kellgren-Lawrence grade of 1 or 2 and 16 (55%) a grade 3 or 4. The surgical treatment type and Kellgren-Lawrence grade are listed in Analysis with a Pearson chi-square test revealed a statistically significant relationship between severe OA (Kellgren-Lawrence grade 3 or 4) and treatment with combination plate and screw fixation (χ The anatomic reduction was determined using Wilppula's classification system. Good or fair anatomic reduction was achieved in 12 of 14 cases (86%) in which transarticular screw fixation was used compared with 14 of 17 cases (82%) in which dorsal plate fixation was performed. Combined use of dorsal plating and transarticular screw fixation led to a poor anatomic reduction in 12 of 29 cases (41%). The surgical treatment type and anatomic reduction grade are shown in Subgroup analysis directly comparing the transarticular screw fixation group with the dorsal plate fixation group revealed no significant differences in either the quality of reduction (χ The question regarding the best surgical treatment for Lisfranc fracture dislocations is one that, to date, has not yet been answered in the published data. No predictors of outcome are available to our knowledge, and the proposed classification systems—whether those of Quènu and Küss Dorsal plate fixation is a recent development in a number of treatment options ranging from nonoperative cast stabilization to fixation by percutaneous wiring to transarticular screw fixation to suture button/tight rope fixation. To the best of our knowledge, no clinical study has investigated whether dorsal plate fixation is a superior method. A key finding in our study is that treatment with either transarticular screw/screws or dorsal bridge plating resulted in no significant difference in our outcome measures. The incidence of a return to the operating room for removal of metalware was comparable across the groups. However, the rate of complications was lower in the screw group than in the plate group, although the numbers were too small to be statistically significant. At least radiologically, this suggests that the hypothesized benefit that dorsal plating provides is first in minimizing intra-articular cartilage injury and, second, in reducing the potential loss of reduction during insertion of metalware, because no metal is inserted. Furthermore, plantarflexion, measured using Meary's angle, was greater in the plate group and greatest in the combination group. This suggests that these fixation types are more likely to produce an overall more planus foot. A factor we did not consider during the present study was the role played by the use of locking versus nonlocking plates. Potentially, the use of locking plates could reduce the amount of force required to achieve adequate metalware implantation, limit the loss of position during screw insertion, and affect the overall planus/cavus alignment of the foot. This should be investigated further in the future. A proposed weakness of dorsal bridge plating is that by spanning the TMTJ, in particular, the transverse tarsal joint, the limitation of movement could result in stiffening Another important finding from our study was that fixation with combination plate and screw fixation resulted in markedly worse outcomes—both in terms of the anatomic reduction and the risk of OA. The complication rates were also greater, with most complications occurring in this group. Importantly, this was in the absence of any association between our outcome measures and both the Hardcastle classification and open and closed status. Thus, any Lisfranc fracture/dislocation treated with a combination of screws and plates is more likely to result in a poorer outcome. However, no model is available for preoperative use to predict which cases would be more likely to result in a poorer outcome, because the Hardcastle classification was not associated with the choice of surgery. In theory, the poorer outcomes seen in the plate and screw combination group could have been because this surgical technique is generally used for more extensive injuries involving >1 of the 3 columns of the TMTJ. However, even if true, the current classification systems are unable to help at this stage. The lack of functional outcome scores is a limiting factor in our study—some studies have argued that the radiologic outcome measures often do not correlate with the functional outcome measures In conclusion, at this early stage, it appears that no radiologic benefit exists for either plate or screw fixation for Lisfranc fracture dislocations, although plate fixation might be associated with more complications and a more planus foot. Functional outcome measures will be important in providing more definitive answers to determine which type of operative technique is superior. Finally, a classification system for Lisfranc fracture dislocations providing a guide to surgical fixation and likely outcome remains elusive. The authors thank Professor Danny Liew for his assistance.