This paper presents a method for externalising and formalising knowledge involving the selection of hydrometallurgical process flowsheets for gold extraction from ores. A case-based reasoning (CBR) system was built using an open source software myCBR 3.0. The aim of the systems is to recommend flowsheet alternatives for processing a potential gold ore deposit. Nine attributes: Ore type, Gold ore grade, Gold distribution, Gold grain size, Sulfide present, Arsenic sulfide, Copper sulfide, Iron sulfide and Clay present were modelled and several literature sources of actual gold mines and processes were used for acquiring cases for the system. After preliminary testing, functional evaluation of the built CBR system was carried out by using five real mining projects as test cases. Additionally, human experts in the field of gold hydrometallurgy were interviewed to demonstrate the benefits of the CBR system as it holds no human biases towards any processing techniques. It was found that the suggestions of the CBR system provided useful information and direction for further process design and performed well compared to the interviewed human experts, thus confirming that the system is of practical relevance to the process engineer designing an industrial gold processing plant. The current model was found to be a functioning basis for further development through additional attributes, adjusted attribute weighting and increased number of cases.The governing method for gold ore processing has been cyanide leaching since the late 19th century ( Modelling all facets of a processing plant with a vast number of straightforward rules and deterministic equations is highly challenging, as the available data is often incomplete and fuzzy ( The three most prominent reasoning methodologies available to create a decision support system are rule-based, case-based and model-based reasoning. Of these three, only case-based reasoning (CBR) is able to handle incomplete and fuzzy knowledge in a way suitable for recommending hydrometallurgical process alternatives ( CBR uses the knowledge of past problems, cases, and predicts the likely outcome or applicable solution to a current problem. It performs this prediction based on the knowledge stored in previous cases which are gathered in a case base ( When using the CBR system, a user makes a query by entering values for each attribute and then the system retrieves cases from the case base organised by their similarity with the query. These similarity measures get values between 0 and 1, the former denoting that the query case and retrieved case are completely dissimilar and the latter indicating that they are identical. The total similarity (global similarity) between case and query is a result of the combination of attribute specific similarities (local similarities) by applying a suitable amalgamation function. When a case consists of n attributes, the global similarity, The aim of this research is to construct and study the functionality of a CBR system, designed to recommend possible processing flowsheets for a gold ore of interest. The CBR methodology is applied to compare and rank process alternatives based on similarities between ore properties as defined by the selected nine attributes. Additionally, the constructed CBR system is tested through preliminary retrieval tests and its functionality is evaluated against the expertise of senior level hydrometallurgical experts. This section describes the construction of the CBR system, methodology of the retrieval tests and interviewing techniques applied during knowledge acquisition. The knowledge formalisation described in this paper was performed using the open source similarity-based retrieval tool myCBR in its latest version 3.0 ( At the beginning of knowledge formalisation, the relevant entities in the domain need to be identified, as well as their relationships with each other. In this study, the relevant entities were the mineralogical properties of gold ores. Gold mineral type, referring to the most general description of the ore, such as “ In conclusion, the following attributes were selected to be modelled in the first version of the CBR system: Attribute-value pairs were selected for case representation, describing the mineralogy of an industrially utilised gold ore/concentrate. In myCBR the user can select from several attribute data types, which indicate the nature of the attribute. Examples of data types are numerical values and symbolic values, such as names of substances. The attribute types employed in the built system were symbols, Boolean, and floating point numbers. The attributes and their respective data types are presented in The flowsheets related to the ores in the case base were also gathered to be used as starting points for process design for the ore of interest i.e. the queried ore. The flowsheets were formalised into a separate data base, where the user can examine them. Similarity modelling of the flowsheets was not in the scope of this research. The local similarity of the attribute The attributes The following rules for local similarities of minerals were formulated based on the Nickel-Strunz classification: If the first numbers of the mineral class code are equal, local similarity is 0.5. If the number and the first letter of the mineral class code are equal, local similarity is 0.7. If the number and both letters of the mineral class code are equal, local similarity is 0.8. If the main class code is equal, but the additional letter is different, local similarity is 0.9. If the class code is identical, local similarity is 1.00. In the instance of the attribute After the case structure was formalised, a case base could be compiled. The cases were constructed by extracting the mentioned nine ore attributes from the case sources and transferring them into the attribute-value tuples presented in All the retrieval tests were performed using the built-in retrieval tool of the myCBR software. The preliminary retrieval tests were performed using one attribute-value pair at a time and then increasing the number of attribute-value pairs used, while verifying the validity of the calculations. These hypothetical queries enabled the investigation of the quality of local similarity models, the calculation of global similarities according to Eq. The flowsheet recommendation ability of the built CBR system was tested using mineralogy and process information of actual gold mines ( Process flowsheets of the actual gold processing plants applied for the test queries T1-T5 ( Interviewing techniques can be divided into three categories based on the predefined questions and their control over the course of the interview; structured i.e. a form, semi-structured or theme interview and unstructured or open interview ( The interviews were conducted with experienced hydrometallurgical experts, Interviewees I, II and III, who have worked with gold processing for several years. Their experience level can be described as follows: I: 30 II: 26 III: 33 They were presented with the original descriptions of the ores that were used to construct the test queries T1-T5 in Also the gold concentration [g/t] and the location of the deposit were given to the interviewees. They were then asked to draw a block flowsheet they would propose for the described ore. During the interviewing situation, the interviewer was to not interfere with the interviewees’ answering technique after the instructions had been given. The purpose of this experiment was to compare the CBR system with the human expert in time sensitive situations where no additional information is available and the process suggestion needs to be formulated effectively in an instant. The assembled case base and the challenges that arose from its construction are considered first in this section. Then the results of the retrieval tests are presented and finally the outcome of the expert interview evaluation is discussed. The constructed case base is presented in Regarding the actual extraction process of cases, the attributes Here gold occurs both as coarse visible gold and as fine gold disseminated in sulfides. The corresponding values for the attribute The problem with duplicate values for an attribute happens also with the description of the Paradise Peak site in Nevada, USA: As can be seen in Preliminary testing of the functionality of the calculation algorithms were performed on a simplified case base of 25 cases and the final retrieval tests, based on actual gold processes, were carried out using the full case base of 48 cases. The similarity values of the retrieved cases were compared to the manually calculated similarities of the queried attribute values as they should be equal according to Eq.    As an example of the global similarity distribution for one hypothetical set of queried attribute values, It was shown that the built CBR system is able to retrieve cases from the case base using a set of selected attributes and rank them. The cases with the highest global similarities would then be used as starting points for further gold ore process flowsheet development for the ore of interest. It is up to the user to decide what global similarity level is used as acceptance level. In the query results shown in The five best matching and two worst matching cases retrieved and their similarities with the queries T1-T5 are presented in The best matching case for Query T1 is the East Driefontein deposit, with a global similarity value of 0.86. The ores in both cases are relatively similar, both ores are free milling, in which the gold is distributed as fine free grains and the ores contain sulfides, of which pyrrhotite is mentioned. The differences of the cases are that in the query case there is no clay present, but in the description of the East Driefontein the presence of clay is undefined. The process flowsheets of T1 and East Driefontein are fairly similar as well. Both ores are crushed and ground to somewhat similar size. In both cases alkaline preaeration is utilised before agitated cyanide leaching. The main difference in the flowsheets is that in the case T1 the sand fraction of the ore is treated by vat cyanide leaching, whereas in East Driefontein the whole ore fraction if treated in a cyanide leaching reactor. The best matching cases for Query T2 are the Kidston and Pine Creek cases, with global similarity values of 1.0. All the ores are free milling ores with fine gold particles and clay present. In the case source ( The best matching case for Query T3 is the Ashanti plant, with a global similarity value of 1.0. All the queried values are similar in these two cases. However, the process flowsheets are slightly different. The refractory sulfide ore (Au 2.0 The best matching cases for Query T4 are the two Barneys Canyon cases and the Joutel project, with global similarity values of 0.88. The ores in all cases are refractory iron sulfides, in which the gold grains are enclosed in mineral. The ores contain sulfides, of which pyrite and arsenopyrite are mentioned. Joutel differs from T4 in gold grain size and the Barneys Canyon ores contain clay, unlike T4. However, the process flowsheet of Joutel is much more similar to T4 than the Barneys Canyon cases. In T4 and Joutel the ores are pretreated, by pressure oxidation and preaeration respectively, before cyanide leaching. In the dissimilar Barneys Canyon cases the ore is heap leached without any pretreatment. This underlines the benefit of CBR, as it provides several options for the user to compare. The best matching case for Query T5 is the Grasberg-Ertsberg mining project, with a global similarity value 0.83. The process flowsheet industrially applied in the case T5 is very different from the process flowsheet of Grasberg-Ertsberg. In the case T5 majority of the fine carbonaceous material is processed by conditioning with kerosene prior to resin-in-pulp treatment. The sulfide concentrate of the case T5 is treated by using intensive cyanide leaching. In the Grasberg-Ertsberg case the process employed produces merely Cu-Au concentrate by flotation, which is further processed in copper smelters. Actually none of the process flowsheets of the best matching cases are similar to the process flowsheet industrially applied in the test case T5. Even though more attributes were used in the query, the system could not find similar raw material that have similar process flowsheet, as at the moment there are no similar process flowsheets applied for any of the cases in the case base. The retrieval results for all of the queries demonstrate the inherent capability of CBR to handle fuzzy knowledge. Overall, the results were at least satisfactory for T1-T4 providing similar process flowsheets as either the most similar case (T1, T2 and T4) or in the five most similar cases (T4). The CBR system provides results not only in the form of the best matching case but also a number of next best matching cases, sorted by their global similarity to the query. Thus CBR is able to provide results even when no exact match is found. This capability combined with the approach of similarity based retrieval allows the CBR system to provide possible solutions even on only sparse, incomplete or fuzzy queries. Three hydrometallurgical experts, here Interviewee I, II and III, answered the interviewing questions. As can be seen from In T1, the answers are quite similar, since all would choose a pretreatment for oxidising sulfides, followed by cyanide leaching (Interviewee I did not specify the pretreatment further). For T2, Interviewee I would suggest roasting, Interviewee II’s suggestion is alkaline pressure oxidation and Interviewee III suggests one or the other for the refractory part of the ore. The answers differ most regarding T3 where Interviewee I would float and pressure oxidise the concentrate, then apply CIL (carbon-in-leach), but Interviewee II suggests applying alkaline pressure oxidation followed by thiosulfate leaching due to the ore’s preg-robbing characteristics. Interviewee III however would divide the ore into oxidic and sulfidic streams, only leach the oxidic part, while applying floatation, fine grinding and CIL for the sulfidic stream. All interviewees would suggest pressure oxidation for T4 and Roasting for T5. Two out of three interviewees would apply flotation for T4 and T5. Generally, it can be said that interviewees I and II prefer CIL and possibly would recommend it, unless there was an obvious reason for concluding otherwise. Whereas interviewee III clearly prefers agitated cyanide leaching, unless the ore is preg-robbing. The interviewees agree on the pretreatment methods on none of the test cases, even though the given information is identical and relatively straightforward. This indicates that their assumptions of the ores, past experiences etc. play a role in their decision making. Certain patterns can be seen in their answers. For example, it is possible that Interviewee I has had experience with using flotation before pressure oxidation (T3 and T4), but not before roasting (T2 and T5). Interviewee II might have had lots of experiences with pressure oxidation (T1-T4) and less with roasting T5. Interviewee III seems to be more familiar with regrinding the ore during the process than the other two experts (T3 and T4). Compared to the actual processes utilised for the ores in queries T1-T5 the only question where the interviewees proposed similar flowsheet was T4. On other questions, the process flowsheets they suggested were distinctly dissimilar from the original processes. This merely comes to show that making process suggestions based on lacking knowledge of the ore is very challenging. Humans naturally use their past experiences in situations where rapid decisions need to be made based on lacking information, as was the case in the interviewing situation. However, these presumptions can then follow the decision maker further into the decision making process, even after sufficient information and resources are available. Automated decision support systems, such as CBR, can lessen these human biases by providing objective analysis based on greater amounts of information. The evaluation showed that the CBR methodology and the modelled attributes resulted in a system that was able to retrieve similar raw materials that have relatively similar process flowsheets compared to the test cases (T1-T5). The results of the CBR retrieval tests were compared with the interview results of human experts (I-III). It was shown that the constructed CBR system could retrieve more similar process flowsheets compared to the human experts. When the objective is to quickly assess different processing methods for a gold ore deposit of interest, the CBR system is able to present a variety of options within a few seconds without human biases. These options can then be thoroughly evaluated with geological and metallurgical experiments prior to process design. To enable a more accurate retrieval of cases, in the next phase of this research the number and accuracy of attributes will be improved to cover other relevant mineralogical properties of the ore. For example, The size of the case base will be extended further. This will increase the probability of a similar ore being present in the case base when a query is made. During the construction of the case base, it was noted that the CBR software needs to be modified in a way that one attribute can have more than one value. For example, if two different iron sulfides are present in the ore, the user should be able to enter this into the query. In addition, observations were made about the system’s functionality related to similarity calculations. It was suggested that the impact of large differences in the value of Eventually, the constructed CBR tool should serve gold processing experts in the initial stages of flowsheet design by providing new ideas and possibly a second opinion. The real benefit of the automated decision support system is that it does not exclude any processing methods merely due to human biases, such as familiarity with another processing method. With continued development of the system, its functionality in providing starting points for gold process design will increase further. This work was supported in part by 