The purpose of this study was to compare the biomechanical strength of four different fixation methods for a posteromedial tibial plateau split fracture. Twenty-eight tibial plateau fractures were simulated using right-sided synthetic tibiae models. Each fracture model was randomly instrumented with one of the four following constructs, anteroposterior lag-screws, an anteromedial limited contact dynamic compression plate (LC-DCP), a lateral locking plate, or a posterior T-shaped buttress plate. Vertical subsidence of the posteromedial fragment was measured from 500N to 1500N during biomechanical testing, the maximum load to failure was also determined.
                  It was found that the posterior T-shaped buttress plate allowed the least subsidence of the posteromedial fragment and produced the highest mean failure load than each of the other three constructs (P
                     =0.00). There was no statistical significant difference between using lag screws or an anteromedial LC-DCP construct for the vertical subsidence at a 1500N load and the load to failure (P
                     >0.05).
                  This study showed that a posterior-based buttress technique is biomechanically the most stable in-vitro fixation method for posteromedial split tibial plateau fractures, with AP screws and anteromedial-based LC-DCP are not as stable for this type of fracture.A posteromedial tibial split fracture is a notable injury pattern of the medial plateau, with the fracture line appearing in the coronal plane with a separate posteromedial osteoarticular fragment of variable size The posteromedial fragment, and its often significant displacement, seems to be under-recognised or recognised and undertreated. Clinically, ignoring this fragment can lead to distal displacement, with posterior subluxation of the medial femoral condyle The management of this kind of injury remains controversial. Although small stable fragments can be treated by casting with the knee in extension, open reduction and internal fixation is indicated for large displaced fractures to restore joint congruity and stability Twenty-eight right synthetic tibiae (synbone, type1110, Synbone AG, Swiss) were used to create models of posteromedial tibial plateau split fractures. They were purchased from a single manufacturing batch ensuring the same material properties. With the consistency in their material and geometry, the variability within specimens can be better controlled. A thin blade saw was used to create the osteotomy, simulating a posteromedial split fracture. The fracture model was made based on the fracture morphology described by Higgins: the mean articular fragment angle and sagittal angle of the posteromedial fragment were − The fracture models were then anatomically reduced under direct vision, temporarily fixed with two K-wires, and instrumented with one of following four constructs: (A) two anteroposteriorly placed 6.5-mm inter-fragmentary lag screws (Kanhui medical limited, Changzhou city, China PR), (B) an anteromedially placed 4.5 Each specimen was mounted vertically on the table of a material testing machine (Instron 5569, USA). A synthetic femur (synbone, type2200, Synbone AG, Swiss) harvested with a power saw at a length of 5 After positioning the instrumented specimen, a vertical compressive force was applied with a loading and unloading speed of 1 Data were normally distributed, indicating the use of parametric statistical methods. Thus a Least-Significant Difference (LSD) post hoc multiple comparison was used for both the subsidence and the load to failure data. Data were analyzed using SPSS 16.0 statistical software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL), statistical significance was accepted for The subsidence of the posteromedial fragment under three level axial loads is summarised in The load to failure for each construct is shown in This study was performed to compare the vertical subsidence and the load to failure in a posteromedial tibial plateau split fracture model stabilized by four different types of fixation in use today. Under the in-vitro conditions of this study, the posterior T-shaped buttress plate had significantly better biomechanical properties than each of the other three constructs. Posteromedial tibial plateau split fractures are not uncommon, approximately one third of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures have an identifiable coronal plane posteromedial fragment There are key objectives when treating tibial plateau fractures: anatomical reduction of the articular surface, maintenance of normal knee alignment, and provision of sufficient stability to allow early movement Several internal fixation techniques with different clinical results were reported in the literature. Whilst undisplaced posteromedial fragments have be fixed with screws from the anterior incision, Ali et al. demonstrated that when inter-fragmentary screw fixation failure occurs it is always on the medial side The posteromedial fragment often appears to be part of a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture which is associated with severe soft tissue damage. The increased exposure of the soft tissues and bone with dual incisions is potentially problematic. Some authors have suggested that with the advent of locking plates, stable fixation of bicondylar fracture can be achieved solely from the lateral side The posteromedial key fragment may displace distally and medially especially when the knee is flexed, a posterior-based buttress plate fixation was therefore proposed to maintain stability The data from our study also indicated that a posterior T-shaped buttress plate produced significantly greater stability in controlling the subsidence of the posteromedial fragment under axial loading. A lateral locking plate allowed greater subsidence of the fracture fragment than a buttress plate in this unstable injury. In order to understand these results, it is helpful to consider the principles of the different fixation methods used in our study. Inter-fragmentary screws compress the fracture and produce friction to resist the shear displacement of a fragment, the loads can only be transferred at the screw–fragment interface In our research, synbone models were used for biomechanical test. The obvious advantages of using synbone are the assurance of uniformity, consistency in its material and geometry, and therefore its mechanical properties Several limitations of this study must be considered. Soft tissue tension or attachments may contribute to the alignment and maintenance of fracture fragments in a reduced position The results of this study demonstrate that a posterior-based buttress technique is biomechanically the most stable in-vitro fixation method for the posteromedial split tibial plateau fracture, whilst AP screws and anteromedial-based LC-DCP are not indicated. When a lateral locking plate is planned, it is preferable to augment the fixed-angle construct with a posteromedial buttress plate to stabilize the key fragment. We thank Shang-Chun Guo at the Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital affiliated to Shanghai JiaoTong University, for her assistance and support during this biomechanical study.