It is well known that surface roughness of mineral particles has a significant influence on their flotation behaviors. In this investigation, magnetite was ground in rod and ball mills to generate particles with similar dimension and shape but varying degree of surface roughness, which was quantified using Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). The influence of surface roughness on the floatability of magnetite particles was performed by flotation tests using an XFG flotation machine. Flotation tests indicated magnetite particles possessed higher surface roughness had higher flotation recovery and larger flotation rate constant. The aggregation behaviors of different rough magnetite particles were compared for the first time via an optical microscopy. Results of the optical microscopic tests revealed that there were a large number of aggregations in the system of particles with higher surface roughness. A proposed model was deduced with the parameters carefully calculated (not arbitrarily selected) to analyze the bubble-particle interaction energy using an Extended DVLO (Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek) theory. The theoretical interaction energy points to lowering energy barrier when magnetite particles are covered with 28.03 nm asperities as compared to 9.47 nm asperities. The effect of surface roughness on mineral flotation was investigated from the view of both particle aggregations and energy barrier of bubble-particle attachment for the first time, which are the primary causes for differences in flotation performance.Chemical and physical heterogeneity are known to influence the contact angle and wetting behavior of solid particles [ Existing literature reports the effects of particle surface roughness on their flotation performances quite well, and the possible mechanisms to elucidate the underlying reason have been studied from two perspectives: the Wenzel and the Cassie model, and interaction energy of bubble-particle. Rao et al. [ The aforementioned points illustrate the significant impact of surface roughness on flotation performance of particles, while the underlying reason behind this phenomenon is not well understood for the following two reasons. On one hand, the aggregation of particles affects the flotation efficiency during the flotation process, but there is no direct research reporting the effect of surface roughness on particle agglomeration. On the other hand, although the energy barrier between bubble and particles is calculated, but some parameters for the calculation of energy barrier of bubble-particle attachment are arbitrarily selected. In this investigation, magnetite particles with two different degrees of nano-asperity engineered in rod and ball mills were used to demonstrate the possibility of enhanced flotation recovery. The surface roughness of magnetite particles was characterized by AFM scanning. The particle aggregations was directly observed and the energy barrier for the attachment of bubble-particle was carefully analyzed with the measured parameters, which are measures of improved flotation behavior was elaborated based on the relevant experimental data. Representative sample of pure lump magnetite was purchased from Alibaba co., Ltd. Elemental analysis revealed that the purity of the magnetite sample was more than 91.00 %. To prepare the magnetite samples, they were first crushed to 2 mm in size by hand-maker and then ground to finer sizes in either laboratory-scale rod or ball mills. These two different milling processes were repeated until particles of similar dimensions and shapes but different surface roughness were produced. A closed-circuit grounding process was executed to ensure that the fabricated magnetite particles pass the 0.1 mm screening (Firstly, the magnetite particles of -2 mm were ground via the rod or ball mills for 5 min. Secondly, the screen with the sieve-mesh of 0.1 mm was selected for the wet classification of the ground products, and the oversize product was re-ground via the rod and ball mill. Third, the step two was repeated until all magnetite particles entered into the undersize product.). After grinding, the samples were carefully wet screened to obtain +0.055-0.074 mm size fraction for the measurement of surface roughness, contact angle determination, flotation tests, as well as optical microscope tests. Consistency in dimension and shape of particles produced by two different mills was verified under an optical microscope to eliminate the possible effect of particle dimension and shape on differences in flotation between the two batches of particles. Chemically pure sodium oleate (NaOL) supplied by Aladdin co., Ltd., Shanghai, China, was used as collector. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or hy-drochloric acid (HCl) were used as pH regulator. Deionized (DI) water was used throughout the experiments. The two techniques used in determining the surface roughness of the fabricated magnetite particles were Brunner−Emmet−Teller (BET) surface area analysis and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The BET method is commonly used in analyzing the specific surface area of mineral particles [ The surface topography of magnetite particles was obtained via AFM imaging, which is reliable for imaging both microscopic and sub-microscopic topographies of mineral surfaces under ambient conditions [ The surface roughness R In this study, AFM images of magnetite particle surfaces were collected using a MultiMode 8 AFM (Bruker Corporation, Karlsruhe, Germany) using the peak force tapping-mode. First, the magnetite particles were affixed on a glass slide with glue. Then, six different particles were randomly selected and each particle was imaged. Finally, both R The contact angle of magnetite particles was determined by the sessile drop method using a DSA 100 contact angle goniometer. Prior to the test, 2 g magnetite particles were mixed with 2 × 10 Zeta potentials were performed by a Malvern Instruments Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). A pulp suspension containing 0.01 wt % −5 μm magnetite particles was conditioned in a beaker for 2 min. Then, the pH regulator and NaOL were added as well as the pulp was conditioned for a certain minutes. This was in line with the flotation process. The zeta potential at each condition was measured at least six times and the average value as well as the standard deviation were calculated and reported. Observation of the aggregation behavior between magnetite particles was determined by an optical microscope (PXS, OPTEC, Shanghai, China) equipped with a digital camera. The magnetite samples used in the aggregation observation were prepared as follows. First, 2 g of magnetite particles and 40 mL of DI water were mixed in 50 mL beaker. And the pulp was stirred for 2 min at a rotating speed of 1920 rpm. Then NaOH (or HCl) was added into the pulp to obtain the required pH value and conditioned for another 6 min. Hereafter, the collector was added and conditioned for another 3 min. Subsequently, the droplets were extracted from the suspension and dropped to the surface of a clean glass plate for observation. During the observation, some agglomerates were photographed. Micro-flotation tests were conducted in an XFG flotation machine with 40 mL volume, at an impeller speed of 1920 rpm. First, 2 g of magnetite particles and 35 mL DI water added into a flotation cell were agitated for 2 min. NaOH (or HCl) was added into the pulp to obtain the required pH value and conditioned for another 6 min. After then, the collector with a certain concentration was added and the pulp was kept conditioned for 3 min. The flotation process was performed for 4 min before the flotation products were collected, dried and weighted. The flotation recovery and the standard deviation were calculated based on the weight of the floating magnetite particles. All experiments were carried out at room temperature (25 °C).      Aggregation or flocculation of mineral particles is an effective method to improve the flotation efficiency, and both size and number of aggregation or flocculation affect the flotation performance [ Suresh and Walz developed a model on DLVO interactions between a rough spherical particle and a flat surface [ Two simple parameters define particle roughness [ The total interaction potential (E The retarded van der Waals interaction potential between a spherical particle with hemispherical asperities and air bubble is as follows [ In this quotation, After Substituting Eq. The equation to calculate the electrical double layer interaction potential between a rough sphere particle and an air bubble is [  After substituting Eq. For calculation of hydrophobic interaction potential the Lewis acid–base model was adopted [ In this equation, λ Therefore, The Hamaker constant can be calculated from To calculate the interaction potential between a hemispherical asperities and a smooth surface ( Combined with Eq. After substituting Eq.   In this investigation, two batches of nearly identical magnetite particles, having only different nano-roughness characteristics were produced via rod and ball mills. The effect of surface roughness on particles aggregation was investigated for the first time, and the optical microscopic observations showed that surface roughness contributed to the aggregation tendency of magnetite particles. A simple theoretical model proposed and the related parameters carefully calculated (not arbitrarily selected) here reveals that the interaction energy between a flat bubble surface and a magnetite particle decorated with nano-sized asperities can be lowered and its attachment location can be shifted to a larger distance by manipulating dimensions of asperity. Hence, it can be arrived that higher surface roughness not only benefits the aggregation of particles, but also facilitates the attachment between bubble and particles, resulting in a perfect flotation. The financial supports for this work from the  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.