Mimicking the structural features of natural bone has been demonstrated to bring pronounced advantages for mechanical reinforcement of polymeric orthopedic substitutes that are composed of bioinert polymer matrix and bioactive fillers. However, to trigger effective bone formation and implant integration, the bioactivity of bone substitutes plays a vital role. We hypothesized that the use of hydroxyapatite (HA) and bioactive glass (BG), compared to the use of HA alone, could improve the biological properties of polymer-based bone substitutes. Herein, high-density polyethylene (PE) composites loaded with HA and BG were fabricated using a modified injection molding machine that can provide intense shear flow to regulate the hierarchical structure of the composites. Morphological observation revealed that bone-like structures were formed in both HA/PE and BG/HA/PE composites, showing highly oriented interlocked shish kebabs. In addition, the bioactive fillers were distributed uniformly. Osteoblast proliferation was promoted by the combination of HA and BG. The mechanism was the upregulation of Runx2 expression (1.51 ± 0.17) with BG and the activation of the TAZ/YAP (1.41/0.64) signaling pathway, which accelerated the generation of ossification-related proteins. BG can regulate microRNA to promote the mRNA expression of Runx2. The silencing of Runx2 expression can inhibit BG-induced osteoblast proliferation. These results suggest that the BG/HA/PE composites having a bone-like structure have high potential as bone substitutes to repair large bone defects.The repair of bone defects, which has been a longstanding clinical and socioeconomic need, aims to restore the functions of injured bones due to tumors, tuberculosis, trauma, or metabolic bone disease [ Mechanical and biological properties are the two most important factors for polymer bone substitutes [ In order to improve the biological properties of bone-like HDHA/PE composites, bioactive glass (BG) was introduced in this work. BG is an inorganic biomaterial consisting of calcium, phosphorus, sodium, and silicon oxides; and it can be directly bound with bone tissues [ HDPE (trade name 5000 s) was purchased from Lanzhou Petroleum Chemical Co., China, with a melt flow rate of 0.9–1.2 g/10 min (190 °C, 2.16 kg). The average molecular weight and polydispersity index were 3.1 × 10 To observe the crystalline morphology, the as-prepared composites were cryogenically fractured and etched in a mixture of concentrated nitric acid (65%) and concentrated sulfuric acid (98%) (1:1, by volume) containing 1% potassium permanganate. Then, the etched surfaces were sputtered with a thin layer of gold. The morphology was observed using a field-emission SEM (Nova NanoSEM450, FEI, USA) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. To determine the crystalline structure and orientation, a two-dimensional WAXD measurement was conducted at the synchrotron light source at the beamline BL15U1 of the Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF, Shanghai, China). A Mar165 CCD detector (2048 × 2048 pixels in an area of 80 × 80 μm The melting behavior was investigated using a differential scanning calorimeter (Q2000, TA instruments, USA). The specimen (~5 mg) was heated from 40 °C to 200 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C/min under a nitrogen atmosphere at a flow rate 50 mL/min. The crystallinity was determined by integrating the enthalpy peak from 60 °C to 160 °C and normalizing it with the melting enthalpy of 100% crystalline PE, i.e., 291 J/g. The osteoblast-like cells MC3TC-E1 (Institute of Basic Medical Cell Resource Center, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences) from the embryonic precursor of a newly purchased mouse were cultured in an incubator containing 5% CO The third generation of osteoblast cells was counted. The cell suspension was diluted by LOW-Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum, inoculated in a culture flask, and incubated in a CO CCK-8 reagent can be applied to analyze the cell proliferation and toxicity. First, each cell suspension (100 μL/well) was inoculated in a 96-well plate. Then, the culture plate was placed in a 5% CO The levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), COL I, and OPN in the osteoblast cells were measured by ELISA (Wuhan Boster Biological Technology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China). The unilateral spinal cord was dissected, ground with a grinder, and loaded onto an ultrasonic tissue homogenizer. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation. The production levels of ALP, COL I, and OPN were evaluated using ELISA kits, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The OD values at 490 nm were recorded using a microplate reader (MK3; Ladsystems, Helsinki, Finland). The average levels of ALP, COL I, and OPN were calculated based on the standard curve. The bicinchoninic acid assay kit was applied to determine the protein content of samples. A 20-μg protein sample was selected from each group, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was carried out, and the protein was transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The primary antibody, YAP antibody or TAZ antibody, with a dilution of 1:500, was respectively added to each group, and the mixture was incubated at 4 °C overnight; the secondary antibody that was tagged by active horseradish peroxidase (with a dilution of 1:1000) was added, and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1–2 h. Enhanced chemiluminescence reagent was used to develop and fix the blots in a dark room. After the termination of coloration, the image analysis software Image-lab3.0 (Bio-Rad, USA) was used to conduct relative quantitative analysis for the gray value of each positive electrophoretic band. The data were analyzed according to the following formula: the relative quantitative value of target protein = gray value of target protein band/gray value of the internal reference GAPDH. Total spinal cord RNA was isolated using a Trizol kit (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA samples were then standardized and reverse transcribed with a Transcriptor First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit (Roche) using an oligo-dT/random nonamer primer mix, according to the manufacturer's instructions. qRT-PCR was carried out using the Roche FS Universal SYBR Green Master (Roche) system, according to the manufacturer's instructions, and a Viia7 system from Applied Biosystems. The primer sequences for Runx2 were 5′-GCAGTGCCCCGATTGAGG-3′ and 5′-CATACTGGGATGAGGAATGCG-3′. The primer sequences for β-actin were 5′-AACCCTAAGGCCAACAGTGAAAAG-3′ and 5′-TCATGAGGTAGTCTGTGAGGT-3′. The thermal cycling parameters started with 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s. Specificity of the PCR products was verified by melting curve analysis. NCBI Genebank was searched for the Runx2 gene sequence of osteoblasts for siRNA design. The siRNA of Runx2 was designed according to the targeted mRNA sequence, 5′-GAAGCUUGAUGACUCUAAATT-AdTdT-3′, and 5′-UUUAGAGUCAUCAAGCUUCTT-CdTdT-3′ was for the siRNA containing the silent Runx2 sequence. There were two treatment groups: the BG/HA/PE + siRNA-NC group, transfected with blank vector siRNA, and the BG/HA/PE + siRNA-Runx2 group, transfected with siRNA containing the silent Runx2 sequence. Osteoblasts in logarithmic phase were inoculated in the culture bottle after routine digestion and cultured in serum-free and antibiotic-free, low-sugar medium. The cell density was 70–90% during transfection, and cells in each culture were blended with 50 mL of serum-free medium to dilute the siRNA and transfection reagents; then, the mixture rested at room temperature for 5 min. The diluted siRNA and transfection reagents were mixed and rested at room temperature for 20 min. Cells were treated with transfection reagents at a concentration of 200 nM in serum-free conditions and cultured in the CO The data were expressed as the mean value ± standard deviation. SPSS18.0 statistics software was employed to analyze the data and conduct the single-factor analysis of variance. The comparison and contrast of experimental groups were measured by adopting the Student-Newman-Keuls test, wherein  The crystalline structure of PE and its biocomposites was investigated by two-dimensional WAXD ( The combined results of the SEM, WAXD, and DSC experiments suggested that highly anisotropic structures were formed in the HA/PE and BG/HA/PE composites via structural manipulation. Such unique structures shared the basic morphological features as natural bones, showing the integration of strength and toughness as demonstrated in our previous study [ In the BG/HA/PE group, the areas of osteoblast-like cells were increased ( Compared with the PE group, the ALP (60.1 ± 11.1 vs. 79.8 ± 12.7, The expression differences in Runx2, mRNA, and YAP/TAZ protein of osteoblast cells in the HA/PE group showed no statistically significant differences to the PE group ( In order to clarify the underlying mechanism of BG in promoting the mRNA expression of Runx2, we first utilized TargetScan, PicTar, miRBase, and miRDB to analyze and predict the miRNA expression levels of 16 miRNAs that are regulated by Runx2; and then these miRNAs were detected. Compared with the HA/PE group, miR-34c, miR-133a, miR-137, miR-205, miR-23a, miR-30a, miR-204, miR-211, miR-103a, and miR-208b in the BG/HA/PE group were obviously downregulated by more than two-fold, with statistically significant differences ( There was no difference in Runx2 mRNA expression between the BG/HA/PE group and the BG/HA/PE + siRNA-NC group. Runx2 mRNA expression, however, in the BG/HA/PE + siRNA-Runx2 group was downregulated compared to the BG/HA/PE group (1.51 ± 0.17 vs. 0.51 ± 0.11, In this study, the HA/PE and BG/HA/PE substitutes having bone-like structures were fabricated by structural injection molding. Both the SEM and WAXD results showed that the anisotropic composites had a highly simulated natural bone structure, which was composed of oriented natural polymer (collagen fibril) and apatite crystals. The mechanical performance of the composites was significantly improved, as shown in our previous study [ Osteoblasts as bone-forming cells are responsible for the formation and calcification of the bone matrix, which plays an important role in the growth and development of bone tissue as well as the regulation of the bone mass balance [ Runx2 expression occurs at the beginning of osteoblast differentiation and promotes BMSCs to differentiate into osteoblasts. Runx2 is also the earliest and the most characteristic indication of bone formation; therefore, it is of great significance for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis [ MiRNA is a type of small molecule RNA in cells that regulates gene expression after transcription and can affect a variety of biological processes, including cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and development [ In summary, the HA/PE and BG/HA/PE composites were prepared by structural injection molding. Bone-like structures were formed in the HA/PE and BG/HA/PE composites. The combination of HA and BG in the composites promoted osteoblast proliferation. The underlying mechanism was that BG upregulated the expression of Runx2 and activated the TAZ/YAP signaling pathway to accelerate the generation of ossification-related proteins. In addition, BG played a regulatory role in osteoblast Runx2, which was associated with miRNAs targeted by Runx2 to a great extent. Funding for this study was provided by the None.