Dynamic indirect tensile tests were carried out by using a Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) for coal sampled from the Datong mine in China. The principal purpose was to explore the influence of bedding structure in the coal on its dynamic indirect tensile strength. However, to resolve some contradictions, X-ray micro CT, high speed optical imaging and a discrete element based modelling approach were combined to analyze the test results. The X-ray micro CT was used to detect the actual bedding structure in the coal; the high speed imaging captured failure patterns of the specimens with different bedding directions; and the numerical modelling was utilized to investigate the influence of different bedding structures on dynamic strength. The SHPB and numerical results illustrate that dynamic indirect tensile strength reliably correlates with impact velocity. In addition, the dynamic indirect tensile strength is not only influenced by the bedding direction but also by the roughness and discontinuity of the bedding. Based on these findings, a method is developed to further process the test data including a model to describe the dynamic indirect tensile strength of Datong coal.The dynamic mechanical properties of coal are of great importance in coal mining engineering where they relate to the selection of blasting parameters, stability analysis of coal roadways under impact loading, and the prevention of coal bumps and bursts. Related research on dynamic mechanical properties of coal has been conducted since the 1950s. For example, In this study, a number of dynamic indirect tensile tests for Datong coal are conducted by using an SHPB. It focuses on the influence of the bedding structure on the dynamic indirect tensile strength of Datong coal. Coal specimens with different bedding direction (along the loading direction) were tested by using the SHPB under different impact velocities. Before the test, the density and dynamic elastic modulus were measured. To further define the influence of bedding structure, X-ray micro CT is used to provide spatial data to inform the meshing of discrete element-based numerical models to investigate the influence of different bedding structures on the dynamic tensile failure of coal. From comparison between the experimental and numerical results, relationships are developed to describe the dynamic indirect tensile strength for Datong coal as a function of impact energy. A total of 45 specimens were cut from a single block from the working face of the Xinzhouyao coal mine in Datong, China. According to the ISRM suggested method ( The selected coal samples from the No. 11 seam of the Xinzhouyao coal mine are bituminous coals, with vitrinite reflectance (R  The SHPB is located at the State Key Lab for Geomechanics and Deep Underground Engineering of CUMTB. It comprises a gas gun, a cylindrical steel striker bar (50 The strain rate of the coal specimen which reflects the loading condition of the SHPB test is Another common index used to reflect the dynamic loading condition in the dynamic indirect tensile strength recovered from the SHPB is the loading rate, which can be obtained as Only 32 of the 45 specimens were successfully tested for dynamic indirect tensile strength in the SHPB experiments.  During the test, the load–displacement curves were recorded (see In exploring the influence of bedding structure on the dynamic properties of Datong coal, some contradictions are apparent—i.e. the influences of bedding orientation on the dynamic effect obtained from Due to the natural heterogeneous property of coal, the experimental data is so scatter that it is nearly impossible to capture the main influence tendency of the bedding even if a large number of tests were conducted. Moreover, in the SHPB test, there is only one controllable parameter that is the impact velocity. Other parameters, such as strain rate and loading rate, are derived parameters by using Eqs. In this section, the Distinct Lattice Spring Model (DLSM) ( In this paper, the DLSM was adopted as the numerical simulation tool for the following reasons. First, the DLSM is made up from the most basic ingredients, e.g. mass particles, Hooke springs, the Newton's second law, and a deformation based brittle failure criterion for the normal spring, there is no complex constitutive models adopted. Therefore, the numerical simulation results can be easily interpreted. For example, if we change the bedding angle, the numerical results would directly reflect this change rather than including the constitutive change caused by the bedding direction. Second, the meshless property of the DLSM also make the method is easy to build up complex models. Third, the high performance computing ability of the DLSM ( We simulate a uniaxial compression test on a 50 As the bedding structure always reduces the cohesion of coal matrix, the bedding structure in Datong coal is represented as a group of thin layers with weaker elastic modulus in the numerical modelling. The elastic parameters for the base and weak layer are obtained by using the empirical method described in Modeling was completed on BD specimens (see To obtain the real bedding structure of the Datong coal, an X-ray micro CT was used to extract the 3D mesostructure of a specimen (see The results from these numerical models are presented in The failure patterns of the specimens are captured by using a high speed camera (FASTCAM SA1.1 model 675 From the SHPB test data and numerical simulations (see From In practical application, e.g. the development of a dynamic constitutive model for coal, the strain rate is the most commonly used variable ( In this work, the dynamic indirect tensile strength of Datong Coal is studied by using an SHPB and a discrete element based numerical modelling approach. The influence of bedding structure on dynamic strength was comprehensively studied. To explore the mechanisms by which bedding structure influences dynamic indirect tensile strength of Datong coal, the real bedding structure of a coal specimen is obtained by using a micro X-ray CT. The CT image is utilized in numerical experimentation to build an appropriate structural model and to apply dynamic analysis of failure to explore the principal influencing factors. This work shows that the dynamic indirect tensile strength of the coal is both influenced by the roughness and the continuity/discontinuity of the bedding structure. Moreover, it is observed that the dynamic failure patterns of the coal specimen are strongly influenced by the bedding structure. Combining the SHPB data and numerical simulation, two findings are apparent. The first finding is that the impact velocity is recommended as the most critical experimental detail needed to be recorded during the SHPB test for the dynamic indirect tensile test of coal. The second finding is that the dynamic indirect tensile strength is not only influenced by the bedding direction but also by the roughness and discontinuity of the bedding. Based on these two findings, a model is developed to describe the dynamic indirect tensile strength of Datong coal. This research is supported by the