The function of corn starch and the significance of the order of addition of corn starch and mono ether amine in the reverse flotation of iron ore has been investigated. Understanding hematite depression with starch and the corresponding hydrophilic state involves consideration of adsorption with amine as well as flocculation of fine hematite. Captive bubble contact angle and micro-flotation experiments indicated that amine has an affinity towards both hematite and quartz, and that the role of starch is to hinder the adsorption of amine at the hematite surface so that flotation is inhibited. Micro-flotation results confirmed that quartz does not have affinity towards starch at pH 10.5. In addition to competitive adsorption, flocculation of fine hematite occurs and images from high resolution X-ray computed tomography (HRXCT) and cryo-SEM reveal further detail regarding floc structure. These results provide substantial evidence that the fine hematite particles are flocculated in the presence of corn starch, and flocculation is dependent on the particle size of hematite, with greater flocculation for finer particles. Thus, starch is playing a dual role in the reverse flotation of iron ore, acting as a depressant by hindering amine adsorption at the hematite surface in order to maintain the hydrophilic surface state of hematite, and acting as a flocculant to aggregate fine hematite particles, which if not flocculated, could diminish the flotation separation efficiency by being transported to the froth phase during reverse flotation.Araju el al., Papini et al., Peres and Correa, Pavlovic and Brandao, Weissenborn et al., Liu and Laskowski, Liu et al., and Shrimali and Miller The present investigation was initiated to examine the significance and role of polysaccharides in the reverse flotation of iron ore. Since hematite is already hydrophilic at alkaline pH, where reverse flotation is taking place, the role of polysaccharides should be considered with respect to amine adsorption and maintaining hematite in a hydrophilic surface state. Finally, the significance of the order of addition of ether amines and polysaccharide in reverse flotation has also been taken into consideration. The polysaccharide used in this research is corn starch. These studies are of importance since mono ether amine, used as a quartz collector in the reverse flotation of iron ore, also has an affinity towards hematite. Captive bubble contact angle measurements were performed to determine the role of starch, and the significance of the order of addition in the reverse flotation of iron ore Weissenborn et al. studied the application of starch as a selective flocculant for ultra-fine iron ore Also, the role of starch as a flocculant for the aggregation of fine hematite particles during reverse flotation has been considered in this work. High resolution X-ray computed tomography (HRXCT) has been used for the first time to describe the starch flocculation of hematite for three different particle sizes, as well as the effect of order of reagent addition on hematite flocculation. HRXCT can be used in mineral processing for analysis of packed particle beds as reported by Lin et al., Liu et al., and Wang et al. Cryo scanning electron microscopy (SEM) has been used to study floc structures by Mpofu et al., Kim and Palomino, Zbik et al., and Du et al. The significance of the results is important in understanding existing flotation processes and in the design of new flotation separations. The results and discussion shed more light on the importance of starch in the reverse flotation of iron ore and will help in the design of better reagents for improved separation efficiency. The specular hematite crystals for contact angle measurements were obtained from “The Iron Quadrangle,” Brazil. The quality of the high purity single crystals was confirmed by XRD and EDAX analysis. The presence of peaks at 2θ angles of 84.48° and 39.26° signify that the crystal surface represents the (0 0 1) plane of hematite as described in the literature Pulverized hematite samples used for micro-flotation experiments were obtained from Orrisa, India, and the particle size used for micro-flotation was 150 × 106 µm. The purity of the particles was confirmed by XRD. Pulverized quartz samples used for micro-flotation measurements were obtained from US Silica, and the particle size used for micro-flotation measurements was 212 × 150 µm. The purity of the particles was confirmed by XRD. Synthetic hematite particles, smaller than 5 µm (50% < 2.7 µm, 10% < 0.4 µm), used for flocculation experiments, were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (catalogue no. 310050). The hematite particles had a purity of >99%. Also, natural hematite particles of size 20 × 7 µm (d80 = 10.961) were obtained from Amiron, and other natural hematite particles, 45 × 25 µm in size, were obtained from Orrisa, India, for flocculation experiments. The mono ether amine collector was obtained from commercial sources, and laboratory grade causticized corn starch (CAS: 9005-25-8) was obtained from Sigma Aldrich. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl), obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, were used to adjust the pH. Potassium chloride (KCl), used in solution for ionic strength control, was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Deionized water, with specific conductance of 18 MΩ·cm, was obtained from a Millipore system in the laboratory. A corn starch solution was prepared by adding 3 g of corn starch to 15 ml of 1 M NaOH in a 500 ml beaker. To that solution, 10 ml of 1 mM KCl solution was added and the solution was stirred overnight at 500 RPM. The solution was diluted to make a stock solution with a concentration of 1000 ppm. Corn starch solutions were not used after 72 h from preparation. All corn starch solutions used were optically clear. A mono ether amine solution was prepared by adding 200 mg of mono ether amine to a 500 ml beaker. To that, 500 ml of 1 mM KCl solution was added, and the solution was stirred for 1 h at 500 RPM to make a 400 ppm stock solution. Solutions were not used after 72 h from preparation. The hematite crystal was cleaned with acetone, ethanol, and ample amounts of DI water, and dried with ultra-pure nitrogen before measurements. The hematite sample was oven dried at 60 °C for 25 min, and then cooled for half an hour, open to the atmosphere, before each contact angle measurement. A Rame-Hart goniometer (Rame-Hart, Succasunna, NJ) was used for measuring captive bubble contact angles. The distance between the needle and the sample was kept constant for each captive bubble contact angle measurement. All the measurements were done in 1 mM  KCl solution, and the pH was adjusted by adding the desired amount of HCl or NaOH solution. In tests involving only one reagent, the hematite crystal was conditioned for 15 min by stirring with a magnetic bar in the desired reagent solution (80 ml). For the tests involving mono ether amine as well as corn starch, depending on the order of reagent conditioning, the hematite crystal was first conditioned by stirring for 10 min in the first reagent (40 ml) in a beaker, followed by addition of the second reagent (40 ml) in the same beaker with further stirring for 10 min. After that, the sample, together with solution, was transferred to the contact angle cell for measurement. At least 20 contact angle measurements were obtained at different locations for each experiment, and they were averaged to obtain the reported contact angle value for each pH. Variation in contact angle measurements was ±3°. All contact angle measurements were performed at pH 10.5. The micro-flotation tests for hematite with mono ether amine used as collector and frother, and corn starch used as depressant, were performed using a 112 ml column cell with a porous sintered glass bottom for gas dispersion, and a magnetic stirrer. All micro-flotation tests were performed at pH 10.5. In tests involving only one reagent, 1 g of pure hematite sample (150 × 106 µm) was added to the desired reagent solution (60 ml) in a beaker, and was conditioned for 5 min by stirring with a magnetic bar. For the tests involving mono ether amine as well as corn starch, depending on the order of reagent conditioning, 1 g of pure hematite sample (150 × 106 µm) was first conditioned by stirring for 4 min in the first reagent (30 ml) in a beaker, followed by addition of the second reagent (30 ml) in the same beaker, with further conditioning of 4 min. After that, the sample, together with solution, was transferred to the flotation cell and the flotation cell was filled with the same solution used for conditioning. The flotation was performed for 2 min using nitrogen. The flow rate was maintained at 60 ml/min throughout the experiment. Each experiment was performed two times and the average recovery is reported. The micro-flotation tests for quartz, with mono ether amine as collector and frother, were done similarly. The photons from the X-ray source are attenuated by the sample and then collected by the detector. The relationship between the attenuation intensity (I) and the material properties (µ, attenuation coefficient) through the beam direction The linear attenuation coefficient depends directly on the material density, the effective atomic number of the material (composition) comprising the sample, and the energy of the X-ray beam. This is how the different phases comprising the sample are distinguished. The high resolution X-ray computed tomography system (MicroXCT-400 from Zeiss/Xradia) at the University of Utah was used for flocculation studies of hematite particles. The HRXCT system uses an X-ray detector having sub-micron resolution, combined with a microfocus X-ray source. In this way, the voxel resolution was extended to one micron. The basic layout of this high resolution X-ray computed tomography system is shown in For acquisition of the 3D tomographic images, 1000 projections were generally obtained from the detector (each projection contains a 1024 × 1024 pixel array) at different angles, and then the projections were used for reconstructed 3D tomographic images. The scanning and reconstruction parameters (energy, magnification, exposure time, etc.) depend on the particle size and material properties. The experimental parameters used specifically for hematite particles are listed in Flocculated sediment for HRXCT scanning was prepared as follows. Eighty milligrams of hematite particles, of desired size, were weighed in a small vial. For experiments with a single reagent, the desired reagent solution (50 ml) was added to the same vial and was conditioned for 2 min by rigorous shaking. The particles were allowed to sediment for 24 h. For the tests involving mono ether amine as well as corn starch, depending on the order of reagent conditioning, an 80 mg sample of hematite was placed in a small vial and was first conditioned by shaking for 40 s in the first reagent (25 ml), followed by addition of the second reagent (25 ml) in the same vial, with further conditioning of 40 s by shaking. The particles were allowed to sediment for 24 h. All corn starch solutions had a pH of 10.5. A representative subsample of the wet sediment was taken and placed in a 5 mm syringe tube. The particles were packed inside the 5 mm syringe tube. The sample container containing the sedimented hematite particles was carefully mounted inside the HRXCT system for analysis. Each experiment was performed two times. Three-dimensional tomographic images are represented by intensity values associated with positions in a regular 3-D gird. In order to extract each individual floc, image segmentation is necessary in order to identify and separate the floc particles. In this regard, the original tomographic image was first denoised to improve the image quality using the non-local mean filter which not only smooths the particles but also preserves the particle boundaries. Basically, the denoised image was first thresholded to extract the flocs from the background. A binary image was obtained from this step. Second, the binary image was used to apply the distance transformation. Third, the most important step for successful segmentation was marker extraction. Multi-scale markers were obtained based on two sets of markers: large markers and small markers. The distance transformed image was first thresholded to get markers for particles of larger size. Then, for the extraction of markers for smaller sized particles, the regional maxima of the distance transformed image were extracted by subtraction of the reconstructed H-maximum transformed image from the original image. Combining the small markers with the large markers constitutes the final markers. Finally, the flooding process was applied to distinguish spatial boundaries After segmentation, it was possible to acquire quantitative information for each individual floc from the floc sediment. In this study, it was expected that floc size would be associated strongly with the solution chemistry and surface properties of the hematite particles. Therefore, floc size was described by the equivalent spherical diameter, as calculated from the segmented images. Image processing software was then used to analyze the size distribution of the flocs. A large depth of field for samples can be obtained by SEM and the resulting image provides for a three-dimensional view. SEM can provide magnification beyond 100,000 X. A Hitachi S-4800 high resolution field emission scanning electron microscope was used for visualizing the hematite flocs. The delicate nature of flocs makes it very difficult to perform SEM examination. The wet sample was dipped in liquid nitrogen for a few seconds such that water molecules were immobilized, but with no frost layer. Also, as the SEM does not have a cold stage, the sample started melting after a few seconds in the chamber The sample preparation for cryo-SEM was as follows. Eighty milligrams of ultra-fine hematite particles, were weighed in a small vial. Twenty-five ppm corn starch solution (50 ml), pH 10.5, was added to the same vial and was conditioned for 2 min by rigorous shaking. The particles were allowed to sediment for 24 h. A 5 ml plastic pipette was used to carefully transfer a drop of the floc suspension on the conductive carbon tape of the SEM stub. As the flocs are very fragile and prone to breakage, extreme care was taken during transfer. The stub was submerged horizontally in liquid nitrogen using tweezers. The stub was imaged for flocs immediately after taking it out of liquid nitrogen. Conditions such as, amount of sample, dipping time in liquid nitrogen, and imaging time were optimized to achieve better results. Based on results presented by Shrimali et al. Effect of mono ether amine concentration on the flotation recoveries of quartz and hematite were obtained at pH 10.5 by micro-flotation experiments. It was observed that mono ether amine has an affinity for both hematite and quartz, and at a mono ether amine concentration greater than 10 ppm, flotation recoveries for hematite and quartz are very high, reaching to almost 99% at 100 ppm concentration ( Captive bubble contact angle measurements were performed at the hematite crystal surface in 1 mM KCl solution, with a mono ether amine solution, a corn starch solution, a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution, with mono ether amine added first, a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution, with corn starch added first, a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution, with both reagents added together. All the experiments were performed in solutions at pH 10.5. As can be seen from In the presence of 50 ppm mono ether amine solutions at pH 10.5, the hematite surface is hydrophobic with a contact angle of 62°. This shows that during flotation with just mono ether amine, hematite will be hydrophobic ( In the presence of 50 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, hematite is hydrophilic. Interaction of hematite and corn starch has been discussed in great depth in the literature In the presence of a mixture of 50 ppm mono ether amine and 50 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, with mono ether amine added first, the contact angle at the hematite surface decreases to 50°, compared to a contact angle of 62° with only mono ether amine. This result indicates that corn starch does not have a significant effect on the wettability of hematite when added with mono ether amine, with amine added first. This case is opposite to what followed in the case of reverse flotation where corn starch is added first, followed by mono ether amine ( In the presence of a mixture of 50 ppm mono ether amine and 50 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, with corn starch added first, the contact angle at the hematite surface decreases to 25° compared to a contact angle of 62° with only mono ether amine. This result indicates that corn starch has a significant effect on wettability of hematite when added with mono ether amine, if the starch is added first. This order is followed in the case of reverse flotation where corn starch is added first, followed by mono ether amine ( In the presence of a mixture of 50 ppm mono ether amine and 50 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5 with both reagents added together, the contact angle at the hematite surface decreases to 40° compared to a contact angle of 62° with only mono ether amine. This result indicates that corn starch has an intermediate effect on the wettability of hematite when added together with mono ether amine ( As can be seen from the contact angle results, hematite is hydrophilic at an alkaline pH of 10.5. Mono ether amine does have affinity towards the hematite and the ability to make hematite hydrophobic at pH 10.5. Corn starch does adsorb on the hematite surface, but does not change the wetting characteristics at pH 10.5. One important result, which is of critical importance, is that the order of addition of corn starch and mono ether amine has a significant effect on the wetting characteristic of hematite. When mono ether amine is added first, followed by corn starch, the contact angle of hematite is 50° whereas when corn starch is added first, followed by mono ether amine, the contact angle drops to 25°. These results are compared to a contact angle of 62° in the presence of just mono ether amine, and indicate that though corn starch does not influence the hydrophilic state of hematite it inhibits the adsorption of mono ether amine on the hematite surface and helps to maintain a hydrophilic hematite surface. Hence, when starch is added first, it adsorbs on the surface of hematite, preventing the adsorption of mono ether amine, whereas when the corn starch is added later, mono ether amine preferentially adsorbs at the surface of hematite leading to a more hydrophobic hematite surface, even in the presence of corn starch. A pictorial representation of these phenomena is presented in Micro-flotation experiments were done for hematite particles (150 × 106 µm) in 1 mM KCl solution, with a mono ether amine solution, a corn starch solution, a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution, with mono ether amine added first, a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution, with corn starch added first, a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution, with both reagents added together. All the experiments were performed in solutions at pH 10.5. Experiments were performed to analyze the effect of an increase of mono ether concentration on flotation recovery under the conditions where a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution was used, with mono ether amine added first, and a mixture of corn starch and mono ether amine solution was used, with corn starch added first. Similar to contact angle results in In the presence of 50 ppm mono ether amine solution at pH 10.5, hematite recovery in the concentrate is 96.6% indicating that mono ether amine adsorbs at the hematite surface making it hydrophobic. Similarly, in the presence of 100 ppm mono ether amine solution at pH 10.5, the hematite recovery is 98.7%. These results correspond to the contact angle measurements ( In the presence of 50 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, the hematite recovery in the concentrate is only 1.2%. This confirms that hematite is hydrophilic in presence of corn starch. Similarly, in the presence of 100 ppm corn starch, only 0.3% of the hematite is recovered in the concentrate. These results are similar to contact angle results where hematite was found to be hydrophilic with a contact angle of 0° in the presence of corn starch ( In the presence of a mixture of 50 ppm mono ether amine and 100 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, with mono ether amine added first, the hematite recovery in the concentrate is 21.4%. When the concentration of amine was increased to 100 ppm, 150 ppm and 200 ppm, hematite recovery in the concentrate increased uniformly with amine concentration, with a maximum recovery of 97.8% in the concentrate at 200 ppm mono ether amine ( In the presence of a mixture of 50 ppm mono ether amine and 100 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, with corn starch added first, the hematite recovery in the concentrate is 2.3%. This is in sharp contrast to previous case where mono ether amine was added first and recovery in the concentrate was 21.4%. When the concentration of amine was increased to 100 ppm, 150 ppm and 200 ppm, hematite recovery in the concentrate increased uniformly with amine concentration, having a maximum recovery of 60.7% in the concentrate at 200 ppm mono ether amine concentration ( In the presence of a mixture of 50 ppm mono ether amine and 50 ppm corn starch solution at pH 10.5, with both added together, the flotation recovery in the concentrate is 10.5%. These results are consistent with contact angle results ( For comparison, micro-flotation experiments were done for quartz particles (212 × 150 µm) in the presence of 50 ppm corn starch, with an increasing concentration of mono ether amine. All the experiments were performed in 1 mM KCl solution at pH 10.5. The presence of corn starch did not have any effect on the floatability of quartz and the recovery for quartz was very similar to what was observed in HRXCT was used to analyze the flocculation characteristics of hematite. The ability of corn starch to flocculate hematite has been well studied. In the current research, hematite particles were flocculated and aggregated in a 5 mm diameter tube. Five sets of experiments were done for each particle size as described in Flocculation of hematite by corn starch for <5 µm hematite particles is shown in As discussed in the image processing, A 3-D aggregated bed of flocculated hematite fines is shown in Further examination of hematite particles conditioned with 50 ppm corn starch was done using cryo-SEM. Assuming the average floc size is 107 µm as obtained by HRXCT, Flocculation of hematite by corn starch for 20 × 7 hematite particles is shown in As discussed in image processing, A 3-D aggregated bed of flocculated hematite fines after segmentation is shown in Flocculation, in the presence of just corn starch, observed for two particle sizes, <5 µm and 20 × 7 µm, was fairly different. In the case of <5 µm particles, bigger flocs with higher sphericity were obtained, whereas, in case of 20 × 7 µm particles, an interconnected network of relatively smaller flocs, with almost no sphericity was obtained ( No flocculation was detected for the hematite particles of 45 × 25 µm size, and flocculation due to starch was not observed, which suggest that starch binding energy at the surface is insufficient for stability due to the mass of particles. This can be expected for classical bridging which is the main reason for flocculation, as suggested by Weissenborn et al. A comparison of average equivalent sphere diameter for flocs of different primary particle size is presented in The role of corn starch in reverse flotation has been established from contact angle measurements and micro-flotation. One result, which is of critical importance, is the order of reagent addition, which has a significant effect on wetting of the hematite surface. Micro-flotation results indicate that mono ether amine has an affinity for both hematite and quartz, and in the absence of corn starch, separation is not possible. Micro-flotation results also suggested that corn starch does not have any effect on the wettability of quartz at pH 10.5. In contrast to previous literature, contact angle and micro-flotation results indicate that, though corn starch is not changing the wettability of hematite during reverse flotation, it is hindering the adsorption of mono ether amine on the hematite surface, hence, preventing the surface of hematite from becoming hydrophobic. An increase in the concentration of mono ether amine shows that higher concentrations of amine could be deleterious to the separation and should be avoided in the reverse flotation of iron ore. It seems that starch acts both as a depressant and as a flocculant in the reverse flotation of iron ore and fine hematite particle aggregation due to starch contributes to the success of the reverse flotation strategy. HRXCT in-situ experiments were used to visualize the flocculation sizes of three primary hematite particles. These results indicate that flocculation due to corn starch is dependent on the particle size of hematite, and greater flocculation takes place for minus 5 µm particles. Cryo-SEM images of flocculated hematite particles (<5 µm) have been presented for the first time, and these images are compared with HRMXT images. These results show that corn starch is playing a dual role in the reverse flotation of iron ore. It is acting as a depressant by hindering amine adsorption at the hematite surface in order to maintain the hydrophilic surface state of hematite, and it is acting as a flocculant to aggregate fine hematite particles, which if not flocculated, could diminish the flotation separation efficiency by being transported to the froth phase during reverse flotation. None. This work was funded by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences,