In this study aims to provide an accurate practical anticipation model for investigating the effect of cooling and lubricant fluid on the cutting performance with a special emphasis on the consumed electrical current as one of the most important factors influencing the performance of cutting disks. In this study, 10 dimension stone samples were tested as hard rocks using three types of lubricant fluids, and totally the modelling was conducted based on 160 collected laboratory test samples for each fluid. The modelling was done using two methods of artificial neural networks (ANN) and the hybrid genetic algorithm – artificial neural network algorithm (hybrid GA-ANN algorithm). Furthermore, four influential physical and mechanical parameters of rocks, including the uniaxial compressive strength, Mohs hardness, Schimazek’s F-abrasiveness factor and Young modulus, and two operational parameters, including feed rate (Fr) and depth of cut (Dc) were used as input data, and also the maximum electrical current was used as the output data in these simulations. Finally, the results obtained by the algorithm performance indices such as the value account for (VAF), root mean square error (RMSE), and coefficient of determination (R2) were evaluated. According to the obtained results, totally 18 models were built which the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Neural Network had the highest efficiency for providing an accurate and stable anticipation model compared to the hybrid ANN-GA algorithm. In addition, the proposed MLP models prove that Soap Water with ratios of 1–40 can provide higher performance capacity in cutting process for reducing the consumed electrical current. This network is used for anticipating the maximum electrical current consumed by the cutting machine in order to evaluate the performance of sawing blade in hard rocks and the possibility of a good planning to increase the efficiency of machine using different lubricant fluids.Having a complete knowledge of the cutting process is one of the most important factors enhancing the efficiency and quality of the processed product. Generally, the cost of polishing a stone plaque in rock cutting industries is mostly influenced by factors such as instrumental costs (tools’ wear) and energy consumption expenses, and optimization discussions always attempt to increase the ratio of the production rate to the two aforementioned factors. Generally, the production rate as one of the indices of efficiency and effectiveness has a direct relationship with two factors of diamond tools’ wear and energy consumption As mentioned before, given the importance of having a complete knowledge of the cutting process in enhancing the efficiency of rock factories and quarries, the present research aims to evaluate and predict the performance of sawing blade in hard rocks using artificial intelligence techniques and investigate the effect of the cooling and lubricant fluids on the cutting performance of dimension stone. Therefore, in the first step of this study, by investigating different resources and reviewing previous studies, the influential parameters in the rock cutting process are studied, and then by testing 10 the dimension stone samples as hard rocks, 480 experimental tests are conducted and four influential physical and mechanical parameters of rocks including uniaxial compressive strength, Mohs hardness, Schimazek’s F-abrasiveness factors, Young modulus, and two operational parameters including feed rate (Fr) and depth cut (Dc), as well as the maximum electrical current consumed by the cutting machine are measured for three different lubricant fluids. Also, Due to the ambiguity and uncertainty existed in the evaluating and predicting cutting process, and in order to overcome these problems, artificial intelligence approaches are considered as a powerful tool for modeling the data set. Hence in the next step, based on two intelligent anticipation methods, including artificial neural networks and hybrid ANN-GA algorithm, the desired simulations are done and the optimal model for anticipating the highest electrical current consumed by the cutting machine is determined for the water lubricant fluid. It is worth mentioning that MATLAB software was used for the modeling in this study. In the final step, different lubricant fluids are evaluated in the optimal model in order to investigate the effect of cooling fluids on the cutting performance. Using the obtained results, the relationship between different lubricant fluids and the results of the cutting performance are evaluated. The use of cooling fluids for cooling and lubricating cutting process is inevitable. These fluids are used for the purposes of cooling the contact area and preventing the superficial burning of the diamond disk, lubricating and reducing the friction between the diamond grains and surface of the workpiece, reducing the consumed energy and increasing the tool’s life span, reducing the heat in the workpiece, increasing the surface smoothness and performing disposal of the chip All of the cutting experiments were done in the rock mechanics laboratory of Shahrood University of Technology. For this reason, the rock cutting machine was designed and built in laboratory scale in order to conduct cutting experiments. The statistical population in this study includes more than 480 experimental tests which conducted based on ISRM international standards The artificial intelligence resulted from the philosophy of human intelligence is undoubtedly one of the most important computation techniques in the industrial world. Although the artificial intelligence was initially used in 1920, it had an increasing growth in solving industrial, scientific and theoretical problems during several decades compared to other sciences Evolutionary systems as one of the most important branches of the artificial intelligence operate based on the theory of Darwinism, and in solving problems, they use the competition strategy to reach the best solution. Some of the evolutionary methods include differential evolution algorithm (DE), imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO). This class of evolutionary optimization methods has various applications in the areas of civil engineering, mining engineering and rock mechanics To create an appropriate perceptron neural network for this simulation for the accurate estimation of the electrical current consumed by the cutting machine, after preparing and setting input and output data, the neural network training algorithm and the number of hidden layer neurons must be determined. In the first step, due to the high ability of Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) learning algorithm, this algorithm is used in simulation based on Hagan and Menhaj’s suggestion and also the tansig and purelin functions are used in the hidden and output layers as transfer functions, respectively. In the next step, based on the experimental equations of In the above equations, n shows the number of data set. Values y Thus, for creating an accurate and appropriate model based on the number of neurons in the hidden layer, 11 models are simulated, and based on the performance indices of the neural networks, the efficiency of each model is obtained. The results of these modellings based on water are shown in In the final step, for determining the most appropriate model based on a simple rating system, 11 simulated models are rated Furthermore, the performance indices of model 9 for values of R As mentioned before, meta-heuristic algorithms for the artificial neural networks’ training are one of the most practical optimization techniques. Therefore, in this section, an accurate and efficient model for anticipating the maximum electrical current consumed by the artificial neural network is trained using the genetic algorithm and is used as a practical hybrid algorithm. The algorithm’s control parameters play an important role in creating an optimal model because they lead to the algorithm’s conversion and error reduction. Some of these control parameters were suggested by experts and previous studies to be used directly According to Then, the built models are rated using a simple rating method proposed by Zorlu et al. (2008) and the results obtained from this rating are shown in According to the results obtained from this rating, model 7 with the rating of 51 has the highest rating among the nine simulated models for anticipating the maximum electrical current consumed by the machine for the water lubricant fluid. In addition, the algorithm’s performance indices for the training data in this model include R According to the results obtained from It is clear that the best model simulated by MLP has a better ability and efficiency compared to the superior model of ANN-GA. In the final analysis, the model proposed by the perceptron neural network and prepared by the water lubricant fluid is considered for data obtained from experiments conducted on the same rock sample using two types of soap water with ratios of 1 to 40 and 1 to 20, and then two models are simulated. The results obtained from these simulations are shown in According to the results obtained from In spite of the fact that some studies were conducted on the effect of the cooling and lubricant fluid on the cutting performance, their main focuses were on the wear of cutting tools, other types of cutting machines like gang saw and chain saw machine. To fill this literature gap, the article aims to both demonstrate the role of the cooling and lubricant fluids in stone cutting process and propose an artificial model for the prediction of the maximum electrical current, according to which the obtained results show that the artificial intelligence techniques can be applied as powerful tools for modeling some problems involved in the rock mechanics engineering. According to the analyses conducted in this study, the following points must be considered: The comparison of performance indices of two superior models shows the high efficiency and ability of the multi-layer perceptron neural network for predicting the maximum electrical current consumed by the cutting machine compared to the hybrid ANN-GA algorithm. In fact, by comparing In the simulations conducted, Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) learning algorithm has a significant ability and superiority over the genetic algorithm in training the artificial neural network. Therefore, it can be concluded that despite uncertainty and complexity of the system, the amount of this uncertainty and complexity allowed the Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) learning algorithm to analyze the system. In fact, due to the very high ability of genetic algorithm, it experiences overfitting in training the artificial neural network. It is worth noting that experiments conducted on hard rock samples to determine the physical and mechanical properties of rocks and also study the performance of cutting machine based on the prediction of the maximum electrical current consumed by the cutting machine are considered as an uncertain and complex system and set, but the amount of this uncertainty and complexity is not clear. According to the algorithm’s performance indices indicating the efficiency and ability of algorithm in the conducted simulations, the optimal model designed based on the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Neural Network has the ability to anticipate the maximum electrical current consumed by cutting machines for all three cooling fluids and also for hard rocks. Considering the significance of predicting the electrical current consumed by the cutting machine as one of the most important elements for identification of the cutting process and based on the results obtained, it can be used for better planning to reduce the energy consumption expenses and time, and to increase the efficiency and quality of the processed product. This study shows the role of the cooling and lubricant fluids in order to decrease the consumed electrical current in cutting machine performance. For the final (best) model with a constant value of the electrical current for each fluid, in comparison to the predicted electrical current for each fluid, a comparison was made between the effect of the cooling and lubricant fluid on the cutting performance. Hence according to Evaluation of maximum consumed electrical current as one of the most important factors in the cutting process can reduce the final cost and increase the quality of the processed product. On the other hand, cooling and lubricant fluids are one of the most important factors influencing the cutting tools’ performance amount and function, and the electrical current consumed by the machine. Given the importance of this issue, this study aims to provide an optimal model for anticipating the maximum electrical current consumed by the machine for three cooling fluids. Also, due to the uncertainty existed in the evaluation process in laboratory tests, in this study, using the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Neural Network and hybrid GA-ANN algorithm as intelligent methods, an optimal model is simulated to predict the maximum consumed electrical current. By conducting experiments on 10 hard rock samples, totally 160 experimental tests were done for each of the fluids, including water and two types of soap water with ratios of 1 to 40 and 1 to 20, and four influential physical and mechanical parameters of rocks, including the uniaxial compressive strength, Mohs hardness, Schimazek’s F-abrasiveness factors and Young modulus, and two operational parameters, including Feed Rate (Fr) and Depth cut (Dc) were measured and considered as input data and the maximum electrical current consumed was considered as the output data. According to the results obtained from simulations, it is obvious that for analyzing and evaluating the experiment and cutting process system, the Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) learning algorithm showed a better efficiency and effectiveness compared to the genetic algorithm in the neural network training. The model simulated by MLP under water fluid is defined as 6 × 10 × 1 and includes 6 input layer neurons, 10 hidden layer neurons, and 1 output layer neuron, which has a very acceptable ability in anticipating the maximum electrical current consumed for the hard rocks under other fluids such as two types of soap water with ratios of 1 to 40 and 1 to 20. In addition, it was found that the applicability of Soap water with ratios of 1 to 40 with pH = 7.87 to reduce the maximum electrical current consumed is more reliable than the Soap water with ratios of 1 to 20 and water with pH = 7.88 and 8.23, respectively. Consequently, it can be concluded that the obtained results of the developed model for selecting the best coolant and lubricant can be used in the dimension stone industry and stone cutting factories to reduce the cost with a more reliable design and planning. Finally, it is suggested that the results obtained from this study are compared with other meta-heuristic algorithms for training neural networks, such as differential evolution (DE) algorithm, imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA), and particle swarm optimization (PSO), or other intelligent techniques like support vector machine (SVM) and radial basis function (RBF) and the results are provided in terms of a comprehensive research. We would like to express our deepest thanks to Professor Mahdi Ghaem for his excellent advice.