Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) as ozonation coupled with inorganic materials have been recently demonstrated to be highly suitable for wastewater treatment. In petrochemical wastewaters, pollutants as alkylphenols are often detected. In this paper, we highlight the efficiency to couple ozone with zeolites as SOD, LTA and FAU-X for the degradation of 2,4-dimethylphenol (2,4-DMP). For process requirement the 3 zeolites were prepared as particles of 70μm and 1mm thanks to pseudomorphic transformation without binders. The zeolites were synthesized under their sodium (Na) form and potassium (K) ion-exchange was performed to enhance their basicity. By single ozonation (without zeolite) 100% of 2,4-DMP removal occurred in 25min, but the pollutant is transformed into oxidized by-products corresponding to only 14% of the Total Organic Carbon (TOC) removal after 5h. Adding zeolites to the ozonation process increased very slightly the kinetic of disappearance of the pollutant but increased the removal of its oxidation by-products, with 34% of TOC removal after 5h. Among the zeolites, the best solid catalyst for ozonation was Na-LTA. Experiments with tert-butanol (t-BuOH) put in evidence that Na-LTA generates hydroxyl radicals from ozone, which increased the degradation of the by-products. No adsorption of 2,4-DMP and of the resulting oxidation by-products was detected by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) on the materials after 5h of ozonation. The TOC removal is consequently equivalent to the total mineralization of the organics into CO2.Industrial petrochemical wastewaters contain aromatic compounds such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), benzene–toluene–ethylbenzene–xylene (BTEX) and phenols. In petrochemical effluents, 2,4-dimethylphenol (2,4-DMP) is a typical pollutant, which derived from the cresol part of fractional distillation and extraction with aqueous alkaline solutions In the present study, SOD, LTA and FAU-X zeolites have been tested in ozonation processes for the degradation of 2,4-DMP. The removal of 2,4-DMP was followed within time as well as the oxidized by-products by the Total Organic Carbon (TOC) removal analysis. Acetonitrile (ACN) and water (H SOD, LTA and FAU-X zeolites particles were synthesized by pseudomorphic transformation (without binders) according to ref Pollutant adsorption capacities of the zeolites were performed prior to ozonation process in order to quantify the 2,4-DMP adsorption capacity of the zeolites on the overall degradation mechanism. An amount of 0.2 The ozonation degradation of the 2,4-DMP pollutant was performed in a glass stirred batch reactor (2 The pH of the solution was followed within time and before each ozonation experiment, the pHmeter was calibrated with buffers solutions. To evidence the presence of radicals, a The remaining 2,4-DMP concentration in the aqueous solution was measured by HPLC equipped with an UV detector (Waters 600E pump-717 plus Autosampler and PDA2996, at X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the zeolites were performed using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with a Bragg–Brentano geometry and equipped with a Bruker Lynx Eye detector. XRD patterns were recorded in the range 4–50° (2 Different sources of silica have been used for the synthesis of the SOD, LTA and FAU-X zeolites. Preshaped silica as Davicat 1404 and W432 consisting of irregular particles with sharp edges and average size of 70 Prior O Ozonation experiments were performed with 2,4-DMP (50 To explain the increase of TOC removal with zeolites, the evolution of the pH of the solution was followed. Indeed it is well known that at high pH (>7) the formation of radical species is favored during ozonation due to the interaction of O Another explanation for the increase of the TOC removal, corresponding to a decrease of organic matter in the solution, could be the adsorption of the oxidized by-products of the 2,4-DMP on the zeolites, instead of their expected transformation into CO As Na-LTA zeolite revealed the highest level of mineralization of 2,4-DMP and appeared as a promising material for toxic compounds removal by ozonation, further studies on As this generation of Different batches of Na-LTA have been employed and a good reproduction of the results has been obtained. However, one batch of Na-LTA has been used in a second run of ozonation after filtering and drying (at 50 An excess of NaCl was added to a suspension of Na-LTA in water to limit the exchange of the sodium of Na-LTA with the proton of the solution, which is irreversible. The pH of the mixture increases only from pH 5.5 to pH 7.2, showing that NaCl allows to reversibly exchange protons and sodium cations in the solution. The effect of NaCl in ozonation processes is very important as some wastewater contains some salts as NaCl, which can be present in high concentration level in tannery and dye manufacturing wastewaters, for instance The synthesis of large particles of several zeolites (SOD, LTA and FAU-X) has been successfully achieved by pseudomorphic transformation without using inorganic blinders for a better understanding of phenols pollutant degradation during heterogeneous ozonation. Addition of zeolites to ozonation processes increases drastically the mineralization level of the pollutant. Na-LTA was the most active zeolite. Furthermore, its pseudomorphic synthesis as 1 The authors acknowledge the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 