White bean seeds were subjected to soaking in distilled water for 1, 2 and 3 days. In order to perform complete processing, the seeds were cooked until soft. Effects of soaking and/or cooking of white bean seeds on antinutritional factors, mineral contents and HCl-extractability were studied. Phytic acid and polyphenol contents of all cultivars were reduced. Soaking alone and soaking, followed by cooking, reduced mineral contents of the cultivars, but HCl-extractability was significantly (P
                     ⩽0.01) improved to varying extents, depending on cultivar type. Soaking and/or cooking treatment was thus found to be an effective technique and caused further improvement in the availability of both major and trace minerals in white bean.Legumes play an important role in human nutrition since they are rich source of protein, calories, certain minerals and vitamins ( Three white bean ( Minerals were determined in the samples by the dry-ashing method described by Hydrochloric acid extractability of minerals was performed according to the Phytic acid content was determined by the method of Total polyphenols were determined according to the Prussian Blue spectrophotometric method ( Each sample was analyzed in triplicate and the values were then averaged. Data were assessed by the analysis of variance (ANOVA) as described by The phytate contents of the cultivars varied from 352 to 457 Mineral contents varied between the cultivars. White bean was found to be rich in calcium. Calcium contents of unprocessed cultivars were 377, 346 and 321 Although soaking and/or cooking brought about a decline in total mineral content of white bean cultivars, the HCl-extractability of both major and trace minerals increased significantly as the period of soaking was prolonged. The losses in mineral contents may be ascribed to leaching of these minerals into the soaking medium. Dietary essential minerals, such as phosphorus, calcium and iron, are present in association with antinutrients and this may be the reason for their lower HCl-extractabilities. Improvement in HCl-extractability, which is an index of the bioavailability of minerals, may be explained by the soaking and cooking which release these minerals in free form, thereby increasing their HCl-extractability. Thus, cooking of the seeds after soaking can be considered as a beneficial technique for improving the bioavailability of minerals.