Recycling of steel making dusts often targets Zn removal. Other heavy metals such as Mo, W or Cr do not receive as much attention, and the decontamination of the dusts from these constituents is scarcely addressed in the literature. This study presents a novel approach of the selective separation of Mo from steel making dusts using alkaline solutions with low concentrations, before Zn removal using concentrated alkaline medium. Such an approach has never been reported before and can contribute to more efficient decontamination of the steel making dusts and will increase the value of recovered components since Mo can be significantly preconcentrated. Two samples originating from two steel producers were investigated. One sample contained 2.65% of Mo and 1.87% of Zn, and the second sample had 0.61% of Mo and 35.9% of Zn. Temperature was found to have a low impact on the leaching efficiency of Mo, while increased NaOH concentration promoted leaching of Zn. Excellent pre-concentration of Mo was achieved by using a S:L ratio of 1:3. Almost 5170 mg/L Mo, 1000 mg/L W, no Fe and only 2 mg/L Zn were present in the solution after leaching at 30 °C for 30 min. For the samples containing lower concentrations of Mo and high concentrations of Zn, the selectivity of the process was affected when using higher concentrations of NaOH. A final leachate containing 797 mg/L of Mo and only 11 mg/L Zn was obtained after leaching with 0.05 M NaOH. DFT computations showed that the 2D layered structures of MoO3 and WO3 are decisive factors that account for their high solubilites.Global demand for steel has increased to 1.4 billion tonnes per year and it expected to double by 2050 ( In this work, selective removal of Mo and W was performed via alkaline leaching. The aim was to separate Mo from Zn and Fe. By using higher NaOH concentrations (> 4 M), both Mo and Zn can be recovered. However, to develop more environmentally friendly process, and to enhance the separation of Mo/Zn, leaching was performed using lower NaOH concentrations. This was to enhance recovery of Mo, and to eliminate Zn leaching. Simultaneously, the leaching behaviour of other important impurities (W, Ca, Fe, etc.) was studied, and it is reported. Such an approach has never been reported before and it can bring more efficient decontamination of the steel making dusts. Moreover, it increases the value of the recovered streams since Mo can be remarkably pre-concentrated with very low contamination of Zn. Modern computational tools such as density functional theory (DFT) have been applied in this work. DFT provides atomic scale information on various dissolution and leaching processes ( Steel making dust samples were supplied by Högonäs AB (H), Erasteel AB (E), Uddeholm AB (U), Scana AB (S) and MEROX AB (M). Due to very low Mo content, samples H, S and M were excluded from the study. A representative sample was obtained using the quartering method ( Leaching experiments were carried out in polypropylene beakers with a volume of 100 mL using electric stirrers (Mymeko MSU 0.5). The experiments were carried out using solid to liquid ratios of 1:50, 1:10, 1:5 and 1:3 at low temperatures, 25 and 40 °C. Different concentrations of NaOH were used: 0.05 M, 0.5 M and 1 M NaOH. The amounts of solid sample used were 1 g (for S:L ratio 1:50) and 10 g (for higher S:L ratios). Aliquots were collected from the leachates, and filtered using polypropylene filters with a diameter of 0.45 μm (VWR). These were diluted with 0.5 M HNO Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed with the Vienna The content of Mo, Zn, Fe and Cr in the dusts is given in  The XRD patterns of the samples are given in Mo is present in the steel making dust in the form of MoO Leaching of Zn (II) is possible in acidic and alkaline regions according to the E-pH diagram of the Zn-H The change of standard Gibbs free energy for reactions (2), (3) and (4) were calculated using HSC Chemistry 9 ( The temperature increase had a positive effect on leaching Mo from sample E. At 25 °C, approximately 52% of Mo was leached in the first minute. This increased to 60% after 2 h ( The effect of temperature on the leaching efficiency of Mo and W was studied using 1 M NaOH ( The leachability of the impurities (Ca and Zn) was also investigated. The leaching efficiency for Zn was 8% after 2 h at 25 °C. Increasing the temperature to 40 °C did not have a significant effect, and only 9% of Zn was leached after 2 h ( Sample U was subjected to the same treatment. However, due to the lower concentration of impurities, the leaching behavior of only Mo and Zn was investigated. Due to the lower content of Mo and Zn, the efficiency is reported in % and not in concentrations. Leaching of Mo and Zn from sample U with 0.5 M NaOH shows similarities to sample E ( As with sample E, leaching of Mo was not significantly affected by the increase in temperature. The efficiency reached approximately 48% after 2 h with 1 M NaOH ( The effect of NaOH concentration is summarized in The same study for sample U confirmed that the leaching yield of Mo is not affected by the concentration of NaOH ( In previous research, where Zn recovery was studied via leaching with 6, 8 and 12 M NaOH, leaching of Mo was also observed. When 6, 8, and 12 M NaOH were used at 25, 40, and 60 °C, the Mo yields were approximately 48, 49 and 50%, respectively. On the other hand, the Zn concentration in the leachate was significantly higher (7000–8000 mg/L). The effect of solid to liquid ratio on the metal recovery rates was investigated using 0.5 M NaOH at 25 °C, 40 °C and 60 °C ( To show the selectivity of the process at high S:L ratios, the metal concentrations in mg/L are given in By using a high S:L ratio (1:3), only Mo and W were leached. Moreover, a pre-concentration of both metals was achieved; the final concentration of Mo was 4560 mg/L, and the concentration of W was about 1250 mg/L when leaching sample E at 40 °C. After leaching at 60 °C, the Mo content in the leachate was almost 5170 mg/L, W was 1000 mg/L, and Zn was only 2 mg/L. The effect of the S:L ratio was also investigated for sample U, which contains less Mo (0.61%) and a significantly higher amount of Zn (35.9%). An increase in S:L ratio did not significantly affect the Mo yield at 25 °C ( As previously mentioned, the concentration of Mo is much lower in sample U than in sample E, but after leaching with a S:L ratio 1:3, Mo was pre-concentrated to 874 mg/L. At the same time, the Zn concentration reached 345 mg/L. Since the leaching efficiency of Zn is mostly affected by the concentration of NaOH, for samples with low Mo content, lower concentration of NaOH (< 0.5 M) should be used. The majority of steel making dust is processed with 8–12 M NaOH, but under such conditions the concentration of Zn would reach approximately 8000 mg/L (leaching efficiency of 60%), making it more difficult to further selectively recover Mo from the leachate. Additional experiments were performed using 0.05 M NaOH. At S:L ratio 1:3, the concentration of Mo was 797 mg/L, while the Zn concentration was only 11 mg/L. The mechanisms of the dissolution of solids start with the adsorption of the leaching species. Several parameters of the reaction media affect dissolution, but in general, the adsorption energies of the leachants can correlate directly with their leaching efficiency. In order to understand the atomic scale origins of the differences in solubility between Mo, W and Zn, the surface reactions of their oxides with Na and HO were investigated with DFT. The supercell models of the surfaces are show in Monoclinic MoO The definition of monolayer for these materials is not trivial due to the varied coordination of the atoms in the crystal lattices. In WO The selective recovery of Mo from steel making dusts was successful performed in this study by leaching with less concentrated NaOH solutions (0.5 M and 1 M). Samples from two steel producers were investigated here. Sample E contained 2.65% of Mo and 1.87% of Zn, and sample U contained 0.61% of Mo and 35.9% of Zn. The effect of three main parameters: temperature, leaching media concentration and solid to liquid ratio on metal leachability were tested. The temperature was found not to have significant impact on the leaching efficiency of Mo. An increase in temperature to 60 °C led to an increase in the efficiency of Mo by 10%. The NaOH concentration had a negligible effect on leaching Mo from both samples. However, higher NaOH concentration promoted leaching of Zn, significantly increasing its concentration in solution. It was concluded that a S:L ratio of 1:3 can be used to selectively recover Mo without significant impact on its leaching yield Mo. Moreover, very good pre-concentration of Mo was achieved at this S:L ratio for sample E, when 5170 mg/L of Mo, 1000 mg/L of W and only 2 mg/L of Zn were present in solution after leaching at 30 °C for 30 min (Fe free leachate). Nevertheless, since sample U contained less Mo and more Zn by using 0.05 M NaOH at a S:L ratio of 1:3, the concentration of Mo was kept at almost 800 mg/L, while the Zn concentration was only 11 mg/L. DFT computations show that the 2D layered structures of MoO This work contributes to the limited knowledge about recovery of Mo from the steel making dusts and offers a very effective and environmentally friendly process to pre-concentrate Mo in solution, and to decrease the Zn content to very low concentration or even zero. This can be simply applied as a pre-step before processing of steel making dust to recover Zn. This research was supported by