Pathomechanisms underlying vascular calcification biogenesis are still incompletely understood. Biomineral from human atherosclerotic intimal plaques; human, equine, and bovine medial vascular calcifications; and human and equine bone was released from collagenous organic matrix by sodium hydroxide/sodium hypochlorite digestion. Solid-state 13C NMR of intimal plaque mineral shows signals from cholesterol/cholesteryl esters and fatty acids. In contrast, in mineral from pure medial calcifications and bone mineral, fatty acid signals predominate. Refluxing (chloroform/methanol) intimal plaque calcifications removes the cholesterylic but not the fatty acyl signals. The lipid composition of this refluxed mineral now closely resembles that of the medial and bone mineral, which is unchanged by reflux. Thus, intimal and medial vascular calcifications and bone mineral have in common a pool of occluded mineral-entrained fatty acyl-rich lipids. This population of fatty acid may contain methyl-branched fatty acids, possibly representing lipoprotein particle remnants. Cell signaling and mechanistic parallels between physiological (orthotopic) and pathological (ectopic) calcification are also reflected thus in the NMR spectroscopic fingerprints of mineral-associated and mineral-entrained lipids. Additionally the atherosclerotic plaque mineral alone shows a significant independent pool of cholesterylic lipids. Colocalization of mineral and lipid may be coincidental, but it could also reflect an essential mechanistic component of biomineralization.magic angle spinning matrix vesicle vascular smooth muscle cell Calcifications, which often occur in atherosclerosis, are almost exclusively in the intimal layer of the arterial wall. Small mineral deposits in the fibrous cap are associated with plaque rupture, whereas large calcium phosphate crystals may stabilize it ( Lipids are widely believed to be important participants in some apatitic biomineralization processes ( Comparative mass spectrometric lipidomics of nonmineralized human atherosclerotic plaques shows abundant unsaturated cholesteryl esters and some phosphatidylcholines and sphingomyelins, with elevated concentrations of lipid species, particularly cholesteryl esters, in plaque relative to plasma ( There is considerable evidence that vascular calcification is associated with phenotypic changes of VSMCs toward osteoblast/chondrocyte-like differentiation ( Solid-state NMR is a powerful technique for characterizing the chemical composition and molecular structure of biological materials. It is often effective with little sample manipulation and extraction. This can be particularly useful for composite mineralized tissue because freeing organic material from the mineral phase can require severe and possibly destructive treatments. NMR methods have been extensively applied to vascular deposits and their molecular precursors. Hamilton et al. identified In this study, we use chemical treatment of pathologically and naturally calcified tissue to remove extracellular matrix organic material, leaving only the mineral deposit itself, thus allowing detailed characterization of its organic contents. We find fatty acyl lipids that resist chemical digestion and subsequent organic solvent extraction in all the biomineral types. However, cholesterol and cholesteryl esters are abundant only in mineral from calcified intimal vascular plaque, and they can be mobilized by organic solvents, suggesting significant differences in the roles of these two lipid populations in the calcification process. Moreover, the form of acyl fatty acids we identify in both vascular tissue and bone raises further questions about the source and role of this lipid population. All human material was obtained and used with full institutional ethical approval. Intimal calcifications were obtained from carotid endarterectomies; NMR was performed on four samples, three of which were from different individuals, and one of which was prepared from intimal calcifications from three other individuals, pooled. Calcifications judged to be predominantly medial from six different individuals were obtained from femoral arteries of diabetic patients after amputation. Intimal calcified atherosclerotic plaque was pretreated with collagenase and elastase as described in detail in Duer et al. ( Pure lipids were purchased from Sigma (Poole, Dorset, UK) and used without further purification. Calcifications were released from organic matrix and other connective tissue (collagen and other biomacromolecules) by prolonged digestion in concentrated sodium hydroxide and sodium hypochlorite at 4°C. At intervals of a few weeks, samples were filtered, thoroughly washed with distilled water, air dried, and interrogated by Lipids were extracted from digested mineral by refluxing calcifications from intimal plaque and bone, in 1:1 chloroform:methanol for 30 min. The solvent was decanted, and the refluxed mineral was washed twice with fresh chloroform/methanol and air dried. The washings were added to the original decanted refluxate, which was dried under low vacuum on a rotary evaporator and redissolved in deuterochloroform for liquid-state NMR characterization. All experiments were performed using standard SSNMR methodology on a Bruker 9.4 Tesla Avance-400 wide bore spectrometer, at frequencies of 400.1 MHz ( All  To interrogate the properties of nonpathological mineralized material, several samples of equine bone and a sample of adult human bone were also digested with sodium hydroxide and sodium hypochlorite to free the mineral from the collagenous organic matrix. Changes in the spectral characteristics of intimal plaque mineral and bone on chloroform/methanol reflux are exemplified in Mineral from vascular calcifications closely resembles bone hydroxyapatite by X-ray powder diffraction and After reflux, the intimal plaque mineral lipid spectra now resemble those of pure medial calcifications and bone mineral. This argues for two distinct pools of hydrophobic lipid in or associated with the intimal mineral: one cholesterylic and accessible to organic solvents and possibly a remnant of lipoprotein precursors, and the other less accessible to organic extraction and consisting predominantly of fatty acyl structures. The Interestingly, a detailed atomic-force microscopy study ( The liquid-state NMR spectra reveal the composition of the lipids released by reflux. In the refluxate from intimal plaque mineral ( The much weaker spectrum of the refluxate from bone mineral shows a relatively much higher proportion of fatty acid signals, such as from long-chain terminal methyl groups (ca. 14 ppm) and from olefinic carbons (at ca. 130 ppm). There are no detectable signals around 62 and 69 ppm (which would correspond to the glyceryl carbons of intact triglycerides and phosphatidyl glycerides); it is, of course, possible that the sample preparation has leached these components out of the mineral deposits. Liquid-state spectra of model cholesterylic compounds and glycerides are shown for comparison in supplementary Figs. VII and VIII, respectively. We note there are signals consistent with both 2-methyl (37–40 ppm) and n-methyl-branched fatty acids [n ≠ 2 (36–38, 42 ppm)]. These signals arise from carbons with or next to methyl substitutions, and the net intensity of these signals compared with that between 29 and 30 ppm, which represents the remaining fatty acid chain carbons, suggests that such carbons are relatively abundant; in other words, that there is a preponderance of methyl-substituted fatty acids associated with mineral. A spectrum of pristanic acid, a model methyl branched fatty acid, is shown in supplementary Fig. IX. Neutral (zwitterionic) phospholipids predominate over acidic phospholipids in normally calcifying and calcified tissue; the former, but not the latter, are extractable without demineralization ( In conclusion, intimal atherosclerotic vascular calcifications contain a pool of cholesterylic lipids and a pool of fatty acyl lipids that resist strong alkali and chemical oxidation. The cholesterylic, but not the fatty acyl, population is readily mobilized by organic solvents. In medial vascular calcifications, however, alkali and oxidation leave a predominantly fatty acyl lipid pool closely resembling that in bone mineral and the fatty acyl lipids left behind after organic solvent reflux in intimal calcifications. It is likely that this predominantly fatty acyl pool is common to all three calcification types (intimal, medial vascular, and bone). It is characterized by a relative abundance of methyl-branched fatty acids, and we tentatively suggest that these may represent the remnants of lipoprotein particles. The cholesterylic lipids observed only in intimal calcifications may play an independent role in mineralization, or their presence may be merely a coincidental function of the abundance of such lipids in atherosclerotic lesions. Thus, solid-state NMR shows that participation of fatty acyl lipids in calcification is another factor common to all three families of mineralized tissue, in spite of their different orthotopic or ectopic origins, locations, and pathological significance.