Currently different trade units are used throughout the forest energy supply chain in Sweden: chipping contractors are paid per m3 chipped volume, dry metric tonnes or MWh, hauliers per raw tonnes or m3 chipped volume and the company supplying the chips to the heating plant most often per delivered MWh. This introduces business risks for all market players, and affects studies of chipping equipment. Lately, Skogforsk has used oven dry tonnes, but stakeholders that measure chips in other units want results to be presented in these units as well. To raise awareness about output unit selection and its effect on productivity and fuel consumption studies, Bruks 806 chippers were studied when chipping spruce and beech residues. Results show that the selection of output unit affects the capacity of detecting treatment differences and the direction of such differences. Chipping productivity based on effective chipping time was higher for spruce residues when calculated using chipped volume, and for beech when calculated using raw weight. Similar trends were found for fuel consumption per product unit. As both feedstock characteristics and output measurement unit selection affects study results, a proper experimental design to control these effects is important. In many cases it is a matter of keeping feedstock constant during comparisons of machines/treatments. Care is needed when using chipped volume, as chipper settings may influence chip bulk density and thus chip volume. The use of different units throughout the supply chain reduces transparency and increases the risk for sub-optimal decisions.Productivity and fuel consumption in comminution studies, as in all other studies are a measure of the output in relation to the input. The output in studies of comminution equipment has traditionally been measured in cubic metres of chips, raw tonnes i.e. Mg, or dry tonnes. In Sweden, Skogforsks studies of comminution equipment, chippers and grinders has reported productivities in oven dry tonnes (odt) i.e. oven dry Mg, per effective work time and fuel consumption in litres per odt since 2010. However, forest companies and contractors that measure chips in m To complicate matters’ further it is not uncommon that different market players in the same area use different units, or even that the same market player uses different units to pay the landowner for the biomass and the contractors for the works performed. The current situation in Sweden is that different trade units are used in the supply chain: chipping contractors can be paid for their work in m While raw weight is easy to measure accurately, it is not a good measure of either the amount of biomass or the energy content as long as the moisture content is unknown. Furthermore, the raw weight will change during storage of the material, fresh material will have a moisture content of about 50% (wet base), but properly stored material may have a moisture content as low as 25% in the end of the summer [ Unfortunately, this heterogeneity also affects the scientific community. Measurement of time inputs has been harmonised by e.g. the IUFRO Forest work study nomenclature [ The many methods used to measure output make individual biomass production studies difficult to compare, which is further complicated by the fact that machine design might influence the measurement of the output [ The aims of this study were to raise awareness about the issue of product unit selection and its effect on study results, and to exemplify this by evaluating the effects of two feedstock types on chipper productivity and fuel consumption using different output units. During 2013 and 2014 performance studies of the then new Bruks 806STC chipper were made to describe the time consumption and productivity, fuel consumption, and chip quality when chipping different type of logging residues with the machine. Chip size distribution was used as a measure of chip quality. The 806STC chipper is powered by a 368 kW Scania engine. Chipping of Norway spruce (Picea Abies L. H. Karst.) residues was studied outside Djurås in central Sweden in May 2013 and chipping of beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) residues was studied outside Hässleholm in southern Sweden in April 2014. Average temperature was 18 °C in Djurås and 8 °C in Hässleholm. In both cases, stacked residues were chipped on the landing and transported to the closest suitable reloading position, in Djurås 50–100 m and in Hässleholm 50–250 m. The longer and more variable distance in Hässleholm was caused by a narrow road with less space where the truck could place the chip containers. The chipping operation in Djurås was performed by a contractor using a Rottne F15c forwarder (184 kW) as carrier for the chipper, and the operation in Hässleholm was performed by another contractor using a Ecolog 574C (204 kW) forwarder as carrier. Both forwarders were equipped with booms with 10 m reach and the Rottne had a 0.30 m The time study of the chipping work was done as a comparative time study with snap back timing [ The fuel consumption of the engine that powered the chipper and the engine powering the carrier including the hydraulic loader were measured by topping up their respective fuel tanks after each load using an accurate fuel gauge. To compensate for differences between trailer loads, fuel consumption per produced amount of chips were used in the analyses. Diesel fuel volume was converted to input energy in J by its energy content (9800 kWh per m Chip mass (M) was measured using the certified scales at the heating plants in Borlänge and Hässleholm, where also the volumes were measured by the wood measurement associations. Chip mass per bin on the chipper was scaled using the scales of the machine in Djurås and thereafter corrected using the total weight according to the scales at the heating plant (Eq. The study was designed as a simple comparison of the two feedstocks and all analyses of productivity and fuel consumption were made using t-tests. Chip size distribution was analysed using a general linear model (GLM) on logit transformed shares (S) using the factors » Material«, and »Size_class«. The logit transformation was necessary since it transforms the primary range of shares S from the interval [0, 1] onto the interval [– ∞, ∞] assumed by the normal distribution (Olsson 2002). The test criteria were the interaction of »Size_class« within »Material« (Material × Size_class). If the effect of »Size_class« (on Logit S) was found to be independent of the interactive factor » Material « no effect on chip size distribution may be assumed. Effective chipping time represented slightly less than half of total work time, with delays accounting for 17–28% of the total ( Although the machines were operated a bit differently depending on feedstock, the larger piece size for the beech residues reduced boom out time per odt but increased the time for assistance in feeding, feedstock differences had no effect on effective chipping time per odt of chips ( Chipping of beech residues produced more chips in the 16–45 mm target fraction and less fines than chipping of spruce residues ( Analyses of the effect of measurement unit on productivity were conducted using both productive work time and effective chipping time as denominator. Productivity based on effective chipping time excludes complementary times and should offer a better resolution and increase the possibility to detect the impacts of feedstock and measurement unit on chipping performance. On the other hand, productivity based on productive work time is the unit that is most useful to contractors and buyers of chipping services.  Similar trends are found for fuel use per product unit ( In both studies, the utilisation of the chipper for chipping work was low. This is not unexpected and is in accordance with earlier studies of chipping stacked residues on or adjacent to landings [ How the amount of produced chips was measured had a profound impact on the results of the study. When dry mass (odt) was used to measure output, as is the practice at Skogforsk, no differences were found between the feedstocks, and the same occurred when output was measured as energy content, as favoured by many end users (energy conversion plants). However, large and significant differences were found when the comparison was based on bulk volume or raw weight. These differences reflect the characteristics of the feedstock, which is logical, because that same feedstock represents the output, after processing. In which direction a change in feedstock properties will affect productivity comparisons may in some cases be easy to understand, and in some cases quite complex. A modest increase in feedstock moisture content will in most cases not affect productivity measured as volume or dry tonnes, but it will increase productivity measured as raw tonnes and decrease productivity if measured as net energy content. The effect of feedstock dry density is on the other hand more difficult to predict. A denser wood is more demanding to chip, i.e. the force needed for each cut is larger [ It can be argued that the feedstocks compared were chosen to produce a large contrast between output units and that density differences are not always as large. Yet, the choice of measurement unit influences the results in most studies. Realizing that leads to several considerations on the theory and practice of output measurements. But it is more important to realise that in most studies not aimed at comparing feedstocks, the effects of measurement unit can be controlled and rendered unimportant by a suitable study design. As pointed out in Refs. [ Before embarking into any theoretical discussion, it is important to explore the practicalities of output measurement, and especially the convenience of using one unit or the other. The different ways to measure output all have their pros and cons; Loose volume is usually easy to measure, especially if the chips are discharged into vans or containers, but the result will be influenced by chipper settings and evacuation system used. However, in many cases loose volume is not measured but an estimate is made based on known volume of the van/container and a subjective estimate of van/container filling rate. Solid volume is possible to measure accurately for logs. For other materials, it usually is an estimate based on gross volume of the stack and a “rule of thumb” conversion factor. Both volume measurement give an accurate representation of the amount of biomass harvested/chipped and will therefore be suitable for payment to landowners and chipping contractors as long as the tree species is considered. Raw weight is relatively easy to measure but the moisture content of the material will affect the outcome, if materials with different moisture content are chipped. In a situation where only fresh (newly harvested) material is chipped, raw weight will be a consistent estimate of the biomass harvested. However, this is not the case if stored material is chipped, as storage and weather conditions will affect the raw weight. This can lead to a situation with opposing chip quality goals, where landowners and chipping contractors would prefer to deliver wet chips, while customers would prefer dry chips. Dry weight is usually calculated from a measured raw weight and sampled moisture content. Thus, there is a risk that results are affected by sampling errors. However, it is a unit that is suitable for payment to landowners and chipping contractors as it gives an accurate representation of the amount of biomass harvested/chipped. The energy content is a calculated unit, and it suffers the same risks for moisture content sampling errors as the dry weight. Furthermore, the ash content is also determined through sampling or - as in this study - standardised to a fixed value, depending on the type of material. However, it is the preferred unit by the energy companies as it minimises their business risks. Unless bulk density and moisture content is presented, it's not easy to do conversions between these measures, as this is dependent on material properties, the settings of the machines used and their chip evacuation system. The use of different units throughout the supply chain reduces transparency and increases the risk for sub-optimal decisions. Ultimately, practice will favour those units that are used locally for trading chips. This is no guarantee that only one unit will be used, on the contrary, different market players might very well use different units. Where forest companies act as chip supply companies buying wood from landowners and procuring harvesting, chipping and transport services from contractors, it falls upon them to take the business risks associated with using different measurement units. However, by managing storage effects and optimizing deliveries there is also a profit to be made as a chip supply company cf. [ By stressing the combined impact of feedstock characteristics and output measurement unit selection on study results, this paper highlights once more the importance of a proper experimental design in chipper studies, so that these effects can be controlled. As pointed out in Refs. [ For landowners and chipping contractor's payments based on dry mass basis are the fairest option as it not is affected by factors outside their control, e.g. moisture content at delivery to final customer or chipper settings (for the landowner). However, most end consumers would like to pay for the amount of energy delivered, i.e. per MWh, as this removes most business risks for them. This situation introduces significant business risks (but also opportunities) to the forest companies acting as middleman between forest owners and end consumers, which it is only natural that they try to minimise by using the same unit throughout the supply chain. This study was funded by the