Background and hypothesis
                  Nonoperative treatment is standard for most diaphyseal clavicle fractures, but recent studies have demonstrated improved outcomes with operative treatment of displaced fractures. The objectives of this diagnostic study were to assess agreement of orthopaedic surgeons regarding their treatment preferences for diaphyseal clavicle fractures and to compare them with recent recommendations. Interobserver and intraobserver agreement in treatment decisions were hypothesized to be only slight.
               
                  Methods
                  Anonymized case vignettes of 50 acute diaphyseal clavicle fractures including medical history, physical examination findings, and radiographs were independently reviewed by 32 orthopaedic surgeons from the United States. Four treatment options were offered and decisions were compared with current treatment recommendations. Interobserver agreement was calculated using Fleiss' kappa coefficient. Average intraobserver agreement for surgeons who completed a retest review (minimum interval of 8 weeks) was calculated.
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-two surgeons completed the first round of reviewing and 27 completed the retest (mean interval, 22 weeks). Interobserver agreement was overall fair (kappa = 0.36) and moderate (kappa = 0.56) when operative options were compared with nonoperative options. Median intraobserver agreement was 74% for the 4 treatment options offered and 84% in deciding on operative vs. nonoperative means. Concordance with recent recommendations for operative vs. nonoperative treatment was seen in 91% of decisions (median).
               
                  Discussion and conclusions
                  Recent recommendations appear to have been adopted by a selected subgroup of U.S. orthopaedic surgeons, showing a surprisingly high median concordance of 91% in this study. However, only fair to moderate interobserver and intraobserver agreement was present, leaving potential for improvement.Clavicle fractures are common, representing 5% of all adult fractures. Recently, operative treatment has been recommended in certain instances, such as higher degrees of displacement and shortening >20 mm. The objectives of this study were to assess agreement of orthopaedic surgeons regarding their current treatment preferences of acute diaphyseal clavicle fractures and also to look at concordance with current treatment recommendations. This study included a retest review to examine intraobserver agreement. We hypothesized that there would be slight interobserver and intraobserver agreement among surgeons in the decision-making for treatment of diaphyseal clavicle fractures. Anonymized case vignettes were prepared from a series of 50 diaphyseal clavicle fractures, OTA (2007) type 15-B.  The questionnaire and a document with 50 case vignettes were sent to 42 fellowship-trained orthopaedic surgeons who were acquainted with the research team (convenience sample). All surgeons completed their residency and fellowships at different hospitals or at different times in the United States. Personal characteristics of the surgeons, such as years of practice in orthopaedic surgery, area of subspecialization (e.g., shoulder, trauma), area of fellowship (e.g., sports medicine, trauma, shoulder), and approximate number of clavicle fractures treated per year, were included. The questionnaire was created as an online survey ( Surgeons were asked to print out the questionnaire and to open the portfolio with the 50 case vignettes and the online questionnaire. Surgeons were then asked to mark the preferred treatment options for every case on both questionnaire versions to ensure that no data would be lost during online transmission. If it was more convenient, the completed printout could also be faxed to our clinical research department or sent as a scan via email. The surgeons were asked to destroy the printed copy when the reception of their results was confirmed. For assessment of intraobserver agreement, a survey retest was conducted with the same case order and an interval of at least 8 weeks. Overall frequencies of treatment decisions were calculated for nonoperative (simple sling vs. figure-of-eight bandage) vs. operative (plate vs. intramedullary fixation) treatment. Before distribution of the survey documents, a recommended treatment (nonoperative vs. operative) was determined by the authors for every case by use of recent recommendations in the literature, Interobserver agreement was analyzed using Fleiss' weighted kappa coefficient as described by Landis and Koch. A retest was conducted for the analysis of intraobserver agreement. Answers of the 2 rounds were compared for each surgeon for all 4 options and for the basic 2 options, and median intraobserver agreement was calculated (raw agreement proportions of second vs. first survey). Chi-square tests were used to test for statistical differences between all treatment decisions of surgeons and the predefined recommended treatments. Analyses for overall predictors of treatment decisions (surgeons' experience and age of patients) included stratified analyses, one-way ANOVA for group differences, and univariate linear regression analyses. These analyses were all administered with IBM SPSS 19.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). Kappa values were calculated with Excel (Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA) and formulas by Landis and Koch. The aim of inferential statistical testing was exploration of tendencies for substantial effects, not the statistical validation of effects for the total population of surgeons, as it would be for a population-based health care study. So, we abstained from adjustments for alpha-cumulation, as the available sample of surgeons was not considered to be representative of the general population of orthopaedic surgeons. Of the 42 orthopaedic surgeons, 32 completed one round of surveying (response rate, 76%), and 27 of the 32 surgeons (attrition rate, 16%) also completed the survey retest; 1600 treatment decisions were made by the 32 surgeons in the first survey, and 1350 decisions were made by the 27 remaining surgeons in the retest. Five surgeons did not participate in the retest. Data were complete for all 32 surgeons without any missings. Interobserver agreement was calculated with Fleiss' kappa for more than 2 treatment options and more than 2 observers (in this study, surgeons). Results are displayed in Intraobserver agreement for those surgeons who completed a second round of surveying at a mean interval of 22.3 weeks averaged 76% (MD = 74%, Q1 = 68%, Q3 = 84%, range: 62%–98%) for all 4 options and 85% (MD = 84%, Q1 = 82%, Q3 = 88%, range: 72%–98%) for the 2 basic options (operative vs. nonoperative). Detailed results are presented in A descriptive analysis of the observed treatment preferences for all responding surgeons is displayed in Those results show various patterns of decision-making that cannot be explained by medical indication alone. So additional analyses examined whether treatment decisions were associated with age at injury or with the surgeons' experience ( This study presents data on specialized orthopaedic surgeons' treatment preferences for diaphyseal clavicle fractures. The study also highlights the interobserver and intraobserver variability in treatment decisions for diaphyseal clavicle fractures including Fleiss' kappa calculations for interobserver agreement and concordance with treatment recommendations. Overall, our hypothesis of slight interobserver agreement proved to be too conservative because values of fair or moderate agreement were present. However, these findings showed lower agreement than would be desirable with the background of recent treatment recommendations. We note that kappa statistics have their weaknesses, and the classification from poor to excellent as well as the statistical precision is discussed controversially in the literature. Nevertheless, it is a widely accepted method to calculate interobserver agreement. The findings for intraobserver agreement might imply that stable decision patterns are present in a subset of orthopaedic surgeons specialized in shoulder or sports medicine. For the very high intraobserver agreement of a few surgeons, one is tempted to refer this to the traditional surgical thinking, “Do what you do best and stick to it.” This strategy of decision-making allows comprehensive experience with the chosen treatments, but the disadvantage is that new treatment strategies or procedures may not be attempted. “Classic” teaching suggested that all clavicle fractures do well with conservative means. Regarding concordance of treatment decisions with the recommended treatment (operative vs. nonoperative) predefined for every case by the authors on the basis of recent literature recommendations, For surgeons' preferences in treating this fracture entity and consistency in decision-making, published data are widely lacking. Pieske et al The proportion of operative treatment in this German study Another interesting observation from the data of Pieske et al Limitations of our study include the selection of the surgeons surveyed. We attempted to recruit a sample of surgeons with specific expertise in shoulder surgery to test for agreement and adoption of recent recommendations in this specific expert group. In addition, a few surveyed surgeons were part of the same fellowship program even though they completed their residency at various centers in the United States. These two aspects may have introduced a selection bias and had an influence on the agreement. However, we believe the influence of a “same-school effect” would have shown larger amounts of agreement. The case selection in this study with a high proportion of displaced fracture patterns may also have introduced a bias that could have led to overestimation of the tendency toward operative treatment. Another limitation of the study was the limited amount of information that could be presented for the selected cases, especially for matters that might be gleaned from direct physical examination and the personal discussion with the patient about risks and benefits of various treatment methods. We believe this effect is probably minimal and the results can be generalized to actual clinical scenarios because physical examination does not typically add tremendously to the decision-making in treatment of clavicle fractures. A methodological issue refers to our strong hypothesis of only slight interobserver agreement, resulting in an open question of how much agreement is to be expected in a study on decision-making with anonymized cases and in a clinical context in which the diagnostic process uses further diagnostic assessments and contains several stages of decision-making. The findings of our study revealed a rather large variance in decision-making of surveyed specialized orthopaedic surgeons. Nonetheless, a good concordance with recent treatment recommendations could be shown in the selected group of specialized orthopaedic surgeons. Need for further research exists in the form of large, randomized studies of surgeons' preferences as well as on the basis of evidence concerning treatment outcomes. These are essential to establish internationally accepted guidelines for the treatment of this specific fracture entity. The authors wish to thank Christel Zeuner and Annika Waldmann for support with data processing and Mario Iskenius for data analyses with the R statistics software. Further, the authors also would like to thank Marilee P. Horan for her great help on the organizational side of this project. One or more of the authors, PJM, has received from a commercial entity something of value (exceeding the equivalent of US $500) not related to this manuscript or research from Arthrex. PJM is a consultant and receives payments from Arthrex and has stocks or stock options in Game Ready and Vumedi. HJDH, CJP, and PJM received research support from the Steadman Philippon Research Institute, which is a 501(c)3 nonprofit institution supported financially by private donations, and corporate support from the following entities: Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Arthrex, Siemens, Ossur Americas.