The Fe3+ leaching solution which was produced by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidas was used to leach pentlandite. The effects of several kinetic parameters including temperature, Fe3+ concentration and Cl− on Ni recovery were investigated in a container independently. The results showed that the leaching rate of Ni was favored by the rise of temperature, the increase of Fe3+ concentration and the partial replacement of SO4
                     2− by Cl−, all of which could prove the indirect mechanism for sulfides leaching. Then a bioleaching process comprising biooxidation and chemical leaching is proposed. In the biooxidation process, A. ferrooxidans was used to produce Fe3+ at 30°C, which was then fed to the chemical process to oxidize pentlandite at 50°C. This biological–chemical leaching process features the continuous production of Fe3+ in the bioreactor and the high temperature leaching of pentlandite in the chemical reactor. By using this process, Ni leaching rate of 83.8% was obtained at 5 days. According to the results, the present heap leaching process could be improved by the results obtained by this biological–chemical leaching process.In recent years, bacterial oxidation of sulfides has become a well-established commercial application due to its facility of construction, use, expandability and maintenance and environmental soundness, as well as cost advantages The formation of sulfur (Eq. Thereby, some examples of microorganisms capable of oxidizing ferrous and elemental sulfur above 40 Based on the indirect mechanism of Fe Pure culture of In order to obtain the suitable conditions for the leaching of pentlandite in this biological–chemical technique, the effects of several process variables on Fe It is reported that the leaching rate of sulfides in ferric chloride are more rapid than in sulfate media As shown in According to the indirect mechanism for the leaching of sulfides, the Fe The pentlandite particles below 0.074 The effect of temperature on Fe As shown in The effect of Fe The results showed that [Fe In the last few years, the application of chloride hydrometallurgy has been accepted for the leaching technology As shown in Under the optimal conditions which were obtained above, the biological–chemical leaching test of pentlandite was conducted. In order to study both the role of It can be seen that the leaching rate of Ni in the inoculated system with 50  In addition to pentlandite, JinChuan nickel ore also comprises many other substances such as gangue minerals, magnetite, chromite and so on As a conclusion, both the strong acidity and the higher ratio of [Fe The Fe This research was supported by Key Science and Technology Financing Projects of Ministry of Education, China (No. 10710), International Cooperation Projection of Gansu Province (No. 0708 WCGA 150), the Science and Technique Program of Gansu Province (Grant Nos. 2GS035-A52-008-01, 2GS064-A43-019-02), the Science and Technique Program of Lanzhou city, Gansu Province (Grant No. 03-02-24) and by the Science and Technique Foundation of Tongjian Corporation and Jinchuan Group LTD.