Details of the current restructuring of this Chemical Engineering Series, coinciding with the publication of the Fourth Edition of Volumes 1 and 2 and to be followed by new editions of the other volumes, have been set out in the Preface to the Fourth Edition of Volume 1. The revision involves the inclusion in Volume 1 of material on non-Newtonian flow (previously in Volume 3) and the transference from Volume 2 to Volume 1 of The new subtitle of Volume 2, Fluid–solid separation processes are discussed in the earlier chapters under the headings of Sedimentation, Filtration, Gas Cleaning, and Centrifugal Separations. The remaining separations involve applications of mass-transfer processes, in the presence of solid particles in leaching (solid–liquid extraction), drying, and crystallisation. In distillation, gas absorption and liquid–liquid extraction, interactions occur between two fluid streams with mass transfer taking place across a phase boundary. Usually these operations are carried out as continuous countercurrent flow processes, either stagewise (as in a plate-column) or with differential contacting (as in a packed column). There is a case therefore for a generalised treatment of countercurrent contacting processes with each of the individual operations, such as Distillation, treated as particular cases. Although this approach has considerable merit, both conceptually and in terms of economy of space, it has not been adopted here, because the authors’ experience of teaching suggests that the student more readily grasps the principles involved, by considering each topic in turn, provided of course that the teacher makes a serious attempt to emphasise the common features. The new edition concludes with four chapters which are newcomers to Volume 2, each written by a specialist author from the Chemical Engineering Department at Swansea— Adsorption and Ion Exchange (Chapters 17 and 18) (topics previously covered in Volume 3)  Chromatographic Separations (Chapter 19)  and Membrane Separations (Chapter 20)  These techniques are of particular interest in that they provide a means of separating molecular species which are difficult to separate by other techniques and which may be present in very low concentrations. Such species include large molecules, submicrometre size particles, stereo-isomers, and the products from bioreactors (Volume 3). The separations can be Again I would express our deep sense of loss on the death of our colleague, Professor John Coulson, in January 1990. His two former colleagues at Newcastle, Dr. John Backhurst and the Reverend Dr. John Harker, have played a substantial part in the preparation of this new edition both by updating the sections originally attributable to him, and by obtaining new illustrations and descriptions of industrial equipment. Finally, may I again thank our readers who, in the past, have made such helpful suggestions and have drawn to our attention errors, many of which would never have been spotted by the authors. Would they please continue their good work! In this reprint corrections and minor revisions have been incorporated. The principal changes are as follows: Addition of an account of the construction and operation of the Szego Grinding Mill ( Inclusion of the Yoshioka method for the design of thickeners ( Incorporation of Geldart’s classification of powders in relation to fluidisation characteristics ( The substitution of a more logical approach to filtration of slurries yielding compressible cakes and redefinition of the specific resistance ( Revision of the nomenclature for the underflow streams of washing thickeners to bring it into line with that used for other stagewise processes, including distillation and absorption ( A small addition to the selection of dryers and the inclusion of Examples (Chapter 16).