Electrochemical cells of the type (Ag | Ag+ electrolyte | Ag-Sb-compounds) have been applied to determine the thermodynamic properties of the intermetallic compounds in Ag-Sb system. Both AgI and β”-alumina were used as fast Ag+ ion conducting solid electrolytes. The usage of these two different electrolytes, in their respective ionic conduction domains, allowed emf measurements in the Ag-Sb system over a significantly wide temperature range. For the first time, emf values of the intermetallic compounds in the Ag-Sb system have been measured above 450K. Several different cell arrangements were applied to ensure reproducibility of the experiments and to evaluate the effects of different cell arrangements.
                  The parasitic cell potential contributions to the emf values, resulting from thermovoltage and contact potential differences were measured by using symmetric cells. The results obtained with the symmetric cells were analyzed and compensated from the measured emf values of the actual experimental electrochemical cells.Recently, thermoelectric materials are becoming increasingly important in the field of energy technology and environmentally friendly refrigeration devices. For instance, Ag-Sb compounds in the Ag-Sb-Te and Pb-Ag-Sb-Te systems are promising materials for thermoelectric applications Fundamental to the field of thermoelectric materials is the need to optimize a selection of suitable material properties. The performance of thermoelectric materials is assessed using the dimensionless figure of merit Ag-Sb intermetallic phases can be found also in silver and copper ores as secondary and primary minerals and in base metals anode slimes, which is a raw material for the recovery of the precious metals The Ag-Sb system is composed of two intermetallic phases: Ag In previous emf studies, the electrochemical cells with solid Ag The provenance and mass fraction purity of the materials used in this study are listed in The pure binary phases Ag The grinding of the synthetized binary phases was performed in an agate mortar. After the grinding, the other substance of the cell reaction was mixed to the synthetized binary phase to achieve equilibrium of two coexisting phases. In (A) and (B) types of test electrodes, shown in The final equilibrium of the two phases were reached when the whole cell arrangement were annealed inside experimental emf furnace before the actual measurements. At least 7 days annealing were needed before the measured emf was constant and equilibrium was assumed to be reached. Some of the reference electrodes were formed by pressing Ag powder into a pellet. The contact between the pelletized test electrodes and Pt wires were formed by pressing Pt wires against the pelletized electrodes. The high-temperature equilibrated electrodes were prepared by mixing appropriate amounts of Ag and Sb such that two phases coexist in equilibrium already in synthetization stage. Therefore, neither grinding nor pressing of the sample electrodes was needed after synthesis. Shots or pieces of Ag and Sb were weighted to a quartz ampoule by using Toledo AB 204S balance. In (A) and (B) types of test electrodes, as shown in In both of the sample electrode preparation methods the reference electrode was made of pure Ag, which was either in powder form or as a sheet. If a plate like shape of Ag was used, the plate was bended around the Pt lead wire and Pt wire was squeezed firmly between Ag sheets to establish unrestrained electric contact between the test electrode and the Pt wire. In the present study, both β”-alumina discs and pressed AgI were used as the fast Ag The measurements were carried out with the cells (A) and (B): All the cell arrangements were pressed during the experiments between two closed end alumina tubes loaded by steel springs outside the experimental furnace ( The experiments were carried out in inert argon atmosphere. Traces of oxygen in experimental work tube may cause undesirable reactions in the electrochemical cell, which will affect to the measured emf. To remove oxygen traces from argon, it was first lead through a furnace filled with titanium chips. Therefore, the oxygen content of the inert gas reacts with titanium forming titanium oxides. Therefore, no oxygen may pass to the experimental furnace. Experiments were done with multiple apparatuses and some of them did not include a separate gas purification arrangement. However, the measured emf did not deviate notably whether the gas purification arrangement was used or not. The emfs of the experimental cells were measured using Keithley 6517B electrometers. The resistances generated by the two resistance thermometers were measured by Keithley 2000 DMMs. All of the measurement devices were connected to PCs, which collected data from each device once every five seconds. To examine the functional temperature limits of β”-alumina in emf studies, the experimental cell (III) was measured at 483.65 The parasitic contributions to the cell emf, resulting from the presence of temperature gradients and contact potential differences, were measured and compensated from the gathered data. The parasitic cell potential difference emerging in the experimental cells was measured by the symmetrical cells: The parasitic cell potentials were plotted as function of experimental temperature and the temperature gradient over the symmetrical cell separately for both cells. The dimensions, electronic contacts and electrolyte materials of the symmetric cell arrangements were identical to the experimental cells (A) and (B). Therefore, the measured emf of cells (C) and (D) has been assumed to be comparable to the error of the experimental cells. The emf of the symmetrical cells where measured either by decreasing or increasing temperature step by step and moving the cell arrangement carefully inside the work tube to measure emf of the symmetrical cell in different temperature gradients over the cell. The measured data points of the symmetrical cells are averages of 1000 measurements. Polynomial surface fits, shown in The emf values obtained with experimental cells (A) and (B) as well as the experimental uncertainties were compiled in Since the electronic conductivities of AgI and β”-alumina are negligible in the experimental conditions as their transference number are The experimetal data obtained in this study, presented in According to Feschotte, Monachon and Durussel In isothermal equilibrium conditions, chemical potential difference of silver (Δμ where The results obtained with the symmetric cells (C) and (D) were analyzed and expressed by Eqs. The standard Gibbs energies of formation of Ag Gibbs energies of reaction (ii) were similarly calculated directly from temperature dependence of emf(T) within the temperature range 525-738 The standard Gibbs energies of formation of the virtual cell reactions can be written as: Therefore, the estimated standard Gibbs energy of formation of Ag The obtained results for both Ag The phase transition suggested in the compilation of Massalski Voronin and Osadchii as expressed by Eq. At equilibrium conditions, standard Gibbs energies of reactions in the cell (E) can be expressed as: where Standard entropies of the intermetallic compounds, at antimony saturation given in In this study, standard thermodynamic properties of Ag-Sb-intermetallic compounds have been determined by the solid state electrolyte emf technique using two different fast Ag The fundamental improvement in this study includes; the introduction of β”-alumina solid electrolytes for the thermodynamic studies of the Ag-Sb system, the usage of two different Ag Based on the results obtained with several electrochemical cells, thermodynamic properties of Ag The standard Gibbs energy of formation of Ag The value for Ag Financial support of the