The tensile or Mode I fracture toughness is one of the most important strength parameters of mortar which is usually measured experimentally in the laboratory. Several widely accepted indirect methods have been used for toughness measurement but they estimate it and do not provide the real and precise fracture toughness of mortar. In this paper, the direct tensile fracture toughness of mortar is determined through a compression to tensile load transferring device (called Compression-to-Tensile Load Transformer (CTLT)) in the laboratory. This sophisticated device is developed to use a specially prepared Bond Shaped Sample (BSS) containing edge cracks. These samples are carefully prepared and subjected to the direct tensile loading by the special loading device. The direct fracture toughness results are verified by performing the Notched Brazilian Disc (NBD) tests (the standard indirect tests). The effect of crack length and crack overlapping on the stress concentration at the crack tip is analyzed numerically using finite element method. However, comparison of these results can provide a good basis for the validity of the direct toughness result. The experimentally observed fracture propagation pattern is also in good accordance with those obtained by the standard finite element method.Fracture mechanics principles can be used to study the initiation and propagation of cracks in mortar (rock like or brittle materials) structures subjected to a stress field (Whittaker et al., Fracture toughness is one of the most important parameter in fracture mechanics literature which describes the resistance of a crack (within a material) to continue its extension under a prescribed loading condition. Investigation on fracture toughness and its determination and/or measurement is vital to understand the mechanism of fracturing and failure behavior of mortar structures sustaining different loadings. Therefore, the fracture mechanics principles based on the concept of fracture toughness (as a material property) have been used in the stability analysis of mortar and rock structures. According to the three individual stress conditions, a crack may propagate under the three failure modes, correspondingly. The stress intensity factor of Mode I which is also known as the tensile mode or the opening mode is defined for the individual tensile fracture. The Mode II of stress intensity factor is defined for the in-plane sliding or shear mode of loading. The Mode III of fracture toughness is assigned for the tearing or out of plane loading mode (Whittaker et al Because of its importance, a plenty of researchers allotted their investigations on the measurement of fracture toughness of brittle materials including all the three modes (Chang In the present research work, a new testing method is proposed to measure the direct fracture toughness of mortar in the laboratory. Therefore, a compression to tensile load transferring (CTLT) device is designed for testing the specially prepared mortar specimens in form of Bonding Shaped Sample (BSS) containing edge cracks. In this elaborately designed device, the compression load is changed to that of tensile while the device is put in a general compression testing machine. Each BSS specimen can be easily prepared in the laboratory within 30 min. For the direct determination of the mortar fracture toughness in the laboratory by CTLT device, three different mortar samples with different tensile strength have been prepared. Different mixtures of water, fine sand and cement have been used for these samples. Such cylindrical specimens with 5.6 cm in diameter and 11.2 cm in length have been realized to measure uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the mortar samples according to the ASTM Furthermore mortar “I” shape specimens have been prepared by mixing fine sand and cement in a blender and then poured the mixture into a “I”shaped Plexiglas box of size 19 × 19 × 6 cm consisting of four sheets bolted together and two rectangle blocks with the internal dimension of 2 × 6 × 6 cm which fixed at the left and right sides of the box. Notches are obtained by using small shims instead of by cutting the mature. These specimens (called the Bond Shaped Sample (BSS)) are ready for the direct fracture toughness tests at the end of the curing process. Notched Brazilian Disc (NBD) specimens of mortar have also been prepared to carry out the indirect measurement of fracture toughness in order to validate the “I” shape test results. The NBD mortar specimens have been realized starting from two semi cylindrical molds linked each other by an elastic belt with thickness and diameter equal to 2.7 cm and 5 cm, respectively. A 8 cm metallic shim with a thickness of 0.05 cm is being inserted in middle of the mold and the mortar mixture is then poured into it. The metallic shim leaves an open joint (crack) through the specimen as the mortar mixture get seated and hardened. This crack is perpendicular to the front and back of the specimen. Then, after about 8 h, the metallic shims are removed and the front and back faces of the specimens are cleaned and polished. The prepared NBD mortar specimens are stored in the laboratory at room temperature (i.e. the temperature is controlled at 20 ± 2 °C) for 10 days. Six models consisting horizontal and oriented joints have been built. The joint lengths were selected to be as 4 cm and 6 cm. In a fixed joint length, the joint angularity can be changed with different values of 0° ( In the present research, for measuring a direct fracture toughness of brittle mortar, a compression-to-tension load transformer (CTLT) is developed. This device converts the compression load to tensile load. The CTLT consists of two main parts made of hardened stainless steel ( As shown in When this set up (CTLT) is situated in the uniaxial loading frames, the upper part of the loading frame compresses the upper cast such that the lower surface of joint is in tension. On the other hand, the lower part of the loading frame compresses the lower cast such that the upper surface of joint is in tension. Such a mechanism brings the notches to tensile loading condition. The compressive load is applied by means of a 30-ton hydraulic load cell ( The failure surfaces of nearly all tested samples show the tensile fracture mechanism for these samples because these fracture surfaces are varnished with no pulverized material and no trace of shear displacement. For the case of horizontal joints (cracks) with the length of 4 cm and 6 cm, the cracks propagates horizontally related to the loading axis direction as shown in For the 30° oriented joints with lengths of 4 cm and 6 cm, the tensile crack initiates from the tip of the joint and propagates diagonally till interact with the mortar specimen's left edge ( For the 60° oriented joint with length of 4 cm, the tensile crack initiates from the tip of the joint and propagates diagonally till coalesce with the lower sample edge ( As shown in For the case of 75° of bridge area angle, the tensile crack initiates from the tip of the lower joint first and then propagates diagonally till interact with the upper joint surface ( For the joint with the bridge area angle, 90°, the tensile crack initiates from the tip of the lower joint and propagates diagonally till interact with the joint surface (  From The crack propagation pattern of the mortar specimens with the bridge length of 5 cm. having different bridge area angles, 25°, 50°, 75° and 90° are shown in  For the case of joints (cracks) with the bridge length of 8 cm., the cracks are quite far from each other and therefore, the bridge area angles of 0° and 50° are considered as shown in For the joint with a bridge area angle of 0°, the tensile crack initiates from the tip of the joint and propagates horizontally till coalesce with the other joint tip ( Marji  For notch angularity of 60° and 30° the The fracture toughness of mortar sample consisting two non-persistent joint and the average value are listed in As shown in The fracture patterns of the three mortar samples, subjected to NBD test, are shown in The indirect fracture toughness of each NBD tested mortar sample and the average value are listed in The Mode I stress intensity factor of mortar samples with cracks can be simulated by different type of numerical methods such as the finite element method (FEM), which is widespread in solving the engineering problems. In this research, a two-dimensional finite element code named FRANC2D/L (FRacture ANalysis Code for 2-D Layered structures) which is specially designed to analyze the fracture mechanics problems is used to simulate the tested mortar specimens behavior. Such a computer code is based on the theories of linear and nonlinear elastic fracture mechanics. The FRANC2D/L was originally developed at Cornell University and then modified for analyzing multi-layer structures at Kansas State University. The typical finite element mesh of a tested mortar specimen with boundary and loading conditions is shown in Six models consisting horizontal and oriented joints have been built. The joint lengths were 4 cm and 6 cm. In a fixed joint length, the joint angularity may get different value of 0°, 30° and 60° ( All these models were subjected to a tensile stress till crack initiation was occurred. This stress was used for calculation of fracture toughness ( As shown in The stress distribution of the mortar specimen models considering one bridge angularity of 0°, 30° and 60° are shown in As shown in The crack coalescence of the mortar specimen models with the joint angularity of 0°, 30° and 60° and joint length of 4 cm and 6 cm are shown in The direct Mode I fracture toughness of mortar is measured through the development of CTLT and BSS samples. A compression to tensile load transferring device is designed for testing the specially prepared mortar specimens (i.e. BSS) containing edge cracks. To compare the results obtained through these tests with those obtained by the indirect tests (such as the Brazilian Tensile tests) three different mortar samples made from NBD specimens are also tested in the laboratory. A standard numerical method i.e. a two-dimensional finite element code named FRANC2D/L has been used to simulate these experimental works. However, the following main conclusions may be gained from this research. The CTLT device is designed to obtain tensile fracture toughness and to induce extension failure under a true (direct) uniaxial tensile stress. The specimens used for BSS tests are easily prepared in the laboratory (it takes about 30 min to prepare each sample). The Mode I direct fracture toughness of brittle materials can be measured easily (it only requires to know the notch length and the critical applied load). For the direct measurement of fracture toughness, the BSS tests are carried out on 14 samples with different bridge lengths and for the indirect measurement of toughness, the Notched Brazilian Disc tests were also performed for providing a basis for comparison. Comparing the results obtained by these two different methods, it is recognized here that the fracture toughness measured by BSS tests is about 11% lower than that of measured by the NBD tests. In the numerical simulation of the BSS samples, the stress distribution and failure process of these samples analyzed and the failure process and the fracture pattern of the samples were observed which were reasonable and in good accordance with the experimental results. As a whole it is concluded that the BSS test is capable of measuring the direct fracture toughness values of brittle materials like mortar. None.