The electrical field requirements of Electro Active Polymer (EAP) actuators have to be lowered in order for them to be used with other electro devices. The research field on EAP expands day by day. As determined by many studies on polymeric samples, the electrostrictive strain becomes saturated when increasing the input electrical field. It was also found that the maximum strain value depends strongly on the sample thickness. A combination of the polarization saturation effect and heterogeneities in the polymer thickness led to a three-layer model that could correctly describe the strain behavior versus the electrical field as well as versus the polymer thickness. The model assumes that the polymer is not homogeneous along the thickness but presents some skin effects formed during its curing. It is considered that the characteristics of the skin layer, such as relative permittivity and Young's modulus, differ from those of the inner layer. When the electrical field is applied parallel to the polymer thickness, the outer and inner layers present varying strains. Since the layers are attached together and since only an in-plane motion is considered, the strain must be the same in each layer. Consequently, stresses appear in the layers. The obtained simulation results fit the experimental data well. Moreover, the results from the model displayed the electrical distribution in the material.Electro Active Polymers (EAPs) have started turning the heads of many researchers as of the last decade due to their outstanding characteristics. Not only the cost performance and the flexibility, but also the possibility of high strain levels is attracting Based on this fact, an intermediate material was fabricated in our laboratory. The target was a polymeric material able to generate as much strain as a human muscle (around 20%) with only a moderate electrical input as traditional piezo materials (i.e., less than 20 In the process, it was noticed that the strain converged in the high electrical field regime (we used only up to 20 The present paper proposes a model that can explain the strain saturation in relation to the thickness. In this model, the polymer was assumed not to be homogeneous but rather heterogeneous along the thickness direction. Based on the assumption that the polymer processing can generate two skin layers, it is a three-layer model. The skin layers were considered to have “slightly” different characteristics as opposed to the “bulky” inner layer. These phenomena, the strain saturation and the thickness effect, appear in both pure PU and composite samples. In the present paper, simulation results are compared with the experimental results of only pure PU samples. The experimental setup has been described in detail in several papers Samples of pure polyurethane (PU) elastomers made by solution casting with DMF as the solvent were used in the study. A certain variation in thickness, between 20 and 200 It was pointed out in the introduction that the saturation of strain versus electrical field, When an electrical field is applied to the specimen, an electric polarization occurs. In a polymeric specimen, there is no residual polarization after turning off the field application. The generated polarization Based on such a strong dependency of the strain on the thickness as shown in Due to the non linearity of the polarization, the equivalent capacitance The input voltage The current Starting from the electrostriction equation of the first layer, Numerous parameters need to be determined. The parameters in   In the case of polyurethane, the thickness strain  For the sake of comparison, It should be noted that the strain did not come back to zero, experimentally, when the electrical field reached zero at 5, 10, 15 and 20 In the experimental results in The maximum strain versus the sample thickness is presented in The thickness of outer skin, The same coefficients were input in the outer and inner layers to see the case of homogeneous material, i.e., the case of a one-layer model. Second remarkable point which was completely different from the result of the three-layer model was the thickness effect. This was already clearly expressed by the curve with open circles in the strain versus thickness relation of It was assumed that the material was not homogeneous and that there were three layers in the thickness direction. What happened in these layers when the electrical input was applied?   The electrical fields Based on Based on the saturated polarization, a three-layer model was established to explain the strain saturation and the thickness effect of polymeric samples. The material was considered inhomogeneous in the direction of the thickness where the electrical field was input. However the fitting was not yet perfect due to a large number of parameters needing to be better adapted, the simulation could recreate the experimental phenomena well. Thicker the sample is, the inter-layer force becomes bigger then the total strain level becomes smaller. Comparing to homogeneous model which gives no fitted results, the inhomogeneity in the material was confirmed. With the parameters obtained from this model, moreover, an electrical induction mechanism in the material was assumed.