The impact of suspension heating method on the flocculation process using thermosensitive polymer is reported in this paper. In experiments a model suspension of chalk in RO water (purified by Reverse Osmosis) was destabilized using a copolymer of N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM) andcationic diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride (DADMAC). The measurements were made using a laboratory setup consisting of a mixing tank with four baffles, Rushton turbine, laser particle sizer Analysette 22 by Fritsch and a system of pump and thermostating devices. Two different modes of heating were used. In the first case the temperature of the system was gently raised above the Lower Critical Solution Temperature (LCST) using an electrical heater placed inside the tank, while in the second case the system temperature was rapidly raised by an injection of hot water directly into the tank. It was proven that heating method as well as the polymer concentration was crucial to the shape and size of created flocs.At present, the main goals of chemical and process engineering are not only to achieve the highest possible efficiency but also to precisely control the process in order to obtain highly defined structure of the final product. This tendency can be seen in the field of aggregation and breakage phenomena. Each day new, more sophisticated methods are proposed, like application of grafted flocculants ( Many researchers have investigated the thermosensitive polymers. The experiments focused mainly on their aggregating properties. One should mention, among the others, the application of charged random copolymers of poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPAM) ( In all references mentioned above the kinetics of the flocculation process as well as the heat transfer conditions were not taken under consideration. Moreover in most cases the experiments conditions were far from industrial reality, e.g. flocculation was run in a cylinder or laboratory test tube. These facts may lead to the large differences between the laboratory and pilot scale installation results. In this paper the impact of heating method on the particle size distribution is presented. Authors prove that the heating method plays the key role in the thermosensitive flocculation. The flocculant was synthesized at room temperature (25 °C) in aqueous solution via free-radical polymerization with redox initiation system. Two comonomers were used: NIPAM (Acros Organics) and DADMAC (Acros Organics) in 95:5 M ratio. Reaction mixture was purged with nitrogen for 60 min in order to remove oxygen. Once initiated the reaction mixture was allowed to react for four days. The polymer product was purified by thermoprecipitation – when heated the post-reaction mixture separated into white polymer precipitate and turbid liquid containing impurities only; the latter was discarded. In the copolymer formed, NIPAM units are responsible for hydrophobic/hydrophilic transition while DADMAC units ensure better flocculant–particle interaction due to the presence of positively charged nitrogen atom. The initiating system used was ammonium persulphate (APS, initiator, POCH, Poland) and The molecular mass of the copolymer in the final product has been estimated by intrinsic viscosity measurement to be approximately equal to 200,000 g/mol. Mark–Houwink parameters for this particular copolymer are not present in the literature. It has been reported that comonomer addition below 5% does not change the polymer's viscosity significantly ( In experiments a model suspension of calcium carbonate precipitate ( The laboratory setup consisted of a mixing tank with the Rushton turbine, laser particle sizer Fritsch Analysette 22, peristaltic pump and computer ( In the first experiment the polymer was injected to the fully filed tank and mixed with suspension for 5 min at room temperature. Next an electric heater was placed inside the tank in order to warm up the suspension to the target value equal to 40 °C. Then the particle size distribution was measured. In the second experiment the secondary thermostated tank was employed. Initially the mixing tank was partially filed with suspension. The polymer was injected at room temperature and it was mixed for 5 min in order to achieve a steady state. Next the hot water was instantaneously poured from the secondary tank by a dosing valve. In result the final suspension had exactly the same temperature, concentration and volume as in the first experiment, i.e. 40 °C. In this case the PSD was measured after first, third, fifth, tenth, fifteenth and twentieth minute after water injection. LCST determination was performed using Hitachi U-2800 A spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 520 nm. The measurement cell temperature was adjusted by a thermostate. A 0.1% wt. aqueous solution of the polymer was prepared and its transmittance was measured as a function of temperature. When the suspension achieved the steady state the samples were taken in order to take microscopic photographs of the aggregates. Firstly a pipette with a wide end as well as the sample glass was warmed up to the suspension temperature. The samples were photographed instantaneously after they were taken from the tank using Olympus CH30 microscope equipped with digital CMOS camera (Opta-tech, Poland). The thermosensitive polymers change their nature from hydrophilic into hydrophobic at the lower critical solution temperature becoming insoluble in water. The LCST of synthetized polymer was determined by analysis of optical transparency at different temperatures ( The flocculation course was measured only for the injection of hot water. It was assumed that the suspension achieves the target temperature instantaneously in comparison to the time of aggregation (the time of injection was never longer than 10 s and the first measurement was made 60 s later). It was proven that the course of thermosensitive flocculation was similar to the course of the “classical flocculation” where high molecular weight polymers are used. The difference was in the destabilization initiation (in the investigated case it was injection of hot water instead of polymer) as well as the bonding factor (hydrophobic interaction instead of bridging). The flocculation courses at different polymer doses are presented in The addition of flocculant to the suspension at room temperature had almost no influence on the particle size distribution. The difference between the PSDs was smaller than the differences arising from the chalk samples variances. The initial size distribution was unimodal and the resulting mean Sauter diameter was equal to 1.6 μm. In the case of small polymer dosages (not higher than 1 mg/g) the flocculation course was very similar to the standard process, i.e. a process where single addition of commercially available flocculant is used in order to destabilize a suspension (e.g. These results were compared with the one obtained for gentle heating ( The similarity between the particle size distributions was not observed when higher doses of polymer were used. It was surprising that in the case of rapid heating extremely large flocs appeared in the suspension. As their size exceeded 1 mm, they will be called hereafter superflocs. The dashed lines in  The comparison of flocs created during gentle and rapid processes could suggest the differences in mechanisms of aggregation in both cases. The process occurring during gentle heating is well described in literature ( In order to confirm the presented mechanism an additional experiment was done. A sample of polymer solution was placed in a 100 ml glass beaker with a magnetic stirrer. Then hot water was injected using a large glass pipette in such a way to imitate the process condition from the stirred vessel in which the flocculation research was done. Next the samples were taken on the preheated microscope slides and instantaneously investigated using the microscope. The images revealed that the received solid structures had a fibrous nature ( It was proven that the heating method as well as the concentration of polymer had the key influence on the aggregation mechanism and the final particle size distribution of destabilized suspension. In the case of small polymer dosages the flocculation course was very similar to the standard course of flocculation using high molecular weight polymers. The final PSDs in case of gentle and rapid heating were almost identical. However, in the case of high polymer doses the abrupt heating of suspension resulted in creation of superflocs, apparently due to the appearance of fibrous structures of insoluble polymer above the LCST. Simultaneous action of the basic mechanism of aggregation and the enmeshment within the fibrous structure of insoluble polymer resulted in a bimodal PSD of suspension at the steady state. The described phenomenon creates new possibilities of precise PSD control in industry. For example a process suspension could be treated by a spot injections of hot medium which would lead to a higher removal of solid particles from suspension. In authors opinion the same mechanism of superflocs generation should appear in case of flotation using a preliminary heated air.