Electrochemical advanced oxidation processes, anodic oxidation and electro-Fenton, have been applied to oxidative degradation of 2-chlorobenzoic acid (2-CBA) in acidic aqueous medium by using Pt or boron-doped-diamond (BDD) anode. Electrolyses were conducted in an open and cylindrical cell with a carbon-felt cathode for H2O2 generation. The main oxidizing species is hydroxyl radical (
                        
                     OH) formed at the BDD surface in both processes and in the bulk from the Fenton’s reaction between initially added and then regenerated Fe2+ (catalyst) and electrogenerated H2O2. Decay of 2-CBA concentration followed a pseudo-first order reaction kinetics. The absolute rate constant of the hydroxylation of 2-CBA was determined by using the competition kinetics method and found to be 2.04×109
                     M−1
                     s−1. The comparative study of TOC removal measurements during electro-Fenton treatment showed a higher mineralization rate with BDD anode than Pt anode due to the higher oxidizing power of the former anode. The chlorine present in 2-CBA is completely released in the form of chloride ion at Pt anode, which is slowly oxidized to Cl2 at the BDD anode. Aromatic oxidation intermediates such as 2-chlorophenol, catechol and benzoquinone are identified by reversed-phase liquid chromatography. Oxalic acid is detected by ion-exclusion-chromatography as the main carboxylic acid. This ultimate end product is finally oxidized into CO2 by hydroxyl radicals. Based on the identified intermediates and inorganic end products, and TOC removal results, a plausible mineralization pathway of 2-CBA by electrogenerated hydroxyl radicals was proposed.A large variety of electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) has been developed to degrade/mineralize low contents toxic and/or persistent organic pollutants in waters. EAOPs are considered environmentally friendly technologies able to electrogenerate in situ hydroxyl radicals ( The simplest and well common EAOP for water remediation is the anodic oxidation It has been found that the use of active anodes like Pt and IrO EAOPs based on H The oxidation power of H In electro-Fenton process, Fe Although the Pt anode was classically used in the electro-Fenton process, it was recently shown that the efficiency of the process can be significantly enhanced by using a high O The electro-Fenton process is widely used to treat non biodegradable or refractory organic compounds with low energy cost, such as dyes The halogenated aromatics represent an important class of very common water pollutants. It has been known to cause severe pollution problems because of their carcinogenicity due to the presence of the C–Cl bond, which is also responsible for their toxicity 2-Chlorobenzoic acid (2-CBA) was reagent (99% purity) grade from Aldrich. Anhydrous sodium sulfate (Na All the electrolytic trials were conducted in an open, undivided and cylindrical glass cell of 250 In all trials, the solution is stirred magnetically in a rate of 800 2-CBA and all aromatic intermediates were identified and quantified by reversed-phase HPLC using a Merck Lachrom liquid chromatography equipped with a L-7100 pump, fitted with a Purospher RP-18, 5 The concentrations of chloride ions released during the electrolyses were determined by Ion Chromatography (Dionex ICS-1000 Basic Ion Chromatograph equipped with a conductivity detector). The system was fitted with an IonPac AS4A-SC, 25 The dissolved organic carbon of treated solutions was determined as Total Organic carbon (TOC) using a Shimadzu VCSH TOC analyzer. Samples withdrawn at different electrolysis times were microfiltered onto a hydrophilic membrane (Millex-GV Millipore, pore size 0.22 The energy consumption ( The relative oxidation power of EF and AO processes was studied by electrolyzing a 0.3 As expected The effect of applied current value on the oxidative degradation rate of 2-CBA was examined by using the applied current values of 50, 100, 200 and 300 When compared with TOC removal kinetics ( The inset panels of To clarify the influence of initial amount of the pollutant on the mineralization ability of the electro-Fenton with BDD anode, the electrolysis of three different concentration of 2-CBA was performed at 300 The absolute rate constant for the second order kinetics of the reaction between 2-CBA and hydroxyl radical was determined by using the competitive kinetics method We have not found literature data for The oxidation of 2-CBA by EF with Pt or BDD is accompanied by the release of Cl For large industrial application, it is also very important to estimate the treatment costs. To better clarify the cost of these methods to establish their viability at industrial scale, it is preferable to determine the energy consumption per TOC mass removed. The oxidative degradation of 2-CBA discussed in Section The first stage in mineralization process is consisted of the decarboxylation, which can occurs either by direct electrooxidation at the anode followed by addition of The oxidative degradation of 2-CBA was performed by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes with higher oxidation rate in the sequence AO-BDD