A simple, fast and economic method for age determination of steel samples is presented, based on the change of mechanical properties over time. The mechanical strength was determined by Vickers microhardness testing, finding a linear relationship in between this parameter and the age of the sample. For calibration, four different archaeological samples of different ages were used, all of them hypoeutectoid steels. They were taken from excavation sites spread all over the Iberian Peninsula. The samples' age ranged from 1st century B.C. up to 18th century A.C. Microhardness was measured on either ferritic or pearlitic zones, obtaining a slightly better regression coefficient for the pearlitic zones, which was attributed to particular characteristics of the samples used. The proposed method should have the potential to be extended to hypereutectoid steels.An ageing process, altering the microstructure of iron and steel The samples under study were taken from different archaeological sites in Spain, as shown in The archaeological samples were selected within the group of hypoeutectoid steels, all of them manufactured by hot forging and cooling down in air to room temperature. The carbon content of all archaeological samples oscillates around 0.15 wt.%. For comparative measurements, we selected a hypoeutectoid steel, containing 0.15–0.20 wt.% carbon (ASTM 1020), in the hot-worked and normalised condition, as a reference at age zero, which means that a material fabricated nowadays. The microstructure and chemical composition of this steel can be assumed to be very similar with the original properties of the ancient steel samples To evaluate the variation of mechanical properties over large periods of time, some series of Vickers microhardness measurements were carried out on both pearlitic zones and ferritic grains of the samples. This method is valid for hypoeutectoid steels containing any percentage of carbon and was chosen because the extracted samples were very small in size to preserve archaeological findings of considerable historical value. The values obtained by Vickers microhardness tests were then transformed to the more commonly used Brinell hardness scale Finally, mechanical strength values were plotted against the antiquity of the samples investigated. Results were fitted to a linear regression, obtaining two equations describing the variation of the mechanical strength of both the pearlitic zones and ferritic grains versus time. Samples for this study were extracted from the corresponding archaeological pieces by conventional cutting methods, although applying the special care required for these types of ancient and precious materials. Due to the small size of the cut samples, they were fixed firmly in resin; later, they were conventionally ground and polished using abrasive papers and alumina of different grades. For metallographic observation, etching with a 10% Nital solution and a time ranging from 20 to 45 s were carried out. Metallographic observation was made by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) after the specimen had been sputter coated with gold. For subsequent Vickers microhardness studies, samples were again ground and polished to remove the gold layer, followed by another 10- to 15-s etching with a 10% Nital solution. This test was carried out following the UNE-7-423-86/2 standard, using an Akashi MVK-E3 hardness tester equipped with the corresponding VG-101 control module. Vickers microhardness was separately measured for pearlitic zones and for ferrite grains. This should allow one to apply the results obtained not only in the field of hypoeutectoid steels, but also to amplify the method to hypereutectoid steels, focusing attention mainly on the pearlitic phase. Twenty indentations were made for each investigated area and each sample, including the modern steel sample (ASTM 1020). For data evaluation, the median value of the results obtained in each series of experiments was used. The age associated with archaeological pieces, values that were used for the graphic representation of results, was taken from the chronology proposed during the respective archaeological excavation of sites selected for this investigation. We assume that these dates, given by the responsible leaders of the excavations (see Experimental values for Vickers microhardness (HV) were then transformed to Brinell hardness (HB) units. The basis of these calculations is the assumption that the transformation of Vickers data to Brinell hardness units is reliable in the field of carbon steels Values for mechanical strength obtained by applying A typical SEM pattern for a modern hypoeutectoid steel sample (ASTM 1020), in the hot-worked and normalised conditions, is shown in Typical pearlitic zones with small interlaminar spaces, embedded in a matrix of ferrite grains, can be clearly seen. Cementite layers in the pearlite conserve this spacing, although presenting a curved surface on one side or the other, as can be seen in However, in contrast to modern steel samples such as ASTM 1020, antique steel tends to form prismatic cementite layers of parallel orientation and very flat structure, as shown in As the mechanical properties of a material are closely related to its microstructure, it seems logical to assume that antique steel has somewhat changed its mechanical characteristics. The evolution over time is slow, but appreciable, as we could confirm by the present metallographic study. All samples studied would have had initial characteristics similar with the ASTM 1020 steel, but the ageing of the microstructure becomes more and more evident as time passes. To properly evaluate the changes in the hardness of each microcomponent of the steel samples under study, it is important to correctly select a representative site before applying the microhardness test. Both pearlitic areas and ferrite grains need to be of a sufficient size to properly locate the diamond tip of the Vickers microhardness test, taking care that the indentation does not partially invade the frontiers in between both zones. Furthermore, zones have to be avoided where defects, impurities or slag inclusions, resulting from the ancient forging process, are present. The sampled zone has to be clearly characterised as ferrite or pearlite from a metallurgic point of view. The values obtained for microhardness for both, pearlite and ferrite, were then transformed, first, to Brinell hardness and later to the scale of mechanical strength. Data were plotted versus the age of the respective pieces, as shown in Results show that the values obtained for mechanical strength, using the procedure described, fit perfectly within the expected range for hypoeutectoid steels. Values were then, for the different sampled sites, fitted to a linear regression, obtaining the following mathematical expressions. Regression coefficients were .9924 for Potentially the method should be extended as well to hypereutectoid steels, measuring Vickers microhardness only in pearlitic zones. The Vickers microhardness test shows that there is evidence for a change of mechanical properties over time, reflecting a microstrutcural evolution within archaeological samples of carbon steels. In particular, as could be shown by metallographic observation, ageing is associated with a change to a prismatic-planar morphology and a gradation of the cementite layers and, furthermore, to a tendency of the pearlite phase to form an exterior crust of cementite. On the base of Vickers microhardness measurements, it could be shown that there is a linear relationship between the age of the respective samples and their mechanical properties when applied to pearlitic zones and ferrite grains in hypoeutectoid steels pieces. The corresponding linear regression can be used to determine quite accurately the age of an unknown ancient hypoeutectoid steel sample in a fairly simple way. Potentially, the method should be extendable to other metallic materials as well, e.g., to hypereutectoid steels, and current investigation is focused on obtaining more data to confirm this theory.