We design and conduct a field experiment in which treated subjects receive a precise and objective signal regarding their knowledge about a public good before estimating their WTP for it. We find that the causal effect of objective signals about the accuracy of a subject׳s knowledge for a public good can dramatically affect their valuation for it: treatment caused a significant increase of $85–$129 in WTP for well-informed individuals. We find no such effect for less informed subjects. Our results imply that WTP estimates for public goods are not only a function of true information states of the respondents but beliefs about those information states.Familiarity with economic decisions can significantly influence how those economic decisions are made. For example, direct experience with a good can influence an economic agent׳s valuation for that good ( While economic research shows that better information can affect important economic decisions, like willingness to pay (WTP) for a good, one under-studied characteristic of information is a consumer׳s belief about the quality of their information set. An intrinsic characteristic of a consumer׳s information set is that, unless the consumer is an expert in the area, they are likely to be uncertain about their information set׳s accuracy. In stated preference valuation of public goods, how a consumer׳s existing information about a good interacts with new information plays a crucial role. In such surveys, the researcher provides the subject with a large amount of information about a public good (e.g., a new flood defense system, provision of a public green space, etc.) before eliciting willingness to pay (WTP). If subjects are uncertain about their preferences, information provided by the researcher could interact with the ex-ante information endogenously acquired by the subject before the survey to affect WTP estimates ( The literature is unclear as to the nature of information updating used by subjects in stated preference valuation. With respect to endogenously acquired information, like previous experience with a public good before a survey, evidence suggests subjects in stated preference surveys update their information sets in some ways consistent with Bayesian updating ( One overlooked area lying at the intersection of stated preference valuation and behavioral economics concerns how preferences and WTP for a public good could be affected by exogenously varying an agent׳s certainty about the “quality” of their information set. This paper develops and tests hypotheses addressing this unresolved issue. We embed a field experiment within a choice experiment designed to elicit WTP for policies intended to preserve cold water coral (CWC) sites off the coast of Norway. We measure subjects׳ knowledge about CWCs by giving them a quiz on scientific information about the public good. The main hypothesis then uses a purely experimental design embedded in the choice experiment to test the causal effect of providing objective signals about subjects׳ knowledge regarding CWC on the level and predictability of their stated WTP by randomizing which subjects are informed of their test score. The experiment is constructed as follows: at the beginning of the stated preference survey we provided basic information about CWCs in the context of development pressures around the coast of Norway. Next, all subjects take a short quiz that asks brief scientific questions which probe their understanding of CWCs (e.g., CWC depth, if CWC is a living organism, etc.). Next, subjects are randomly assigned to a treatment or control group. In the treatment group, subjects are informed of their test scores immediately after completing the quiz. We find a surprising result: informing a well-informed subject of their test score caused a significant increase in stated WTP of between $85 and $129 for establishing a large marine protected area. Further, the channel for this treatment effect occurs only for the size of the preserve itself. We find no effect of treatment on preferences for indirect use values the quiz did not cover like potential harm to industry. We do not find this effect for individuals who are not well-informed. Better-informed subjects had a higher WTP and higher scale (lower variance) than less well-informed subjects, although no causal effects can be established here. Finally, we find that well-informed subjects in the treatment group do not have significantly more predictable WTP estimates from the econometrician׳s perspective. That is, receiving the external signal about how well informed a subject was did not affect the scale of the utility function for our respondents. Our main experimental result is different from previous work which shows that objective signals about an economic agent׳s subjective beliefs about themselves (e.g., their attractiveness to the opposite sex) affects economic decision making ( How levels and certainty over a subject׳s information set affects consumer WTP is particularly important in the context of stated preference valuation for public goods. First, in stated preference valuation subjects are given a large amount of new information that they may or may not already know. Thus, in stated preference valuation, how information provided to the subject interacts with the subject׳s ex ante information set matters. Second, if the information provided to a subject implicitly reinforces what they already know about a good, providing that information could act as a positive objective signal about the subject׳s information set. Third, if in the design of a survey there is positive reinforcement to subjects about their information set, we find evidence that it will significantly increase estimated WTP for the good. Lastly, we find a similar result from the lab that transfers to field experiments in CV studies. This provides motivation for further investigating the link between results from both experimental and behavioral economics and stated preference methods. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: section two discusses a conceptual framework for interpreting the role of objective signals on willingness to pay. Section three discusses our case study, experimental design and empirical strategy. Section four presents results and a discussion. Section five offers concluding remarks. The main hypotheses we test in this paper are (1) what is the causal effect of objective signals of knowledge on WTP for a public good and (2) how the effect of objective signals could vary over different levels of knowledge. The motivation for our experiment is recent work in experimental economics which shows that there is a causal effect of information on economic decision making and that this effect varies by whether the information reflects positively or negatively on the individual ( The most natural framework for processing new information is Bayesian updating. In Bayesian updating new information (the signal) is weighted against previously existing information (the prior) to form an updated posterior distribution about the state of the world (e.g., a subject׳s valuation for the good in our case). One form of new information is an objective signal about the quality of an information set. If a subject receives an objective signal that their information or knowledge about a topic is high quality, then it should decrease the relative weight the subject gives to new information about that topic. Specifically, the subject would be more likely to interpret new information at odds with their prior information as noise. The converse is also true: if a subject receives an objective signal that their information or knowledge about a topic is low quality, it should increase the weight the subject gives to new information. Recent behavioral and experimental research shows that agents might give less weight to objective signals that are not flattering to the subject, such as poor performance on a test ( One important caveat is how subjects׳ beliefs about the accuracy of their information set could be correlated with the level of knowledge a subject has about a particular topic. For example, if low scoring people on average know they have poor quality information sets, then the objective signal does not convey new information. Similarly, high scoring people could systematically believe they have accurate information. In that case, we would expect signals about information set quality to have no effect for either high or low quality information set subjects. Lastly, there is a related literature in pyschology on the role of confidence with regard to accuracy in recall ( A large number of cold-water coral sites have recently been discovered off the coast of Norway. A choice experiment was designed to collect information about peoples׳ valuation for such extended protection. The results are intended as an input to the actual decision-making process on site selection making our choice experiment consequential ( No increase in protected area, but keep the current 2445 A moderate increase to 5000 A large increase to 10,000 With regard to Attractive for fisheries (FISH). Attractive for oil and gas industry (OIL/GAS). Attractive to both fisheries and the oil/gas industry. Attractive to neither fisheries nor the oil/gas industry. For the attribute Choice cards were then designed based on these four attributes, using two options which increased CWC protection at a cost, and one no increase, no cost alternative. As part of this experiment, we are able to test for how different knowledge levels about CWCs affect WTP and scale estimates. The main contribution of the paper, however, is that we design an experiment to test how objective signals of knowledge about the CWC affect WTP and scale estimates. To do so, we developed a novel technique to create a score which informs the econometrician about the level of familiarity each participant has for CWCs. After the presentation of preliminary information about the CWC survey, each respondent completed a short 8-question multiple choice quiz on cold-water corals (see We integrated a field experiment into the CWC survey to identify the causal effect of an objective signal of a participants׳ knowledge about a public good- CWC in this case- on WTP and scale estimates. Respondents were randomly allocated into two groups of equal size. Group 1 was told how well they had performed in the quiz (number of correct answers) before they started the choice experiment. Group 2 was not told their score. Group 1, then, is the treatment group and group 2 is the control group. Because assignment into groups was random, the interpretation of the estimated coefficient on the binary treatment variable is causal. Importantly, the quiz is entirely designed around objective information about CWCs in and of themselves. Not a single question deals with the oil/gas or fishing industries, nor the effect of CWC on habitat for juvenile fish. At no point in the survey is scientific information about the interaction of CWC and fish, oil or habitat presented. Presumably, whatever a subject knew before about the interaction of fish/oil/habitat and CWC is what they knew after since the quiz was entirely about characteristics solely regarding the public good (e.g., cold water coral or “CWC”). As a result, the only relevant information for which a subject received a signal if treated was over the CWC in and of itself. Therefore, we expected the strongest effect of treatment is on size of the CWC preserve since the signal did not give any information whatsoever about oil/gas or fish. The most versatile methods in which consumers׳ preferences for public goods can be modeled and quantitatively described are based on their stated choices between different carefully designed possible management situations regarding the public good. We model respondents׳ stated choices using random utility theory ( Assumptions with respect to the random term The focus of this paper makes it interesting to test how observed scale, As a result, the ‘effective’ scale is a function of The above specification leads to the Heteroskedastic Multinomial Logit (H-MNL) model, with the following closed-form expression of the probability of choosing alternative We choose this model because it is it allows us to simply and transparently highlight the effect of respondents׳ prior information (knowledge or experience) and the effect of signals about knowledge on scale and WTP estimates. A similar specification, which allows for an systematic investigation of differences in scale between respondents, choice tasks or alternatives was earlier used by The goal of this paper is to test two hypotheses. First, we test for how knowledge about the public good (e.g., CWCs) is related to WTP and scale estimates for increased provision of the good. To test for increases in WTP, we include the knowledge score as a covariate in the vector In what follows we present the results from estimating the H-MNL model described above using the data collected from the CWC survey. The goal of this section is twofold. First, we would like to investigate how knowledge correlates with WTP and the scale parameter for the public good. Second, we would like to test whether objective signals of respondent׳s knowledge about a public good cause changes in their WTP and scale. Attribute levels of choice alternatives for each study were coded in the way described in In this section, we define our familiarity measures (knowledge in the CWC study) in the following way. We used a knowledge-related binary variable (  We also estimate the model in which the familiarity-related variable is interacted with the choice attributes. It is important to note, before proceeding, that these estimates are not causal. They are only presented to see how familiarity obtained via knowledge is correlated with WTP estimates. Any causality for knowledge on WTP estimates can in no way be inferred in this section.  The results in We next test whether objective signals about an agent׳s knowledge about a public good cause differences in her scale (and stated WTP, but not in this section) for the public good. This is made possible by the experimental treatment we incorporated in the cold water corals study: half of respondents were in a treatment group and were told their test scores before they completed the choice cards, while the other half were in a control group and not told their test scores. To test for the effect of objective signals on scale, we estimate the H-MNL model using score and treatment-related covariates. Again, we parse the subjects into two groups: those that score above the mean on the quiz ( The effects of being in the treatment group on choice uncertainty are illustrated with the results presented in higher knowledge score changes the scale parameter being told ones quiz score changes the scale parameter being told ones quiz score changes the scale parameter differently for respondents with higher knowledge A significant coefficient on  While the above results show that signals do not have an effect on the scale of the utility function (i.e. an effect on its error term variance), it is entirely possible that there could still be an asymmetric effect on the individual preference parameters, and hence on respondents׳ WTP. To test for an effect of signals on WTP, we estimate a MNL model where for each choice attribute we include interactions with knowledge levels and treatment-related indicator variables. As before, we split the sample into 4 different groups of CWC respondents: high quiz scorers and low quiz scorers and treatment and control group. Higher scorers are defined as individuals scoring above the mean (7 or 8) and low scorers are individuals scoring below the mean (0–6). A significant coefficient on  There was no other observed significant effect of treatment, nor the interaction of high knowledge and treatment, for any characteristic. Specifically, treatment had no significant effect at the 5% level for either high or low scoring groups on preferences for CWC reserve if subjects were told the reserve would affect commercial interests or non-commercial fish stocks. The interaction of being well-informed and treated caused a marginally significant decrease at the 10% level in preferences for CWC protection if informed that the area was important to fisheries. Given the lack of statistical evidence, we attribute this marginally significant coefficient to noise. No other interactions were significant. In sum, then, we find strong and consistent evidence that treatment increased the preference for more of the public good (e.g., a larger reserve). We find no other convincing evidence of significant treatment effects. These results are consistent with the nature of the informative signal for the treated group: the only information for which a subject received a signal is over knowledge about CWC in and of itself. Not a single question dealt with fisheries, oil/gas or habitat. The significant effect of treatment on preferences for high scorers acts to increase estimated WTP for the amount of the public good (e.g., CWC preserve size) for that group. The effects are substantial on both coefficient levels and standard errors. For moderate (large) increases in the reserve size, treatment led to a statistically significant increase on willingness to pay of $85 ($129). In both cases, there is a very significant reduction in the standard errors of WTP estimates for the treated group: the simulated standard error on WTP decreases by roughly 50% for nearly every attribute including size. The magnitude of these results is somewhat surprising: high scorers being informed of their level of knowledge declare significantly higher WTP for the level of provision of the public good. This effect was significant for preferences at the 5% level for both moderate and large increases in reserve size. There were no other significant effects at the 5% level. As a result, signals affected preferences to provide an increased quantity of the public good for the high scoring group. We find no convincing evidence that signals caused a change in preferences for the public good when informed it could affect other industries or non-commercial fish habitat. In sum, then, treatment causes an increase in demand for the public good for high scorers. It causes no change in the interaction of demand for the public good and any other form of demand which was part of the survey (e.g., commercial or habitat effects). As in many laboratory and field experiments with similar designs, we can only suggest possible mechanisms for this result. First, we can note that the result is only present for high scorers. Consequently, we can infer that the mechanism is related to the level of knowledge of the individual in addition to uncertainty over the accuracy of their knowledge. Further, the effect was only present for preferences directly related to the informative nature of the signal (e.g., demand for the public good rather than interactions of the public good with other industries). This result is largely consistent with other behavioral literature on asymmetric updating ( One appealing strictly neoclassical explanation is that uncertainty about the accuracy of a consumer׳s information matters for stated WTP for public good provision. There is evidence for this type of an explanation since only preferences related to the informative signal (e.g., size of CWC preserve) were affected by receiving that signal. There are of course other behavioral explanations like a connoisseur effect for the public good or an intrinsic social responsibility prompted by the objective signal informing individuals they are indeed well-informed. An even larger question is what this result implies for choice experiments in general. If actual WTP for a public good is so intimately tied to knowing the accuracy of one׳s information state, this is surprising. Clearly, we do not imply that the optimal stated preference protocol should include objective signals of respondents׳ information states, but we do acknowledge that these results have implications for both the robustness of WTP estimates and the proper interpretation of WTP estimates. In this paper, we investigate the effects of objective signals of knowledge on willingness to pay for a public good. We find that objective signals of a participants׳ knowledge about a good cause an increase in agents׳ willingness to pay for provision of that good. The marginal effect of additional knowledge on WTP is significant and large for well-informed subjects who are randomly assigned treatment in which they receive an objective signal about the accuracy of their knowledge. In effect, then, well-informed subjects are willing to pay significantly more for the good when subjects receive objective signals about the quality of their information set. We find no such effect for relatively poorly informed subjects. We are not able to determine the precise mechanism for how objective signals about knowledge affect WTP. There are several possible explanations which we are not able to reject as possible explanations: good news/bad news, risk aversion and neoclassical Bayesian updating, a connoisseur effect, etc. Our main result, then, prompts further questions for additional research both in the behavioral literature and insofar as this result has implications for demand estimation for public goods. The data from the cold water coral survey was collected as part of the project "Habitat-Fisheries interactions - Valuation and bio-economic modeling of Cold Water Coral", funded by the Norwegian Research Council (grant no 216485). DT’s inputs were funded by MASTS, the Marine Alliance Science and Technology Scotland (www.masts.ac.uk). We thank three referees and former JEEM editor Daniel Phaneuf for comments on an earlier version of this paper. David Eil, Bill Neilson, Justin Rao, and Christian Vossler all provided helpful feedback during this research project. MC gratefully acknowledges the support of the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education and the Foundation for Polish Science. NH thanks the University of Waikato for their support during the writing of this paper. Assume that a consumer is allocating money over privately providing a public good, Assume that utility is concave in the private good Consider a risk averse Bayesian updater with an uncertain measure of knowledge Assume that the government׳s payment mechanism for the public good By definition, increases in expenditures on the public good must decrease consumption of the numeraire good since Now take two consumers with the same budget constraint and uncertainty over the accuracy of their knowledge described by priors. Assume that full information consumer (a) has a low valuation for the public good and consumer (b) has a high valuation for the public good. If Now consider consumption dynamics for a mean preserving change in Question 1: What is a coral?  a plant a fungus don׳t know Question 2: At which depths do we find most cold water coral reefs? <30 meters 30–100 meters >100 Do not know Question 3: How much do cold water corals grow annually? 4 25–100 >100 do not know Question 4: What do cold water corals eat? They emit secretions that attract fish that they catch and eat  They photosynthesize with the help of a symbiotic algae do not know Question 5: What is the main threat to cold water coral reefs? Predation by fish Destruction by wave action  do not know Question 6: At what temperature range do cold water corals grow? 0 4 13 do not know Question 7: How do cold water corals reproduce? Asexually through budding where a polyp divides into two genetically identical pieces  Both sexually and asexually do not know Question 8: How old is the oldest cold water coral reef found off the Norwegian coast? Less than 1000 years old Between 1000 and 8000 years old  do not know