Flotation tests were performed on a skarn ore to attain the selective separation of scheelite (CaWO4) from fluorite, apatite, and silicates. Fluorite and apatite constitute common gangue minerals in scheelite ores. Due to their similar surface properties and good floatability, the separation of scheelite from fluorite is particularly difficult. These ores are usually processed at basic pH using sodium silicate as a gangue mineral depressant and a fatty acid as the collector. Sodium silicate was not efficient enough to depress the fluorite in the studied ore. Thus, different depressants were tested in the flotation of scheelite using a commercial mixture of fatty acids. The effect of adding metallic salts [FeSO4, Al(NO3)3, and Zn(SO4)] prior to sodium silicate was therefore investigated. The sole use of organic molecules (starch, lignin sulfonate, tannin, carboxymethyl cellulose, and citric acid), instead of sodium silicate, was also studied. This led to a global depression of the minerals, including scheelite, and did not improve the selectivity of the separation. The addition of metallic cations did not significantly enhance the selectivity of the flotation; however, iron sulphate slightly increased the sodium silicate performance. Overall, among all the studied depressants, the combination of sodium carbonate and sodium silicate presented the best efficiency. This system was then studied through the design of experiments methodology. Strong synergistic effects existed between the two reagents, mainly impacting the scheelite and fluorite recovery as well as the scheelite grade. This was attributed to surface carbonation of the minerals, subsequently leading to a better depression by sodium silicate. The effect of sodium carbonate on the apatite and silicates was small. This was attributed to spontaneous carbonation and the presence of complex crystallographic structures, respectively. The efficiency of the sodium carbonate/sodium silicate combination was limited (maximum WO3 enrichment ratio = 16.48) due to the lack of selectivity of the depressants. The proposed optimization of the flotation separation of scheelite from gangue minerals maximizes both the WO3 grade and recovery.Tungsten has been classified as a critical metal by the European Union for its economic importance and high supply risk [ Separation of calcium minerals by flotation is very difficult because they exhibit the same surface properties [ The main depressant used in the selective separation of scheelite from gangue minerals is sodium silicate [ In this study, several depressants were tested to enhance the separation contrast between scheelite and gangue minerals (apatite, fluorite, and silicates). Tests were performed on an ore composed of scheelite, fluorite, apatite, vesuvianite (a calcium silicate), and feldspars acquired from a Portuguese deposit. Metallic cations (Fe The ore used in this study was a tungsten skarn acquired from Tabuaço (Portugal). It comprised 85% silicates (mainly calcic: vesuvianite, zoisite, and grossular; also includes feldspars and quartz), fluorite (11%), apatite (3%), and scheelite (1%). The scheelite liberation mesh was 150–200 μm, estimated by optical microscopy. The blocs were crushed in jaw crushers and a gyratory crusher to produce a −4 mm fraction. This product was sieved at 150 μm and the non-passing fraction was ground in a laboratory ball mill to reach the liberation mesh. A 50 mm hydrocyclone was used to deslime the ground ore to 10 μm. The flotation feed was constituted by the underflow (−150 + 10 μm fraction). The same collector was used for all the flotation tests. This was RBD15 (MeadWestvaco), a commercial mixture of Tall Oil Fatty Acids (TOFA). The main fatty acids of this collector were oleic acid (36%) and linoleic acid (25%), with small quantities of palmitic and linolenic acids. The mixture was prepared as an aqueous solution at alkaline pH, attained via the addition of sodium hydroxide. All the pH modifiers (NaOH and Na The flotation tests were realized in AGITAIR LA-500 rotor-stator apparatus with a 1.5 L cell fed with 500 g of −150 + 10 μm material. The rotational speed in the cell was set at 900 rpm during conditioning and flotation, with a solid-liquid ratio of 33%. The samples were conditioned in the cell with tap water at pH 9.5–10 for 1 min, with the depressant for 2–5 min, and with the collector for 3 min. The pH was adjusted to 9.5–10 by adding NaOH. The tests were carried out at room temperature (20–22 °C). During the flotation process, the airflow was set at 0.27 m All the tests were realized with 200 g/t RBD15. The depressant concentrations were adapted so that only the most significant results are presented in this paper. In tests involving the addition of metallic cations and sodium silicate, the cations were systematically added to the mixture prior to the sodium silicate.’ The flotation products were analysed by energy dispersive X-Ray fluorescence spectroscopy (ED-XRF) using a Thermo Scientific Niton™ Xl3t portable XRF analyser. The results were corrected using standards, the contents of which were measured by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission and mass spectrometries (ICP-AES/ICP-MS) at the Service d'Analyse des Roches et des Minéraux (SARM-CNRS, Nancy, France). The fluorine grade of the samples was measured by potentiometric analyses, performed at the SARM-CNRS (Nancy, France). A multivariate calibration based on 100 fluorine standards was developed and used to estimate the fluorine content when direct analysis was not performed. In this work, the P The DOE methodology was used to optimize the flotation separation performance. This method takes the influence of each parameter, including their interactions into account. A DOE is defined by the number of studied factors (k) and the number of levels set for each factor (l). When the number of levels is ≥3, this methodology can efficiently describe the non-linear phenomena as interactions between two flotation reagents [ The DOE methods and response surface methodologies have been used in many different fields [ Preliminary flotation tests were performed to set the limits and levels of the experimental area ( The validation of the models was performed through the relationships between the experimental and predicted results. For this statistical analysis, both the correlation coefficient (R All the tested organic molecules exhibited similar behaviour ( Previous studies have reported that sodium silicate exhibits a strong depressing effect on silicates as well as on apatite and calcite [ The efficiencies of the different depressants in terms of WO Under aqueous conditions, Na The results of the 16 tests together with those of the preliminary tests are summarized in After the first modelling step, the ANOVA was performed on each model to estimate their significance. The F-test was performed on the models, with a 0.05 significance level. The critical F-value was then calculated, considering the degrees of freedom (DF) of the models and the residuals. This value was then compared to the calculated F-values of the models. For each model, the critical F-value was significantly lower their F-value, suggesting that the The validation of the models was performed through the relationships between the experimental and predicted results. For this statistical analysis, both the correlation coefficient (R For all the models, the Student's For the WO The WO The WO The P The two reagents present close molecular weights so that the different coefficients could be compared in terms of molecular mechanisms. Thus, the discussion could be based on the response surfaces. First, the predicted WO The P The F recovery is proportional to the fluorite recovery, assuming that all the fluorine atoms are contained in the fluorite. The behaviour of the fluorite recovery was very similar to that observed for the scheelite recovery ( Finally, the SiO The WO The WO The predicted WO Similar trends were also observed when the WO The WO The same phenomenon was observed, with a more pronounced effect, when WO To optimize the proposed method, the WO To validate the models, one test from  Different depressants were tested to attain the selective depression of gangue minerals from scheelite, and to eliminate them from the scheelite concentrate. This enhances the WO Strong synergistic effects between the two reagents, mainly on scheelite and fluorite. These effects were attributed to surface carbonation that makes sodium silicate adsorption more favourable. Inefficiency of the effect of sodium carbonate on apatite, probably caused by spontaneous carbonation of the mineral surfaces (formation of francolite or adsorption of dissolved CO Very high affinity of sodium silicate for the silicates minerals, comparatively inducing little effect from sodium carbonate. The complex crystallographic structures of the silicates may hinder surface carbonation. Strong correlations between the responses that can be attributed to locked particles or the chemical affinity of the sodium silicate for the different minerals. The former explanation is quite unlikely considering the amount of scheelite that would be involved. Spectroscopic studies would be mandatory to understand the mechanisms involved in the sodium carbonate/sodium silicate depressing system. Overall, the DOE permitted the setting of the best experimental conditions in terms of reagents concentrations, thereby leading to optimized gangue mineral depression in the floatation process. These conditions were established as: 1150 g/t Na The research leading to these results has received funding from the