A panel of 18 recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) variants, both natural and engineered, constitutively expressing Cre recombinase under the cytomegalovirus early enhancer/chicken β actin (CAG) promoter, were screened for their ability to transduce bone in Ai9 fluorescent reporter mice. Transgenic Cre-induced tdTomato expression served as a measure of transduction efficiency and alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity as an osteoblastic marker. Single injections of AAV8, AAV9, and AAV-DJ into midshaft tibial fractures yielded robust tdTomato expression in the callus. Next, the bone cell-specific promoters Sp7 and Col2.3 were tested to restrict Cre expression in an alternate model of systemic delivery by intravenous injection. Although CAG promoter constructs packaged into AAV8 produced high levels of tdTomato in the bone, liver, heart, spleen, and kidney, bone-specific promoter constructs restricted Cre expression to osseous tissues. AAV variants were further tested in vitro in a human osteoblast cell line (hFOB1.19), measuring GFP reporter expression by flow cytometry after 72 h. AAV2, AAV5, and AAV-DJ showed the highest transduction efficiency. In summary, we produced AAV vectors for selective and high-efficiency in vivo gene delivery to murine bone. The AAV8-Sp7-Cre vector has significant practical applications for inducing gene deletion postnatally in floxed mouse models.Viral vectors are effective delivery systems for safe and efficient delivery of therapeutic payloads to target cells Gene editing in the context of the bone remains an underdeveloped field. Bone gene therapy has historically focused on local delivery of osteogenic proteins, such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). Nevertheless, gene targeting in a fracture healing scenario has a number of uses. For preclinical model development, it can be used to analyze the effects of gene overexpression or disruption on bone repair. This can be advantageous for genes where the associated mouse models have severe phenotypes that affect animal health or bone biomechanics. In this study, we used it as a screening modality to test a variety of AAV variants to identify those with a tropism for osteoblasts and osteocytes and/or skeletal tissues. A panel of 18 natural and engineered AAV variants was screened in a murine fracture model where vector-encoded Cre recombinase expression was detected via fluorescent tdTomato expression in the Ai9 reporter mouse strain ( Next, AAV variants expressing Cre recombinase were trialed in mice using an intravenous (systemic) delivery approach. In this case, Cre recombinase was expressed either under a constitutively expressing cytomegalovirus early enhancer/chicken β actin (CAG) promoter (control group) or bone-specific (Sp7, A healing fracture callus is a complex cellular microenvironment containing multiple cell types. Long-bone fractures also have adjacent musculature that can be unintentionally transduced by gene therapy vectors, leading to vector loss, increased cost of therapy, and decreased safety of potential gene therapy applications targeting bone fractures. We hypothesized that different variants of AAVs could have unique abilities to transduce bone cells within a healing fracture callus, and this was tested in a murine tibial fracture model following local injection. All variants tested in our murine tibial fracture model showed some level of transduction of the skeletal muscle surrounding the fracture site ( Fifteen of the 18 variants tested gave a positive tdTomato signal within the callus; however, many were only able to transduce a small proportion of the cells in the callus; e.g., AAV3 and AAV-2i8 ( Importantly, the analysis showed that three vector variants, AAV8, AAV9, and AAV-DJ, were able to functionally transduce cells within the callus with high efficiency ( Fluorescent alkaline phosphatase (AP) staining was performed using ELF 97 reagent and co-imaged with a tdTomato signal ( In a preliminary study, constructs driven by a ubiquitous CAG promoter packaged into AAV2, AAV8, and AAV-DJ were compared after intravenous injection of 5 × 10 To increase the efficiency of transduction, the dose of AAV administered by single injection was increased 10-fold (5 × 10 To examine the bone specificity of the three AAV constructs encoding individual promoters, tdTomato expression was analyzed in a range of tissues, including brain, heart, lung, liver, spleen, and kidney. The tissue expression profile of AAV8 harboring the CAG promoter was similar to that of a previously published AAV8-cytomegalovirus (CMV)-luciferase construct, The same panel of AAV variants was subsequently used to transduce a human fetal osteoblast (hFOB) cell line in culture. Seven of the 18 variants tested showed an ability to functionally transduce the cells and resulted in 14%–56% of GFP-positive cells ( This paper describes a method for high-efficiency Two AAV variants, natural AAV8 and engineered AAV-DJ, AAV8 is a natural AAV variant isolated from rhesus monkey tissues, and it has been shown to have high efficiency in liver transduction in mice, reported to be 10–100 times higher than that of AAV2. AAV-DJ is an engineered variant composed of elements from AAV2, AAV8, and AAV9, which was selected for its ability to transduce cells in the presence of human neutralizing monoclonal antibodies, AAVs have been used to deliver CRISPR/Cas9 constructs Engineered AAV variants have great potential for use in bone, specifically in genetic bone conditions. There is potential for AAV vectors to be used in functional genomics studies to induce disease-causing mutations and model genetic bone conditions. Ultimately however, this technology may be capable of correcting pathogenic mutations in patients. Historically, gene therapy targeting bone has focused on intramuscular delivery, introducing factors skeletal muscle cells produce to stimulate bone cells located in close proximity. 18 different AAV variants were tested for their efficiency of transducing cells For systemic delivery, three different constructs were packaged into AAV8 capsids ( Both CAG and Sp7 constructs included non-functional “stuffer” sequences to maintain constant construct length because construct size can effect transduction efficiency. All rAAV stocks were prepared by polyethylenimine (PEI) (Polysciences, Warrington, PA, USA) triple transfection (2:1 PEI:DNA ratio) of adherent HEK293T cells (CRL-3126; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) with a pAd5 helper plasmid, Ai9 mice (The Jackson Laboratory [JAX] stock number 007909), a Cre reporter mouse strain with a tdTomato red fluorescent reporter gene, Mice for fracture experiments were aged 10 weeks at the time of surgery. Mice for systemic injection experiments were aged 8 weeks at the time of injection. Animal experiments were approved by The Children’s Hospital at Westmead/Children’s Medical Research Institute Animal Ethics Committee under protocols K350 and K357. A panel of 18 variants of AAV ( Female mice aged 10 weeks were used in closed fracture experiments. In preparation for surgery, mice were anesthetized with ketamine (35 mg/kg) and xylazine (4.5 mg/kg) intraperitoneally and maintained using inhaled isoflurane. Tibial midshaft fractures were generated by experienced staff. Through a small incision below the knee made with a 27G needle, an intramedullary rod (0.3-mm-diameter stainless steel insect pin) was surgically inserted into the medullary canal of the tibia. A modified set of surgical staple removers was used to generate fractures manually by three-point bending. Fractures were confirmed via X-ray (Faxitron X-ray, Tucson, AZ, USA) to be transverse, above the fibular junction, and without comminution. 10 μL of viral stock solution was diluted with 50 μL isotonic sterile saline and injected into the fracture site bilaterally, with half of the solution injected into the soft tissue on each side of the tibia. A 29G insulin needle with a 1-mL syringe (Terumo, Shibuya, Japan) was used for each injection, with the needle inserted until it touched the tibia and then pulled slightly away from the bone surface for injection. Post-surgical pain was managed using buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg subcutaneously, every 12 h as required). Fracture repair and pin stability were monitored weekly by X-ray. At the experimental endpoint of 14 days, animals were euthanized with carbon dioxide, and specimens were collected post-mortem for histology. AAV-8 containing constructs driven by the CAG, Col2.3, and Sp7 promoters were tested in Ai9 mice (n = 4 mice per group), with a saline-only group included as a negative control (n = 4). Animals were sacrificed 14 days after vector delivery to examine transduced cells that had undergone genetic recombination to express tdTomato in bones and other tissues. Viral stocks were diluted in 200 μL isotonic sterile saline to doses of 5 × 10 Fractured and non-fractured tibiae were removed with surrounding soft tissue intact, along with femora and L3 vertebrae. The brain, heart, lungs, spleen, liver, and kidneys were also removed. All tissues were fixed overnight in 10% neutral buffered formalin at 4°C. Care was taken to protect samples from light throughout histological processing because of the tdTomato fluorescence present in the samples. Samples were then changed to 30% sucrose for a further 12 h at 4°C. All samples were cryo-embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT Compound (Sakura Finetek USA, Torrance, CA, USA) using an isopentane bath suspended in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until cryosectioning. Tibiae were sectioned on a cryostat at 5 μm using the tape transfer method on cryotape (Section-lab, Hiroshima, Japan). Tape sections were adhered to uncoated glass microscope slides using chitosan solution (1% chitosan [Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA] in 0.25% acetic acid [Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA]) and left to dry at 4°C. Tibial sections were stained with the ELF 97 Endogenous Phosphatase Detection Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), a substrate that forms a strong yellow/green fluorescent precipitate in the presence of AP. The standard staining protocol for the reagent was followed to detect AP activity and, hence, labeled osteoblasts. These sections were co-stained with DAPI (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for nuclear staining, mounted with CC Mount (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and coverslipped for imaging. ELF 97- and DAPI-stained sections were observed with a DMi8 inverted wide-field fluorescence microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) with a 10× objective. A DAPI longpass filter was used to concurrently illuminate DAPI and ELF 97, and the color camera was used to capture both signals. A Texas red filter was used to illuminate tdTomato. Tile scan images in both channels of entire tibial fracture calluses, proximal tibial epiphyses, L3 vertebrae, and organs were taken and stitched upon capture in LASX software (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). The 18 AAV variants were tested Cells were analyzed for GFP fluorescence using FACSCanto (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) with a blue laser (emission, 502 nm). Flow data were analyzed using FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The percentage of GFP+ cells was determined based on gating for the non-transduced cells, and cells were transfected with GFP plasmid using Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). This was done because it is known that transfected cells will emit some GFP fluorescence, and virally transduced cells usually display a higher amount of fluorescence at high MOIs; hence, the upper threshold was set past this sample to capture brighter cells. A true positive control was not able to be used because there is no evidence in the literature to suggest that the hFOB cell line has been transduced previously using AAV vectors. L.R.L. performed the bulk of the experiments and data analyses. L.P. performed animal surgery and animal care. L.L. provided the panel of AAV variants and designed, cloned, and packaged custom AAV constructs. D.G.L., C.F.M., and A.S. conceived the study, designed the experimental plan, and assisted with data analysis and interpretation of results. L.R.L. and A.S. drafted the manuscript, with all authors providing critical feedback and revisions. This work was supported by funding from the Supplemental Information can be found online at 