The present study was aiming at describing the feeding ethology and assessing surface sediment reworking together with associated effects on sediment characteristics and aerobic bacterial community composition by the ampharetid polychaete Melinna palmata, which exhibits very dense populations in the Arcachon Bay (French Atlantic coast). There was a plasticity in the main aspects (i.e., positioning of the tube at the sediment-water interface, stretching of the worms outside their tubes while feeding, location and mechanism of faeces production) constitutive of the current knowledge regarding feeding ethology in ampharetids. On average, worms dedicated 84.6% of their time to the prospection of surface sediments and produced faeces exclusively at the water sediment interface, which resulted in surface sediment reworking and induced the zonation of surface sediment in three distinct areas, namely: undisturbed sediment, prospected and faecal mound areas. Average individual surface prospected area and surface sediment reworking rate were 28 cm2 and 6.8 mm3.h−1, respectively. Surface sediments were coarser and their bulk organic contents were lower in prospected areas, intermediate in faecal mound areas and higher in undisturbed sediments. Oxygen penetrated deeper in the sediment column in faecal mound areas. Aerobic bacterial community composition associated with surface oxygenated sediments within these three areas also significantly differed, which suggests that sediment reworking per se (i.e., irrespective of changes in redox conditions) do have an effect on those compositions. These results are discussed in terms of potential food limitation in the very dense populations of M. palmata present in the Arcachon Bay. It is suggested that the high densities of these populations result from both hydrosedimentary fluxes due to tidal currents and from the enhancement of particle sedimentation in Zostera noltei meadows.Once sedimented, particulate organic matter undergoes early diagenesis (i.e., a sequence of mineralization reactions taking place in the top sediment column). This process is mainly achieved by bacterial communities featuring different metabolic capacities in relation with the availability of a series of final electron acceptors. In the absence of benthic macrofauna, these receptors show a typical vertical zonation ( Sediment reworking is typically a 3D process ( The analysis of the effects of bioturbation on bacterial community composition and function has also favored the assessment of the vertical component due to the tight interactions between these communities and available final electron acceptors. Gallery biodiffusors (sensu ( During the present study, we used the ampharetid polychaete  For the present study, adult worms were collected during April 2012 (anatomy of feeding organs, 1st and 2nd series of experiments) and December 2013 (3rd series of experiments and tentacles number) in the Arcachon Bay (French Atlantic Coast) at the “Germanan” site (44°42′726”N, 1°07′940”W) where extremely dense populations of The tentacles of 10 worms collected in December 2013 were counted under a Nikon® SMZ25 stereomicroscope. The anatomy of the feeding organs was investigated using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Fifteen worms collected in April 2012 were left for one hour in filtered (0.22 μm) and sterilized seawater to ensure that their tentacles were deployed. Heads and tentacles were then dissected and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde with 0.4 M cacodylate buffer and 7% NaCl for 24 h. Samples were rinsed 3 × 30 min in 0.4 M cacodylate and 4% NaCl before being post-fixed with 2% osmium tetroxide in 0.4 M cacodylate and 10% NaCl. They were then dehydrated through a series of incubations in increasing alcohol concentrations (10 min in 50%, 10 min in 70%, 10 min in 90%, 10 min in 95%, 2 × 10 min in absolute and 15 min in propylene oxide). After critical-point-drying, samples were coated with gold and observed using a Quanta 200 SEM (FEI Company) at the Bordeaux Imaging Centre (University of Bordeaux, France). Three series of experiments were carried out during April 2012, November 2012 and February 2014 ( The aims of the first series of experiments ( A computer piloted IDS μeye UI-1580SE-C-HQ video sensor (Stemmer Imaging) was positioned 30 cm straight above the aquarium sediment surface, which was illuminated with infrared light. This system allowed for the collection of images of the sediment surface during 24 h at a frequency of 0.1 Hz. Collected images were assembled in an AVI film, which was then visually analyzed to assess: (1) feeding ethology, (2) different types of behavior, and (3) time allocation patterns between these behaviors. Additional images of the sediment surface were collected under ambient light on days 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30 (starting from the beginning of the acclimation period) using a Nikon ® D7000 Reflex 16.2 Mpixels camera fitted with a 18–105 mm lens. A special care was taken to insure that the image plan was strictly parallel to the sediment surface. For all worms, a zonation of the sediment surface became rapidly visible. This included: (1) a faecal mound area near the tube opening, (2) a prospected area devoid of surface particles, and (3) undisturbed sediment ( At the end of the 20 d experiment period, the surface sediments of: (1) faecal mound areas, (2) prospected areas, and (3) undisturbed sediments were sampled using a truncated (to allow the passage of the largest particles) pipette tip fitted to the needle port of a 10 mL syringe. All the surface sediment of each three areas was sucked by gently pulling the syringe plunger while the truncated tip was moved to sample the very top (i.e., about 2 mm) surface sediment layer. Each sample was homogenized and divided in two for the assessments of: (1) main sediment characteristics, and (2) aerobic bacterial community composition. Sediment granulometry was assessed using a Malvern® Master Sizer laser microgranulometer and expressed as median diameter (D50) and mud content (i.e., the volume % of particles <63 μm in size). Particulate organic carbon (POC) and nitrogen (PON) were measured on 10 mgDW (dry weight) freeze dried decarbonated (with 0.2 N HCl according to ( Aerobic bacterial community composition was characterized by Automated Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis (ARISA), a PCR-based whole-community fingerprinting method ( The aim of the second series of experiments ( Four Unisense® A/S Clark-type microelectrodes (( The aims of the third series of experiments ( Surface sediment reworking rates were assessed for 5 individual worms (15.2 ± 5.0 mgWW) through laser telemetry ( Time periods allocated to the different types of behaviors were assessed during the first and the third series of experiments. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was performed to check for possible differences in time allocation patterns between these two series. Changes in main sediment characteristics within undisturbed sediment, faecal mound and prospected areas were described using a non-metric Multi Dimensional Scaling (nMDS; ( Aerobic bacterial community composition was described using nMDS (  where p Differences in the values of D and E Significant differences between oxygen penetration depths between the three considered areas were looked for using a Friedman ANOVA for paired samples. All statistics, except for Friedman ANOVAs (Excel®), were performed using the PRIMER® 6 package ( Examined worms bore from 11 to 15 tentacles (12.6 ± 1.3 mean ± sd). Tentacles were implanted side by side around the upper lip of the mouth ( The position and the elevation of the anterior part of the tube varied between worms. On some occasions, the anterior part of the tube was vertical and only slightly emerging from the sediment surface. On some others, the anterior part of the tube was lying horizontal at the sediment surface. None of the observed worms left their tube during our experiments. Moreover, worms did not always stretch their anterior part out of the tube while feeding ( Seven types of behaviors were identified: (1) Time allocation patterns between behaviors did not significantly differ between the first and the third series of experiments (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, During the first series of experiments, average total surface sediment reworked area increased from 37 to 49 cm An example of a microtopography scan taken during the third series of experiments is shown in Overall, the granulometrical and main biochemical characteristics of surface sediments significantly differed between the undisturbed sediment and the prospected and faecal mound areas (multivariate One-Way PERMANOVA, Oxygen penetration depths significantly differed between areas (Friedman ANOVA for paired samples, p < .01). Mean oxygen penetration depths were shallower in prospected areas (4.0 ± 0.1 mm) than in undisturbed sediments (4.9 ± 0.2 mm) and in faecal mound areas (7.2 ± 0.4 mm). Overall, 296 OTUs were found, ranging from 200 to 1166 bp. In undisturbed sediments, we recorded 209 OTUs ranging from 200 to 1032 bp, versus 218 ranging from 200 to 1032 bp in faecal mound areas and, 238 ranging from 200 to 1166 bp in prospected areas. Mean values of 1-D significantly differed between areas (Friedman ANOVA for paired samples, p < .01). They were lower in undisturbed sediments (0.909 ± 0.043) than in faecal mound (0.938 ± 0.012) and prospected (0.948 ± 0.012) areas. E The observations achieved during the present study allow refining the current knowledge regarding the anatomy of the feeding organs and the feeding ethology in ampharetid polychaetes. Our morphological observations confirm that the upper lip of Bacescu ( Queiros et al. ( To our knowledge, vertical sediment reworking by Such a sediment reworking mode results in the zonation of the surface sediment in three distinct areas: (1) faecal mounds resulting from faeces accumulation, (2) prospected areas that may be conversely depressed relative to the general sediment surface ( The use of laser telemetry to infer surface sediment reworking rates has only been introduced recently ( Sediment reworking by During the present study, we assessed two bulk characteristics of sedimentary organics, namely POC and PON. Both parameters correlated negatively with D50, which at least partly reflects the general negative relationship linking sediment grain size and associated organic matter concentrations (( During the present study, mean oxygen penetration depths were between 4.0 (prospected areas) and 7.2 mm (faecal mound areas). These values are slightly higher than those (i.e., typically between 2 and 4 mm) measured both In the English Channel and the Celtic sea, the density of subtidal During the present study, worms were collected from a very dense (i.e., up to 6745 ind.m Many studies have assessed the effect of macrobenthic bioturbators on sediment bacteria (see review in Studies assessing bacterial community composition have been mostly carried out in situ and have involved samplings at different depths within the sediment column. Observed differences in bacterial community composition thus potentially resulted from changes in oxygen and other electron acceptors availabilities. Only several studies have tackled the effect of macrobenthic bioturbators on bacterial community composition in surface oxygenated sediments. Most of them were however based on the comparison of bacterial community composition in field stations ( Our own results also show that aerobic bacterial community composition differ in undisturbed sediments, faecal mound and prospected areas by During our experiments, aerobic bacterial community composition seemed to differ most between undisturbed sediments and prospected areas and were intermediate in faecal mound areas. Diversity and equitability also tended to be lower in undisturbed sediments than in prospected and faecal mound areas. This last result is in contradiction with those of Wilde and Plante ( Cécile Massé was supported by a doctoral fellowship from