The deposition of particulate matter on filter fibers (a system of cylinders) in a laminar flow normal to their axes has been simulated by a new Lattice Boltzmann model for two-phase flows. In the model, gas dynamics is solved by the Lattice Boltzmann method, while the transport of solid particle is described by the cellular automation probabilistic approach, where solid particles are constrained to move only on the same regular nodes as the fluid particles and their motion probabilities to neighboring lattices depend on the combined effect of drag forces from fluid, Brownian diffusion, and other external forces. The Lattice Boltzmann two-phase flow model is allowed to quantitatively simulate the filtration process of fibrous assembly, including the steady capture efficiency and pressure drop during the filtration processes of clean fibers, the dynamic evolution of the branch cluster structure, capture efficiency and pressure drop along with particle loading. The detailed information on the particle trajectories and the dendrite structures (fractral dimension and porosity) are obtained. Our results are in good agreement with previous theoretical predictions and experimental observations.Fiber filtration, which is at advantage of high capture efficiency of submicron particle, is very widely used for air purification in coal-fired power plants, mining engineering, cement industries, work places and life areas. Since the fifties of last century, scientists in this field have been developing mathematical models or carrying out experimental investigations to predict and improve filter performance Conventional numerical methods, which used Navier–Stokes equations for flow fields and Lagrangian approaches for particle motion, are usually utilized to simulate gas-particle flow in filters Lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) is an efficient alternative for the kind of gas–solid flows with complex and dynamic boundary conditions Basically, it is possible to distinguish gas–solid flow models based on the LBM among Lagrangian full-resolution-particle tracking approach, Lagrangian point-particle tracking approach, and cell automation probabilistic approach, depending on different ways for description of particle migration (Lagrangian tracking or probabilistic determination) and particle volume (full resolution or point like). As the name suggests, the Lagrangian full-resolution-particle tracking approach views solid particle as objects with geometric boundaries imposed on the fluid. The interaction between a “large” solid particle and its surrounding fluid particles is calculated by summing the transfer of momentum to the solid boundary (before and after rebound With respect to the Lagrangian point-particle tracking approach (we call it the LB-Lagrangian approach in the following text), solid particle is viewed as point without volume, and the motion of each particle is directly calculated from the Lagrangian approach of the equation of motion under consideration of different external forces such as drag force, gravity, and Brownian force. The point-particle assumption is reasonable when the particles are smaller than the Kolmogorov scale of fluid phase Another LBM-based approach for fluid–solid flows was proposed by Masselot and Chopard To sum up, the LBM-based gas–solid flow models, in comparison with conventional CFD models based on the Navier–Stokes equation for continuous fluid, have significant advantages of easily implementing complex and dynamic boundary conditions, and they are able to consider the back-influence of dynamic boundary conditions (that is, the changed surface structures due to particle deposition and resuspension, toppling, and erosion will have non-negligible effects on fluid field which influences interactively the next particle behavior). These advantages are essential for the simulation of filtration process. Among the three kinds of LBM-based gas–solid flow models, the LB–CA method is at advantages of considering complicated mechanisms of particle behavior through simple and intuitive rules, straightforward implementation of massively parallel computation This paper is organized as follows. In Solutions of the gas flow and potential fields are first calculated using the LB method in term of Lattice Boltzmann–BGK (Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook) model The evolution of the density distribution functions at each time step is given by the discretized BGK model In fact, the LB Eq. The LBM represents a first-order explicit finite-difference discretization of the finite discrete velocity model of the Boltzmann equation It is worth noting that the filtration process is a case of the dilute gas–solid flows and the effect of particles on the fluid (the gas phase modification due to the presence of particles) is thus neglected. In fact, the so-called two-way coupling effect can be considered through an additional force (which represents the reacting drag force and describes the interaction between the fluid and particle phases) in the LB evolution Eq. Particle transport in fluids depends on the combined effects of the fluid–particle interaction, gravity and buoyancy, and even Brownian diffusion and electrostatic force. Masselot and Chopard The solid particle may still stay at the original node or jump to a nearest-neighbor node, depending on the transport probabilities to directions 1, 3, 5 and 7: It is proven that the binomial scattering can be approximated by a Gaussian distribution if the number of simulation particles is large enough Unfortunately, the existing CA probabilistic model only estimates roughly the actual displacement of a particle within a time step. For example, the displacement of sand/snow particle under the action of the local fluid flow and gravity force is Δ Brownian diffusion has significant effect on the motion of, especially, small particles. It is well-known that the collection of submicron particles by fibrous filters is dominated by the mechanism of Brownian diffusion. Particle movement in the space due to Brownian diffusion can be regarded as certain random walk process, where the transition probability (which depends on diffusion coefficient ( In the Lagrangian particle tracking approaches, particle velocity and position are calculated by integration of the equations of motion for the particle. In this paper, in order to save computational time, the particle velocity and displacement can be explicitly calculated through integration of the equations of motions over time The accurate particle displacement Δ The present CA probabilistic model is able to consider particle transport under the action of other external forces such as gravitational force and buoyancy, electrical forces and van der Waals forces, by adding these forces into Eq. Once the particle position and velocity are determined by the model, the particle fields can be obtained by statistics of all simulation particles over all nodes. Simulation particles are usually weighted to represent these real particles. That is, the number, As the particles deposited, the shape of fiber surface continues to change, resulting in some dendrite-like clusters consisting of deposited particles. Both fiber and clusters serve as collectors of the coming particles. Furthermore, the dynamic evolution of dendrites affects the flow fields and thus the subsequent particle deposition. It is necessary to consider the interaction between two-phase flow fields and non-steady surface geometry. In the LB methods, the complex boundary conditions can be dealt with very simple rules. There are three kinds of nodes in LBM-based two-phase models: fluid node, solid node and boundary node. Fluid particles and solid particles within fluid nodes can evolve according to Eqs. Fluid particles within fluid nodes or boundary nodes may collide with rigid obstacles or walls which are represented by solid nodes. Bounce-back boundary condition (bbc) with second-order accuracy is adopted, saying, fluid particles bounce back from where they came (as shown in The two-dimensional computational domain is a square with side length of The inlet velocity of fluid is constant: Eq. The capture efficiency and pressure drop of loaded filters are related to not only the loaded mass but also the performance of clear fibers. We first simulated particle capture process of clear fibrous filters using the LB–CA method in the section. In the following cases, particles will “disappear” if they deposited on fibers, so the shape of fiber does not change and the fiber keeps “clean”. Fiber capture efficiency can be calculated as follows: Three main mechanisms for particle collection by fibers are considered: Brownian diffusion, interception, and inertial impaction. It is well known that the capture efficiency due to Brownian diffusion is related to Peclet number We first simulated the Brownian-diffusion-dominated collection processes, where particle size is comparatively small and For larger particles, Interception mechanism affects the capture process of particles of all sizes, however the contribution on the overall capture efficiency is comparatively little in general. With respect to intermediate particles, the Brownian diffusion is relatively weak, and their inertia is also relatively low. Therefore, the interception mechanism is highlighted to be the most important collection mechanism. In these cases, the particle trajectories in the whole flow field basically correspond to the fluid streamlines (see Pressure drop Δ When the Reynolds number Miyagi's formula for an isolated row of parallel fibers is Kuwabara's Formula is expressed as We obtained dimensionless drag forces over five fiber volume fractions by changing the fiber diameter. In real cases, particles will deposit on the surface of the fiber, which will change the shape of fiber and thus affect the flow field. On the other hand, the formed dendrite-like clusters will have significant effect on capture efficiency and pressure drop. It is necessary to investigate the dynamic formation of dendrite-like clusters. In the following simulations, flow fields and particle fields are both calculated in each time step in order to capture the characteristics of the non-steady processes. Several important parameters, fractal dimension, porosity, capture efficiency, and pressure drop, of the dust-loaded fibers are calculated. Kanaoka et al. Factually, when Brownian diffusion is dominant (that is, Fractal dimension ( As shown in Porosity is another characteristic of dendrites. The average porosity is usually defined as following:  The growth of dendrites results in the expansion of capture range and the increase of pressure drop and capture efficiency of fibers. Kasper et al. There is an empirical model for pressure drop of dust-loaded fibers The Lattice Boltzmann-cell automation model offers a useful tool for description of the gas–solid flows, where gas dynamics is solved by the LB method while the solid particle motion is described by the CA probabilistic approach. Different from the traditional LB-Lagrangian model, solid particles in the lattice Boltzmann-cellular automation model are constrained to only move on the same regular lattices as the fluid particles, and their transport probabilities to neighboring nodes depend on the local fluid flow and other external forces subject to solid particles. In the Lattice Boltzmann-cellular automation model, the interaction between gas–solid flow and complex and unsteady geometric boundary can be easily realized. However, the existing Lattice Boltzmann-cellular automation model is able to describe particle behaviors only on the level of qualitative simulation because some empirical or tentative formulations/parameters are introduced so that the effect of fluid on particle transport is roughly estimated. In this paper, the Lattice Boltzmann-cellular automation model is for the first time improved to describe particle transport under consideration of combined effects such as Brownian diffusion, drag force, and other external forces. The actual displacement of a particle within a time step is accurately calculated from the Lagrangian equations of motion for a particle, in such a way that the transport probabilities of a solid particle to neighboring nodes is determined by the ratio of its actual displacement on a lattice direction and the lattice length of the direction. The Lattice Boltzmann-cellular automation model is used to describe the steady and unsteady filtration process, including the steady capture efficiency and pressure drop during the filtration processes of clean fibers, the dynamic evolution of the branch cluster structure, capture efficiency and pressure drop along with particle loading. Our results are in good agreement with previous theoretical predictions and experimental observations. The Lattice Boltzmann-cellular automation model presented in this paper is able to quantitatively describe the filtration process, owing to correct consideration of fluid–particle interaction. The filtration processes of clean fibers or dust-loaded fibers are simulated when only one capture mechanism (Brownian diffusion, interception, or inertial impaction) predominates (although the three capture mechanisms have either strong or weak effects on the filtration processes in our simulation). The detailed information on the particle trajectories and the dendrite structures are obtained. An isotropic distribution of particles around the fiber with relatively open pore structure is formed for the diffusion-controlled deposition; when interception mechanism dominates, the structure of dendrites becomes more branched and open; particles with larger inertia collide with the windward of fibers, resulting in a dendrite with compact structure (steady fractal dimension and lower porosity). This paper only considered the filtration process of single fiber or a row of cylindrical fibers in a laminar flow normal to their axes. These cases can be viewed to be two-dimensional gas–solid flows. The reliable predictions will help construct the optimal fibrous filter structures, and provide basic model parameters and constitutive equations for macroscopic modeling of penetration and press drop. However, it should be mentioned that in the real case of fibrous assembly, in addition to single fiber theory, size and shape of pores defined by the fibrous assembly as well the orientation of fibers play a vital role in particle filtration. Capturing by filter media can also be distinguished as surface and depth filtration. As for these real cases, three-dimensional simulation should be considered. The Lattice-Boltzmann gas–solid flow model is able to deal with complex and dynamic boundary conditions, and is thus a promising candidate for numerical simulation of particle filtration by real fibrous assembly. The authors were supported by “the