Acute compartment syndrome is a condition that may result in sensorimotor deficits and loss of function of the affected limb as a result of ischemic injury. It is considered a surgical emergency and prompt diagnosis and treatment results in more favorable outcomes. The use of regional anesthesia is controversial in patients at risk for compartment syndrome due to concern of its potential to mask symptoms of the condition. A 44-year-old African American male presented to surgery for open reduction and internal fixation of a comminuted distal radius fracture. As part of an off-label, investigator-initiated, and institutional review board–approved study, he received a perineural injection of liposomal bupivacaine (Exparel) around the median, ulnar, and radial nerves at the level of the proximal forearm. The following morning, his initial complaints of numbness and incisional pain progressively evolved into worsening numbness, diffuse discomfort, and pain with passive movement. A diagnosis of compartment syndrome was made and he underwent an emergency fasciotomy. The diagnosis of compartment syndrome requires a high index of suspicion and prompt treatment. This patient’s changing pattern of symptoms—rather than his pain complaints alone—resulted in the diagnosis of compartment syndrome treated with emergent fasciotomy in spite of finger numbness that was initially attributed to the liposomal bupivacaine. While the use of liposomal bupivacaine did not preclude the diagnosis of compartment syndrome in our patient, it should be used with caution in patients at risk for compartment syndrome until additional data, particularly regarding block characteristics, are available.Acute compartment syndrome is a rare condition associated with serious patient morbidity and its prognosis relies on timely diagnosis and treatment. According to Leversedge et al. (2011), “a compartment syndrome exists when the interstitial tissue pressure within an osteofascial envelope rises to levels that impair cellular function and, when sustained, can lead to irreversible changes in the contents of the compartment. Progressive tissue ischemia occurs when arterial perfusion is diminished because of increasing interstitial tissue pressure that constricts or collapses the arterial inflow. Such a decrease in pressure gradient occurs with an abnormal elevation in intracompartmental tissue pressures (such as from injury), a relative decrease in arterial perfusion pressures, or both” Liposomal bupivacaine (Exparel) is a novel formulation of bupivacaine that may provide postoperative analgesia for up to 72 hours via tissue infiltration techniques We report our experience with a patient who received a peripheral nerve block using liposomal bupivacaine and subsequently developed acute compartment syndrome. Witnessed verbal consent was obtained from the patient prior to the preparation of this case report. Additionally, the Ochsner Clinic Foundation Institutional Review Board (IRB) determined that IRB approval was not necessary for the formulation and submission of this case report. A 44-year-old African American man presented to the Emergency Department (ED) complaining of left wrist pain after falling from the back of a semi-trailer truck. After clinical evaluation and imaging studies, he was diagnosed with a comminuted distal radius fracture. He underwent an uneventful closed fracture reduction in the ED and was subsequently evaluated in the orthopedic clinic. The swelling in his fingertips was appropriate and the patient did not complain of pain disproportionate to his injury. The patient was scheduled for surgery the following day. Upon arrival in the preoperative area, the patient was examined by the orthopedic service and deemed to be at low risk for compartment syndrome. He reported his pain as severe and various postoperative pain control options were discussed. While he declined a continuous perineural brachial plexus catheter, he expressed interest in participation in a liposomal bupivacaine study currently underway at our institution (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT02058303). The risks and benefits of the nerve block and the study were discussed in detail and his questions were addressed prior to provision of consent. He was placed on continuous electrocardiogram, pulse oximetry, and non-invasive blood pressure monitors prior to administration of intravenous sedation and block performance. Per our investigator-initiated, IRB-approved study protocol, 5 mL of undiluted 1.3% liposomal bupivacaine (Exparel, Pacira Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Parsippany, NJ) was injected around the median, ulnar, and radial nerves at the level of the mid to proximal forearm under ultrasound guidance, corresponding to a total of 15 ml (195 mg) of liposomal bupivacaine. In accordance to the study protocol, an ultrasound-guided supraclavicular single-injection block was also performed using 30ml of 1.5% mepivacaine immediately after the liposomal bupivacaine blocks. Sensory blockade was evaluated by a blinded research assistant at 5-minute intervals post block, and was found to have absent sensation to pinprick in the median, ulnar, radial, and musculocutaneous nerve distributions of the hand within 10 minutes. At the conclusion of the block procedure, the splint was removed and significant swelling at the wrist and distal forearm was immediately observed. The splint was not previously removed to maintain fracture reduction. No swelling was observed at the level of the mid to proximal forearm and his compartments were soft prior to surgery. In the operating room, examination of the fracture pattern revealed extensive comminution and several fracture lines with intraarticular extension. Two Kirschner wires were used for preliminary fixation of the major fracture fragments and a long volar plate was then applied and secured. Final intraoperative fluoroscopy images revealed good fixation and position of the fracture fragments. The wounds were irrigated, and the skin was closed without difficulty. At the conclusion of the surgical procedure, the patient’s forearm was still significantly edematous although the compartments remained soft. The orthopedic team decided to admit the patient postoperatively for observation and serial compartment checks given the extent of his injury and associated swelling. His postoperative splint was windowed to facilitate compartment checks during the acute postoperative period. The duration of surgery was approximately 3½ hours and he complained of incisional pain on the lateral aspect of his forearm in the post anesthesia care unit. The arm was covered with a sugartong splint and cast padding, which was windowed generously to facilitate thorough examination of the upper extremity. This allowed access to both the medial and lateral aspects of the forearm to examine both the sensation and swelling of these areas. During Orthopedic evaluation in the post anesthesia care unit, he was able to wiggle his fingers and motor function involving the median, radial, ulnar, and anterior and posterior interosseous nerves appeared grossly intact. He exhibited diminished sensation in the median, ulnar, and radial nerve distributions of the hand and this was attributed to the liposomal bupivacaine block. During surgery, a flexor carpi radialis incision was made in the lateral forearm (commonly used for treatment of distal radius fractures), and he localized his pain to this area at this time. A hydromorphone PCA was initiated and his pain improved. He was serially examined overnight, and no acute changes were found with his compartment checks or his subjective reports. The following morning, however, he reported increased pain and swelling in the left distal forearm and hand. He complained of worsening paresthesias in the distribution of the median nerve throughout the hand. On examination, his compartments were noted to be taut, and he was unable to move his fingers. Severe pain was elicited with passive movement. A diagnosis of acute compartment syndrome of the left forearm and acute carpal tunnel was made, and he was transported emergently to the operating room for fasciotomy and carpal tunnel release. Intraoperatively, his musculature was beefy red and viable throughout, with no evidence of ischemia. Once satisfactory release of the affected compartments was achieved, the wounds were covered with a wound VAC. During the ensuing days serial washouts and partial primary closure attempts were performed ( His sensation returned to baseline approximately 24 hours post-fasciotomy. The patient has since recovered all sensation in his hand and is currently receiving outpatient occupational therapy to recuperate his strength and range of motion. This is the first known instance of compartment syndrome in a patient treated with perineural liposomal bupivacaine. The rarity and emergent nature of this disorder makes formal clinical investigations challenging, and data on anesthetic management of these patients are primarily limited to case reports, case series, and expert opinion. Although the use of neuraxial or regional anesthetic techniques remain controversial in this patient population, compartment syndrome has been diagnosed and treated in patients with epidural analgesia as well as single-injection and continuous perineural blocks. All providers must be vigilant and have a high index of suspicion for compartment syndrome, as delays in surgical treatment can significantly worsen outcomes, since increased compartment pressures result in decreased tissue perfusion and ischemia. Fortunately, compartment syndrome is a rare condition, although it is more commonly seen in significant high-energy polytrauma. Isolated distal radius fractures, for example, rarely lead to compartment syndrome Predictors of compartment syndrome include pain disproportionate to the patient’s injury and worsening or evolving pain symptoms in the face of a previously adequate analgesic regimen. The use of regional anesthesia and patient controlled analgesia techniques have been questioned because of their potential to obscure or delay the diagnosis During his initial serial examinations, the patient had documented pulses, no increased pain on passive or active movement, soft compartments, and numbness in his fingers that was attributed to the liposomal bupivacaine. He reported incisional pain along the lateral forearm in the distribution of the musculocutaneous nerve approximately four hours after the performance of the median, ulnar, radial, and supraclavicular blocks. The musculocutaneous nerve was not blocked with liposomal bupivacaine and this suggested resolution of the single-injection mepivacaine supraclavicular block. The patient reported high pain scores both preoperatively and throughout his hospitalization. Thus, the exclusive complaint of pain would have been unreliable in this scenario. However, the evolution of his pain from lateral forearm incisional pain to diffuse pain in the wrist and forearm—combined with the other clinical findings such as taut compartments in the forearm and pain with passive movement—prompted the orthopedic team to perform an urgent fasciotomy. The fact that the musculature was beefy red and viable in appearance during the fasciotomy does not imply that there was no compartment syndrome. It may indicate that the compartment syndrome was intervened upon quickly enough such that widespread muscle necrosis had not yet occurred. Close communication with our orthopedic surgery colleagues is warranted at all times. While the initial complaint of hand numbness was attributed to the perineural liposomal bupivacaine, the orthopedic team was informed that a change in severity, location, or type of pain was considered pathologic and concerning for compartment syndrome. To date, no reports of delays in acute compartment syndrome diagnosis have been conclusively attributed to peripheral nerve blockade This case reports illustrates the importance of continuous vigilance and timely surgical care in patients at risk for compartment syndrome and that a median, ulnar, and radial nerve block performed with liposomal bupivacaine does not preclude diagnosis of compartment syndrome. Our experience suggests that perineural use of liposomal bupivacaine, like any regional anesthetic technique, has the potential to obscure the diagnosis of acute compartment syndrome, but this did not result in a delay in the diagnosis and treatment. Our study involved injection around the median, ulnar, and radial nerves at the level of the proximal forearm. It is unknown if other peripheral nerve block sites would exhibit similar block characteristics. While our patient was not determined to be at risk for compartment syndrome at the time of block performance, the condition developed as part of an evolving clinical scenario. A potential drawback of liposomal bupivacaine is the inability to discontinue its effects as one could stop an infusion of dilute local anesthetics via a perineural catheter or await resolution of a single-injection block. This case report suggests that while with vigilant monitoring and close communication between the anesthesiology and orthopedic teams compartment syndrome can be diagnosed and treated despite receiving perineural blockade with liposomal bupivacaine, it may be best avoided in patients deemed to be at risk for this condition until more evidence—particularly regarding block characteristics—is available. The absence of data regarding block onset, duration, sensorimotor blockade, and the inability to discontinue its effects may make perineural liposomal bupivacaine a poor agent for use in patients that may be at risk for compartment syndrome at this time, particularly when other alternatives (such as peripheral nerve catheters with dilute local anesthetic infusions) are available. Clinical suspicion and close observation are warranted to protect patients from the potentially catastrophic effects of compartment syndrome regardless of the choice of regional anesthetic technique. We would like to thank the Ochsner Clinic Foundation Publishing Services team and Dr. Lauren D. Vazquez for proofreading this submission. We also thank Ms. Shannon Caruso (Ochsner Clinic Foundation Medical Photography) for taking the patient photographs. José R. Soberón, Jr. received research funding from Pacira Pharmaceuticals (Parsippany, NJ). My institution received an unrestricted research grant from Pacira Pharmaceuticals in 2013 and this was used to fund the study discussed in the manuscript. No funding was used in the preparation or submission of this case report. The remaining authors have no relevant financial disclosures to report.