Single crystals of Zn–Mg–Er and Zn–Mg–Ho icosahedral phases were grown from the melt using the liquid encapsulated top seeded solution growth technique. The fivefold planes of these as-grown single crystals were polished and used for the present nanoindentation studies using Hysitron triboscope attached to an atomic force microscope with a maximum load up to 16mN. The reduced Young's modulus (E
                     r) and nanohardness (H) were found to be 135±10GPa and 8.5±0.2GPa for the F-type Zn65Mg25Er10 quasicrystal whereas for the P-type Zn74Mg15Ho11 quasicrystal (QC) these were 135±10GPa and 7.8±0.2GPa, respectively. Using the appropriate constants, the average E in both the quasicrystalline alloys was estimated as 140±10GPa. The elastic and plastic deformation characteristics in load–displacement, F–h, curve appears to be identical in both the QC phases. The peculiarity in the load–displacement curves, in terms of pop-ins were observed frequently. AFM images showed the steps in the pile-up material which can be identified as shear bands and correlated with the pop-ins. The first pop-in was observed in the load range of 70μN in case Zn–Mg–Ho and 84μN in case of Zn–Mg–Er QC. The contact pressure, p, turns out to be 13GPa for Zn–Mg–Ho and 18GPa for Zn–Mg–Er QC. The maximum shear stress under the indent, τ
                     Tresca is found to vary from 6 to 8GPa, which is close to the theoretical shear strength of this material (∼E/20). The energy required for the indentation was determined from the first pop-ins and it turned out to be 0.88eV/atom, close to the thermal energy required for deformation of quasicrystals. Thus the ‘pop-ins’ are attributed to the elastic-plastic transition during indentation.The stable quasicrystal (QC) in the Zn–Mg–RE system (where RE Earlier, the micro-indentation techniques have been adopted to characterize the mechanical properties of single and poly-quasicrystalline materials However, to the best of our knowledge, the systematic analysis of the nanoindentation studies of the present material has not yet been reported. Therefore, the aim of the present paper is to investigate the nanoindentation responses on single crystals of Zn–Mg–Ho and Zn–Mg–Er icosahedral phases and analyze in terms of its elastic and plastic properties. The single quasicrystals were grown from the melt using the liquid encapsulated top seeded solution growth method. Preparation details for the growth of the simple icosahedral (P) Zn–Mg–Ho single crystal are described in Brühne et al. The experiment of nanoindentation was carried out using Hysitron triboscope with a Berkovich indenter having a spherical tip of radius ∼200  The size of ‘pop-ins’ in terms of displacement burst in the load displacement curves varies from 1 to 15 An attempt was made to analyze the energy required for creating the first pop-ins, which occurred at 70–80 The following conclusions can be drawn from the present investigation: The Young's modulus, The ‘pop-ins’ in the form of displacement bursts were observed in single and multi-indent mode in both the cases. The first ‘pop-ins’ were observed in the load range of 70 (Zn–Mg–Ho QC) and 84 (Zn–Mg–Er QC) μN and at displacements of 10 and 15 The AFM measurements clearly reveal the formation of shear bands in a step-wise manner. Therefore this can be taken as the main initial mechanism for plastic deformation and can be related to the ‘pop-ins’ observed in the One of the authors (NKM) would like to thank Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, Germany for the Research Fellowship during which a part of the work was completed. The partial support derived from the project sponsored by Department of Science and Technology (DST project-SR/S3/ME/051/2005-SERC-Engg) New Delhi, India is also thankfully acknowledged.