Experiments of circular and elliptic cylindrical matrices with the same cross-section area in the axial high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) had been conducted previously. The results showed that the elliptic matrices present much better performance than the circular matrices at lower magnetic induction (<0.35T). However, previous theoretical analyses indicated that the capture efficiency of the circular and elliptic matrices were almost the same. A very important factor was not considered in the theoretical analyses, namely the applied magnetic induction. Almost all the theoretical studies concerning the basic principles of HGMS in the past were based on the premise that the matrices were saturated by the magnetic field. In the present paper, particle capture behaviors of the circular and elliptic matrices in the axial HGMS were studied with varying the magnetic field. The generic particle motion equations were derived and the particle capture cross sections of the matrices were compared, for both the case that the matrices were unsaturated and saturated by the magnetic field. The results showed that capture behavior of the circular and elliptic matrices were magnetic field dependent. The absolute difference of the particle capture cross section area between the circular and elliptic matrices increases first and then decreases with the increase of magnetic induction (0.1–0.8T). The capture cross section area of the elliptic matrix can be 1.25–1.6times larger than that of the circular matrix within a moderate induction range. In high magnetic induction, the capture cross section area of the circular and elliptic matrices is almost the same. The analyses provide explanation for the conflict in previous publications and reveal the good magnetic characteristics of the elliptic matrix and its promising application prospect in HGMS.the applied magnetic field strength, A/m the magnetic field induction, T the saturation magnetic of the matrix, 2.1 length of the matrix, 0.2 half the long axis of the elliptic matrix, mm half the short axis of the elliptic matrix, mm half the focal length of the elliptic matrix, mm ratio of matrix long axis to short axis, – radius of the circular matrix, 1 radius of the magnetic particle, μm volume of the magnetic particle, mm magnetic susceptibility of the magnetic particle, 0.0025 elliptic angle coordinate, – elliptic coordinate, – imaginary symbol, – napierian base, – polar angle coordinate, – polar coordinate, m permeability of vacuum, 4π the velocity of the fluid, 0.1 viscosity of the fluid, 1 As the core component of high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS), magnetic matrices play a decisive role for the performance of the HGMS system and have attracted much attention from scientific researchers. High permeability matrices of circular cross-section are the most commonly employed in HGMS. The matrices’ cross-section shape, as well as the matrices’ size ( For the application of special cross-section shape matrices in HGMS, the authors simulated the magnetic field around the circular, elliptic, square and diamond shaped cross-section matrices and conducted experiments to test the performance of the matrices in the axial HGMS ( Consequently, the authors deduced the magnetic field around the elliptic matrix and derived the motion equations of magnetic particles around the elliptic matrix in the three configurations of HGMS: longitudinal, transversal and axial ( For the comparison of the particle capture cross section of the matrices, a very important factor was ignored, i.e., the applied magnetic induction. The particle capture cross section in the parallel stream HGMS (    The magnetic field around the elliptic matrix when the matrix is saturated by the magnetic field has been given by the authors in previous publication ( Similarly, Eqs. With the generic particle motion equations of the matrices, the particle motion trajectories around the matrices can be depicted, for both the case that the matrices are unsaturated and saturated by the magnetic field. The fourth order Runge Kutta method is adopted for the solution of the equations. In the axial HGMS, the performance of the matrices is determined by the capture cross section of the magnetic particles. For magnetic particles of radius The following parameters which are almost the same as those in the experiments (   With the particle motion equations around the matrix, the capture cross section of different size particles under a variety of magnetic induction can be calculated and depicted. Then the particle capture cross section of the circular and elliptic matrices under different circumstances can be compared. In the experiments of  For more intuitive observations of the difference of the particle capture cross section between the circular and elliptic matrices, the capture cross section of the matrices are quantified through integration of the capture cross section boundary. The capture cross section area is the area enclosed by the capture cross section boundary subtracted by the matrix cross-section area. The capture cross section boundary for different circumstances is integrated and the capture cross section area is calculated. As the increase of the particle size, the increase trend of the particle capture cross section area of the circular and elliptic matrices under different magnetic induction is quite different. The different performance of the circular and elliptic matrices can be more intuitive by comparing the capture cross section area of specific particles under different magnetic induction. The relative difference of the circular and elliptic matrices can be well reflected by the ratio of the particle capture cross section area. From the analyses above, it can be seen that, for the circular and elliptic matrices of the same cross-section area, the particle capture behaviors of the matrices is magnetic field dependent. Within a relatively low magnetic induction range, the elliptic matrix has larger particle capture cross section than the circular matrix. When the packing fraction of the circular and elliptic matrices is the same, equal number of matrices is packed, the total particle capture cross section area of the elliptic matrices is larger than that of the circular matrices. So the hematite recovery of the elliptic matrices was higher than that of the circular matrices in the experiments ( Thus at a moderate magnetic field, the elliptic matrix is more capable of capturing fine weakly magnetic particles, which is of great significance for the processing of weakly magnetic minerals. In mineral processing, the grade of the concentrate and recovery of the valuable minerals are equally important and usually a moderate magnetic field is adopted in HGMS. For circular and elliptic matrices of the same cross-section area, the elliptic matrices present higher capture efficiency for fine magnetic particles. Usually these fine mineral particles are highly liberated and are of high grade, which is very conductive to improve the grade of the concentrate and the recovery of the valuable minerals. The elliptic matrices present better magnetic characteristic than the circular matrices and have promising application prospect in HGMS. The analyses conducted in this article are for the axial configuration of HGMS. Theoretical and experimental studies can also be conducted in the longitudinal and transversal configurations of HGMS to further validate the particle capture model. Moreover, adopting elliptic matrix that has the same cross section area as the circular matrix is just one scheme, elliptic matrix of other shape relationship with respect to the circular matrix can also be considered. These involve a great deal of theoretical and experimental work and may be conducted in follow-up studies. In this article, the generic particle motion equations of the circular and elliptic matrices in the axial high gradient magnetic separation are derived, for both the case that the matrices are unsaturated and saturated by the magnetic field. The particle capture cross section of the circular and elliptic matrices are calculated and compared with varying the magnetic induction under the same cross-section area. For both the circular and elliptic matrices, the particle capture cross section is becoming larger with increasing the magnetic induction within the induction range of 0.1–0.8 This research work was financially supported by the