This report presents 5 cases of intrusive luxation in immature permanent central incisors. The intruded incisors, with careful monitoring, were allowed to spontaneously re-erupt, which avoided the need to reposition the tooth either orthodontically or surgically. All of the teeth re-erupted spontaneously in a few months. The root development continued in all of the cases and all pulps remained vital. There were no other signs of pulpal and/or periapical pathology. It can be concluded that intruded immature permanent teeth can spontaneously re-erupt, conserve their vitality, and continue their root development without any surgical or orthodontic management.Intrusive luxation injuries are axial displacements of the teeth into the supporting alveolar bone, which results in comminution or fracture of the socket and considerable injury to the periodontal ligament. Clinical signs are a reduced clinical crown length and expansion of the labial alveolar bone. Radiographically, the periodontal space is missing or reduced. Intrusive luxations have received relatively little attention in the literature compared with other types of trauma. Andreasen The optimal treatment for intruded permanent teeth has not yet been determined. Observation for spontaneous eruption Surgical crown uncovering Orthodontic extrusion Partial surgical extrusion, immediately followed by orthodontic extrusion and surgical repositioning. Observation for spontaneous eruption is based on the empiric finding that intruded immature teeth frequently erupt spontaneously in a few months. The aim of this article was to report 5 spontaneously re-erupted immature permanent teeth without any sign of pulpal and/or periapical pathology. All of the cases reported here involved children who were referred to the Department of Pediatric Dentistry, University of Ankara, Turkey, for the management of intruded central incisors. In our clinic the main treatment principle of intruded immature permanent teeth is allowing for spontaneous re-eruption if endodontic intervention is not deemed necessary. If the teeth do not show any sign of re-eruption in a few months or endodontic treatment is required, orthodontic repositioning is employed. Seven successive referrals of intruded immature permanent teeth have been followed for extended periods. In 2 cases spontaneous eruption did not occur because of severe crowding. These 2 teeth were repositioned with an orthodontic appliance and are not included in this report. Medical histories of the children were noncontributory. The children were instructed to rinse daily with 0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate. Standard clinical and radiographic examination procedures were used in all cases. The difference between the incisal edge of the intruded tooth and the adjacent incisor was noted. The roots of all of the intruded teeth were incompletely developed and there were no root or alveolar bone fractures noticed. It was decided not to reposition the teeth surgically at first but to allow some time for possible spontaneous re-eruption. The patients were then reviewed at 2, 4, and 8 weeks and every 3 months thereafter. At each recall visit, mobility, percussion, palpation, and vitality tests; measurement of the difference between the incisal edge of the teeth suffering from intrusion and the adjacent incisor (the amount of eruption); and radiographic controls of the related tooth were carried out. In the follow-up examinations, it was seen that the root development and the pulp vitality continued without any signs of pulpal and/or periapical pathology in all of the cases. All of the teeth fully re-erupted spontaneously in a few months (3 to 8 months). The first case report involved an 8-year-old girl who came to our clinic 2 weeks after having fallen in school. Intraoral examination revealed that right maxillary central incisor was intrusively luxated. The parents of the child informed us that she had an anterior open bite before the trauma. Radiographically the tooth appeared to have open apex and it had been intruded approximately 3 to 4 mm ( An 8-year-old boy was seen at our clinic 5 days after an automobile accident, which led to almost complete intrusion of his anterior tooth. The maxillary left central incisor was intruded 8 mm. The mesial edge was visible and had an enamel fracture. The maxillary right central incisor was slightly mobile and sensitive to percussion, and had an uncomplicated enamel-dentin fracture. Radiographs obtained did not show evidence of root fractures and confirmed the clinical diagnosis of intrusion and enamel fracture in the left maxillary central incisor, and concussion and enamel-dentin fracture in the right maxillary central incisor ( A healthy 8-year-old girl had fallen at home and injured herself 1 day earlier. The maxillary left central incisor was intruded with one third of the clinical crown below the free gingival margin ( A 7-year-old girl slipped and fell on the ground at school. Her maxillary left central incisor suffered mild intrusive luxation and an enamel-dentin crown fracture. Radiographs confirmed an immature root ( This case involved a 9-year-old boy who had fallen in school 2 days earlier. Intraoral examination revealed a red and swollen gingiva around the maxillary left central tooth. The maxillary central incisors were sensitive to percussion and the maxillary left central incisor was markedly intruded. Radiographic examination showed that the teeth had open apices and no root fracture was evident ( Intrusive luxation is defined as displacement of the tooth deeper into the alveolar bone. In the dental literature different treatment approaches have been suggested for the management of intrusive luxation injuries. However, disagreement exists regarding the most favorable approach to bring intruded teeth back to their normal position. Ellis On the other hand some authors suggest that surgical repositioning of intruded teeth may increase the risk of external root resorption and loss of marginal bone support. Although there is a lack of general agreement concerning the optimal treatment for traumatically intruded permanent incisor teeth, there is a general agreement that immature teeth normally will re-erupt spontaneously because of their high potential for eruption and for pulp and periodontal repair. Taintor et al. Faria et al. In the cases reported here, the more conservative option of observation was chosen, as endodontic intervention was not deemed necessary. The teeth were carefully monitored for continuing signs of vitality and if endodontics had been required gingival surgery or orthodontic repositioning may have been employed. All of the teeth reported here maintained their vitality and did not show any sign of periapical pathology during the follow-up periods. However Andreasen Careful monitoring for spontaneous re-eruption of the intruded immature permanent teeth is a more conservative treatment approach compared with surgical or orthodontic extrusion. The present case reports suggest that these teeth have a high potential of spontaneous eruption, while conserving their vitality and continuing root development.