Introduction
                  Tibial plafond fractures represent a small but complex subset of fractures of the lower limb. The aim of this study was to describe the health related quality of life, pain and return to work outcomes 12 months following surgically managed tibial plafond fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  The Victorian Orthopaedic Trauma Outcomes Registry (VOTOR) database was used to identify patients with tibial plafond fractures. All patients captured by VOTOR with a tibial plafond fracture between September 2003 and July 2009, were identified consecutively and comprised the initial cohort. The radiographs of all identified patients were classified using the AO/OTA fracture classification. A review of the included patient’s medical records was performed. Data were collected on the injury event, management and complications. Outcomes at 12 months were prospectively collected by telephone interview and included return to work, a numerical rating scale for assessment of pain and the Short Form 12 (SF-12).
               
                  Results
                  There were 98 unilateral tibial plafond fractures; 91 fractures were managed operatively, 4 non-operatively and 3 underwent amputation. The 91 operatively managed patients were the focus of this study. A two-stage management approach, involving temporary external fixation, followed by definitive open reduction and internal fixation, was the most common operative treatment. The follow-up rate at 12 months was 70%. 57% had returned to work by 12 months post-injury, the median (IQR) pain score was 2 (0–5) and 27% reported moderate to severe persistent pain. Mean PCS-12 scores were significantly lower than Australian norms (p=0.99), 38.2 for males and 37.5 for females.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The presence of persistent pain, loss of physical health and a low return to work rate highlights the profound impact of tibial plafond fractures on patients’ lives. Although this study looked at the early 12 month results, it is expected these outcomes will continue to improve over time. Further studies, with larger patient numbers, must focus on how to improve not only the operative management of these fractures, but also patient’s mental and overall physical health in the long term. Improved management techniques and early identification of injury patterns known to perform poorly may help long-term outcomes.Tibial plafond fractures are associated with a high degree of morbidity. Frequently the soft tissue envelope surrounding the distal tibia is severely compromised Clinical outcomes such as ankle function, range of motion, clinical ankle scores and post-traumatic osteoarthritis have been the focus of many papers Deficiencies in the literature on tibial plafond fractures include studies on long-term clinical results and health related quality of life outcomes. The social and mental health impact associated with tibial plafond fractures and the predictors of these outcomes requires further investigation. Three papers have been published over the last 10 years focusing on these outcome measures by Marsh et al. and Pollak et al. in 2003 and Marsh et al. in 2010 A retrospective observational cohort study was undertaken. Ethics approval was granted for this project from the Alfred Health ethics committee, Melbourne Health ethics committee and Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee. The Victorian Orthopaedic Trauma Outcomes Registry (VOTOR) captures information about orthopaedic trauma patients in Victoria using a sentinel site approach, with four hospitals included. VOTOR collects data about all adult patients with orthopaedic and/or spinal injuries admitted to these hospitals for >24 All patients captured by VOTOR with a tibial plafond fracture between September 2003 and July 2009, were identified consecutively and comprised the cohort. The International Classification of Disease – Edition 10 Australian Modification (ICD-10 AM) codes indicating a fracture of the distal tibia was used to identify cases from the VOTOR database. The ICD-10-AM codes used were S82.3 (Fracture lower end of tibia) and S82.31 [Other fracture of lower end of tibia with fracture of fibula (any part)]. There is no specific ICD-10 AM code for tibial plafond fractures. There were 273 cases with a ‘Fracture of the lower end of the tibia’ (S82.3) and 123 cases with ‘other fracture of the lower end of the tibia with fracture of the fibula’ (S82.31). Of the 396 cases identified within the VOTOR database, 277 cases were from the two major adult trauma centres and were therefore to be considered for inclusion in this study. Patient radiographs of all these cases were reviewed by two orthopaedic surgeons. Where the two orthopaedic surgeons did not agree, a third orthopaedic surgeon reviewed the films. A consensus of two out of three orthopaedic surgeons was required to confirm the final recorded classification. The Muller AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen)/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) classification system, code 43A/B/C was used Distal tibial fracture cases not classified as tibial plafond fractures were excluded from the study. Pathological and Relevant data were extracted from the VOTOR database, and the medical records of the included cases. Specific information collected from the medical record review focussed on the injury event, fracture details including whether the fracture was open or closed and classified according to the Gustilo-Anderson classification system, management and complications The 12-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-12) Version 1.0 is a reliable generic health status instrument that has been validated for use within the Australian population The patient reported outcomes included in the VOTOR telephone interview were: SF-12 Return to work (RTW) Pain, assessed using a Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) ranging from 0 (no pain at all) to 10 (worst possible pain) Summary statistics were used to describe the profile of participants and responder vs. non-responder analysis (for VOTOR data, defined as followed-up and lost to follow-up), their injuries, management and outcomes. For continuous variables, the mean and standard deviation (SD) were reported for normally distributed variables. Where the data were not normally distributed, the median and interquartile range (IQR) was used. Independent The key outcomes of interest for this study were: SF-12 mental (MCS-12) and physical (PCS-12) component summary scores at 12-months post-injury Return to work at 12-months post-injury (if working prior to injury) Presence of moderate to severe persistent pain (NRS Data analyses were performed using Stata software (release 9.2 and 11.2; Stata Corp, College Station, Texas). A p-value After radiological review of the 277 identified fractures of the distal tibia within the VOTOR database between September 2003 and July 2009 (from the two adult major trauma centres), there were 98 unilateral tibial plafond fractures identified. Of the 98 unilateral fractures, 91 were managed operatively, four were managed non-operatively and three were managed by amputation. Non-operatively managed fractures were due to minimal fracture displacement or in patients who were not medically fit to undergo surgical management. The three patients who underwent amputation, presented with complex open fractures (Gustillo-Anderson, Type 3, one of each A, B and C) and were all AO/OTA Type C tibial plafond fractures. One amputation was performed at 2 The mean (SD) PCS-12 score was 38.2 (11.7) for males which was lower than the mean (SD) PCS-12 score of 49.7 (9.6) for the Australian population (t There was no difference between the mean MCS-12 score and the Australian population norms for either men (mean (SD) 52.0 (9.8) vs 53.4 (7.8), t No particular variable was predictive of poorer MCS-12 or PCS-12 outcomes, however the AO/OTA fracture classification approached significance (p Pain data were collected for 64 (70%) of the 91 tibial plafond fracture patients; the median (IQR) pain score at 12 months post-injury was 2 (0–5). Of the 64 respondents, 17 (26.7%) reported moderate to severe persistent pain at 12-months post-injury. Factors identified as being associated with moderate to severe pain included the patient’s compensable status, mechanism of injury and the AO/OTA classification ( Of the 91 patients included in this study, 68 (75%) patients were working prior to their injury. At 12-months post-injury, the return to work status was known for 54 (79%) of which 31 (57%) had returned to work. The absence of other associated injuries was associated with a better return to work rate, although this finding did not reach statistical significance ( The purpose of this study was to assess the health related quality of life outcomes of patients following tibial plafond fractures, in the Australian context. All patients were treated at one of the two Level 1 trauma centers in Victoria, Australia. A range of tibial plafond fracture types were represented in this study, with patients who sustained AO/OTA Type A, B and C fractures investigated. There was variation in surgical management approaches in these trauma centers, with a number of orthopaedic consultants managing patients at any given point in time. Few studies have described the impact on patients’ lives following tibial plafond fractures, despite their often complex and protracted treatment course The overall return to work rate for patients at 12 months was 57%. We found lower rates of return to work in compensable patients. While not significant in our study, this observation was similar to the findings of previous studies of orthopaedic trauma patients More than a quarter of our cohort reported persistent moderate to severe pain at 12-months post-injury, and the prevalence of moderate to severe pain was higher in patients with Type B fractures. One hypothesis, although not previously described in the literature is that despite the Type C fractures being more complex than the Type A and Type B fractures, the association of Type C fractures with more severe soft tissue trauma, may lead to nerve damage resulting in less pain transmission. Type C fractures are potentially more likely to result in post-traumatic ankle stiffness, which may limit movement and pain generation. Another possible explanation is that Type C fractures are all intra-articular injuries, whereas Type A fractures are extra-articular distal tibial shaft fractures and therefore the location of the fracture has an influence on the long term pain associated with the injury. Long-term health related quality of life outcomes associated with tibial plafond fractures were assessed by Polack et al. and Marsh et al. Marsh et al. identified fracture comminution as a significant predictor for speed of recovery for PCS scores over time This study has strengths and weaknesses. The strengths include the number of patients, highly relevant outcome data and the quality of data reported from the VOTOR database. The weaknesses of this study include the short follow-up time of 12 months and despite being a large number of tibial plafond fracture patients, overall this is still only a small cohort. Although tibial plafond fractures are an injury affecting only small numbers of patients each year, this study included over 90 cases of tibial plafond fractures, one of the largest cohorts studied. Nevertheless, the overall patient numbers in this study were relatively small, limiting the study’s power to identify predictors of outcomes and to detect differences between patient groups. The overall impact of the small sample size for many analyses was that there was only sufficient power to detect the largest effects, and multivariable analyses were not performed. Despite some cases being lost to follow-up, there was little evidence of responder bias. Hence the results of this study are likely to be representative of the wider population of tibial plafond fracture patients. The patient demographics and injury profile of patients within this study are consistent with that of other tibial plafond fracture studies, further strengthening the case for generalizability to other tibial plafond populations. Future studies of tibial plafond fractures need to include larger patient cohorts, with multiple treatment options to enable better investigation of the relationship between surgical management and patient-reported outcomes, information needed to inform clinical practice guidelines. Tibial plafond fractures account for a small, but highly complex group of lower limb trauma cases. In this study, we found that more than one in four tibial plafond fracture patients reported moderate to severe persistent pain, 57% had returned to work, and physical health scores were profoundly lower than population norms, at 12 months post injury. Although this study looked at the early 12 month results, it is expected these outcomes will continue to improve over time. Future studies need to focus on inclusion of larger patient numbers, intricacies of differences in management approaches and the long-term impact on patient’s mental and physical health to better inform clinical practice. There are no known conflicts of interest for any of the authors involved in this paper to be declared. The Victorian Orthopaedic Trauma Outcomes Registry (VOTOR) is funded by the