The acceptance of the first edition of our book by the CFD community has certainly been overwhelming and most welcomed. We were extremely pleased by the positive feedback received even within a short period since its inception of publication. In response to the numerous comments, our second edition aims to further enhance and update the fast-growing subject, significant developments, and important applications of CFD. Not straying away by the primary focus to offer CFD users with a In the treatment of the fundamental physics of fluid flows, we have added the generic form of the equations pertaining to compressible flows that in retrospective is an extension to the incompressible form of the equations for CFD. At the time of writing the first edition, we have focused predominantly on the description of the most popular discretization approaches in CFD based on finite difference and finite volume. Recognizing that other discretization methods such as the finite element and spectral methods that are still available in the mainstream of CFD, we have provided a summary of the basic ideas underpinning the utilization of these methods to solve the fluid flow equations. To reflect the iterative approach that is also commonly being adopted to solve the systems of discretized equations in commercial CFD codes, a dedicated section on multigrid method has been written. In the first edition, we have also identified a number of key sectors where CFD has been firmly established. They are aerospace, biomedical science and engineering, chemical and mineral processing, civil and environmental engineering, power generation, and sports. In this second edition, we further illustrate the application of CFD in the areas of metallurgy and nuclear safety. Considering the widespread of CFD throughout a number of significant engineering industries, the proper handling of complex geometries becomes ever more important in view of different types of meshing approaches that can be employed. Discussions on key aspects of structured, body-fitted, and unstructured meshes have been provided within the practical guidelines of grid generation. Lastly, an alternative numerical approach based on the discrete element method has been added to the growing list of advanced topics in CFD.