Pressurized borosilicate glass cylinders were used to (1) simulate experimentally high-voltage transformer bushing behavior under high-velocity impact from an air gun, (2) investigate fragment dynamics to estimate the impact range of airborne fragments, and (3) evaluate the efficiency of an elastomeric coating on ballistic damage initiation and fragment confinement. Using high-speed cameras, the velocities and directions of ejected fragments from the cylinders were determined along with fragment distribution symmetry. Drop tower testing was added to independently verify the air gun results on the cylinders through a different test under similar impact energies using flat samples of the same glass. Elastomeric coatings were also applied to both the cylinders and flat samples to increase their resistance to high energy impact. It has been shown that internal pressure in the glass cylinders plays a major role in the failure modes during high-velocity impacts. This pressure affects velocities, directions, and symmetry of fragment distribution. The fragment impact range investigation turned out to be inconclusive due to highly erratic behavior of the fragments after the blast. Most importantly, it has been ascertained that fragment dynamics are drastically altered by elastomeric coatings, producing a high level of fragment confinement both in the drop tower and gun tests. By extrapolating the air gun and drop tower data out to high power rifle energy levels, unique predictions of the critical coating thicknesses to prevent the initiation of ballistic damage and to confine fragments in borosilicate glass cylinders and C-120 porcelain bushings were achieved for the first time.High voltage (HV) transmission structures can be damaged in service by a variety of low and high-velocity impacts. For example, low-velocity laboratory impact to transmission conductors has been investigated by Waters et al. A bushing must be able to insulate HV conductors through a grounded enclosure, such as the transformer holding tank, without causing a flashover event Transformer bushings behave like pressure vessels in service. Traditionally, metallic pressure vessels are designed with a leak-before-break (LBB) concept. If a high-pressure metallic gas bottle bursts, the resulting explosion can destroy surrounding structures and cause severe injuries to personnel An explosive reaction of a ceramic transformer bushing can be described by four steps, demonstrated in In this research, a unique testing methodology is suggested and applied to investigate high-velocity impact failures of small glass pressurized cylinders representing full scale porcelain HV transformer bushings. Impact testing of full scale transformer bushings is an expensive endeavor. Therefore, this research utilizes a simplified and less expensive scale model of the bushings subjected to air gun 0.22 lead pellets with an impact energy of about 95 J. In a real full scale scenario the bushings would be made out of C-120 porcelain and the projectiles would be of a higher caliber than the lead pellets. The most commonly used materials for HV bushings are porcelain, glass or glass fiber reinforced polymers Polymer coatings have been used for blast mitigation The experimental testing methodology presented in this work was developed to identify how the combined effect of the air gun and the internal pressure inside the cylinders and potentially HV porcelain bushings affects the resulting blast profile and the fragmentation velocities and directions, and how the blast could be absorbed by high quality elastomeric coatings. Additional testing was performed using a drop tower approach to complement the ballistic testing for a wider range of impact energies. Two types of glass samples were prepared for this research. For the ballistic testing, Corning 7740 borosilicate cylindrical glass cylinders were fabricated by Allen Scientific Glass in Boulder, Colorado. The cylinders had a diameter of 50.8 mm (2″), a wall thickness of 6.35 mm (¼″), and a height of 304.8 mm (12″). The cylinders were designed with a closed rounded top and a ball flange base. Testing was done on eleven as-supplied samples. In addition, eight cylinders were coated on the outside with the Line-X XS100 with thicknesses of 1.43 mm (45 mil), 2.29 mm (90 mil), 3.05 mm (120 mil) and 6.10 mm (240 mil). For the drop tower testing, square plate samples of the same borosilicate glass were also fabricated by Allen Scientific Glass. Each sample had a measurement per side of 101.6 mm (4″) and a thickness of 6.35 mm (0.25″). The square glass samples were also tested as-supplied and coated with the same thicknesses as the cylindrical samples. The coatings were applied at Line-X of Boulder, in Boulder, Colorado. The coating was sprayed on using a Fusion Air-Purge gun with a Graco round mix chamber (AR4242) with a 1 mm (0.042 in) impingement port and an extension tip with orifice diameter of 1.52 mm (0.06 in). The spray technique was applied at 18.6 MPa (2700 psi) at 347 K (165° F). The coating is a proprietary polyurethane/polyurea elastomeric coating with a flexibility of 115% at room temperature The glass cylinders were designed to fit inside a flange mounted on top of a pressure containment box ( An AirForce Condor pre-charged pneumatic air gun with an onboard reservoir tank and a maximum recommended operating pressure of 20.7 MPa (3000 psi) of compressed air, was used to launch the projectiles. The projectiles were H&N 5.6 mm (0.22 caliber), 1.66 ± 0.02 g (25.62 grain) Rabbit Magnum II lead pellets. The muzzle velocity of each shot was recorded with a MagnetoSpeed Model V3 ballistic chronograph and was found to be 340 ± 1.84 m/s, giving an initial kinetic energy of the pellet at 95.3 ± 1.01 J. A schematic of the experimental arrangement used in this work is shown in The uncoated cylindrical samples were tested at pressures of 0, 69, 207, 345, 448, 517, and 690 kPa. Two samples were tested at each pressure condition, except for one sample tested at 69, 517, and 690 kPa. All coated samples (two for each coating thickness) were tested at a pressure of 207 kPa, which is the typical pressure of a transformer bushing in service. The coated samples were weighed before and after testing to obtain a percentage of mass loss due to impact. The overhead high-speed camera captured a radial profile of the resulting blast of the uncoated cylindrical samples after impact. The images were analyzed to determine fragment profile velocities in relation to a 360° circle. Zero and 180° were assigned as the locations of the pellet exit and entrance, respectively. Fragment velocities were plotted radially in the x-y plane. The radial distance from the centers of the graphs depicted the average magnitude of the tracked profile velocity in the x-y plane and the radial direction represented the position in degrees from the pellet exit point at which the tracked fragment portions were located. Profile velocities were obtained by tracking any portion of a fragment that could be measured, since most fragments were not fully resolvable. As many as 50 tracked fragment portions were followed for each test. Because of the measurement capabilities of the set-up, the fragment velocity profiles were generated based on the x-y plane velocities seen in high-speed imagery and not on the z component. It is assumed, based on limited visual observation, that the x-y plane velocities are more significant than the z direction velocities over the analyzed time interval of 0.2 s for the unpressurized sample and 0.1 s for the pressurized sample. A profile velocity bar graph was generated for all pressures tested using an average of the top 10% of the measured profile velocities along with the maximum profile velocity for each test. To examine symmetry of the blast profile, AutoCAD was used to trace out the fragment blast cloud in high-speed imagery and the cloud shape/profile was compared to a perfect circle. The blast profile examined the entire circular reference at 10° increments. Java was used to generate a symmetrical deviation plot comparing the blast profile to a perfect circle. A polar plot of this deviation was used to demonstrate areas where the blast had large deviations from symmetry. A bar graph was also generated based on the polar plot values. The impact flash of the pellet for the pressurized and unpressurized samples marked the starting time point (initial frame). The ejection time of a fragment was determined to be the first measurable observation of a fully resolvable fragment. The Phantom 5 camera used to track fragments had a window frame of 22.86 cm x 22.86 cm (9 in × 9 in), which didn't allow tracking of fragments for the complete impact event. A large number of fragments were also produced by the impact, which reduced the ability to recover all of them. Some fragments also had a tendency to break apart as they hit the ground, causing a shape change that made them even less identifiable in comparison to fragments in the image. The limitation of this set up precluded correlating actual fragments collected with the corresponding fragments seen in the window. Because fragment mass could not be tracked experimentally, fragment volume was calculated by using an AutoCAD tracing of the projected surface area and an assumed thickness equal to the sample wall thickness (6.35 mm). A majority of recovered fragments did show thickness to be equal to the wall thickness of the cylinder, therefore an assumption was made that the fragment thickness was constant. Mass, in turn, was calculated using the obtained volume of the fragment and an assumed borosilicate glass density of 2.23 g/cm Testing cylindrical pressurized samples is time consuming and expensive; therefore a simpler test method was developed using a drop weight on flat plates with an applied coating on the top surface. Using this method the impact energies were controlled, but were capped out at lower energies compared to the air gun test, but still within the same order of magnitude. By using the drop weight tester information could be obtained that was not observable with the air gun test. For example, it could be determined at which energy levels the glass plates did not break under certain coating thicknesses. A Gardner impact tester, catalog number TR 1120, was used to test each square plate sample following ASTM The air gun tests all resulted in significant damage to glass so the no failure energy could not be determined experimentally (see In The unpressurized sample forms a fine localized ejection cloud that can be seen in Failure modes of brittle materials under ballistic conditions have been extensively studied Brittle materials under impact develop cone, radial, and ring cracking All velocity profiles were examined for all of the tested pressures. Two examples of velocity profiles for 0 and 690 kPa are shown in The blast symmetry was also examined using Java to further validate the results seen in the velocity profiles shown in In order to estimate the range of impact by fragments after the blast, predictions had to be made regarding the way the velocities of fragments were changing with time for the unpressurized and pressurized cylinders. In All fragment velocities presented in  The initial velocities shown in Regarding potential relationships between peak velocities and fragment masses, numerical simulations and a Baker explosion model modified for 1 atmosphere external pressure have both shown that fragments from an idealized pressurized tank burst are first accelerated by the internal pressure and then decelerated with time Since the fragment velocities in The drag model was used with the assumptions that each fragment moves through the airspace and A After integration the solution is re-arranged to give: Nine fragments were considered with three different masses (0.1, 5, 55 g) and three different velocities (1, 5, 10 m/s). The masses and velocities represented the ranges of the masses and velocities observed in the impact testing in After examining the data in The velocities of approximately 50% of the fragments appeared to decrease over time. Of the 12 best fits of the experimental velocities, 6 displayed a decrease, 2 displayed an increase, and 4 demonstrated semi-stationary behavior. In the decreasing category, ( The reason some fragments exhibited increasing trends in their velocities, as shown in The behavior of brittle HV bushings under combined pressure and high-velocity impact is of major concern for the integrity of the power grid. One mitigation strategy could be a polymer coating applied to the surface of the bushings to prevent ejection of fragments into the surrounding area. It was observed that all the coated cylindrical samples tested had significant crack networks inside their walls but the fragments were still held together by the coating, with the exception of a partial side rupture of a sample coated with a thickness of 1.43 mm. Even with the side rupture, the majority of the fragments remained adhered to the coating. For the thicker coated samples a fine white powder was present inside the cylinders instead of much larger glass fragments. The mass loss was small in all cases (less than 4%), as shown in Based on the R  Using the best fit values from The drop weight tests also allowed examination of no failure energy instead of just confinement. The impact energies for the samples with 0% mass loss in If no failure energy data from the drop tower tests ( After examination of the two test methods used in this research it was estimated where borosilicate glass will not fail under a certain coating thickness and where the coating can sufficiently confine fragments to a mass loss of 1%. The maximum energies delivered in this research are 95 J for the air gun. However, energies delivered by conventional rifles are much higher. A 0.308 Winchester caliber, for example, delivers approximately 3.5 kJ of energy. Therefore, the best fits from The difference in the material properties for the borosilicate glass tested in this study versus C-120 porcelain used in actual bushings should be taken into account. This would allow better estimates to be made regarding the coating thicknesses needed to prevent bushing failure and potential mass losses. This could be done by comparing the fracture toughness, K Bushings can be up to several meters in length and up to a half meter in diameter depending on its voltage class. They have an outer petticoat profile to increase leakage distance that vary in spacing from approximately 50 – 150 mm. A 58 – 61 mm coating is therefore comparable in size to the surface characteristics of the bushings. Under the same assumptions, for a coating thickness of 3.05 mm, a mass loss of 27% would occur. Preparations are being made to verify these unique predictions by rifle ballistic testing of HV porcelain bushings. The prediction of coating thickness was determined based on low energy impact on borosilicate glass cylinders and plates, performed by air gun and drop tower experiments. The extrapolations were based on the quasi static fracture properties of both materials Another source of error could be the linear extrapolation of air gun and drop tower response of borosilicate glass to much higher impact energies caused by high power rifles. However, one study presented a potential linear relationship between a depth of penetration quantity and the projectile energy Pressurized borosilicate glass cylinders under impact from a 0.22 caliber lead pellet at 335 m/s (1100 ft/s) were investigated. As pressure increased from 0 to 690 kPa the resulting fragment blast becomes fully symmetrical at about 207 kPa, whereas unpressurized samples display a directional fragment blast distribution after impact. It was also found that fragment velocities increased with pressure. No clear relationships were observed between fragment masses, their initial velocities, and ejection time for the unpressurized and pressurized cases. The impact range investigation turned out to be inconclusive due to a highly erratic nature of fragment dynamics with the velocities of airborne fragments rapidly decreasing or increasing with time irrespective of their masses, ejection times and testing conditions. The fragments did not follow, even remotely, a simple Newtonian drag model. Elastomeric coatings were also investigated for their fragment confinement and potential no failure energy capabilities on jointly pressurized and impacted glass cylinders and drop tower glass flat samples. Several major observations were made regarding the coating effect. First, the drop dower testing was found to be a very useful complementary technique for the ballistic testing of the coated glass samples with the drop tower damage predictions overestimating the air gun approach by a factor of about 3. Second, the coatings changed the failure characteristic and fragment dynamics drastically by protecting the samples from the initial impacts, minimizing mass loses of the impacted glass, and greatly affecting the fragment confinement strongly depending, however, on the thickness of the coatings and testing methods. In general, mass losses were much higher from the coated drop tower flat samples than from the coated air gun impacted and pressurized cylinders. Despite the fact that the high-velocity impact testing was performed in this research on small scale glass cylinders as opposed to full size transformer bushings, useful experimental observations were made. Estimates were generated based on two different test methodologies to gain a perspective regarding the ability of an elastomeric coating to confine fragments and prevent failure for borosilicate glass and C-120 porcelain bushings in high-velocity impact scenarios. The most important prediction made in this research was that full scale bushing could be protected by polymer coatings even under high energy rifle impact if sufficient coating thickness is applied. A rifle energy of 3.5 kJ on a porcelain transformer bushing would require a coating thickness of 58–61 mm to protect the bushing against failure. This research was supported by the Security, Safety and Law Enforcement Office of the Bureau of Reclamation and the NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Novel High Voltage Materials and Structures under #IIP 1362135. Information in this paper may not be used for advertising or promotional purposes. The data and findings should not be construed as an endorsement of any product or firm by the Bureau of Reclamation or the Federal Bureau of Investigation.