The steady motion of spheres representing particles inside tubes filled with different fluids has been investigated using both a finite-element and a finite-volume method. The rheology of the fluids has been modelled by the power-law able to describe the shear-thinning (pseudoplastic) behaviour of a series of polymer solutions. New results have been obtained for a series of tube/sphere diameter ratios in order to investigate the wall effects on the drag exerted by the fluid on the sphere. The results agree well with previous simulations for an unbounded medium (infinite diameter ratio). Experimental investigations have also been carried out and simulated, and the results compare favourably with the experiments. The present simulations revealed the convergence of the drag coefficient to a constant value independent of tube-to-sphere diameter ratio when the power-law index approaches zero.It is well known that confining walls exert an extra retarding effect on a sphere in free fall. Knowledge of the wall effect is required if the fluid hydrodynamic drag of a sphere falling in a fluid medium of infinite extent is to be estimated. Considerable research effort has been expended in studying wall effects on a sphere falling freely in Newtonian fluids at the axis of cylindrical tubes. Consequently, a wealth of information is now available on wall effects on sphere motion in Newtonian fluids, and indeed based on a combination of numerical and experimental results, it is now possible to evaluate the wall correction factor under most conditions of practical interest, namely, the value of the sphere Reynolds number and the tube-to-sphere diameter ratios In contrast, little is known about the wall effects on spherical particles settling in power-law fluids. Admittedly, a substantial body of information is now available on drag on spheres in power-law fluids, but most of such theoretical studies have not dealt with wall effects. Thus, the early studies based on the use of variational principles The assumption of the infinite expanse of fluid inherent in almost all analytical studies, however, poses a serious experimental difficulty, for such experimental studies are always carried out in fall tubes of finite size From the foregoing description, it is thus, safe to conclude that few theoretical results are available on the extent of wall effects on a sphere settling in power-law fluids in cylindrical tubes even in creeping flow conditions. This work endeavours to fill this gap in the current body of knowledge on this subject. Extensive numerical results are reported herein encompassing wide ranges of conditions as 1≥ The flow of a fluid around a sphere falling inside a cylindrical tube is shown schematically in The constitutive equation that relates the non-Newtonian stresses with the velocity gradients is given by the generalised Newtonian model: The quantity of interest is the drag When inertia is not neglected, the generalised Reynolds number For the flow boundary conditions and referring to The governing conservation equations, Computations based on the FEM have been performed with the general FLOWCAD computer program based on the Galerkin formulation of the conservation equations for non-Newtonian fluids (e.g. The method of solution for the non-linear set of equations is direct substitution with continuation in the power-law index (the A series of runs have been carried out with different grids and the two different methods (FEM and FVM). At a given power-law index The calculations using the FVM have been performed on a PC equipped with a PENTIUM MMX-200 Typical results from the simulations for the flow field (kinematics) and stress field (dynamics) are shown in In As the radii ratio increases beyond 10, the differences between Newtonian and power-law behaviour become smaller, and they converge together for power-law index  As mentioned previously, Chhabra and Uhlherr It is thus, appropriate to contrast the present numerical predictions with that of  The flow around a sphere falling inside tubes filled with shear-thinning fluids obeying the power-law model, has been simulated by both the FEM and the FVM with similar results. The methods are comparable in these kinds of problems in computational speed, but the FEM requires more space. The numerical results are in very good agreement with previous experimental results. New results for the drag around a sphere show that the tube/sphere diameter ratio has a strong influence on the drag, showing an increase and then a decrease as the shear-thinning character of the fluid increases (lower power-law index The present work has revealed that when the power-law index The present results can be used for deducing the rheological parameters