In mineral flotation, frothers are used to produce fine bubbles, reduce bubble rise velocity, and stabilize the froth, three properties that enhance the flotation process. These properties depend on the frother structure and this paper is part of an investigation into the frother structure-property relationship. The property here is bubble rise velocity and the structural variation is alkyl chain length of two frother families, alcohols and polyglycols. Single bubble rise velocity profiles were determined in a 350cm column. Velocity at 300cm as a function of concentration is determined and as a measure of the impact of structure on reduction in bubble rise velocity the concentration at minimum velocity (CMV) is estimated. The effect of increasing alkyl chain length is to decrease CMV by about ca. 90% in alcohols and ca. 70% in polyglycols for every one carbon addition. Taking log CMV as a function of the number of carbons in the alkyl chain gives a series of self-similar linear plots. An argument relating bubble rise velocity to surfactant molecule packing on the bubble surface is proposed.Surface active agents known as frothers play a critical role in most mineral flotation systems. The main functions of frothers are to reduce bubble size, to slow bubble rise velocity, and to stabilize froth, which together enhance particle collection rate ( The frother molecule has two parts: a hydrophobic (non-polar) hydrocarbon (usually alkyl) chain and a hydrophilic (polar) head. The general understanding is that the frother molecule adsorbs at the water/air interface with the polar group oriented to the water-side and the hydrocarbon chain to the air-side. As a consequence, water/air interface-related properties are modified, causing the noted effects on the bubbles and froth. The ability of surfactants to change the properties of interfaces is dependent on their chemical structure ( Water/air interfacial properties are related to the hydrocarbon chain length of the surfactant, which is recognized in processes such as flotation, flocculation and foam separation ( The frother functions also reflect their structure. However, commercial frothers are often not pure and are too few to identify a structure-property relationship. Systematic variation in structure, such as chain length, and position of branched hydrocarbon groups and hydroxyl groups, is required. That is, more surfactants from the frother families need to be tested. In a previous study,  The table effectively includes two commercial frothers (i.e., having the same reported structure): DF200 (tripropylene glycol methyl ether The setup used to determine the local rise velocity as a function of distance, or velocity profile, is shown in The experiment was initiated by activating the camera at the moment of bubble release with the experimenter adjusting speed to maintain the bubble in the field of view. The images were continuously displayed on a monitor (Sony PVM-1340) through a signal sender and receiver set (Radio Shack 15-2572). After recording, the images were processed offline to give position, and from sequential images, the local velocity. From the profile the velocity at 300 Before any test the system was flushed repeatedly with tap water till the known velocity profile in tap water was obtained, which could require up to 20 times the column volume. Meeting this criterion, plus the use of minimum gas rate to just release a bubble and strict adherence to the 350  Rather than using the full profile to compare structures we reduce to a single metric, the velocity at 300 The trend was similar in all cases: with increasing concentration, the velocity (at 300  The results are correlated by plotting log CMV vs. carbon (n) number ( Predicting frother functions according to its structure is of interest to chemical suppliers, modelers and flotation plant operators alike. The approach here was to determine the effect of hydrocarbon chain length on the bubble rise velocity profile for a series of surfactants from two frother families, alcohols and polyglycol ethers. Previous work had established that the bubble velocity profile was a reliable measure sensitive to surfactant type and could be represented by the single metric, velocity at 300 To track the effect of structure we use the concentration at minimum velocity, CMV. The graphical method of estimation is similar to that used in determining other physiochemical characteristics of surfactants, e.g., critical micelle concentration from surface tension vs. concentration ( The basic frother molecule structure comprises hydrophobic hydrocarbon groups and hydrophilic group(s), in the cases here O and OH. Due to their amphiphilic nature, such molecules concentrate at the air/water interface oriented to minimize contact between the hydrophobic groups and water molecules, leaving the hydrophilic part exposed on the water-side of the interface and the hydrocarbon groups on the air-side. From the thermodynamic point of view, the oriented structure at the interface lowers the free energy of the system. The packing of surfactant molecules at the air/water interface plays a pronounced role in surface properties ( Armed with the understanding that the slowing of bubble rise velocity is related to surface tension gradients, which are controlled by the distribution and packing of the adsorbed surfactant molecules, we can offer an interpretation of the observed chain length effect on CMV. It is known that increasing alkyl chain length increases hydrophobicity ( The above interpretation is qualitative. Potential quantitative interpretation may derive from the observed linear relationship between log CMV and n. This type of correlation is shown for other surfactant properties, for example, log CMC trends linearly with n ( Zhang and co-workers ( The effect on single bubble rise velocity profile of the number of carbons (n) in the hydrocarbon group for two alcohols, 1-alcohols, 1,2diols, and two polyglycols, polypropylene glycol alkyl ethers and polyethylene glycol alkyl ethers, was determined. The concentration at minimum velocity at 300 The work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through the NSERC (