In this work, a new methodology to evaluate solids transport in the froth was tested and validated. The methodology was based on using solid radioactive tracers, which was implemented in a two-dimensional flotation cell. The prototype cell represented a radial section of an industrial flotation cell (130 m3) and was operated at steady state using a two-phase (air-water) system. The experimental tests consisted of adding a small amount of radioactive solid tracer (0.3 g) near the top of the froth (TOF) or near the bottom of the froth (close to the interface). A non-floatable mineral was selected as the solid to evaluate both the solids entrainment into the concentrate and the solids settling into the collection zone. The solid tracer consisted of fine and coarse gangue particles with P80 values of 35 and 120 µm, respectively. Twelve collimated sensors located along the froth and collection zones allowed the evaluation of solids transport in the froth and solids settling from the froth to the collection zone after tracer addition at different distances from the discharge lip. The results obtained using the new methodology were in good agreement with the expected tendencies: a longer distance to the froth discharge lip as well as a coarser particle size promotes higher solids settling from the froth to the pulp zone while decreasing the solids entrainment into the concentrate. In addition, froth surface velocity measurements were performed using the Visiofroth system, and good agreement was observed between the froth bubble velocity and the solids transport velocity measured near the discharge lip. These results provide experimental evidence that solids radioactive tracers are a powerful tool to study and quantify particle motion in the froth, solids entrainment and solids settling into the collection zone.Froth flotation is a separation process widely used in mineral applications worldwide. This process utilizes the physicochemical surface properties of mineral particles to separate valuable minerals (hydrophobic) from the gangue component (hydrophilic). Basically, hydrophobic particles dispersed in slurry are selectively attached to air bubbles, being transported upwards by buoyancy. On the other hand, hydrophilic particles are not collected by air bubbles, but they can be recovered by entrainment to the concentrate stream, which mainly consists of fine and ultra-fine particles. The entrainment of non-valuable minerals is a non-selective process and has a detrimental effect on the concentrate grade ( The main factors that affect mechanical entrainment are the water recovery, solid percentage in the pulp, particle size, froth structure, froth residence time and particle specific gravity ( Due to the need for increasing recovery of valuable minerals, some ores are ground to a fine size; simultaneously, finer non-floatable particles are more likely to be recovered by entrainment into the concentrate ( Solids transport in froth and entrainment processes are known to be governed by multiple interacting variables ( At industrial scale, entrainment and its detrimental effect on flotation performance are critical in the final cells of industrial flotation banks, where the solids content of floatable minerals recovered by true flotation is scarce and the froth becomes less stable. Thus, a permanent challenge related to the flotation cells design is decreasing the gangue entrainment without affecting the recovery of valuable mineral. Flotation cell size has increased dramatically during the last few decades and at present cells of up to 550 and 630 m From the point of view of modelling, froth flotation models including entrainment mechanisms have been developed to improve flotation performance. For example,  Another technique to study particle motion and froth transport in the flotation process has been developed using radioactive tracers. The aim of this work is to present a new technique based on using radioactive particle tracers to evaluate the froth solids transport velocity to the concentrate and the fraction of solids entrainment into the concentrate as function of the initial distance to the discharge lip. Non-floatable solids transport in froth was studied considering two variables: the particle size and the location of particles in the froth, either on top of the froth or near the bottom of the froth (interface level). A two-dimensional flotation cell using a two-phase (air-water) system was used to simulate the limiting conditions (lower froth stability) observed in the last cells of rougher flotation banks. In these cells, the mineral recovered by particle attachment (true flotation) is very low, which decreases the froth stability. Even so, the water recovery is still significant, as is the fine particle entrainment, which strongly decreases the concentrate grade. A methodology to study solids transport in the froth phase using solid radioactive tracers was developed in order to evaluate solids velocity in the froth, solids entrainment into the concentrate and solids settling into the collection zone. The flotation experiments were conducted in a prototype flotation cell. For validation purposes, the results of solids transport velocity in the froth were compared to the froth velocity measurements from Visiofroth™ camera system ( A flotation cell representing a slice of the upper radial section of a 130 m The prototype flotation cell had a water volume of 210 L, and the froth depth was kept at 4.5 ± 0.5 cm below the lip level. A constant concentration of 12 ± 0.3 ppm of frother (F150, Flottec) was used for each experiment (this condition provided enough and stable froth), while the superficial gas rate was maintained at 1.5 ± 0.2 cm/s. For these operating conditions, experiments were carried out using a non-floatable mineral (commercial catalyst, mainly composed of aluminium oxide) in two particle size distributions as shown in The experimental tests were performed at a froth discharge water flowrate of 2.8 ± 0.2 L/min. To control the pulp level, a conditioning system consisting of a 200 L stirred tank (with the same conditioned water) and a Masterflex pump (Cole-Parmer) was used. For the above experimental conditions ( The experimental tests consisted of adding 0.3 g radioactive solid tracer (activity 1 mCi) in a 3 mL water suspension of each particle size distribution. To produce the radioactive samples, solids were first chemically assayed for element detection in order to produce radioisotopes by gamma neutron activation. The radioactivity type and intensity were determined considering the solid characteristics ( Tracers were injected near the top of the froth or near the bottom of the froth, just above the interface, at five distances from the overflow lip (5, 21, 36, 66, and 95 cm). Twelve radiation sensors (Altaix) were used to evaluate the tracer response in the prototype cell: five were located along the froth zone (1–5), five were located in the collection zone (6–10) and two were located in the concentrate launder discharge pipe (11–12), as shown in The solids entrainment into the concentrate was calculated relative to the maximum entrainment condition (reference) when the injection was close to the discharge lip (5 cm). Consequently, the solid tracer activity was evaluated by integration of the response curve, while the tracer passed sensor 12 at the system output after injection at different distances from the discharge lip (21–95 cm). These results were compared with the maximum activity observed by sensor 12 after injection at 5 cm distance.   Twenty tests were carried out, considering fine and coarse solid distributions, by tracer injection at two different levels: near the top of froth and close to the bottom of froth, near the interface (INT), and at different distances from the discharge lip (5, 21, 36, 66 and 95 cm), as shown in  Similarly, in the case of the coarse particles (P The froth solids transport measurements, related to the evaluation of solids entrainment and settling, were validated by comparison with the froth bubble velocity measured by the Visiofroth™ system, as shown in The solids entrainment was evaluated by comparing the relative radiation (area under the curve) observed in Sensor 12 after tracer injection on top of the froth or near the interface at different distances from the concentrate discharge lip. In order to quantify the relative entrainment, the radiation observed for tests 1 and 11 (  Similar results were observed for the coarse solids distribution on top of the froth in These results show that the use of the radioactive solid tracer methodology allow the evaluation of the relative impact the distance to the concentrate discharge lip has on fine and coarse solids entrainment for the case of low-stability froths (froths with a low solid content), i.e., conditions close to those observed in the last cells of industrial rougher flotation circuits. In this way, this approach becomes a useful tool for industrial flotation process diagnosis and modelling. A new methodology using radioactive solid tracers for evaluating froth solids transport and solids entrainment into the concentrate was developed and successfully implemented. The solid tracers consisted of fine and coarse non-floatable gangue particles with P The new methodology was evaluated in a two-dimensional prototype cell operating with an air-water system to simulate the limiting conditions observed in the last cells of industrial flotation banks (very low froth loading). The procedure consisted of seeding a small amount of solid tracer (0.3 g) near the top of the froth or near the bottom of the froth (interface level) at different distances, from 5 to 95 cm from the discharge lip level and observing the tracer response by means of radiation sensors located in the froth, collection zone and concentrate launder discharge pipe. The new methodology allowed the evaluation of the relative entrainment of fine and coarse solids as a function of the distance to the discharge lip. The froth solids velocity, measured by the radioactive tracer, was in good agreement with the froth bubble velocity measurements of the froth surface by the Visiofroth™ system near the discharge lip. This study showed that the seed of solids tracers in froth is a good tool for tracing the non-floatable minerals transport in low-froth-loading systems. The next stage of this research is to implement and validate the methodology at industrial plant scale. The authors are grateful to