The purpose of the work was to characterize the behavior of FRP anchors installed at the end of FRP sheets and develop a methodology to calculate the capacity when the anchors exhibited the fiber rupture failure mode. To do so an extensive experimental program was undertaken and the force transfer mechanism between the anchor and the structure was studied in depth. A theoretical model and then an adapted simplified model were developed and empirically calibrated with the experimental results, which yielded a number of design equations. The main observation from the experimental results is that the anchor was weaker when the fanning angle increased and the efficiency dropped as the anchor increased in size. The final contribution to the knowledge is a method to calculate the capacity of anchors installed at the end of FRP sheets when exhibiting fiber rupture failure mode.The use of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) materials in combination with the Externally Bonded Reinforcement (EBR) method is a strengthening system that is commonly deployed to increase the load-carrying and/or ductility capacity of structural members, with comprehensive overviews of the utilization of FRP being available in the literature One of the main drawbacks of EBR-FRP systems is premature debonding, which entails the debonding of the FRP reinforcement from the substrate at a strain level that is typically a small fraction of the rupture strain. While many different solutions exist to prevent or delay premature debonding, FRP anchors have proven to be a suitable solution FRP anchors consist of a bundle of fibers, or a rolled fiber sheet, soaked into epoxy resin as adhesive and with one end introduced into a hole pre-drilled into the structure and the other end bonded to the FRP sheet. Anchors are generally divided into straight and bent anchors, depending on the orientation in which the anchors are introduced into the structure. In FRP anchors can be used in two locations with respect to the FRP sheet, either within the boundaries or at the end of the FRP sheet. When the anchors are installed within the boundaries of the FRP sheet the anchors increase the load that is necessary to debond the FRP sheet from the surface because the anchor reduces the slip of the FRP at the anchor. Namely, the anchor cannot transfer the entire force that it can carry to the FRP reinforcement, but only a fraction of that force. Additionally, the anchors installed within the boundary of an FRP sheet bonded to masonry reduce crack growth and make delayed debonding occur in a time greater than the service life, while also prolonging the service life. Several studies have investigated the behavior of FRP anchors when the anchors modify the boundary condition of the differential equations of the bond. The exact theoretical behavior for FRP used in masonry is explained in the literature FRP anchors consist of three components: the anchor dowel, the anchor fan, and the key portion, see The main impediment for wide implementation of FRP anchors in EBR-FRP systems is the lack of a recognized design methodology to calculate the capacity of FRP anchors, although the roles that FRP anchors play in the equation that governs the bond when installed within the boundaries of the FRP sheet have been studied for masonry structures To develop a reliable guideline an extensive database and an in depth analysis of the FRP-to-structure force transfer mechanism is paramount. Kobayashi The research purpose is to advance knowledge on the behavior of straight FRP anchors installed at the end of the FRP sheet when used to transfer the load from the FRP reinforcing sheet to the concrete substrate. More specifically, the fiber rupture failure mode is considered, with the aim being to develop design guidance for engineers to use when straight FRP anchors fail by fiber rupture. A comprehensive database has been compiled and two theoretical models to describe the force transfer mechanism between the FRP reinforcing sheet and the substrate have been developed. The theoretical models were then empirically calibrated to obtain design equations to calculate the peak tensile load of FRP straight anchors exhibiting fiber rupture failure mode. The text matrix and related parameters, the testing set-up, the specimen manufacturing process and the materials used in the study are described herein. The test matrix shown in The specimen names in Whilst FRP anchors are rarely subjected to tension load only in real installations, a simplification was necessary in order to systematically address the testing of FRP anchors, and a recommendation is made that further validation of the results reported herein with case study testing that addresses loading combinations that combine both axial and shear loading would be advantageous. The novel test set-up, which has never been used before, was specifically designed for the test program based on two premises: (i) to replicate a real case installation as closely as possible with minimal iterations of testing; and (ii) preventing any shear, torsional or moment action on the anchor. The shear strengthening of a beam as shown in To closely replicate a real installation during testing, the RC block has to be vertically pulled away from the beam using a steel frame as a reaction frame. The rotation of the block was calculated by measuring the out-of-plane movement of the blocks using linear variable differential transformers, with no rotation being observed during tests except for 6-bundle anchors, see The first step in the assembly process was to grind the surface of the concrete to eliminate imperfections and loose material, exposing the aggregates and the concrete pores to improve the FRP-to-concrete bond strength and replicate the behavior of the anchor in a real structure, see The CFRP sheets and the anchor bundle were cut into the required size, combining the bundles together to construct a bigger anchor where necessary and tying the anchor end using a metal wire to simplify the insertion of the anchor into the pre-drilled hole. The epoxy resin was prepared and mixed with the help of an electric drill, saving a small part to be mixed with thickener to use as a primer layer on the concrete surface and introduced into the hole to saturate the concrete pores, see Five concrete mixes with two target compressive strengths were used to manufacture the RC blocks onto which the FRP anchors and FRP sheets were bonded, referred to as nominally ‘Weak’ and ‘Strong’. The RC beam was constructed using the Strong mix. The compressive and tensile strengths reported in The manufacturer-specified material net-fiber properties for the FRP products used in this research project are given in The CFRP anchor data reported in The failure mode for all the tests reported herein was fiber rupture of the anchor, either at the Key portion ( The specimen name (including number of bundles and the target fanning angle), the actual measured fanning angle The average ( The main interpretation from the results was that the relationship between anchor size and ultimate load was not linear, in accordance with the limited research previously reported Another interpretation of the results is that, for a given anchor size, the ultimate load at which the anchor failed reduced as the angle The efficiency results for every test have been plotted versus their corresponding fanning angle for every anchor size with approximate trend lines in The force transfer mechanism from the FRP sheet through the straight FRP anchors and into the RC structure was studied, with the hypothesis regarding the effect of fanning angle Considering the anchor as a two-dimensional body, the tensile force is transferred from the FRP sheet to the FRP anchor through the fan component and into the RC structure via the dowel. As can be seen in The force transferred by the fan is equal to the sum of the infinitesimal forces in the longitudinal direction The integral between 0 and Previous studies reported the non-linear relationship between the anchor size and the anchor efficiency, see for example The fibers transition from a circular section in the anchor dowel to a rectangular section at the top of the anchor fan, although in reality the thickness of the rectangular section is negligible when compared to the width (typically 1–3 mm thickness compared to 200–500 mm width) so the cross section can be simulated as a line. M The coefficients a to e in the theoretical model described in Eq.  The average value of the ultimate load capacity is typically reduced by a safety factor for engineering design, or alternatively a percentile value is also commonly used. An investigation was undertaken to provide engineers the possibility to use more conservative 95 and the 99.87 percentile equations, which are dependent on the standard deviation. The absolute deviation is the difference between the recorded ultimate load for each test and the predicted ultimate load using Eq. The 16 data sets from Three commonly used normality tests were applied to the normalized data, being the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (K-S) test, the Anderson–Darling (A-D) test and the Chi-Squared ( Having established that the data were normally distributed, the 95 percentile is obtained by subtracting 1.645 times the standard deviation from the average and the 99.87 percentile is obtained by subtracting 3 times the standard deviation from the average, which is also in accordance with the ACI 440 The three dimensional surface describing Eqs. Finally, a comparison is made between the value predicted with the design equations and the experimental values in The main shortcoming observed in the empirically calibrated equations reported in Eqs. To address the inconsistent form of Eqs. No significant relationship was observed between sub-failure mode and anchor capacity, which means that the height at which the fibers rupture does not have an effect on anchor capacity. Confirming previous studies, the relationship between anchor size and ultimate tensile capacity of the anchor was not linear, with the efficiency dropping as the anchor increases in size. A novel observation is the effect of fanning angle A significant conclusion of the research is the design equations that have been developed, based on a theoretical model empirically calibrated with the data obtained. These design equations reflect the observations from the results, wide anchors are weaker than narrow anchors and large anchors are less efficient than small anchors. Engineers now have a tool to calculate the tensile capacity of FRP anchors exhibiting fiber rupture failure when the anchors are installed at the end of the FRP sheet, which combined with the existing methodologies for concrete-related and FRP-to-FRP debond failure mode enable engineers to reliably calculate the capacity of the anchor when installed at the end of the FRP sheet. Further research could include investigating different materials such as glass fibers, basalt fibers or natural fibers and widening of the anchor size range to include larger anchors. A parametric analysis with the assistance of computer modeling techniques such as Finite Element Methods (FEM) may reduce the need for an extensive experimental program. Experimental verification of the validity of the proposed empirically calibrated equation when implementing FRP anchors on real FRP-EBR systems is paramount, most specifically when designing seismic strengthening of existing buildings that involves cyclic and dynamic loads. The authors acknowledge the support of the technical staff of the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Auckland. The materials used in this project were supplied by Contech Limited and Sika (NZ), and their contribution to the success of this project is gratefully acknowledged. Funding support provided by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 