Heating and cooling of residential buildings consumes around ten percent of the world's energy. One approach for reducing these costs is solar passive design using building materials with high thermal mass such as Rammed Earth (RE). Several studies have examined the performance of small RE structures or individual rooms within RE dwellings and have demonstrated the material's capacity to provide comfortable internal conditions passively. However, there is a lack of scientific evidence about the performance of full RE houses in real-world settings spanning several seasons. This research investigated the thermal performance of RE structures prior to occupancy and over the course of an occupied year. Two custom-designed houses were built in the hot-arid city of Kalgoorlie-Boulder, Western Australia: one with traditional solid RE walls and the other with walls with an insulating polystyrene core (iRE). Otherwise the houses were identical in orientation and design.
                  This study is presented in two Parts. Part A examined the houses' performance without occupants: This Part examines their occupied behaviour in terms of the occupants' thermal comfort. Comfort was examined using qualitative and quantitative data from sensor measurements as well as occupant surveys and simulated results using state-of-the-art assessment software BERS Pro. Comfort scores for measured and simulated data were determined using rules built into BERS Pro's engine Chenath and a modified version of the ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55-2010 SET* method.
                  Real-world thermal comfort of both houses outperformed their simulated behaviours: occupants reported comfortable conditions throughout Summer (outdoor maxima 45°C) and Winter (minima 1°C) with no artificial cooling and with minimal heating. The Chenath and SET* methods agreed with comfort performance in Summer but scored Winter performance poorly. Similarly, simulations predicted poor performance in Winter. Consequently, predicted energy demands due to heating were likely far higher than those needed in reality. This paper therefore argues from measured evidence of RE and iRE houses for the suitability of RE as a sustainable building material able to curb domestic energy demands. Collected data has been made publicly available for future analyses.Rammed earth (RE) is a high thermal mass construction method relied upon for millennia to passively provide comfortable living conditions In this series, we contrast the unoccupied and occupied thermal behaviour of two houses, one built with traditional solid RE walls (RE) and the other with walls with an insulating polystyrene core (iRE). The houses are hereafter referred to as the “monolithic” and “insulated” houses respectively. The houses were built in Kalgoorlie-Boulder, Western Australia (WA) and designed to optimise passive solar behaviour, making extensive use of thermal mass, optimised ventilation and orientation. Performance prior to occupancy was discussed in Part A of this series. That paper described the houses' construction and instrumentation, our experimental approach and the strategies used for data collection and management. Unoccupied performance was quantified in terms of thermal stability (the ability to resist large changes in diurnal temperature) and thermal lag (the ability to offset peak temperatures): features important to controlling thermal comfort. Performance in all rooms was measured using a suite of sensors and simulated using NatHERS software Part B of this series expands on Part A's findings to examine the houses' occupied performance over twelve months. Again, performance was evaluated using measured data and simulated data from This study's experimental programme was explained in detail in Part A of this series. Here, we describe the techniques used to adapt the installed instrumentation to accommodate occupants and the simulation methodology. The aim of this research is to investigate the thermal behaviour of hybrid RE and iRE houses under real-world conditions. Head-level room temperatures and humidities are key data for the assessment. However, it was not feasible to have sensors hanging at head-level while the houses were occupied. To address this problem, we developed a machine learning algorithm that learned models for accurate, long-range estimation of sensor readings A common grievance of occupants of Australian low-energy dwellings is that NatHERS energy assessments fail to accurately capture their use of the structure and so its efficiency In this study, house performance was simulated using For unoccupied performance, simulations assumed external doors and windows remained shut and no artificial heating or cooling (including cooking, bathing etc.) was permitted. Occupied simulations assumed normal occupant activity (cooking, bathing, sleeping etc.) and the opportunity to employ artificial heating and cooling. The The monolithic house was occupied by a family of five: two adults and three children under the age of ten. The insulated house was occupied by two adults. Both were Aboriginal families who volunteered to take part in the study and who had no prior contact with the research team. Either family was free to withdraw at any point with no repercussions (i.e. they would not be asked to leave the houses). Both families resided in the houses for the duration of the study, excepting short absences for holidays in Winter. The occupants were surveyed monthly and asked: how they would rank the thermal comfort during the day (very poor/poor/normal/excellent); how they would rank the thermal comfort during the night (as above); whether they had used the ceiling fans or heaters (and, if so, when); whether they had experienced any day or set of days that were too hot or cold (and, if so, when); how many people had occupied the house (normal tenants/moreor fewer), with details; whether they were happy to continue with the study. Thermal comfort was assessed by ‘scoring’ each house according to the percentage of time that hourly temperature was within comfortable thresholds. Comfort thresholds were calculated using two methods: the comfort rules used within The The heating threshold (i.e. the lower comfort limit) varies by room use and activity. In living rooms, heating is required if temperature falls below The SET This section assesses the thermal performance of the Kalgoorlie-Boulder rammed-earth houses during Summer and Winter. The following questions were addressed: How differently did the houses perform? Did the residents perceive the houses to be thermally comfortable or not? For how much of the time and when were the houses thermally comfortable according to either simulations or measured data? What were the sources of differences between the comfort scores and occupant feedback? Survey results showed that both houses were comfortable Outdoor hourly temperatures during Summer and Winter are compared in Hourly temperatures were measured or simulated for each room in both houses throughout Summer and Winter. Here, we predominantly focus on those in the southern bedroom both for brevity and as it was the room with the largest RE or RE/iRE envelope (by metre of wall). Measured and simulated dry bulb temperature in the southern bedroom and outdoors during Summer are shown in   As for Summer, Simulated results in Thermal comfort scores for both houses using the    SET Overall, both the   Both houses received similar SET  Sleeping and living areas scored differently in Winter under  SET Overall, the All rooms required heating in Winter when simulated using  SET heating takes a lot of energy due to high thermal mass (density and specific heat cap) Several differences between measured and simulated performance were apparent. The most critical was This series examined the performance of two RE houses in Kalgoorlie-Boulder, Western Australia. The houses were built to optimise passive solar properties and comprised mixes of RE, iRE and lightweight insulated walls. A substantial sensor and logging array was installed in each house to monitor unoccupied and occupied performance. Performance was also simulated using the state-of-the-art thermal modelling software The houses' performance in Winter was poorly reflected by the The authors would like to thank Mr Adrian Welke of Troppo Architects for his input throughout the project. We would also like to thank Mr Barron Bonney of the Indigo Mining Services for his help with running initial experiments, on-site technical support and for running occupant surveys. Funding for this project was from the