The mathematical relationship (breakage equation) between the inlet and outlet particle-size distributions of a roller milling operation is described, and the breakage function linking the two is defined. The forms of the breakage equation and the breakage function are different for roller milling than for other comminution operations, such as hammer milling or ball milling. The breakage equation is discretised to give a matrix form, from which it is demonstrated that during roller milling of wheat, particles break independently of one another. This is an important assumption of breakage equations for many comminution operations and experimental results are presented, which confirm its applicability to the roller milling of wheat grains. Breakage matrices are successfully used to predict the outlet particle-size distributions from First Break milling of wheat. Later papers in this series consider the form of the breakage function.Size reduction is an important operation in many food processing applications, of which a prime example is wheat flour milling. In flour milling, the predominant comminution tool is the roller mill Roller mills give certain advantages in flour milling; corrugated rolls tend to shear open the wheat grain such that the bran remains large and the floury endosperm detaches and becomes small, allowing the bran to be removed by sifting. However, they have been studied relatively little in a process engineering sense, so that the approaches commonly applied to hammer and ball mills have not been effectively extended to roller mills. Significant, indeed critical, differences exist between roller mills and other mills The breakage equation for roller milling (which relates inlet and outlet particle-size distributions) is somewhat simpler than for other milling systems. However, by way of balance, the breakage function (which describes the particle-size distribution resulting from breakage of an inlet particle of a particular size) is somewhat more elusive. The form of the breakage function is the subject of Paper II in this series, and the effect of different wheat varieties the subject of Paper III. The current paper is concerned with the form and use of the breakage equation for roller milling; for the sake of clarity, this will be derived first, before introducing the extra complexity of breakage equations previously reported for other milling systems. The particle-size distribution of the feed to any milling system may be defined by a probability density function Similarly, the particle-size distribution of the outlet from a roller mill can be described as a function of outlet particle size Here,  While the form of the breakage equation is relatively straightforward, the form of the breakage function, Here, Many workers have questioned the applicability of the assumption of normalisation, for ball mills It is argued here that it is emphatically not the case that breakage in a roller mill of the type used for flour milling will result in normalisable progeny distributions. Particles must pass through a fixed narrow gap between two counter-rotating rolls. Clearly, for a given roll gap, a large particle will be broken extensively, while a small particle could pass through with only minimal attrition. Indeed, as a general rule, large inlet particles break to give small outlet particles, while small inlet particles result in relatively large outlet particles (see later). This is because larger inlet particles must be more extensively deformed to pass through the narrow roll gap. Thus, the ratio of particle size to roll gap is critical, and the concept of breakage functions that can be normalised is inapplicable. Austin (i) The concept of (ii) The concept of (iii) The concept of a (iv) The use of the above concepts in weight balances of the form: Most breakage equations have been derived for batch grinding or steady state continuous grinding in retention mills Here, the cumulative forms of the probability function, For steady state continuous grinding in a retention mill, such as a ball mill, the feed and product size distributions do not change with time, and can be related, for the fully mixed case, by: For a once-through grinder with no retention (such as the roller mill), the breakage equation is given by Austin In this case, In other words, the breakage function introduced here for roller milling incorporates the selection function. The question, thus, arises: is the selection function necessary for roller milling? The answer to this question depends firstly on whether all or only some of the particles passing through the mill are broken (i.e. selected) and secondly on whether For First Break roller milling of wheat, all particles are selected for breakage as they pass through the roller mills (no intact wheat grains survive in normal operation), so the selection function is, in principle, unity. However, because of the size and shape characteristics of wheat (and other cereal) grains, it is quite likely that some of the products of the breakage will still be of a sufficient size to be retained on the top sieve (i.e. the same one which retains the feed grains). Thus, purely from a sieve analysis point of view, it would appear that less than 100% of the feed had been selected for breakage. Clearly, there is some difficulty with the concept of a selection function in such cases. For roller milling of flour stocks or other materials, it remains to be determined whether selection functions are necessary to predict the output of milling. An assumption of all the above breakage equations is that particle breakage is independent, i.e. a particle of size Broadbent and Callcott In expanded form, Broadbent and Callcott As noted earlier, in roller milling, it is emphatically not the case that particles of different sizes break in the same general pattern, due to the strong interaction between roll gap and input particle size. A normalisable breakage function cannot, therefore, be assumed, from which to calculate the elements of the breakage matrix; each column of the matrix will be different. The elements of the breakage matrix can instead be determined experimentally by milling mono-sized or narrow size range fractions. The size distribution from each mono-sized fraction forms the corresponding column of the breakage matrix. The continuous form of the breakage equation for roller mills can be discretised to give the matrix form (see Having determined the breakage matrix by milling mono-dispersed fractions, the output for any actual input size distribution can be predicted using The following sections describe the experimental construction of breakage matrices for roller milling of wheat over a range of roll gaps. Breakage matrix predictions are then compared with results of milling mixed samples, and the form of the breakage function is estimated. In the following work, wheat was separated into fractions using the Satake SPU 125AU Purifier, and the fractions and whole samples milled on the Satake STR-100 Test Roller Mill (Satake, Japan). The Purifier is a tandem, triple-deck purifier that uses a combination of sieving and aspiration to separate flour stocks. In this work, it was used without aspiration and with slotted sieves to separate wheat by thickness into size fractions. The STR-100 Test Roller Mill is a single pass, fully variable test mill, which uses full scale diameter rolls (250-mm diameter, 100-mm length) to mimic commercial flour-milling operations. Each roll is independently speed controlled to provide a wide range of roll speeds and differentials. Roll gap is adjustable over the range 0.0–1.4 mm to a precision of 0.05 mm. Rolls are interchangeable, to allow coarse and fine fluted break rolls to be studied in sharp-to-sharp, dull-to-dull, etc., dispositions, as well as the use of smooth reduction rolls. Feed rate and position are also adjustable. Hereward wheat (1997 UK harvest, 11.4% protein, bulk density 78.1 kg/hl, moisture content 14.2%) was characterised using the Satake Grain Image Analyser, then separated into seven fractions using the Satake SPU 125AU Purifier. Slotted sieves were used to separate the grains by thickness. A total of 28 kg of wheat was separated, of which 98.8% was recovered from the purifier. The top and bottom fractions were discarded as being nonrepresentative (the top fraction tends to contain nonwheat material, and the bottom shrivelled or damaged kernels); these fractions, representing 2.5% of the total, were also removed from the original whole sample, hereafter referred to as the native feed. Batches of 1 kg of this native feed and of each of the fractions were conditioned to 16% moisture overnight. Samples were milled on the Satake STR-100 test roller mill. For these studies, a differential of 2.7 was used relative to a fast roll speed of 600 rpm. Rolls were fluted at 10.5 flutes/in. and operated in a sharp-to-sharp disposition. Five roll gap settings were studied: 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.7 mm. Roll gaps were set using the indicator on the mill and checked with a feeler gauge. Samples of 100 g were milled and collected for sieve analysis; the samples were fed at a rate of 375–500 kg/h, corresponding to 3750–5000 kg/h on a full length commercial mill. Sieve analysis was performed on a Simon plansifter using the entire milled stock. Samples were sieved for 3 min using a sieve stack comprising wire mesh sieves of size: 2057, 1676, 1204, 850, 600, 420, and 211 μm, along with a bottom collecting pan. Breakage matrices were constructed from the sieve analysis data for each roll gap. The breakage matrix for each roll gap was then used to predict the output particle-size distribution for the native feed. These predictions were compared with the actual milling output from the native feed for each roll gap.    Knowing the breakage matrix, it is possible to predict the output for any feed size distribution, or indeed for a mixture of, e.g., soft and hard wheats in a grist. The above approach could also be extended to include particle parameters other than size (for wheat, this would include grain hardness, density and protein content), and to predict output parameters other than size distribution (e.g., for flour stocks the bran, or ash, distribution is of interest). As noted earlier, the columns of the breakage matrix approximate the breakage function, In the next paper in this series, the form of  The ability to predict particle-size distributions from roller milling operations is essential for effective design of size reduction operations, such as flour milling and minerals processing. The breakage equation and breakage function have been defined for roller milling, and compared with those for other milling systems. The usefulness of the concept of selection in roller milling is questioned, and the necessity for confirming the assumption of independent milling of particles is highlighted. The breakage equation was discretised to give a matrix form similar to that of Broadbent and Callcott The authors gratefully acknowledge the Satake Corporation of Japan for their generous support of these studies, Philip Bunn for his experimental studies in support of this work, and the delegates on the short course “Particle Technology: Roller Milling Operations” (February 1998) who, in an ambitious combined experiment, produced the excellent breakage matrix predictions. Considering the outlet size distribution, measured using a stack of Similarly, for the inlet distribution measured using a stack of  Then substituting into The elements of the breakage matrix are given by: The elements of the breakage matrix also provide estimates of the breakage function. Considering So the elements of a column in the breakage matrix, divided by the sieve aperture range, approximate