This paper presents the petrographical, mineralogical and geochemical characteristics of the Carlés Cu–Mo–Au ore deposit, located in the Rio Narcea Gold Belt (Cantabrian zone of the Iberian Massif). It is related to a small postkinematic calc-alkaline monzogranite, which intrudes as a cedar-tree laccolith into the upper siliciclastic Furada Formation (late Silurian age) and the Nieva carbonates (early Devonian age). The Carlés deposit consists mainly of a well-developed exoskarn. The exoskarn is mostly calcic skarn made up of early garnet and pyroxene, and later amphibole, magnetite and sulfides. The presence of magnesian skarn has been recorded on the north side of the intrusion (roof of granitoid). Magnesian skarn consists of olivine, which is partially replaced by diopside and phlogopite and spinel. Close to the igneous rock, skarns are overprinted by strong potassic alteration. The ore is related to the skarn retrogradation and post-skarn veining and faulting. The skarn-related ore consists of earlier, uneconomic magnetite and Fe–As sulfide assemblages and economic Cu–Au–Ag (Bi–Te) assemblages on the eastern and western sides of the contact aureole, and uneconomic Mo and subeconomic Fe–As–Cu–Au–Ag on the northern side of the contact. Later subeconomic Fe–As–Sb–(Zn–Sn–Cu–Au–Ag) assemblages crosscut the granitoid, skarn, marbles and mineral associations developed previously, and are related to younger episodes of fracturing and faulting. Fluid inclusions in the first hydrothermal stage consist of an aqueous solution with significant contents of CO2, which reach unmixing conditions as a result of a decrease in P–T conditions. This led to two types of solutions, aqueous solutions of moderate to high salinity and hydrocarbon solutions of low salinity. This unmixing phenomenon controlled the first stage of gold precipitation. During the late hydrothermal activity, primary low-salinity-aqueous-carbonic inclusions with contrasting densities are found. They homogenize into vapor, critical or liquid phase. Homogenization temperatures are practically the same in all inclusions, indicating a boiling phenomenon that could control a new precipitation of gold.The Carlés copper–gold skarn deposit occurs in the Rio Narcea Gold Belt approximately 50 Most of the previous papers on the Carlés skarn focused on the eastern side of the igneous and metasomatic bodies, which are well exposed in the vicinity of the local road and were explored by AAC with a ramp and two galleries. The first reference to the Carlés skarn was given by The first paper describing the geometry of the intrusion and its relation to the skarn formation was from This paper focuses on the mineralogy, petrology and hydrothermal evolution of the Carlés deposit with emphasis on the distribution of the metasomatic facies and the geometry of the igneous body. Field data were combined with exhaustive sampling more than 35 000 The Carlés area is situated in the western part of the Somiedo–Correcilla Unit, within the Somiedo Nappe, near to the Narcea Antiform. The latter forms the western limit of the Cantabrian Zone. The geology of the area and the location of Carlés are shown in The sedimentary facies have had an important stratigraphic and lithologic control on the Carlés skarn development. In addition to the granitoid, the lithological control of the Carlés skarn also involves the late Silurian clastic sedimentary rocks of the Furada Formation, and the early Devonian carbonate rocks of the Rañeces Group. The Furada Formation is made up of 80–200 The position of major folds in the Somiedo nappe is controlled by the frontal and lateral ramps ( The Carlés intrusion occurs as a multiple laccolith (cedar tree laccolith) up to 800 The emplacement of the monzogranite body was apparently constrained by structural and stratigraphic factors. The structural factors include preferential intrusion along NE–SW fractures (and their NW–SE conjugates) ( Preferential emplacement of the monzogranite along the conjugate faults resulted in longitudinal projections NE and NW of the igneous body along the fault planes ( In the monzogranite, from the dome to the end of the tongues, a mineralogical and textural zoning is exposed. It is characterized by increasing silicification and development of secondary microcline away from the main body. The Carlés skarn is mostly an exoskarn ( In the East sector of the intrusion, two separate tongues of monzogranite provided excellent exposure of the ores and host rocks ( From the East and West sectors to the North sector (NE and NW parts of the intrusion), a skarn envelope is developed all around the main monzogranite body ( In the North sector of the Carlés intrusion, the monzogranite body intrudes the carbonates of Nieva Formation using the NE–SW and NW–SE conjugate fault systems. Here the NW fractures are the most important. In this part of Carlés skarn, the intrusion cuts a dolostone layer of the Nieva Formation giving way to a magnesian skarn up to 2 Pyroxene endoskarn alteration in the Carlés intrusion is limited to only a few decimeters in width. At different points, the minerals in the monzogranite are replaced by microcline, pyroxene (Hd 70–75) and biotite, but primary igneous textures are preserved. Such substitution, though very limited, allows us to recognize the presence of endoskarn. Development of endoskarn began with early potassic alteration resulting in replacement of the monzogranite minerals by microcline plates and scarce biotite inside of which partially corroded plagioclase remnants can be recognized. Later, all the remnant and new minerals are partially replaced by clinopyroxene. Pervasive overprinting of the bedded limestones by fine-grained garnet and pyroxene commonly results in a banded skarn ( The earliest changes observed in the Furada and Nieva Formations involve changes of siltstone and limestone to siliceous hornfels and marble, respectively. Remnant patches of marble appear near to the outer limit of skarn formation. This stage of hornfels and marble development is probably coeval with initial emplacement of the Carlés intrusion. Later on, metasomatic garnet and pyroxene skarn developed from the monzogranite. The textural and optical characteristics of garnet and pyroxene change through the skarn from the inner to the outer parts. Three types of garnet can be distinguished in the skarn ( (a) Microcrystalline garnets, dark brown in color. These are mostly isotropic and appear all along the skarn. They range in composition from Gr23 to Gr60, but most have compositions around Gr40. (b) Granular euhedral garnets, red to brown in color, with concentric zoned growth. Optically they are mostly anisotropic and their composition ranges from Gr54 to Gr84. (c) Garnets filling fractures and partially replacing previously formed garnets. These are brown in color and their composition ranges between Gr70 and Gr75. Along crystallization, garnet becomes coarse-grained and more birefringent and exhibits complex sector and concentric zonation patterns, which do not manifest any consistent compositional trends. Overall, the evolution is from andraditic composition at the beginning of the processes to grossular composition at the end. Isotropic cores of garnet (Gr40 to 50) and anisotropic rims (Gr60 to 70) are also commonly found. Three main types of pyroxene can be distinguished ( (a) Fine-crystalline diopsidic pyroxene (Hd 26–52), pale green in color. It replaces garnets along stratigraphic layers and forms alternating garnet–pyroxene bands ( (b) Granular pyroxenes, green in color. Their composition is intermediate to hedenbergite-rich (Hd 50–75), and they appear in the endoskarn or as veins cutting A-type pyroxene. (c) Granular pyroxenes, hedenbergite-rich (Hd 73–92), dark-green in color. They grow in veins, fractures and filling cavities ( Pyroxene, like garnet, becomes coarse-crystalline along crystallization and its overall evolution from a compositional point of view is from diopsidic to hedenbergitic members. C-type pyroxene forms later than the other two types and it is related to the retroskarn and sulfide mineralization process. Scapolite is found, in scarce quantities, in the east sector as subhedral crystals in the outer limits of the skarn formation, filling cavities in the garnet skarn. The average composition of Carlés scapolite based on microprobe analyses is 4.92(±1) From the limestones (outer part) to the monzogranite (inner part), marble grades into a pyroxene-rich skarn, giving way to a massive pyroxene skarn, which alternates with marble, following original sedimentary layers. Towards the inner part, garnet and later pyroxene appear forming alternating bands following stratigraphic layers up to 1 Magnesian skarn appears in the north part of the Carlés deposit. It is a banded skarn with phlogopite-rich bands alternating with diopside-rich bands and some layers, up to 20 Close to the skarn envelope around the monzogranite, the igneous rock is cut and altered by a stockwork of veins and microfractures, a few millimeters to a centimeter in thickness, and with preferred directions NNE–SSW and NNW–SSE. The veins are filled by quartz with some feldspar and carbonates together with early loellingite and arsenopyrite and some later molybdenite and chalcopyrite. Where chalcopyrite is present, the gold content increases. The monzogranite is partially sericitized and chloritized where this stockwork occurs. Retrograde alteration of the garnet–pyroxene skarn to form a pyroxene, amphibole, magnetite and feldspar assemblage is a very important process in the Carlés deposit. Two stages of mineral replacement can be distinguished: amphibole–magnetite first and potassium feldspar later, both accompanied by quartz and small amounts of albite. The two alterations are preferentially developed along a stockwork of microfractures and veins affecting both the monzogranite, as mentioned previously, and the inner zone of the garnet–pyroxene skarn ( The replacement of garnet and pyroxene bands by amphibole and magnetite is the first retrograde alteration developed in the Carlés skarn, although amphibole also locally replace remnants of marble inside the skarn. The amphibole zone mainly develops on garnet–pyroxene bands ( In the east part of Carlés, there are some variations in the spatial position of the amphibolite–magnetite zone from the previously mentioned galleries+40 level to the+70 level. At the +40 level, the amphibole alteration zone is closer to the monzogranite than at the +70 level. We can conclude that with increasing depth, amphibole alteration is closer to the monzogranite than in shallow zones. The composition of these amphiboles varies within the calcic amphibole types ( Two groups of amphibole can be distinguished namely: (a) Those with Na+K>0.5, Ca (b) Those with Na+K<0.5, Ca Feldspathic alteration is most developed in the inner part of the skarn, close to the monzogranite intrusion. Contrary to what happened with the endoskarn, feldspathic alteration in the exoskarn is the latest in time and replaced amphibole, garnet and pyroxene. It also appears to be related to quartz veins in the garnet zone. The most abundant feldspar in skarn is coarse reddish potassium feldspar (Or 92–99). Associated with this feldspathic alteration, silicification of garnet, pyroxene and amphibole occurred ( As indicated above, the Carlés deposit consists of two main ore zones: the Carlés East (Cu–Au) sector and the Carlés North (Mo) sector ( The first stage of metallic mineralization in the Carlés deposit appears to be more recent but directly related to the formation of the silicate skarn previously described. Magnetite, sulfides and gold mineralization in the Carlés skarn follow coarse crystalline pyroxene (C type), amphibole, quartz, K-feldspar and calcite deposition, processes that continued beyond the main period of garnet–pyroxene formation. Although some sulfides were also deposited prior to and after this main period in the skarn evolution, they are not generally abundant, except for some pyrrhotite–arsenopyrite occurrences in the outer parts of the skarn. The most abundant opaque minerals present are magnetite, chalcopyrite, bornite, arsenopyrite, loellingite, pyrite, pyrrhotite and molybdenite. Gold has a mineralogical expression essentially as electrum, but petzite and calaverite have been locally observed as minor gold-bearing constituents of the ore. Other accessory minerals are wittichenite, hessite, bismuth, bismuthinite, joseite-b, tetradymite, sphalerite, fahlore, stannite and several other Cu–Sn sulfides, and ilmenite. Above all, metallic mineralization at Carlés is most important in lenses within amphibole–pyroxene; in contrast, in amphibole–garnet zones, it is normally restricted to narrow veins and small pockets. Magnetite was the first metallic mineral formed. It is deposited mostly at the outer limit of the amphibole zone, and forms stratigraphic bands, several centimeters to a decimeter in thickness. Locally it is cross-cut by pyroxene–sulfide veins. After magnetite, the deposition of loellingite, pyrrhotite and the first arsenopyrite began. Arsenopyrite is more abundant in the inner zone and pyrrhotite in the outer zone, close to the marble. The next deposited minerals were copper (chalcopyrite, bornite) and gold mineralization, which formed together with bismuth minerals. This is the most important economic association. The distribution of copper minerals changes from the inner zones to the outer zones. In the inner zones close to the monzogranite body, chalcopyrite is the most abundant. In the intermediate zone, spatially coincident with amphibole, bornite with important amounts of chalcopyrite appears. In the outer zones, copper minerals are scarce. Chalcopyrite and bornite grew simultaneously, together with bismuth–gold minerals and they partially replace the minerals previously formed. In the inner zones, gold and bismuth minerals are located in fractures affecting arsenopyrite and loellingite crystals together with some chalcopyrite. In the intermediate zone, gold minerals are related to bornite and the richest zones are located where bornite appears with loellingite. Where arsenic minerals are not associated with copper minerals, there is no gold or bismuth. In the east part of the skarn, around the monzogranite body and outside the monzogranite tongues, there is an ore zone consisting of loellingite–arsenopyrite, bismuth, bismuthinite, joseite-b, tetradimite and gold with only small amounts of chalcopyrite. The mineralization is related to amphibole alteration of pyroxene and garnet along a network of microfractures filled by quartz and some carbonates. The gold content of this zone can reach up to 145 The following metallic mineral associations occur in the skarn: (a) (b) (c) (d) Two main ore zones can be outlined. Economic gold and copper ores are located mainly on the eastern side of the exoskarn, whereas economic molybdenum ores are located on the northern and northwestern sides. Subeconomic to non-economic ores are widespread along the exoskarn and endoskarn, and locally away from the skarn, alongside several later fracture zones. Analysis of As, Ag, Au and Cu in more than 10 000 samples was performed on Carlés drill cores. No correlation between the As content and gold content was found in the skarn. A correlation is found between the Ag and Cu content ( Gold ores can be divided into four main groups, as a function of Cu–As ratios: (a) High Cu, high As. These ores contain averages of 1.4 (b) High Cu, low As. These ores contain averages of 1.7 (c) Low Cu, high As. These ores contain averages of 0.3 (d) Low Cu, low As. These ores contain averages of 0.3 These four groups involve early and late ores in lodes, pods, veins and disseminations superimposed on the prograde skarn, though always late with respect to it. In general terms, a positive correlation between the As/Cu and Au/Ag ratios is evident. Ag is positively correlated with Cu, but no clear correlation can be directly established between Au and any of the main ore metals. Molybdenum ores on the northern side of the skarn involve coarse-crystalline molybdenite in the skarn assemblages. They have subeconomic grades of gold. In addition, late, post-skarn veins with high Sb, Mo and As and subordinate Cu, Sn, Zn, Bi, Te and Au are up to now of little economic interest due to their limited extent, although gold and molybdenum can reach locally high grades. The metallic mineral distribution is different in the north area of the Carlés intrusion, along the NNW–SSE fracture zone. This zone made up the roof of the intrusive body and from it and along stratigraphic layers, a garnet–pyroxene–amphibole skarn was formed with some marble remnants inside. The geometry of this skarn is like an umbrella over the intrusion ( Unlike the other areas, in the amphibolitized zone related to the NNW–SSE fracture, there is molybdenite accompanying gold instead of copper minerals. The molybdenite has approximately the same distribution as copper minerals in the other areas. Molybdenite skarn is also found developed as an umbrella in the upper part of the intrusion. A zonation between copper and molybdenum can be defined, copper minerals crystallizing in the lower and middle part of the intrusion, and molybdenite only just in the roof. Skarn in the Carlés deposit is zoned in terms of garnet, pyroxene, amphibole, K-feldspar and metallic mineral abundance, their spatial association and/or composition. These zonations are defined by the presence of silicates, calcsilicates and metallic minerals. In the Carlés skarn, the following mineral assemblages are differentiated: I. (a) Garnet–pyroxene–feldspar–quartz–arsenopyrite–chalcopyrite. This is the innermost mineral association and is characterized by abundant quartz and secondary microcline. Garnet (Gs23 to Gs40) is isotropic, scarce and replaced by pyroxene (Di63 to Di 78) and pink microcline along crystal rims. Closer to the outer sections, amphibole is present and microcline and quartz decreases sharply. Pyroxene forms centimeter- to meter-wide layers and fine-grained crystalline aggregates. Together with quartz and secondary microcline, pyroxene is also found in cross-cutting veinlets. Other minerals include apatite and titanite. Arsenopyrite (Apy 1), with some replaced crystals of loellingite, and chalcopyrite, occurs as veins and lenses several centimeters long. The average Au content in this mineral association is low (up to 1 (b) Olivine–diopside–phlogopite–spinel–magnetite–arsenopyrite–chalcopyrite. Magnesian skarn is only up to 2 II. (a) Garnet–pyroxene–amphibole–magnetite–loellingite–arsenopyrite–chalcopyrite–bornite. Previously described by (b) Garnet–pyroxene–amphibole–molybdenite–arsenopyrite–loellingite–magnetite. This mineral association only appears in the uppermost part of the intrusive body in the Carlés North molybdenum area. Silicate mineralogy is the same as previously described and the most important difference is substitution of molybdenite for copper minerals. The other sulfide and gold minerals are the same. III. Garnet–pyroxene–arsenopyrite–pyrrhotite. This outermost mineral association has sharp boundaries and is characterized by lack of amphibole and only a small amount of K-feldspar. Red garnet is euhedral, has anisotropic rims rich in Gs, and is partially replaced by pyroxene and scarce microcline (in the internal section) and calcite (close to the marble). Arsenopyrite (Apy 2) and minor pyrrhotite are the most abundant sulfides. Pyrrhotite is commonly transformed to pyrite, marcasite and magnetite. Cavity-filling minerals include microcline, calcite, quartz, minor scapolite, arsenopyrite (Apy 2), and pyrrhotite. No significant Au values have been observed. This is the outermost skarn mineral association and beyond it we only found marble and hornfels layers up to 3 The most recent ore assemblages to form at Carlés include quartz–carbonate cross-cutting veins and lodes that cut across the monzogranite, skarn and limestone. Their preferred orientation is NW–SE. These veins are made up of a first quartz, mostly idiomorphic and zoned, with a later and more abundant carbonate, mostly calcite ( Magnesian skarn is also affected by this hydrothermal alteration. The most important mineral transformations are diopside to chlorite–serpentine, olivine to serpentine and phlogopite to chlorite. This stage of alteration is different in the Carlés North molybdenum area, where these latest events develop an intense prehnite alteration, which affects with special intensity the areas with endoskarn, the skarns being altered mostly to prehnite, actinolite and chlorite. The presence in the deposit of three different associations containing arsenopyrite enables formation temperatures to be estimated. The first two associations, both deposited after the quartz of the first hydrothermal stage, are Ccp–Apy (intergrown and replacing loellingite) in the innermost zones (Apy 1) and Po–Apy (intergrown and replacing loellingite) in the outermost zones (Apy 2) ( The measured decrease in As concentration in arsenopyrite (Apy 2) ( The As content of the arsenopyrite in quartz deposited with pyrite, chalcopyrite and sulfosalts (Apy 3) allows temperatures below 300°C to be established ( The first studies of fluid inclusions at the Carlés area were performed by In a later paper, In this paper, we study fluid inclusions in idiomorphic and zoned quartz associated with carbonates and related to the late hydrothermal stages ( In the present work, D-type inclusions are primary carbonic low-salinity aqueous in nature in which contrasting densities are found. Low density inclusions show two phases (L These temperatures are higher than those estimated using As content in the arsenopyrite of the second hydrothermal stage. Taking into account that quartz formed previously to arsenopyrite (250–300°C), the data are in agreement. All these data are in agreement with a gradual cooling of the system with an initial unmixing (first hydrothermal stage) and later boiling phenomenon (second hydrothermal stage), which could be related to a development of expansive fracturing. As  On the whole, the metasomatic evolution of the skarn agrees with the model of The earliest and most widespread mineral in the skarn is garnet (grossular–andradite). Its composition, however, undergoes gradual variation and, with time, it changes to a grossular-rich member with a Fe-rich core. During the second metasomatic stage, the pyroxene replaces garnet. Pyroxene forms during several episodes. Its composition varies with time from fine crystalline diopside (Hd 52–26), which replaces garnets, to coarser crystalline hedenbergite (Hd 65–95), which mainly occurs in veins and fractures. Comparing the composition of garnet and pyroxene ( The first hydrothermal stage is a retrograde alteration of previously formed minerals. It is characterized by formation of: (a) hastingsite–ferropargasite amphibole ( The mineralization begins with the formation of magnetite bands, locally cut by hedenbergite-rich pyroxene veinlets (Hd 96–75), which also cut the fine crystalline pyroxene bands. During a later stage, deposition of the rest of the metallic minerals begins with loellingite, which is partially replaced by arsenopyrite. Next, the Cu sulfides (chalcopyrite–bornite) are deposited together with gold, bismuth and silver minerals. The highest concentrations of gold found (up to 25 The position and association of metallic minerals defines a mineralogical zonation. Arsenopyrite with chalcopyrite and scarce electrum mainly appear in the inner parts, close to the monzogranite. In the next zone and related to amphibole, we find magnetite+chalcopyrite first, and towards the outer zone, chalcopyrite+bornite+magnetite. In the outer part, and related to the skarn envelope, outside the monzogranite tongues, electrum and bismuth minerals appear, accompanied by loellingite, arsenopyrite and scarce chalcopyrite. This evolution of the metallic mineralization could indicate a progressive increase of the During the first hydrothermal stage, which took place at high temperature (>400°C), gold was probably transported as a chloride complex and precipitated as a result of unmixing phenomena due to cooling ( The last hydrothermal stage is produced along fractures and faults affecting both the monzogranite and the skarn and produces chloritization of garnet, pyroxene and amphibole, and sericitization of feldspar. It is characterized by the association of quartz, calcite, arsenopyrite, pyrite, and small amounts of chalcopyrite, molybdenite, sphalerite, stannite and jamesonite. During this second hydrothermal stage, at lower temperature (<400°C), the fluid inclusions are low salinity, aqueous and carbonic. In this case, gold probably was transported as a bisulfide complex and deposited either by loss of sulfur, which separated as sulfides, or by loss of H Fluid inclusion data agree with this evolution, with gradual cooling of the system with initial unmixing (first hydrothermal stage) and later boiling phenomena (second hydrothermal stage), which could be related to a development of expansive fracturing. Unmixing phenomena could provoke a first gold precipitation. Later boiling could favor a second gold precipitation. We thank Rio Narcea Gold Mines for their support of this study, both financially and for data provided. We thank Belen Fernández for her help with the drawing. This work was also financed by the CICYT project PB96/0555 (Educational Science Ministry of Spain). We thank the reviewers and editors for their encouraging suggestions, which have improved significantly the content and clarity of the paper.