      The field of nutrition was largely dominated in the nineteenth century by German chemists, led by Justus von Liebig [ Other reports revealed that microorganic nutrients might be present. The development of scurvy in mariners was a common problem. This disease was prevented by the consumption of limes on British ships (hence, the term “Limey” to describe British sailors) and sauerkraut and fruits on other ships. This led Hoist and Frohlich to conclude that scurvy could be prevented by a nutrient present in these foods [ A key experiment demonstrating essential micronutrients was one carried out at the Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station, engineered by Stephen Moulton Babcock and carried out by E. B. Hart supported by McCollum and Steenbock [ The conclusion of the Wisconsin Experiment Station study was that there are unknown nutrients present in corn and not found in wheat that are essential for life and reproduction. This led E. B. Hart, Chairman of Biochemistry at Wisconsin, to conceive that a search for these nutrients must begin. Professor McCollum was asked to search for these nutrients using small experimental animals. McCollum and Davis demonstrated there was present in butter fat a substance that prevented xerophthalmia and was also required for growth. They termed this “a lipin-soluble growth factor” [  The disease rickets was very likely known in antiquity but was described in the 15th century as revealed by later writings. Whistler first provided a clear description of rickets in which the skeleton was poorly mineralized and deformed [ With the discovery of the vitamins, Sir Edward Mellanby in Great Britain began to reason that rickets might also be a disease caused by a dietary deficiency [ McCollum, who had moved to Johns Hopkins from Wisconsin, continued his experiments on the fat-soluble materials. McCollum used aeration and heating of cod liver oil to destroy the vitamin A activity or the ability to support growth and to prevent xerophthalmia [ At the same time that Sir Edward Mellanby was carrying out the experiments in dogs, Huldshinsky [ Steenbock and Hart had noted the importance of sunlight in restoring positive calcium balance in goats [ From irradiation of mixtures of plant sterols, Windaus and colleagues isolated a material that was active in healing rickets [ Windaus’ group provided chemical syntheses of the vitamin D compounds, confirming their structures and thus ending the era of the isolation and identification of nutritional forms of vitamin D and making them available for the treatment of disease. For his contributions, Windaus received the 1938 Nobel Prize in chemistry. Besides bone mineralization, the earliest discovered function of vitamin D is its important role in the absorption and utilization of calcium. The first report of this finding was in the early 1920s by Orr and colleagues [ For many years, investigators have attempted to show that vitamin D plays a role directly on the mineralization process of the skeleton. However, early work by Rowland and Kramer [ A final site of vitamin D action to elevate plasma calcium is in the distal renal tubule. Although experiments were suggestive of a role for vitamin D in increasing renal tubule reabsorption of calcium, a clear demonstration of this did not occur until the 1980s at the hands of Yamamoto With discovery of the receptor for the vitamin D hormone (described in The true pioneer of vitamin D metabolism was Egan MA Kodicek working at the Dunn Nutritional Laboratory in Cambridge U.K. Kodicek used a bioassay at first to study the fate of the vitamin D molecule and found that much vitamin D was converted to biologically inactive products [ Professor Kodicek then began to synthesize radiolabeled vitamin D By 1968, the first active metabolite of vitamin D was isolated in pure form and chemically identified as 25-hydroxyvitamin D Proof that 1,25(OH) Immediately after the identification of 1,25(OH) The next important step was the demonstration that it is parathyroid hormone that activates 1α-hydroxylation of 25OHD During the course of identification of 1,25(OH) Zull and colleagues provided evidence that the function of vitamin D is blocked by transcription and protein inhibitors [ Cloning of the cDNAs encoding the vitamin D receptor in a human and mouse permitted the isolation of the gene encoding the vitamin D receptor [ From a historical point of view, one of the most important discoveries was vitamin D-dependency rickets type II [ However, the discovery of vitamin D responsive elements in the osteocalcin, osteopontin, preproparathyroid, and 24-OHase genes represent important This work was supported in part by a fund from the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation.