Intra articular fractures of the distal aspect of the tibia are amongst the most complex injury of the leg and represent a major treatment challenge.1 The management of these injuries is controversial and published outcomes vary dramatically from method to method and also from author to author (Fig. 1(A) and (B)).
                  Everything about these fractures seems uncertain even including the use of the name ‘Pilon Fracture’. McCormack defines all fractures involving the horizontal weight-bearing surface of the distal tibia as tibial plafond fractures.2 She defines fractures of the pilon as being fractures of the supra-malleolar portion of the distal tibia which usually extend into the plafond. The most commonly accepted definition, however, is that suggested by Tile as being a fracture of the distal tibial metaphysis involving the ankle joint.3Classical open reduction internal fixation remains the method of choice for Ruedi type I injuries with minimal soft-tissue trauma given that surgery is carried out by experts within 4–6 A failure to respect the soft tissues will result in unacceptable results in internal fixation. In Ruedi type III injuries a worse prognosis is inevitable. Cases must be assessed on an individual basis and a treatment pathway meticulously planned out in advance. Some cases maybe suitable for classic internal fixation, others are best dealt with by limited internal fixation and hybrid external fixation. Traction and early motion will not give such good results as either open reduction or internal fixation or the use of an external fixator in experienced hands. However, traction and early motion is a very safe option and remains the method of choice in developing countries. This fracture is rare and the complications are related directly to the surgical treatment given to the patient. This fracture is not appropriate for treatment by surgical trainees unless working under direct supervision. Finally it must be accepted that some fractures are unfixable. These fractures will inevitably be treated by an arthrodesis which is best delayed until soft-tissue conditions are optimum. Many classification systems of Pilon fractures have been described of which the AO/OTA classification is the one most commonly quoted. Although this classification is the most comprehensive, the most commonly used classification is that of Ruedi and Algower ( Pilon Fractures, are rare injuries representing 5–7% of all tibial fractures. These fractures are usually caused by high energy trauma. Two distinct mechanisms of injury exist. The commonest mechanism of injury is a compression force between the talus and the tibial plafond. This may occur following a fall from a great height when the talus impacts on to the tibial plafond initiating a fracture which extends up the tibial shaft. A similar mechanism of injury exists in road traffic accidents where the foot is often trapped and a compression force is applied across the ankle joint. These injuries are all high energy and because of this open fractures are common and severe soft-tissue damage is inevitable. Significant numbers of these patients sustain pilon fractures in the context of polytrauma and in these cases the management of other life-threatening injuries takes priority over the management of the pilon fracture. This injury may also occur as a result of tortional forces. In these cases the energy required to create the fracture is less and the resultant soft-tissue damage is also considerably less. The classic mechanism of such tortional injuries is ski trauma, but the design of ski boots has significantly reduced the incidence of these fractures since the 1970s. High energy compression type injuries create severe comminution, impaction and extensive damage to the articular cartilage of the distal tibia. Torsional injuries tend to be less complex with comparatively large bone fragments and reduced or absent impaction. The damage to the articular cartilage is clean edged and the articular cartilage usually remains attached to the subchondral bone. Because these two mechanisms of injury create fundamentally different fracture ‘personalities’ it is to be expected that treatment regimes suitable for one group of fractures may prove inappropriate when applied to the other. Unfortunately many authors lump all distal tibial fractures with intra-articular extensions into a single group with regard to describing treatment protocols and the inclusion of two fundamentally different fracture patterns within a single classification accounts for much of the confusion in published literature. There is a significant risk of compartment syndrome developing following a Pilon fracture. This is perhaps most common in crushing injuries. The diagnosis of a compartment syndrome is clinical and based primarily on pain that seems disproportionate to the known pathology. Given that the Pilon fracture is perhaps the most devastating injury of the tibia, clearly the definition of inappropriate pain is hard to make and a high index of suspicion and willingness to measure compartment pressures is advisable to avoid missing the diagnosis. Consideration should be given to routinely measuring compartment pressures in unconscious patients with tibial Pilon injuries. The diagnosis of a tibial Pilon injury can be made with two standard radiographs—an AP and a lateral. The displacement of the fracture, however, usually means that these films give two oblique views of the distal tibia and fibula. Because immediate surgery is a great rarity in these injuries and delay in carrying out surgery is usually essential to allow soft-tissue recovery it is rarely necessary to rely on plain radiology alone for surgical planning. The complexity of fracture patterns means that further investigations are usually extremely helpful in planning treatment. The most useful addition investigation is a CT scan. Meticulous preoperative planning is always indicated in the management of these injuries. However, even with full investigation severe comminution often means that the surgeon may encounter a different situation what he was expecting when the fracture is exposed. It is therefore vital that surgery should not begin without having a full range of instruments and implants available. The use of autologous bone graft is usually required in impacted fractures and a suitable bone graft donor site needs to be prepared. If using a tourniquet be aware that operating times are long and it is probably best to harvest the bone graft before applying the tourniquet. Despite the fact that it is now over 30 years since the publication of the landmark paper by Ruedi and Algower, Historically fractures of the lower end of the tibia into the ankle joint were regarded as ‘not being amenable to internal fixation’. In the 1950s and 1960s attempts at internal fixation of these fractures usually led to poor results. Prior to the 1970s the accepted ‘safe’ method of treating these injuries was to apply traction to the fracture by the use of an os calcis pin. After a period of traction, early active mobilisation of the ankle was encouraged. The rationale of this treatment is that of ligamentotaxis. Longitudinal traction will reduce all bone fragments which have soft-tissue attachments. The method will therefore not reduce those fracture fragments that have no soft-tissue attachments. Impacted articular fragments which have been driven up into the tibial metaphysis do not have soft-tissue attachments and these fragments will not reduce with longitudinal traction. Treatment with longitudinal traction therefore often results in the fibula being brought out to length together with the lateral portion of the articular surface of the tibia, which is attached to the fibula via the inferior tibio-fibula ligaments. Impacted fracture fragments do not reduce and defects in the articular surface of the tibia fill in with a mixture of fibrous tissue and fibro cartilage. A degree of secondary congruence of the joint is obtained because the intact talar dome moulds the healing soft-tissues into a reciprocal shape by movement. This method is however, also associated with subluxation of the talus anteriorly on the distal tibia. Post-traumatic osteoarthrosis and stiffness are the rule, but functional results are often reasonable for several years after injury. By the 1960s there was good experimental and clinical experience to show that the optimal treatment of all intra-articular fractures should consist of anatomical reduction of the joint surface, rigid fixation and early active mobilisation. The pioneering work of the AO Group Clinical experience had shown that a failure to obtain anatomical reduction was usually associated with poor initial function and a high risk of post-traumatic osteoarthrosis. This finding has subsequently been confirmed for a variety of intra-articular injuries including fractures of the os calcis Given their background in experimental research and their commitment to compression techniques, it was inevitable that the AO Group would develop methods of treating Pilon fractures by open reduction and internal fixation. Although the principles of anatomical reductions, rigid fixation and early active mobilisation were easily understood, the problems of how to translate these principles into reality in the presence of comminution and impaction were more difficult. By the late 1960s Algower developed a reproducible technique. He realised that for successful joint reconstruction to take place it was necessary to reassemble the tibial plafond based on a piece of the distal tibia that was known to be in the correct anatomical position. He had observed that in the majority of pilon fractures the lateral intra-articular fragment of the tibia was still attached to the distal fibula by intact inferior tibio-fibula ligaments. If the fibula could therefore be anatomically reduced and fixed reconstruction of the distal tibia could be carried out using this lateral intra-articular fragment as the cornerstone. In turn, this of course meant, the first step of reconstructing the articular surface of the distal tibia lay in fixing the fibula anatomically in those cases in which the fibula was fractured. In October 1969 Restoration of length and axis of fibula, usually using plate osteosynthesis. Reconstruction of the articular surface of the distal end of the tibia. Filling in of the defect resulting from impaction using cancellous autograft. Support of the medial side of the tibia by buttress plating to prevent a late varus deformity. In their series all patients were operated on as emergencies within 6 The publication of this article revolutionised thought as to the management of this injury and the techniques advocated by Ruedi and Algower were widely followed in the 1970s. Initial results were encouraging. However, despite these encouraging results many surgeons started to experience significant complication rates when following this treatment protocol. Typical papers published in the 1970s and 1980s reported non-union rates of up to 18%, superficial infections of 20%, osteomyelitis rates of 17%, arthrodesis rates of 27%, BK amputation rates of 6%, post-traumatic osteoarthrosis rates of 54% and mal-unions in 42% of patients. In an effort to assess the true incidence of complications encountered in the treatment of Pilon fractures McFerran looked at 52 tibial pilon fractures treated in his institution in the late 1980s. By the 1980s, published work gave conflicting advice as to the optimal management of these injuries. Ruedi and Algower’ s classic paper suggested that open reduction and internal fixation carried out as an emergency procedure was a safe and reliable operation which could be expected to give good to excellent results in three quarters of patients. McFerrans paper would suggest that the treatment of pilon fractures by open reduction and internal fixation was associated with an unacceptably high level of operative complications and generally poor results. How then can these two landmark papers be reconciled? Analysis of the results of treatment in all forms of trauma, when two groups of patients are being compared, is bedevilled by one common problem. The patient populations that are being compared may be significantly different. As Schatzker puts it, ‘most trauma research attempts to compare apples with oranges’. With regard to these two papers the patient population being studied were radically different. Seventy-five per cent of Ruedi and Algowers patients suffered ski trauma. The classification of these injuries is not clear from the original paper but it is reasonable to assume that significant numbers of these patients were Ruedi I and II type injuries. All McFerrans patients were the results of high-speed road traffic accidents. The vast majority of his patients were Ruedi type IIIs. It should be noted from McFerrans paper that the incidence of complications was related to the grading of the fracture and that the incidence of complications increased significantly in type III injuries. Ruedi and Algowers patients were treated by one or other of the authors, both extremely experienced and dedicated trauma surgeons. McFerrans patients were treated by supervised residents. Ruedi and Algowers patients had a short evacuation time between sustaining trauma and reaching the hospital. McFerrans patients were often delayed and were frequently polytraumatised. It would appear therefore that the patient populations were significantly different. It is clear that the results of open reduction and internal fixation when performed by experienced surgeons using classic techniques produce excellent results in torsional injuries. It is also clear that if these techniques are applied by non-specialist surgeons in high velocity trauma the results are radically different. The most commonly encountered problem following open reduction and internal fixation of fractures of the tibial plafond is breakdown of the wound. The majority of Pilon fractures are caused by high energy trauma with the upper surface of the talus moving proximally and smashing the lower end of the tibia, much as a hammer hits an anvil. This violent force also has the effect of stripping soft tissues from the bone and destroying the vascular connections between the skin and the underlying soft-tissues. The classical surgical technique as described by Algower and Ruedi is a two-incision technique. The first incision is centred over the fibula, the second over the antero-medial aspect of the tibia. A 7 The high incidence of soft-tissue complications following surgery led surgeons to consider changing three elements of the original treatment protocol. The vascularity of the overlying skin will in most cases recover within 10–14 days of the initial trauma. Treatment protocols were therefore developed to temporarily fix the Pilon fracture using an external fixator and delay open reduction and internal fixation until recovery of soft-tissues. The classical tibial approach for the treatment of this injury by open reduction and internal fixation is a gently curved antero-medial incision. This approach allows excellent visualisation of the distal tibia. Meticulous handling of the soft tissues reduces trauma but nevertheless this approach inevitably creates significant additional soft-tissue damage. For this reason it is clear that more minimal access approaches have considerable theoretical benefit with regard not only to soft-tissue healing but also fracture union. Unfortunately indirect reduction techniques combined with percutaneous fixation under image intensifier control can only be carried out where soft-tissue attachments exist to the fracture fragments and this does not commonly occur. These techniques are therefore most useful in Ruedi I and II injuries where there are large bone fragments with intact soft-tissue attachments. Supplementary percutaneous fixation can also be usefully added into a conventional open reduction and internal fixation. For example, the lag screws used to fix the medial malleolar fragment are often best inserted by a separate stab incision overlying the medial malleolus to avoid excess tension on the medial side of the distal tibial incision. If impaction has occurred minimal access through a limited anterior approach is possible but most surgeons experience is that in the end a limited surgical approach comes closely to resemble the classic approach advocated by Ruedi and Algower so that the advantages of limited exposure are often more apparent than real. The classic clover leaf or T plates used to buttress the tibial metaphysis are bulky implants. Attempts have been made to create lower profile implants but many authors have felt that the biomechanical function of the buttress plate can be more safely achieved by the use of an external fixator. Uniframe fixators applied to the proximal tibia and the os calcis do not invade the zone of injury and therefore pin track sepsis is less of a problem to the patient when it occurs. However, uniframe fixators control AP movements poorly and do not of course allow any movement of the ankle joint, since they span the joint to achieve stability. Hybrid external fixators using fine wire in the distal tibia allow more accurate control of the metaphyseal element of the fracture. Because the fixator does not cross the joint a degree of early movement is possible. Sepsis around the wires is common and potentially serious since the wires pass through the zone of injury. In practice, however, wire sepsis seems not be a major clinical problem. Intra-medullary nail fixation of tibial Pilon fractures has been tried by nailing enthusiasts. In these techniques custom made nails are used whose distal transverse locking bolt can be inserted within 4 It is clear that the dilemma in Pilon fractures lies in the fact that what is desired is anatomical reduction of the fracture and stable fixation but if this is done by conventional means the complication rate is unacceptably high. The resolution to this dilemma may lie in getting away from a cook-book approach to the management of these complex injuries and treating each individual fracture according to the nature of the fracture, its associated soft-tissue problems and the resources and experience of the treating team. The key is clearly the soft-tissue injury. It is perhaps best to regard the Pilon fracture as a devastating soft-tissue injury which just happens to include a fracture. Given that the vast majority of these patients will have a significant soft-tissue injury, immediate surgery makes no sense except in two circumstances. Open fractures clearly need to have their wounds debrided and their fractures stabilised. This usually means the use of an external fixator, but the insertion of a lag screw through an open wound may often considerably aid stability. The second situation is that of a low velocity spiral injury of the Ruedi 1 variety, which is most commonly seen in ski trauma. If the patient is seen shortly after the accident then immediate open reduction and internal fixation with meticulous care of soft tissues will usually give excellent results. The majority of patients will benefit from a delay in carrying out their surgery of up to 14 days. In most cases it is safe to carry out immediate surgery to fix the fibula and apply a bridging external fixator to hold the fracture out to length. The classic fixator is a uniframe applied to the proximal tibia and os calcis. If this fixator is used, with or without primary fixation of the fibula, a significant number of cases develop subluxation of the talus anteriorly on the tibia. It is probably safer, therefore, to use a triangular frame with pins applied to the proximal tibia and to the 1st and 5th metatarsal bone ( How do you know when the soft-tissues have recovered? Clearly this depends on the severity of the soft-tissue injury, but as a rule once wrinkling of the skin is seen, soft-tissue recovery has started. Note, however, that the presence of a fracture blister containing blood-stained fluid is an indication that there is, in effect, full thickness skin loss under the blister. The choice of definitive fixation depends on the comminution of the fracture. Highly comminuted fractures with depression of the articular surface cannot usually be reconstituted by indirect means. Limited access surgery in the end always seems to involve an incision of at least 5 The choice of whether to use a hybrid external fixator or a buttress plate again depends on the associated soft-tissue trauma and the methods chosen for fixation of the intra-articular element of the fracture pattern. The use of a hybrid external fixator is associated with a significant incidence of pin track sepsis (20%). Fortunately pin track sepsis is rarely associated with deep sepsis. The function of articular cartilage is to allow movement of the joint and to conduct load. The nutrition of articular cartilage requires some load to be carried out through the joint. Strict non-weight bearing, therefore, is detrimental to articular cartilage although it maybe necessary if the quality of the fixation is inadequate to take partial load. Most post-operative regimes involve 6–8 weeks of non-weight bearing followed by 20 Because significant numbers of Pilon fractures are unfixable due to severe comminution and/or a lack of good bone stock, the case for primary arthrodesis has been suggested. There would seem to be little indication for primary arthrodesis since such an operation would submit the patient to all hazards of the soft-tissue complications of open reduction internal fixation. If, therefore, a decision is made to go for an arthrodesis it is probably best to do this as a staged procedure a number of weeks after the injury when good soft-tissue conditions have been obtained. Patient A is a 34-year-old gentleman who fell approximately 5 Patient B was a 54-year-old male involved in a road traffic accident. He was the driver of a bus involved in a head on collision. His pilon fracture occurred on the right leg which was on the brake pedal at the moment of impact. Classical open reduction internal fixation remains the method of choice for Ruedi type I injuries with minimal soft-tissue trauma given that surgery is carried out by experts within 4–6 A failure to respect the soft tissues will result in unacceptable results in internal fixation. In Ruedi type III injuries a worse prognosis is inevitable. Cases must be assessed on an individual basis and a treatment pathway meticulously planned out in advance. Some cases maybe suitable for classic internal fixation, others are best dealt with by limited internal fixation and hybrid external fixation. Traction and early motion will not give such good results as either open reduction or internal fixation or the use of an external fixator in experienced hands. However, traction and early motion is a very safe option and remains the method of choice in developing countries. This fracture is rare and the complications are related directly to the surgical treatment given to the patient. This fracture is not appropriate for treatment by surgical trainees unless working under direct supervision. Finally it must be accepted that some fractures are unfixable. These fractures will inevitably be treated by an arthrodesis which is best delayed until soft-tissue conditions are optimum. The successful management of Pilon fractures depends on an accurate assessment of the fracture in the context of the patient. Success depends not only on these fractures but also on the equipment available for the treating team and their experience. If a surgeon feels that all tibial Pilon injuries should be treated in one particular way then he or she will be denying their patient optimal management. Pilon fractures vary from those rare easy cases with minimally displaced big blocks of bone which can be treated by percutaneous screw fixation through to open contaminated, highly comminuted high energy injuries where the surgeons sole aim should be the prevention of infection, the restoration of soft tissues and the alignment of the bones such as to allow a delayed arthrodesis of the ankle to take place safely. There is clear evidence that if a unit wishes successfully to take on these difficult and challenging patients then members of the Team will need to include those with expertise in conventional open reduction and internal fixation, limited open reduction and internal fixation, percutaneous closed reduction and internal fixation, hybrid external fixation and conventional bridging external fixation. As in most fracture surgery the most important tool available to the surgeon is his brain.