The results of joint uranium and rhenium sorptions from the solutions with strong base anion exchange resin Ambersep A920U (herein after A920), are presented in the paper. Effect of salt form (sulfate, chloride, nitrate, hydroxide), nature of sulfate, nitrate, and chloride containing compounds (acids, their sodium and zinc salts), sodium carbonate and ammonium hydrocarbonate and their concentration in the solutions (1–1000mol/m3) to sorption ability of the metals were studied in static conditions.
                  It was found that А920 anionite sorb the metals from the solutions differently. Rhenium is sorbed with the anion exchange resin of all salt forms and from the solutions of any composition. The nature of sulfates (acid, salts) has different effects: sulfuric acid better suppresses rhenium sorption as compared to that for zinc and sodium sulfates. The increase of sulfate concentration from 1 to 1000mol/m3 reduces sorption of rhenium gradually and steeply. The nature of nitrates and chlorides does not affect sorption ability of rhenium but high concentration of the compounds depresses its sorption. Rhenium sorption from carbonate and hydrocarbonate solutions proceeds similarly to that for sulfate solutions. Rhenium is sorbed better from sodium carbonate solutions than from ammonium hydrocarbonate solutions.
                  Uranium is well sorbed with the anion exchange resin in sulfate form and badly with the anionite in nitrate and chloride forms. Uranium is sorbed only from sulfate, carbonate and hydrocarbonate solutions in contrary to rhenium. Sorption ability of uranium at concentrations from 1 to 1000mol/m3 is growing in contrary to rhenium, however at higher concentrations sorption ability is declining similarly to that for rhenium. The following groups were registered in the IR-spectra of saturated anion exchange resin: SO4
                     2−, HSO4
                     −, NO3
                     −, HCO3
                     −, and CO3
                     2− together with rhenium and uranium groups.
                  Different sorption abilities of the metals were explained by their ion state in the solutions.Underground leaching solutions (in situ leaching — ISL) of uranium ore contain commercial quantity of the metal despite low rhenium concentration (0.25–0.5 The papers of theoretical character appeared later ( Currently uranium in Kazakhstan from ISL solutions is sorbed with A920 by DOW chemical Company. А920 is a strongly basic anion exchange resin with macro-porous structure. Static exchange capacity of the anion exchange resin regarding to chloride ion is ≥ The aim of the work is the establishment of regularities of rhenium and uranium sorptions from the solutions using exchange resin A920. Effect of anion exchange resin salt form (chloride, sulfate, nitrate, hydroxide), nature of anions in solutions, using as example sulfuric, hydrochloric and nitric acids and their salts (with sodium and zinc) as well as sodium and ammonium carbonates at concentrations 1–1000 The following reagents were used: А920 exchange resin, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, nitric acid, sodium sulfate, zinc sulfate, sodium nitrate, zinc nitrate, sodium chloride, zinc chloride, sodium carbonate, ammonium hydrocarbonate, ammonium perrhenate, triuranium octaoxide (protoxide -oxide uranium). All reagents were analytical grade purity. Ammonium perrhenate AP-O is produced by company “Zhezkazganredmet”, Kazakhstan, purity – 99,99%, triuranium octaoxide produced by company Kazatomprom, Kazakhstan. The anion exchange resin was purified from impurities and iron with sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid solutions and then it was transformed into sulfate, nitrate and hydroxide forms via washing with relevant acid solutions or sodium hydroxide in dynamic conditions ( Solution containing 1 The experiments were carried out in static conditions with periodic agitation at room temperature until equilibrium in the system is achieved. The solutions were analyzed for rhenium and uranium periodically. After achievement of the equilibrium the anion exchange resin was filtered off under vacuum, and was washed with absolute ethanol until negative reaction for rhenium. Experiments were carried out with the same weighed samples of resin and equal volumes of corresponding solutions. Rhenium in the solution was determined with AES method using Optima 2000 DV analytical instrument (USA, Perkin Elmer) after separation from uranium. Uranium was determined with titration method (State standard 640-38229886-02-2000). Saturated anion exchange resins with minimum and maximum concentrations of the metals were studied with IR-spectroscopy method using IR-Fourier spectrometer «Avatar 370 CsI» with Avatar Diffuse Reflectance device. In order to record IR spectra the resins were milled together with KBr. Identification of the groups was made according to Visual examination of the solutions and the anion exchange resins showed that fine yellow sediment appeared in the solution and in the anion exchange resin after interaction of the solution with hydroxide form of the anion exchange resin. After strong agitation part of the sediment comes to the solution from anion exchange resin surface. Some quantity of uranium is remained in the solution ( Static exchange capacity (SEC) of А920 regarding to rhenium and uranium and recovery of the metals depending on anion exchange resin salt form (concentration of rhenium and uranium in the original solution was 1 Both metals are sorbed from sulfate solutions ( Another regularity was found for sorption of the metals from the solutions with different salt concentrations. Rhenium curves are going down gradually with the increase of salt concentration from 1 to 1000 The change of sulfuric acid and sulfate concentration from 1 to 10 Sorption characteristics of uranium in contrary to rhenium are growing from 1 to 10 Analysis of the IR-spectra showed that the anion exchange resin saturated from sulfuric acid solution at 1 Only rhenium is sorbed from nitrate solutions ( Spectra of the anion exchange resins saturated from nitric acid and nitrate solutions are similar, however the intensity of NO It should be pointed out that uranium was precipitated in zinc chloride solution and its concentration in the solution was decreased from 1 to 0.02 Only rhenium is sorbed from chloride solution. ( Spectra of the anion exchange resins saturated from the chloride solutions are almost the same, only intensity of absorption bands at 910–918 Both metals are sorbed from sodium carbonate (pH: 6.6–11.4) and ammonium hydrocarbonate (pH: 4.3–8.7). Sorption of uranium is better than rhenium at carbonate cocentrations of more than 1 The regularities for rhenium and uranium sorptions from carbonate solution of different concentrations are similar to that for sorption from sulfate solutions ( Sorption characteristics for uranium are increasing in interval from 1 to 10 Spectra of the anion exchange resins saturated from sodium carbonate and ammonium hydrocarbonate have absorption bands related to the anionite, rhenium, uranium, CO Analysis of the results of uranium and rhenium sorptions with A920 anion exchange resin from the sulfate, nitrate and chloride solutions as well as sodium carbonate and ammonium hydrocarbonate solutions at 1–1000 Different sorption abilities depend on their different ionic states in the solutions. Rhenium in the said solutions with different concentration exists in the form of ReO Ionic state of uranium depends on the nature of the compounds and their concentrations, uranium concentration, pH, temperature and ionic strength of the solution ( Referring to the above said, one may suppose that uranium sorption with anion exchange resin in the sulfate form proceeds in two steps. First, complex uranium anions [UO The fact that high concentration of sulfuric acid in the solution strongly suppresses uranium sorption could be explained. When sulfuric acid concentration is high the solution contains not only sulfate ions, but also hydrosulfate ions, sulfuric acid molecules and compounds of ion pair particles H Dissociation of sodium and zinc sulfates in water solutions is different. According to