Poorly cemented sands are mainly located in areas where layers of unconsolidated formations exist. Drilling a borehole in the ground causes stress perturbation and induces tangential stresses on the borehole wall. If the cohesion between sand particles generated by existing cementation is not high enough, the tensile stress concentration may cause grain debonding and, consequently, borehole breakout. In this study a series of solid and thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) laboratory tests was performed on synthetic poorly cemented sand specimens. The applied stresses were high enough to generate breakout on the borehole wall. Simultaneous real-time monitoring and deformation measurement identified the development of localised breakout zones and compaction bands at the borehole wall during the tests. The results from the video recording of the tests showed that a narrow localised zone develops in the direction of the horizontal stress, where stress concentration causes the full breakout in specimens. Dilation occurred at lower confining pressures in TWHC specimens and contracting behaviour was observed during the onset of shear bands at higher pressures. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies showed that sand particles stayed intact under the applied stresses and micro- and macrocracks develops along their boundaries. The SEM imaging was also used to investigate and characterize pre-existing microcracks on the borehole wall developed due to the specimen preparation. It showed that boring the solid specimen in order to produce a TWHC specimen could generate microcracks on the borehole wall prior to testing which affects the process of borehole failure development during the test.thick-walled hollow cylinder weight ratio of cement to sand grains weight ratio of coarse to fine sand weight ratio of water to sand grains shear stress (MPa) Uniaxial compressive strength mean grain diameter (mm) coefficient of uniformity deviator stress (MPa) confining stress (MPa) angle of internal friction (deg) Poisson's ratio Drilling a borehole in the ground is a common method for measuring the spatial position of underground formations, characteristics of faults and fractures, extracting oil and gas and also for monitoring the petrographic assessment of borehole walls. Several borehole instability problems during and after borehole completion have been reported by drilling companies in Australia. When a borehole is drilled through such a weak formation, instability or grain bonding breakage at the borehole wall may occur due to the relaxation of the pre-existing in situ stresses underground. Tangential stresses develop around the borehole and the radial stress tends to become zero on the borehole wall in case no supporting system is available ( A well designed experimental study can be a valuable approach for acquiring in-depth knowledge on the failure behaviour of granular materials. These localised zones develop due to grain dislocation and crushing which may leads to formation of compaction bands and porosity reduction or dilatant zones. The thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) test is a common method for simulating stress and strain states adjacent to underground excavations in order to study the failure behaviour of geomaterials under different stress paths. The specific shape and loading paths that can be applied to these specimens make them more popular for simulating in situ stress conditions around underground openings such as boreholes, wellbores and tunnels and for reproducing various combinations of stress paths ( In this paper a series of TWHC laboratory tests was designed and conducted under fully controlled conditions. Real-time monitoring of sand debonding was carried out during the test in order to study the failure mechanism of poorly cemented sands around the borehole. Micromechanical behaviour of the specimens when inducing a localised zone on the borehole wall under different stress conditions was investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). This study aims to provide a more realistic and comprehensive view on the behaviour of poorly cemented sands and can be helpful when designing an adequate supporting system to keep the borehole open during the service period. Exploration boreholes are being drilled throughout Australia to discover new mineral reserves leading to potential mining activates. One of these drilling sites is located in Burra, South Australia where exploration boreholes are being drilled through a poorly cemented sandy formation. The majority of these boreholes are 25–30 Laboratory studies on the damage development in poorly cemented sand specimens allow us to develop a better understanding on the mechanical behaviour of such materials under in situ stresses in the vicinity of a drilled borehole. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and triaxial tests on solid and thick-walled hollow cylinders (TWHC) were performed under various stress conditions. Various mixtures of sand, cement and water were casted into specifically designed and prefabricated cylindrical moulds to prepare suitable specimens for laboratory tests. Most of samples collected from the drilling site were of fine and sub-angular sand grains with random orientations. The pale yellowish-grey specimen was produced at the laboratory and its grading size and fabric closely resembles that of poorly cemented sands in top 200 Natural silica sands of two different size ranges were used for reproducing poorly cemented sandy layer at the drilling site. The mean diameter value ( The optimum water ratio for cement–sand mixture was evaluated by using the standard Proctor test compactor hammer; with the energy of 0.55  Various mixtures with respect to different A modified Hoek cell with a fitted micro camera was designed and manufactured at the University of Adelaide. The fitted camera allowed real-time monitoring and video recording of the borehole walls and of the process of particle bonding breakage during the tests on TWHC specimens. The modified hollow cylinder test cell was built by applying modifications to the Hoek triaxial cell into which a TWHC specimen of 63 The specimen loading process comprised of several stages. First, vertical and confining stresses acting on the specimen were simultaneously increased up to a certain stress level to simulate hydrostatic stress condition at the boundaries. Then, the vertical load was increased at constant displacement rate of 0.07 Triaxial tests were conducted on the final designed solid specimens with different Triaxial tests were conducted on the synthetic TWHC specimens using modified Hoek cell to study the effect of cement content, confining pressure and diameter size on borehole breakout and failure mechanisms under different stress conditions. Since retrieving intact specimens after the tests was not possible, real-time camera monitoring was implemented. This allowed to identify the initiation and direction of borehole breakout and to locate the damaged zone on the borehole wall. Principal TWHC tests were conducted for three different cement contents (   During the tests, lateral and axial strains on solid and TWHC specimens were measured to study the effect of confining pressure and cement content on the volumetric strain in the prepared specimens.  Field observations during drilling operations show that sand dislocation or running sand phenomenon in poorly cemented sand layers occurs during the drilling process or a short time (up to an hour) after the borehole drilling is completed. In experimental studies all test and specimen conditions must be under control before other properties are examined. Drilling a borehole through a synthetic specimen before applying the stresses (e.g. In order to support the above mentioned arguments, three solid specimens with different cement contents were prepared. Boreholes were drilled through them without applying external stresses. Then specimens were cut into different sections for the SEM imaging. As a general view of the localised band, it was a narrow zone with a few grains wide, in which compactant volumetric strain was dominant. As mentioned earlier, in order to determine the location of the initial localised damage zone on the borehole wall during the test, a micro camera was deployed inside the top platen. Once the testing of the specimen was completed, the damaged specimen was unloaded and removed gently from the cell to investigate the dimension of the initial localised bands (i.e. width, length and depth), which were induced due to the applied stresses. Afterwards, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging was carried out for post-test inspections. Applying stresses to the TWHC specimens that exceeded a critical value induced sand particle debonding and dislocation on the borehole wall. According to The depth of the breakout zone was measured by dissecting the specimens at just above or below the breakout zone based on the sand debonding area, which was captured by camera. According to In the first stage of the test with the application of higher confining and axial stresses, specimens experienced higher pressures until reaching the hydrostatic stress state. Naturally considerable number of microcracks generated in the stress concentration area, which is located adjacent to the borehole wall. In the next stage of the test, where the deviatoric stress gradually elevated, the number of affected contact bonds and particles prone to dislodge grew and was more than for the case with lower confining pressures. However, since the range of change in the confining pressure was not high enough (i.e. 1–5 Lengths of the localised damage zones were measured in terms of the angle from the centre of the borehole. Results showed that in most of the cases in 20 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging showed that microcracks extended into the borehole wall ( Also, the recorded test videos ( It is important to note that no preferred horizontal breakout direction was observed in the conducted tests due to the application of an isotropic confining pressure to the specimens and breakout directions were controlled by the heterogeneity of the specimens due to mixture preparation.  Also, SEM analyses showed that in synthetic poorly cemented sand specimens, the main reason of borehole breakout is the breakage of bonding between the grains similar to Tablerocks in which the Feldspar grains cracked first and more extensively than the quartz grains ( It is worth mentioning that unlike previous tests on Berea sandstone, which were conducted by As mentioned in the previous section, the onset of the borehole breakout in all TWHC specimens occurs with the appearance of a few shear bands on the borehole wall. Also, shear bands were observed on the external surfaces of the solid specimens subjected to triaxial testing.  Shear failure angle can be predicted by the Mohr–Coulomb relations as; Once the test on the TWHC specimens was completed, the detached sand particles were carefully collected from the lower platen. SEM study was performed on the debonded grains to identify the size range and ratios of the detached particles versus the initially used particle sizes for preparing the mixtures. In low-porosity sandstones bondings fill the space between the grains leaving smaller room for pore spaces, but in poorly cemented sands the volume of pore spaces is relatively higher than that of the total bonding. The pore collapse that occurred within the compaction bands is the result of intense bonding breakage and crack development in the specimens. Compaction bands are formed in the zone of weak particle contacts where the bonding sutures can break and let the particles rearrange to form a denser matrix. Thus, borehole breakout is accommodated by debonding of those loosely cemented particles. In the case of strong bonding between grains, the particles within the compaction band are typically cracked or even crushed due to the high stress concentration. This form of breakout is often dilatant like limestone or Tablerock sandstone ( Recorded videos showed that the breakout zone grows as the debonded sands fragments/particles are falling off from the borehole wall. Due to relocation of the stress concentration on the edge of breakout line, compaction band extends and results in detachment of more particles. Homogeneity of specimens diminished in the strain-hardening section of the stress–strain graph before the maximum stress due to decreasing the material stiffness. Having conducted laboratory experiments for disparate stress magnitudes and investigating the post-peak behaviour of TWHC specimens, several stages for the development of debonding phenomenon were identified. Real-time borehole monitoring showed that for Also, recorded videos showed that under considered stress ranges for the current test programme, there were no significant changes in the borehole breakout onset until up to the displacement rate of 0.09 The potential practical application of this study is to predict borehole instability problems for actual drilling fields and provide analysis on the behaviour of poorly cemented sands adjacent to a drilled borehole. It is worth mentioning that the application of stresses at a drilling field and to TWHC specimens in the laboratory are different. In an actual field, the localised zones will be generated during or after the drilling operation, as the in situ stresses are already present and applied to the borehole wall during the drilling of the borehole. Whereas, in the laboratory tests the localised zones will be generated at the borehole wall when the external stresses are applied to the boundary of TWHC specimens. In this study, TWHC samples with perfect boreholes were prepared in the laboratory and then, far-field stresses were applied to them. Thus, the drilling of a borehole using air core or reverse circulation (RC) drilling methods results in a local stress release at the borehole wall and generating localised zones contrary to the loading of TWHC in the laboratory. These contractancy or dilatancy will be formed subsequent to the drilling operation due to stress concentration at the borehole wall. In the current study, it was found that localised zones will cause borehole instability and a full borehole collapse is the result of stress release at the damaged area. In this study a series of solid and thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) laboratory tests was performed on synthetic poorly cemented sand specimens. Applying higher stresses than a certain threshold for the considered TWHC specimens led to the breakage of grain bondings within a narrow localised band, which was normal to the maximum principal stress. This allowed the detached and loosened grains to rearrange to form a lower porosity compaction band and this initial breakage intensified the stress concentration behind the breakout tip. As microcracks extended, the stress concentration moved toward the specimen’s outer boundary releasing more sand particles and progressing the breakout zone. This process continued until the state of equilibrium was established between the formed sand arch and induced stresses acting on the localised band tip. Results showed that applying the confining pressure beyond a specific magnitude transformed the mode of failure from dilation to the pure contraction in TWHC. The volumetric strain results illustrated that the localised bands were in general compactant for the confining pressures greater than 2 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations revealed that the fundamental mechanism of bonding breakage was the extension of small and splitting cracks which developed in the vicinity of the borehole wall and propagated deeper into the matrix with increasing the stress. Real-time monitoring showed that the cracks were formed on the borehole wall with no signs of the formation of compaction bands at the initial stage of the crack development. During this process no considerable change was observed in the volumetric strain. Once the volumetric strain reduced dramatically the compaction bands formed and could be observed. Also, a localised compaction zone formed along a narrow band on the borehole wall, the direction of which was sub-parallel to the confining pressure direction and perpendicular to the maximum principal stress. Moreover, SEM studies showed that when drilling a hole in a cylindrical solid specimen prior to applying far-field stresses, microcracks would develop on the borehole wall and an area around the borehole will be disturbed. The geometry of failed zones was influenced by the stress state and borehole size. Results showed that the depth and width of the breakout zone increased with increasing the confining pressure ( Near the borehole wall intra-granular cracks were observed after the test. According to SEM analyses, no crushed grains were observed in the localised zone and the sand particles remained intact under the range of applied stresses. This allows suggesting that stresses that caused debonding and repacking were at levels lower than those required to induce grain damage. In some cases released grains rolled at the localised band and generated dilatancy under low confining pressures. At localised zones, debonded intact grains usually repacked and accommodated a lower porosity narrow compaction band until the completion of the test at Results showed that the grain size distribution of debonded grains contained higher amount of fine grain sizes especially in lower confining pressures (i.e. 1–2 This work has been supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative Research Centre whose activities are funded by the