The x–y robotic spraying technique developed in the Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia is capable of fabricating various sizes of thickness and porosity of gas diffusion layer (GDL) used in the proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC). These parameters are obtained by varying the characteristic spray numbers of the robotic spraying machine. This investigation results were adequately represented with mathematical equations for hydrogen gas distribution in GDL. Volumetric modulus (M) parameter is used to determine the value of current density produced on the electrode of a single cell PEMFC. Thus the M parameter can be employed as indicator for a successful GDL fabrication. GDL type 4 has three variables of layer design that can be optimized to function as gas distributor, gas storage, flooding preventer on GDL surface, to evacuate water from the electrode and to control the electrical conductivity. The gas distribution in GDL was mathematically represented with average error of 15.5%. The M value of GDL type 4 according to the model was 0.22cm3/s and yielded a current density of 750A/m2.A typical cell in a polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) stack is basically made of 11 layers: bipolar plate (BP), gas flow field (FF), gasket (G), gas diffusion layer (GDL), electrode (E), membrane (M), electrode (E), gas diffusion layer (GDL), gasket (G), gas flow field (FF) and bipolar plate (BP) [BP–FF–G–GDL–E–M–E–GDL–G–FF–BP]. A typical membrane electrode assembly (MEA) is madeup of the middle five layers of the cell, namely GDL–E–M–E–GDL. A recently developed membrane electrode gasket assembly (MEGA) is made of six layers or G–GDL–E–M–E–GDL–G Physically, GDL has porosity and pore diameter which function as gas distributor in the direction of electrode layer in PEMFC. Generally, there are four types of GDL configuration In this paper, the thickness of GDL in different configurations in the range of 250–350 The diameter of carbon aggregate inside and outside the carbon cloth in GDL fabricated by the sprayer follows the Knudsen model The In the layer of PEMFC electrocatalyst, hydrogen is oxidized to proton and electron to produce current, thus one of the equations to represent current density in PEMFC performance If hydrogen concentration in electrocatalyst GDL layers of the MEAs are fabricated from carbon black, Vulcan XC-72 with particle size of 30 The GDL study in this work has placed emphasis on the spray characteristic determination and the GDL fabrication. The sprayer nozzle was operated in one cycle periodic function for the spraying experiment ( The plot of GDL thickness, Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to examine the surface of the GDL samples produced. As shown in The analysis of all types of GDLs fabricated and their respective performance results are presented in GDL type 1 ( At The GDL type 2 was fabricated by further spraying GDL type 1 with Eq.  In  The The GDL type 4 is the modified form of GDL types 1, 2 and 3, which was developed to obtain a better MEA performance. Based on both experimental and mathematical investigations, the GDL type 4 showed a superiority in the voltage/current performance than the rest, while the GDL type 1 possessed the highest average porosity, as expected. Meanwhile, to represent the gas distribution in GDL, Eq. Each type of GDL has different The robotic sprayer in this experiment can yield various sizes of thickness and average porosity of GDL. GDL thickness obtained experimentally was adequately simulated by the mathematical model developed, which also agreed well with those in the literature. The mathematical equations used represent the hydrogen gas distribution in the GDL. The volumetric modulus parameters obtained were determined from the value of current density produced in a single cell PEMFC. It is observed that the GDL type 4 is the best one among the GDL types studied since it yielded the highest current density. Therefore, the volumetric modulus parameter can be used as an indicator for a successful gas diffusion layer fabrication in the MEA. The financial support from the Malaysian Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment, through IRPA Project 08-02-02-0020 is much appreciated.