Current trends in chemical reactor design are based on adapting these to the requirements of a particular chemical process. Processes involving reactions between the gas and liquid phase in particular require precise adjustment of all parameters. The common denominator for most modern design solutions is enhancement of the mass transfer area and the overall volumetric mass transfer coefficient. Gas – liquid contactors evolved from a typical stirred vessel to a plethora of other types suitable for many applications, such as bubbling columns. The Spinning Fluids Reactor presented in this paper uses tangential inlets of both fluids that cause a swirling flow. High tangential velocity of the liquid phase results in a high shearing force that decreases the size of the generated bubbles and increases the mass transfer area per bulk liquid. The reactor of our design can reach gas-liquid interfacial areas up to 16 400m2 per cubic meter, which is an order of magnitude higher than values obtained in the majority of gas-liquid contactors what we believe is a significant improvement over common designs.Mass transfer area [m Constant in Eq. Constant in Eq. Sauter mean diameter [m] Measured bubble diameter [m] Hydraulic diameter [m] Pore diameter [μm] Friction factor [–] Overall volumetric mass transfer [1/s] Inlet channel length [m] Number of bubbles [–] Gas flow ratio [m Liquid flow ratio [dm Inner porous partition radius [m] Reynolds number [–] Tangential velocity [m/s] Inner porous partition axial distance [m] Gas holdup [–] A plethora of reactors are used in the chemical industry for a variety of purposes. For example stirred tank reactors are commonly used in bioreduction of volatile organic compounds Improving mass transfer in the process can be achieved by changing certain reaction parameters. However, the process engineer is often limited by an inability to change pressure or temperature, thus diffusion and reaction kinetics. This leaves contact time, and surface area as common parameters to improve the process efficiency. Over the decades a number of reactors have been developed to attempt to apply these advantages. Apparatus contact time should be at least the same as the total process time, which consists of diffusion- and reaction- time. The influence of the distribution of the residence time on the reactors performance was mentioned by Weber and MacMullin in 1935 A number of ideas have been published over the decades to attempt to improve the contact time. Green invented an improved apparatus for the catalytic conversion of hydrocarbon oil Seibert et al. The most commonly applied method is to increase the surface area. For example a Continues Integrated Mixer Apart from changing dimensions of the reactor, the bed may also be varied. To extend contact time, one of the most commonly used packings are Raschig’s rings. The original rings were invented by Raschig in the 1880s and passed numerous improvements, until they became Pall rings in 1950s (2nd generation) and Super rings, which are now considered as 4th generation rings Maggio in 1958 changed the vessel reactor’s screen shape to avoid fouling. His screen (usually flat) was conical in shape and allowed to increase the liquid-bed contact area in the inlet/outlet zone Zhang et al. Another parameter which may be altered to enhance the process in gas-liquid contactors is the gas holdup (ε Miller In this paper, we would like to introduce the spinning fluids reactor (SFR). This novel design is based on the ASH Due to very important design corrections, the SFR has applicability in many chemical processes which give it an advantage over its precursors, where an enhanced mass transfer coefficient between gas and liquid is required. Unlike the ASH, the SFR does not lead to separation of any of the phases introduced into the apparatus, but due to the elimination of the pedestal, vortex finder, and the overflow aperture both gas and liquid have a stable residence time distribution and flow through the reactor undisturbed. The main improvement of the SFR over the ASH is the tangential inlet of the gas phase introduced to the reactor body. Such a solution allows us to apply different types of inner porous partitions, to accurately control bubble size. In addition, the advantage of the tangential gas inlet, which generates a rotational flow of the gas phase, is that the liquid phase is not pushed away from the mesh. The pressure drop of the gas phase in the SFR is several times lower than in ASH and usually does not exceed 1 The SFR obtains its high mass transfer area in part through the high centrifugal force applied on the liquid and bubbles. The liquid is sheared at the inner surface of the reactor, and the consequent shear stress further reduces the bubble size in the reactor. However, the use of centrifugal forces to increase the reactor efficiencies is not novel and has a long history. Centrifugal force field was used in reactors for decades. Heath and Al Currently a number of other spinning or centrifugal reactors are under discussion in literature, such as the Rotor-stator Spinning Disc Reactor The SFR consists of three main adjustable elements: inlet head, reactor body, and an inner porous partition (IPP), as shown in The inlet head (as showin in For a standard SFR setup, the Reynolds number in the inlet gap can reach Re The reactor body ( A liquid velocity as a function of axial distance from the inlet for a plug flow model can be obtained with Eq. The IPP ( The porous partition in this paper is a polypropylene frit with a pore diameter of d Gas penetrates through the porous partition to the liquid film. The high fluids’ flows and small porous diameters cause a cross flow bubbling process. We believe, that between the liquid stream and the surface of IPP, a gas cushion forms. In this case, friction between liquid and IPP material loses its significance and only the kinetic energy of the gas creates a resistance. A gas cushion in a similar construction was confirmed by Das and Miller in 1996 Typically, there are three groups of methods to determine the mass transfer area created by a gas liquid contactor: chemical, physical, and geometrical A high-speed camera (Fastec Imaging HiSpec 1) was mounted next to the reactor’s outlet and photos of the outcoming gas-liquid stream were taken, which allowed measurement of the bubble diameter distribution. A typical photo of the bubbles formed by the SFR is shown in Additionaly, a gas/liquid ratio in the outflow mixture was determined by measuring the volume of outcoming aerated mixture and the volume after froth collapse, which allowed to calculate the ε The dependency of the mass transfer area on the liquid flow ratio was investigated. For this a low gas flow ratio was applied to increase the impact of the shearing force and decrease buoyancy forces in the bubble formation process. Additionally, a small amount of surfactant, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was added as a frother, to investigate the impact of surface tension on the bubble formation process. Using Eq. Despite measurements of interfacial area, K The SFR has proven its applicability in gas-liquid mass transfer processes. Basic experimental data presented in this paper can be compared to other typical designs, as shown in We present here the SFR, which is a very promising design of a gas – liquid contactor, that has already proven its applicability in several laboratory and pilot plants. The design utilizes the centrifugal force of a reacting liquid to decrease bubble diameters in the bubbling process. Experiments revealed, that the mass transfer area in SFR is at least one order of magnitude higher than values obtained in common reactors. Such values are more impressive when one considers the compactness of the device; the total SFR’s volume does not exceed 7