A recovery process for effective separation of silicon, silicon carbide micro powders and polyethylene glycol from the wire sawing slurry is proposed. The separation between silicon and silicon carbide is based on their size difference and surface charging state. The aim of this work is the study of the solid phase and liquid phase separation of silicon carbide and Silicon. Some methods applied for this purpose are the centrifugation process, phase-transfer separation as well as liquid–liquid extraction followed by the regeneration of polyethylene glycol by the distillation process. It is verified experimentally that silicon and silicon carbide micro powder can be effectively separated by phase transfer separation, centrifugation, chemical cleaning, filtering and distillation. In this study, the liquid–liquid extraction was used to separate a particle from a powder mixture. The removal of liquid component from a solution via a solvent separated considerably larger silicon carbide particles. The optimal results showed that Si content can reach 82% in the Si-rich powder and 3.8% wt% in the silicon carbide-rich powder. By separating the mixed powder the content reached 31.2wt% of silicon, 63.3wt% of silicon carbide as the raw material, 5.3wt% of the iron fragment, and 0.2wt% of other impurities.Photovoltaic (PV) is the name of a method of converting solar energy into direct current electricity using semiconducting materials that exhibit the photovoltaic effect. The total proportion of electricity generated by solar cells is steadily increasing and it has attracted many scientists to develop new technologies, among which the polysilicon cell is regarded as one of the fascinating ways to transfer the solar light into the storage electrical energy Although, the solar cells causes no pollution The hazardous kerf loss silicon is in the form of slurry it's a viscous mixture that consists of pure fine particles of silicon (Si), silica (SiO Also, the polysilicon recycled from slurry wastes and resupplied as the silicon feedstock to the field of solar cell fabrication again, it will save the shortage of solar grade silicon materials and bring in the enormous environmental and economic benefit. Furthermore, SiC, Si particles and metal fragments suspended in PEG liquid are so stable that recyclers have difficulty obtaining a low-turbidity PEG liquid from silicon slurry waste. Therefore, various techniques have been proposed obviously, a satisfactory recovery process should be simple in operation and economically acceptable, such as centrifugal separation and filtration In the present study, phase transfer separation as liquid–liquid extraction process coupled with centrifugation and distillation have been proposed to effectively recover cutting fluid, which is based on the different particle size and surface charge in the aqueous solution. This process is the simplest way to separate solids from liquids and is easily performed in factories, such as the cases for recycling lubricant and heavy oil The raw material of most solar cells today is crystalline silicon. Luckily, silicon is one of the most widely available elements in the form of sand. Before silicon can be cut into thin wafers, however, it has to be purified, as otherwise, the photo effect will not be very efficient. The production of a typical silicon solar cell ( The majority of MG-Si is used for silicon and aluminum alloys. A much smaller portion is used for fumed silica, medical and cosmetic products and micro-electronics. A small but rapidly growing portion is used for solar applications The current process for making solar modules in our Research Center in Semiconductor Technology for Energetics (CRTSE) involves four key steps: polysilicon production, ingot shaping and wafering, cell production and module production. This article will focus specifically on the wafering step. The wafering process involves slicing the polysilicon ingot into thin wafers with diamond wire (i.e;. A multi-wire saw with polyethylene glycol, containing silicon carbide (SiC) abrasives, is used as vehicle during the processing) A slurry waste is mixture of PEG, scrap metal in fine and large particles (mainly iron fragments), polycritalline-Si and SiC ( The diagram in Solid–liquid extraction was used in the field of minerals processing using different solvents ( The driving force of the phase-transfer separation is the difference in surface properties, i.e., hydrophilicity versus hydrophobicity. After a thorough stirring or shaking, the particles with hydrophobic surface move into the oil phase, and the hydrophilic particles remain in the solid phase. After, the two phases are easily separated after settling, and the preferred product is recovered. Furthermore, the solid particles are settled and separated from a liquid using centrifugal force as a driving force. To recover silicon powder we they used a heavy-liquid with a density between that of Si and SiC as the centrifugation medium. Depending on the rotational speed and distance from the axis of rotation, the centrifugal force as a driving force can be many times greater than the force of gravity, allowing even very small particles or particles slightly denser than the fluid to settle. The resulting settling velocities of the solids can be significantly higher than those generated by gravity forces. This process is followed by the washing of the liquid phase thus obtained to recover the impurities optionally transferred during the extraction. Separating SiC waste, SiC not used, silicon and the metal particles are also performed in several steps. After recycling of large SiC particles with a centrifugal decanter, the slurry waste with low solid content was heated at 500 For liquid phase, the viscosity and turbidity were measured using a Viscometer and turbidity meter (2100Q, HACH). The iron and the metal impurities in slurry are removed by an acid leaching process prior to preparing silica from waste silicon sludge. The samples (10 The third step is the recovery of PEG by distillation process ( The solid phase was characterized by XRD. Radial scans of intensity versus scattering angle (2 The microstructures and surface morphologies of the SiC were examined by optical microscopy metallographic trinocular OXION+10 The comparative study of the various solvents ( The study of the physico-chemical characteristics (viscosity, refractive index, density, etc.) of the slurry before and after treatment (  It was found that the PEG has outstanding shear stability, resistance to thermal degradation and oxidation. It helps fight against the formation of sludge, deposit and the additive remains incorporated in PEG after treatment. The large amount of metal particles is one of the common causes of pollution PEG. The long chain molecules in polymer-type cutting fluid provide good dispersion of abrasives, high lubricity and heat tolerance, resulting in an excellent cutting yield The XRD patterns of the solid phase (Si+SiC+FeO) recovered are presented in The main peaks in the XRD pattern can be indexed to SiC, Si and FeO. The peaks corresponding to the SiC have the highest intensities in the SiC-rich powder, indicating that the SiC is a dominated phase in the cutting loss waste and the peaks corresponding to the Si have the highest intensities in the Si-rich powder. The content of Si and SiC measured by EDS analysis in the obtained powders, can reach 82 The mixture (SiC+Si) after removal of FeO, was observed by high resolution metallographic microscopy ( We collected the used slurry, i.e. having cut a number of assemblies and having been regenerated each cut. As already mentioned, this slurry was first washed with white spirit and filtered to remove oil, then the silicon chips were dissolved in a sodium hydroxide solution 2%. After separation and recycling of large SiC particles with a centrifugal decanter, the SiC recovered was observed by SEM ( In In We can conclude from these observations that the larger needle grains present in the new fragment abrasive grains and more compact, but still sharp, large compact grains remain unchanged. There is also a small population of unchanged compact and sharp grains. The used grains “wear out” are therefore not, in that their edges are not blunt, the only apparent alteration of the abrasive is that the most elongated grain fragment, giving particles smaller and more compact but still sharp. If the abrasive grain does not dull, since the only apparent change is the fragmentation of acicular grains longer, it is interesting to assess the potential loss of efficiency. In this study, it's verified experimentally, that Si and SiC micropowder can be effectively separated by settlement centrifugal, chemical cleaning, filtering, distillation, and extraction. Si particles in the solution will be suspended sufficiently while the larger SiC particles will settle down quickly under the centrifugation field. The abrasive (SiC) is an expensive consumable and used in large quantities. It is currently discarded after a number of uses. We have shown through microscopic observations it undergoes a single change the longest grains are fragmented into smaller grains but still sharp, others are unchanged. The optimal results show that the Si-rich powder can reach 82% wt% Si and SiC-rich phase contains more than 91 The performance index of recycled SiC powder is equal/familiar to the new one, and that can replace the use of new one completely. It's very important to note that the recovered powder with high Si content together with amorphous solar grade silicon further can be used as a feedstock in Czochralski crystalline silicon crystal growth process, or in directional solidification process for multi-crystalline silicon ingots. This work was supported by the Research Center in Semiconductor Technology for Energetics - CRTSE and financed by the