The extractive metallurgy of gold ores is largely driven by their grade and mineralogy. The concentration of gold in the Earth's crust and mantle is extremely low and highly variable, resulting in ore variability in many gold and copper–gold deposits. More importantly, gold in an ore may occur in two or three forms (i.e., microscopic gold, submicroscopic gold, and surface gold), making gold ore processing extremely challenging. The objective of gold geometallurgy is to reduce and minimize the technical risk in project evaluation, plant design, mine planning, and production forecasting through geometallurgical modeling, representative sampling, and subsequent systematic mineralogical and metallurgical test work. Geometallurgy is a technique to document variability within an orebody and quantify and evaluate the impact of many factors influenced by geology and mineralogy, on grinding, flotation, leaching, and metal recovery processes. Automated mineralogy is an important technique used widely by the minerals industry and research institutes in ore characterization, and commercialized in the form of techniques such as mineral liberation analysis (MLA), QEMSCAN, and more recently Advanced Mineral Identification and Characterization System (AMICS). It generally uses scanning electron microscopy hardware as a platform, combined with sophisticated software to provide information on mineral speciation, composition, liberation, association, size distribution, and metal balance. It plays an important role in geometallurgical projects, including those of gold ores. This chapter provides an overview of geometallurgy and automated mineralogy fundamentals and application in gold ore processing, with a focus being on the ore characterization.The authors are grateful to the editorial team for their encouragement and assistance in preparing this chapter. Anonymous reviewers are acknowledged for their constructive comments, which helped to improve the manuscript. Companies that have contributed indirectly to this chapter by providing projects and financial support are also acknowledged. The mining industry is a business full of risks, requiring substantial long-term investment. One of the risks is the technical risk associated with project evaluation, process development, plant design, mine planning, and performance of mineral processing/metallurgical unit operations, which is mainly caused by ore variability. To minimize and reduce the technical risk, mining companies have been using geometallurgy in the past two decades to measure and quantify the spatial variability of the deposits that are being developed. Geometallurgy is an interdisciplinary approach that links the geological, geochemical, and mineralogical characteristics to the metallurgical performance of an orebody. Combined with mine planning, it has been used in scoping, prefeasibility and feasibility studies, process design, and optimization of gold, copper–gold, copper–molybdenum, nickel and iron projects, among others ( As a powerful tool in ore characterization, automated mineralogy has been used widely by the minerals industry and research institutes for more than two decades and is commercialized in the form of techniques such as mineral liberation analysis (MLA), QEMSCAN, and more recently Advanced Mineral Identification and Characterisation System (AMICS). It generally uses scanning electron microscopy (SEM) hardware as a platform, combined with electron-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and sophisticated software, to provide information on mineral speciation, composition, liberation, association, and size distribution, etc. This information is not only required for new flowsheet development and process selection but is also useful for plant optimization. The second part of this chapter will first provide an overview of the basic functions of an automated SEM/EDS system, from sample preparation, to measurement, data processing and reporting, introducing model analysis and liberation analysis as basic results. Then, methods especially related to automated gold mineralogy analysis, such as bright/rare phase search (BRPS) and sparse phase liberation (SPL), are discussed. Geometallurgy is regarded as a new science in the area of economic mineral extraction. It is difficult to know when exactly geometallurgy emerged and when the term was first framed, but certainly it appears to have evolved in the late 1980s or early 1990s. However, real emergence of the study of geometallurgy dates mostly from 2000 and on ( Geometallurgical mapping is a team-based approach that documents variability within an orebody and quantifies the impact of geology (host rocks, alteration, and structure) and mineralogy on grinding, metallurgical response, and metal recovery processes. It is an important tool to reduce the technical risk associated with new mine developments or expansions ( The geologically informed selection of a number of test samples to determine metallurgical parameters and the distribution of these parameters through an orebody using an accepted geostatistical technique to support metallurgical process modeling ( An integrated, multidiscipline approach to the collection and modeling of geometallurgical information ( A cross-discipline approach in which metallurgical performance of an ore is linked to intrinsic geological and mineralogical characteristics ( A scientific discipline in which geological data, mining data, and processing data are coanalyzed to generate useful information and knowledge to optimize resource profitability ( An interdisciplinary approach that links the geological, geochemical, and mineralogical characteristics to the metallurgical performance of an orebody. It is a framework and methodology for process design, mine planning, and plant optimization (  Orebodies are naturally occurring phenomena with little consistency and similarity between different locations and ore types. Even within a single orebody, rock types, ore grade, chemistry, mineralogy, alteration, and deportment of payable metals and deleterious elements often change vertically and laterally, thus causing issues during ore processing. The objective of geometallurgy is to identify and understand the orebody variability and characterize its metallurgical performance, including factors such as comminution, gravity, flotation and leaching parameters, and metals recoveries, and to build a geometallurgical model that can be used to reduce the technical risk at the various stages of a mineral project. Overall, geometallurgy incorporates the principles of process mineralogy and material characterization as a tool for predictive metallurgy. It complements, but does not replace, the traditional metallurgical approach during the project development and mine operation. It mainly focuses on sampling, test work planning, and data integration. Geometallurgy has been used at all major stages of a range of mineral projects, including scoping, prefeasibility and feasibility studies, process design and optimization, spanning gold, copper–gold, copper–molybdenum, nickel, and iron projects, during the past two decades. It plays an increasingly important role in the following aspects: Flowsheet development Equipment selection Mine planning Plant design and optimization Production prediction As an interdisciplinary approach, geometallurgy links the geological, geochemical, and mineralogical characteristics to the metallurgical performance of an orebody. It uses the geological information as a foundation and geostatistics as a tool to collect samples from representative ore types with various grades, host rocks, and alterations at different locations of an orebody and then conducts a comprehensive mineralogical and metallurgical test work on these samples to generate a large amount of data. The data will be processed and integrated with other information and then imported into the geological model to ascertain the distribution and variation of the mineralogical and metallurgical parameters within an orebody. Such a geometallurgical model is then used for process selection, flowsheet development, mine planning, and plant optimization. In recent years, geometallurgy has been advanced rapidly due to the need for developing a number of large deposits (particularly gold ores) and to the implementation of some sophisticated analytical techniques such as mineral liberation analyzer (MLA), QEMSCAN, dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry (D-SIMS), time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS), etc. ( Geometallurgical programs require a team approach across the entire program and each individual component. A geometallurgical program usually starts from geological investigation, including information collection and analysis, followed by geological modeling. Based on the geological model, a geometallurgical matrix will be developed to guide sampling and compositing for further testing. The most important part of a geometallurgical program is ore characterization, including mineralogical studies and metallurgical test work. Overall, ore characterization is the quantification of physical data on samples (drill cores and composites) that represent an orebody and provide criteria for process design and flowsheet development. Unlike base metal ores, which are usually processed using froth flotation, gold ores are often treated using several processes in combination, including unit processes such as gravity separation, flotation, and cyanidation. For refractory gold ores, in which gold occurs mainly as submicroscopic gold in sulfide minerals and is associated with carbonaceous matter in some deposits, pretreatment is required before leaching, making gold ore processing more challenging and ore characterization more important. Gold ores are commonly classified into two major categories: free-milling and refractory. Typically, Based on the mineralogical characteristics and mineral processing techniques required, gold ores can be classified into 12 types, depicted in Mineralogically, gold in an ore or mill product can be classified into three forms based on its deportment: microscopic gold, submicroscopic gold, or surface gold.   The extractive metallurgy of gold ores is largely driven by mineralogical factors due to the fact that gold often occurs in at least two forms in an ore. These factors include particle size, association with other minerals, coatings and rimmings, presence of cyanicides, oxygen consumers and preg-robbers, presence of refractory gold minerals and locking of submicroscopic gold in sulfide and sulfarsenide mineral structures, etc. Among the factors listed in Gold deportment study is critical to any gold project and the information generated from such a study can be used for assisting in process selection and flowsheet development. To properly and precisely determine the deportment of gold in an ore or mill product, some comprehensive approaches involving advanced and conventional techniques have been developed and used for gold deportment studies (  Gold deportment study, particularly detection and quantification of submicroscopic gold and surface gold, requires the use of sophisticated analytical techniques. To address each mineralogical issue effectively and efficiently, a number of advanced and conventional techniques have been used in gold deportment studies ( In recent years, advanced techniques have gained significant development and played an important role in gold mineralogical study such as the use of QEMSCAN alongside traditional diagnostic leaching in the characterization of visible gold in complex ores ( Gold deportment study is an important part of geometallurgy program. It is becoming a powerful tool in predicting the metallurgical performance of a new ore and in troubleshooting the gold loss in an operating plant. If the test work is well designed and properly executed, a gold deportment study will provide very useful information on process selection, flowsheet development, recovery improvement, and reagent-consumption optimization. The results acquired from such a study program should be able to reflect future metallurgical performance of a new ore or identify the cause(s) for gold losses. To ensure that a gold deportment study will provide correct and accurate information as required, selection of mineralogical techniques is most important for any gold project. It is recommended that a comprehensive mineralogical investigation procedure involving conventional and advanced techniques ( Liberated gold: recoverable by gravity, flotation, or cyanidation; Gold associated with sulfide minerals: recoverable by flotation with/without cyanidation or noncyanide leaching; Gold associated with nonsulfide minerals: partially recoverable by leaching. Locked gold is nonrecoverable unless fine-grinding is involved; Preg-robbing capacity of carbonaceous matter: to be pretreated by roasting or autoclaving, if present; and Mineralogical factors that may affect or have affected gold extraction. Optical microscopy has been a very important tool for mineral identification and quantification. It can be automated to gold search or to obtain quantitative mineral composition of rock and ore specimens. However, it lacks the ability to obtain elemental composition, which can vary significantly in a large number of minerals. When SEM became available in the 1960s, mineralogists quickly embraced it. Significant efforts were made to automate it for quantitative mineral analysis ( The first generation of SEM-based tools were developed in Canada (MP-SEM-IPS at CANMET), in Finland (at VTT), in UK (Imperial College London), in South Africa (ASCAN at Anglo Research), and in Australia (QEM∗SEM and CCSEM). The QEM∗SEM was further developed into QEMSCAN by CSIRO and Intellection in Australia ( This section will first provide an overview of the basic functions of an automated SEM/EDS system, from sample preparation, to measurement, data processing and reporting, introducing model analysis, and liberation analysis as basic results. Then, methods especially related to automated gold mineralogy analysis, such as B/RPS and SPL, are explained. The two main hardware components are SEM and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS, EDX, or XEDS). Requirements for the SEM system are: Computer-controlled specimen stage for automated movements in at least Stable beam for extended period (24 Very good back-scattered electron (BSE) image for mineral gray-level separation Strong enough beam to produce high rate of X-rays in mineral samples Requirements for the EDS system are: High count rate (200,000 Allow for flexible control single or multiple X-ray collection Allow for multiple detectors working together Be able to control SEM for imaging (external scan) Samples for gold analysis usually come from (1) processing plant (granulated sample) or (2) mine or prospects (rock chips or drill cores). Granulated samples can be preconcentrated and sized to fractions. Rock chips or drill cores can be crushed to 0.5–1 It was found that when the sample particles are fine (≤53 Also, fine particles tend to agglomeration during the sample preparation, so graphite particles are sometimes mixed with sample particles during sample preparation to minimize agglomeration. There are two basic measurements in a quantitative mineralogy system: (1) point analysis, which produces mineral abundance, and (2) area analysis, which produces liberation and association, grain size distribution for each mineral, as well as mineral abundance.  In point analysis, the number of counts for each mineral accumulated is proportional to its volume percent in a sample. The measured mineral abundance data can be used to calculate the bulk chemical composition of the sample using density and elemental composition of the minerals involved. This calculated assay is often compared with independent wet chemistry assay of the same sample.  Liberation and association data can be generated from mineral map. To obtain accurate liberation data, each plant sample is sized into different size fractions and measured separately. This is to reduce the stereological bias that is inevitable when attempting to measure three-dimensional objects with their two-dimensional sections (  This method does not rely on the gray-level separation between different minerals present, so it was a good choice in the 1970 and 1980s when the typical BSE detector produced low-quality images. One important disadvantage of this method is that it requires a lot more X-ray points to outline the mineral grains in a particle. Thus, systems based on this type of analysis usually require up to four EDS detectors. Development of both hardware and software features of both MLA and QEMSCAN has taken place since the first prototypes were tested ( A recent development in the AMICS system, called Note that there is virtually no difference in BSE gray level between quartz and albite in this sample. Yet, it can be seen that this method produced almost the same result as from the X-ray mapping method, with a much lower number of X-ray points being used. Since the concentration of gold and other precious metals in most samples are very low (at ppm level), it would be very hard to obtain statistically valid data using normal area or point analysis methods. In an average ore with 5 Since this method is focused on minerals of interest and does not spend X-ray analysis time on common gangue minerals, it is usually much quicker to accumulate enough statistics for gold than the area analysis and point analysis methods. The output of the type of analysis is usually gold mineral types, their association with other minerals, their size distributions, and images. Geometallurgy is an interdisciplinary approach that links the geological, geochemical, and mineralogical characteristics to the metallurgical performance of an orebody. The objective of gold geometallurgy is to reduce and minimize the technical risk in project evaluation, plant design, mine planning, and production forecasting through geometallurgical modeling, representative sampling, and subsequent systematic mineralogical and metallurgical test work. Geometallurgy is a technique to document variability within an orebody and quantify and evaluate the impact of many factors including geology and mineralogy on grinding, flotation, leaching, and metal recovery processes. Automated mineralogy is an important technique used widely by the minerals industry and research institutes in ore characterization. It uses SEM hardware as a platform, combined with sophisticated software to provide information on mineral speciation, composition, liberation, association, size distribution, and metal balance. It is a powerful tool in gold deportment study that is often an important part of gold geometallurgy.