Introduction
                  Angular stable osteosynthesis has become the gold standard in the operative treatment of proximal humeral fractures. The aim of this article is to determine the indications for osteosynthesis versus primary arthroplasty based on clinical and radiological parameters.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 368 surgically treated proximal humeral fractures were reviewed. Preoperative X-rays were used to evaluate the displacement and vascularity of the humeral head (according to the Hertel criteria) and the AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen) fracture type. Postoperative X-rays were analysed to assess the quality of the reduction, the reconstruction of the medial hinge and the displacement of the tuberosities. Follow-up X-rays were used to evaluate healing progress, the occurrence of avascular necrosis, loss of reduction and implant related failures. The American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score (ASES score) was used to evaluate the functional outcome. Correlations between a set of variables, type of treatment and eventual outcome were verified in both univariate and multivariate settings, with the significance rate set at p
                     <0.05.
               
                  Results
                  In total, 307 shoulders were evaluated. Mean follow-up was 4.3 years and showed a 15.3% failure rate, a 23.8% re-operation rate and a mean ASES score of 75.3. Better results were noted in patients who were younger at the time of surgery. More displaced fractures, AO type C fractures, varus fracture configuration and reduced head vascularity all led to a worse outcome. Anatomical reduction correlated with better results. Articular fractures had better results when treated with a plate.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures remains difficult, with a failure rate of 15.3% and a re-operation rate of 23.8% at 4.3 years. A significantly displaced varus articular fracture in the older patient results in the worst outcome.Proximal humeral fractures are the third most common fractures affecting people older than 65 years of age with an incidence of approximately 5% of all fractures. These fractures are getting more common as the prevalence of osteoporotic fractures increases; from 40 years of age, the incidence begins to increase exponentially. Review of the Finnish Register showed an annual increase of 13.7% between 1970 and 2002. Most proximal humeral fractures can be treated conservatively with good results. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of these angular stable devices and to predict failure, according to different variables. These variables were preoperative displacement of the fracture fragments, vascularity of the humeral head (according to the Hertel criteria), All surgical procedures performed in the University Hospitals of Leuven are recorded in a database. From this database, all proximal humeral fractures that were treated with angular stable osteosynthesis between August 2001 and October 2006 were identified and analysed. These fractures either met the indications for operative treatment outlined by Neer, All operations took place at the University Hospitals of Leuven and each was performed or directly supervised by one of the three staff members responsible for upper-limb trauma within the University hospital network. Functional outcome of the shoulder was carried out by telephone survey, where patients were informed about the study. All patients consented to have their data stored on a database, and, therefore, ethical committee approval for the use of that data was not sought. With the patient in the beach-chair position, passive mobilisation under image intensification was performed to evaluate displacement and stability of the fracture fragments. When plate osteosynthesis was chosen, an extended deltopectoral approach without detachment of the anterior deltoid was used. The displaced humeral head fragment was gently reduced under direct vision, with a periosteal elevator introduced into the fracture gap to facilitate reduction of the tuberosities. Heavy non-resorbable Ti-Cron 5 (Syneture When an angular stable nail was considered as the appropriate treatment, a minimally invasive deltoid-splitting approach was used with insertion of the nail (proximal humeral nail (PHN), Proximal Humeral Nail, AO, Synthes A standard supervised rehabilitation programme with passive range of motion exercises started on the first postoperative day, with active exercises beginning after the second week. Preoperative X-rays and available computed tomography (CT) scans were used to evaluate displacement, vascularity of the humeral head (according to the Hertel criteria) Relations between a set of variables and a form of treatment and outcome were verified in a univariable as well as in a multivariable setting. One continuous outcome variable (i.e., ASES score) and two binary outcome variables were considered (i.e., failure and the composite end-point failure or re-operation). For the univariable relations, Mann–Whitney A total of 383 proximal humeral fractures were operatively treated between August 2001 and October 2006, of which 368 fractures met the inclusion criteria. At follow-up, 26 patients with 27 fractures were deceased. In the 341 fractures that were eligible for evaluation, 307 files were available on 302 patients. Mean age at operation was 62.4 years. Follow-up averaged 4.3 years, with a minimum follow-up of 2 years. At final follow-up, a failure rate of 15.3% and a re-operation rate of 23.8% were identified. Mean final ASES score was 75.3. The mean time to operation was 4 days (range 0–98 days). The duration of the delay to surgery did not influence outcome. During follow-up, there were 73 re-operations. With the exception of three shoulders, all re-operations were performed within 2 years. The time between osteosynthesis and re-operation averaged 270 days. Patient age alone influenced final ASES scores, with better outcomes found in younger patients (81.3 vs. 69.7, The most important outcome predictor was the AO classification. Approximately one-third of fractures were AO type C and these had the worst prognosis with a failure rate of 31.9% and a re-operation rate of 38.1% ( The initial coronal displacement of the head fragment was another factor that was deemed to be important. When the head was displaced into a varus alignment, a higher failure rate was noted than when it was in valgus or neutral alignment ( In 34 shoulders, a combination of C-type and varus alignment was identified, leading to failure in 16 cases (47.1%) and re-operation in 18 cases (52.9%). The presence of fracture impaction did not influence any of the outcome parameters. The quality of reduction was evaluated by measuring medial wall disruption, tuberosity displacement and the cumulative displacement of all fracture fragments. The failure rate was 24.6% when there was medial column displacement of >10 The vascularity of the head fragment, evaluated using the Hertel criteria, was preserved in 83.1% of shoulders. When the vascular integrity was deemed to be compromised, the failure rate was 57.7% vs. 7.0% in those in whom it was deemed to be intact ( Finally, an assessment of the quality of reduction was performed. When there was a fracture gap of more than 2 Postoperative humeral head varus malalignment of >10° was noted in one-third of all treated fractures. This increased failure rates (26.4% vs. 8.7% in the neutral reduction and 13.2% in the valgus reduction group, Out of 307 shoulders, 185 were treated with an intramedullary nail and 122 with an angular stable plate and screw osteosynthesis (PSOS). In this retrospective evaluation, differences in outcome between those two groups were observed. Failure rate for nailing was 12.4% vs. 20.5% for PSOS; re-operation rate 21.6% for nailing vs. 27.9% for PSOS and mean ASES score 78.8 for nailing and 70.2 for PSOS. All A-type and the most B-type fractures were treated with a nail, whereas the more demanding B-type and most of the C-type fractures were treated with a PSOS. Nailing gave better results for type B fractures, whereas for type C fractures plate osteosynthesis resulted in improved outcomes ( The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of the currently available angular stable devices and to predict failure according to different variables. These variables were preoperative displacement of the fracture fragments, vascularity of the humeral head (according to the Hertel criteria), The fracture type, based on the AO classification, was the most important predictor of late failure or re-operation, with significance noted in both the univariate and multivariate models. This AO classification was used because we believe it is important to differentiate between fractures that involve the anatomical neck as opposed to the surgical neck of the humerus. These data clearly show inferior results in C-type fractures, with the differences between A- and B-type fractures being less striking. When the head was displaced into varus malalignment, a higher failure rate was noted compared with when the fracture resulted in valgus or neutral alignment. The normal anatomical angle between the humeral head and shaft is 135°. In our series, older patients have higher failure and re-operation rates and worse functional outcome scores. The higher failure and re-operation rates may be attributed to poorer bone quality in the older patient. An assessment of the vascular status of the head was performed by measuring the postero-medial metaphyseal extension of the humeral head fragment. The amount of displacement correlates with the magnitude of the initial trauma and thus the condition of the surrounding soft tissues. More displaced fractures predict an inferior clinical outcome. This was also demonstrated by Hertel et al., When evaluating the differences between the intramedullary nails and the angular stable plates, the easier B-type fractures were treated with a nail where the more difficult C-type fractures were more often treated with PSOS, which might explain the better results for nailing in B-type fractures. Nonetheless, significantly better results were noted for intra-articular fractures treated with plate osteosynthesis. For this reason, we believe that nailing might not be the preferred option for managing intra-articular fractures, but can be a valuable tool when managing extra-articular fractures. Bernard et al. In our series, an overall failure rate of 15.3% and a re-operation rate of 23.8% at mean follow-up of 4.3 years were found, with the majority of failures occurring in the first 2 years. This is consistent with evidence found in the literature. Südkamp et al. The consequences of treatment failure must be carefully considered before choosing conservative treatment to manage a proximal humeral fracture. When the fracture is significantly displaced, malunion or nonunion is likely to occur. Delayed surgery for failed early treatment is technically more demanding, and results are inferior to early operative treatment. For fractures with vascular compromise, certain fracture-dislocations, head-splitting fractures, and head impression fractures with >40% of articular surface involvement, hemiarthroplasty is the treatment of choice in the elderly patient. The locking plate, however, can be used to avoid head replacement in the majority of these fractures in the younger patient. Fevang et al. The most important drawback of this study is its retrospective design. Furthermore, we used the AO classification and not the Neer classification. The AO classification is useful because it allows differentiation between intra- and extra-articular fractures. We believe that a good classification should include information about vascularity of the head fragment, the position of the main fracture line (intra- or extra-articular) and, possibly, the number of fracture parts. Other potential weaknesses of this study are that the time to reevaluation was not measured and a comparison to the contralateral shoulder was not done. Ideally, future research would be prospective in design and follow all operatively managed proximal humeral fractures, with fractures being classified according to the vascularity of the humeral head fragment, the position of the main fracture line (intra- or extra-articular) and the number of fracture parts. This would further assist the surgeon in the decision-making process associated with managing these difficult fractures. Operative treatment of proximal humeral fractures remains problematic, with a failure rate of 15.3% and a re-operation rate of 23.8% identified in this study. Recognising patient and fracture characteristics is crucial in choosing the correct treatment. A significantly displaced, poorly vascularised varus articular fracture in the older patient predicts a poor outcome. Proximal humeral fractures must be evaluated and treated individually, according to patient and fracture characteristics. A possible treatment strategy is illustrated in No external funding was received for this study. Francois Hardeman, Peter Bollars, Michaël Donnelly and Johan Bellemans declare that they have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Stefaan Nijs received royalties and consultant payments from Synthes