This chapter discusses proprietary information, including the definition of the term and how it relates to trade secrets, patents, trademarks, and copyrights. Data protection is also discussed.This chapter discusses proprietary information, including the definition of the term and how it relates to trade secrets, patents, trademarks, and copyrights. Data protection is also discussed.  It is not readily accessible to others. It was created by the owner through the expenditure of considerable resources. The owner actively protects the information from disclosure. Very critical forms of proprietary information are intellectual properties. Most countries recognize and grant varying degrees of protection to four intellectual property rights: patents, trademarks, copyrights, and trade secrets. These are grants issued by a national government conferring the right to exclude others from making, using, or selling the invention within that country. Patents may be given for new products or processes. Violations of patent rights are known as infringement or piracy. These are words, names, symbols, devices, or combinations thereof used by manufacturers or merchants to differentiate their goods and distinguish them from products that are manufactured or sold by others. Counterfeiting and infringement constitute violations of trademark rights. These are protections given by a national government to creators of original literary, dramatic, musical, and certain other intellectual works. The owner of a copyright has the exclusive right to reproduce the copyrighted work, prepare derivative works based upon it. Distribute copies, and perform or display it publicly. Copyright violations are also known as infringement and piracy. These can be formulas, patterns, compilations, programs, devices, methods, techniques, and processes that derive economic value from not being generally known and not ascertainable except by illegal means. A trade secret violation in the vocabulary of the law is a misappropriation resulting from improper acquisition of disclosure. The key elements in a trade secret are the owner’s maintenance of confidentiality, limited distribution, and the absence of a patent. The Paris Convention is the primary treaty for the protection of trademarks, patents, trade names, utility models, and industrial designs. Established in 1883, the convention is the oldest of the international bodies concerned with the protection of intellectual properties. It is based on reciprocity, that is, it grants the same protections to member states as those granted to its own nationals, and provides equal access for foreigners to local courts to pursue infringement remedies. Data are a valuable corporate asset. Consider these examples: In the minerals extraction industry, finding ores depends on data. It is no exaggeration to say that before a single shovel is placed into the ground, hundreds of millions of dollars will have been spent collecting and interpreting seismic and other scientific data. Hotels routinely build patron-oriented information databases that enable them to provide personalized service. Retailers collect data to help their managers monitor the flow of products moving from manufacturing plants to warehouses, stores, and ultimately purchasers. The process makes sure that sellable items are on the shelves in the right stores, at the right time, and in the right quantities. Transportation firms routinely track movement of packages, even to the extent of allowing customers to access the information. Manufacturers have refined data-dependent “just in time” techniques to ensure that source materials reach the beginning of the production line not a day sooner or later than required and that the final products leave the plant already sold. Industrial espionage by definition is the theft of information by legal or illegal means. Bugging by illegal means is the interception of communication without the consent of the parties involved. Encryption requires two phones/cell phones/fax machines to be encrypted in order to properly transmit and receive un-intercepted calls. Today’s successful organizations are very competent at collecting and making good use of data. Only a few, however, are fully competent in protecting their data assets, which are growing in value and volume. In some circles information moves from owner to owner, similar to the way money moves in financial markets. Three dynamics seem to be at play: knowledge has become an economic resource, information technology is expanding, and the number of people familiar with information technology is growing by leaps and bounds. Knowledge is emerging as an economic resource. Production in the United States is moving away from a dependence on capital, natural resources, and blue-collar labor. One hundred years ago, the nation’s wealth derived from oil, coal, minerals, ores, and farmlands. Today’s wealth derives from the creation and use of knowledge, and the raw materials that create knowledge are in the form of data. A second dynamic is information technology. New computer hardware and software come on line every day in dazzling arrays. All functions and sub-functions of business are addressed in the information technology marketplace. The Internet, company intranets, and multi-company extranets open doors wide for the collection and dissemination of huge volumes of information. Critical data, such as client lists and strategic plans, are moved around the globe in the blink of an eye by e-mail, fax, and cellular phone. A third dynamic is the increasing ability of the average employee to work competently and comfortably with data. Add to this a very large and rapidly growing new employee class called information workers. In some companies, the entire workforce consists of people who work only with data. Data protection is a challenge not easily met. For example, how does an organization balance the need to use data and the need to protect it from harmful disclosure? The clash between use and protection is problematic. An operations manager will consider data an essential resource to be fully exploited, therefore requiring it to be assessable at all times. He/she will say, “If data can’t be used, our bottom line suffers.” The manager is right; the value of the data is directly related to its use. The Chief Security Officer (CSO) may agree with the operations manager but feel compelled to point out: “If our data is damaged, lost or compromised, the company may fail.” The CSO’s concern appears valid in light of at least one study. An insurance company found that 40% of companies that experienced major data loss as the result of disaster (e.g., fire, flood, hurricane, and terrorist action) never resumed business operations, and a third of the companies that initially recovered went out of business within two years. The CSO can enhance data protection by following commonsense suggestions: Stay on top of the issue. Keep pace with data-related technology, not necessarily at the detail level, but certainly at a level that permits a clear understanding of the risks. Look for countermeasures that take advantage of new techniques and leading edge technology. Maintain a frank and ongoing dialog with data managers about risk avoidance, and don’t be preachy or harp on a shortcoming unless you have a solution in mind. Spread the word among supervisory employees that data protection is their responsibility.