This paper presents a numerical analysis of natural cooling of a right triangular heat source by a water–CuO nanofluid in a right triangular cavity that is under the influence of a horizontal magnetic field. A computational domain is defined and a numerical scheme based on the control volume formulation using the SIMPLE algorithm is developed. The convection–diffusion terms are discretised using a power-law scheme. The effects of the Rayleigh number, the solid volume fraction, the Hartmann number and the heat source position in the cavity on the heat transfer performance of the cavity are examined. The thermal performance of the cavity is enhanced as the Rayleigh number increases, the Hartmann number decreases and the distance of the heat source with the cold walls decreases. An optimum solid volume fraction is found that maximises the heat transfer at high Rayleigh numbers.Static viscosity Brownian viscosity Static thermal conductivity Brownian thermal conductivity Boltzmann constant Modelling function, Modelling function, magnetic field strength specific heat, J/kg·K distance of the heat source from the left and bottom walls, m dimensionless distance of the heat source from the left and bottom walls gravitational acceleration, m/s Hartmann number ( thermal conductivity, W/mK length of cavity, m local Nusselt number average Nusselt number (( fluid pressure, Pa modified pressure ( dimensionless pressure ( Prandtl number ( Rayleigh number ( spherical nanoparticles radius, nm source term in Eq. temperature, K velocity components in dimensionless velocity components ( length of heat source, m Cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless coordinates ( thermal diffusivity, m thermal expansion coefficient, 1/K solid volume fraction non-dimensional parameter in Eq. diffusion term in Eq. Boltzmann constant, J/K Dynamic viscosity, Ns/m kinematic viscosity, m dimensionless temperature ( density, kg/m electrical conductivity, μS/cm stream function bottom wall cold fluid (pure water) hot left wall maximum nanofluid nanoparticle (CuO) Natural convection of electrically conducting fluids under the influence of a magnetic field has been the subject of recent studies The utilisation of nanofluids with enhanced thermal conductivities has been considered as a promising solution for enhanced natural cooling of miniature electronic components In recent years, a number of experimental and numerical studies on the performance of natural convection of nanofluids under the influence of magnetic field in square cavities The study of natural convection in triangular cavities is important because it has many domestic and industrial applications   The continuity, momentum and energy equations for the laminar and steady-state natural convection in the two-dimensional cavity filled with a nanofluid and under the influence of a magnetic field can be written in a non-dimensional form as follows: The following non-dimensional parameters are used in the analysis: The boundary conditions used to solve the governing Eq. The control volume formulation given by Patankar The average Nusselt number on the left and bottom cold walls are: The average Nusselt number of the cavity is: The effect of grid resolution is examined in order to select the appropriate grid density.       Natural cooling of a triangular heat source using a water–CuO nanofluid in a triangular cavity that is under the influence of a magnetic field is numerically examined. The effects of the Rayleigh number, the solid volume fraction, the Hartmann number and the heat source position on the thermal performance of the cavity are examined. The thermal performance of the cavity experiences an enhancement as the flow moves from a conduction-dominated regime at low Rayleigh numbers to a convection-dominated regime at high Rayleigh numbers. The magnetic field does not significantly affect the thermal performance of the cavity at low Rayleigh numbers where the heat transfer is mainly due to conduction. At high Rayleigh numbers, the magnetic field suppresses the circulating cells and causes a reduction in the heat transfer rate. The addition of water–CuO nanoparticles in the base fluid causes an enhancement of the cavity thermal performance at low Rayleigh numbers. However, at high Rayleigh numbers, an optimum solid volume fraction is found that maximises the heat transfer rate. For all Rayleigh numbers, the overall heat transfer of the cavity decreases as the heat source moves away from the cold walls. The rate of this decrease becomes smaller as the strength of convective flow circulations in the cavity increases.