In the present research work, various ceramic materials such as Al2O3 - Cr2O3 - SiC, and Al2O3 - ZrO2 - TiO2 were developed for the analysis of wear performance and hardness. The specimens were coated using plasma spray coating technique. A bond coat of 50μm thickness was applied on the substrate using NiCrAlY for good adhesion before laying the top coat. The wear behaviour and hardness of the samples were investigated by wear and hardness tests. The Energy Dispersive X-ray Analysis (EDAX) was performed to analyse the chemical composition of the samples. The Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) was used to analyse the surface and cross-section of the samples. X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies are carried out to understand the structural and crystallographic information. The performances of the coated and uncoated samples were compared and investigated. It was observed that the specimen with Al2O3 (60%) + ZrO2 (20%) + TiO2 (20%) coating produced best results for wear rate (0.03612mm
                        3
                     /Nm) and Coefficient of friction (0.357). The proposed ceramic coating composition could be recommended for automobile components that require good wear and heat resistance to improve the service life.Aluminium alloys offer a wide range of desirable properties and find applications in the fabrication of engineering structures. The 6000 series aluminium alloys are utilized in the production of cylinder blocks, crankcases and pistons as considerable amount of weight savings can be effected. Especially, Al6061 alloy possesses many favourable characteristics like heat-treatability, good toughness, corrosion resistance along with mechanical strength which make it suitable to cater medium and high strength structural applications. The internal combustion (IC) engine components such as piston and cylinder liner are generally produced using steel, cast iron, and aluminium alloys. These parts experience wear regularly due to friction as they involve continuous movements during IC engine operations. Moreover, these components require hard exterior structure to endure wear and soft interior to absorb energy. Hence, various types of coating materials are attempted on IC engine components to get high hardness and wear resistance thereby longer operating life. Among various coatings, ceramic coatings are normally preferred for wear resistant and thermal load bearing characteristics. Guilmard et al., The SEM observations revealed that micro-cracks were formed on the coating as the substrate was exposed to plasma flame and also the porosity and surface roughness of the coating were likely to increase to certain extent with the increase in coating thickness. The investigation further reveals that the wear mechanism is primarily because of abrasion and when bond coat is exposed, the material lost by adhesion in the pin-on-disc test. Rastegar et al., Hyo-Sok et al., Abdullah Uzun et al., Samadi et al., Deivasigamani et al. From the available literatures it is found that not much attempts have been made to study the wear characteristics of Al6061 alloy coated with different ceramic oxides at various proportions. This work attempts to apply two different set of ceramic coatings on Al6061 alloy to analyse the change in properties. The chemical composition of the Al6061 alloy is given in Al6061 alloy is normally used for the fabrication of IC engine parts like piston, cylinder liner etc. Hence, Al6061 plates of 30 The bond coatings and top coatings are done on specimen plates of Al6061 using a METCO 3MB plasma spraying machine with the selected combinations of ceramic powders as per the spray parameters shown in Alumina (Al Zirconium oxide (ZrO X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks of ceramic coated samples were recorded with a D8 Advanced Bruker Diffractometer in the range of 20 The hardness is measured along with the total thickness of both top and bond coatings. Hardness measurements are taken at three different locations on the transverse section of the coated and uncoated samples and the average value is calculated for each. Friction and wear tests are carried out on the coated specimen using Pin-on- disc. A wear testing machine with A60 grit, Al The objective of this research is to investigate the effectiveness of ceramic coating systems for enhancing mechanical properties of IC engine components like piston and cylinder liner for improving their service life. X-ray diffraction (XRD) studies are carried out to understand the structural and crystallographic information of the prepared samples. Scanning Electron Microscopic (SEM) images along with EDAX spectrum for the samples of uncoated ( The plasma spray technique used for producing the coatings involves high impact force and melting of the spray powders at high temperatures. The powders are melted as a bulk and it contains different range of melt conditions like entirely melted, partially melted and completely unmelted particles. Such a mix of various levels of melted particles leads to porous coating on the substrate and also the rapid solidification of the coating results in micro-cracks. The application of heat during coating process also causes thermal stress due to difference in solidification rate of various layers which again leads to the formation of cracks and other irregularities. The micrographs of the coated A1 and coated B1 also show voids at some places which are caused by various factors such as sudden solidification, different levels of melted particles, different rates of solidification and layers of thermal stress that may form irregularities on the surface   The coated and uncoated samples are tested for their hardness under Rockwell hardness testing machine. The observations shows that the specimens containing ZrO Two different coating combinations of different proportions (A1 to A3 & B1 to B3) are investigated in this study. Both coating systems exhibited better results compared to uncoated material. Hence, both these systems of ceramic coating could be applied for increasing the service life of the piston and cylinder liner components of IC engines. The specific compositions of system B1 could be applied as coating for getting maximum benefit among the tested sample proportions. Wear test is carried out with 15 The  The wear rate for the three material systems (Uncoated, A & B) involved in this investigation is shown in The The The first system of coating which contains CrO The Al6061 material used for fabricating piston and cylinder liner of an IC engine is tested for its wear properties to compare with new proposed ceramic coatings. The specimens made of Al6061 material are coated with Al A bond layer of NiCrAlY is coated on the substrate to ensure better bonding between the substrate and blend of ceramic powders and then the base alloy (Al6061) is pre-heated by blasting and coated as top coating. The uncoated and coated specimens are undergone wear test and their wear resistance is compared. The coated specimens show better endurance to wear compared to the uncoated Al6061 specimen. The uncoated specimen shows a wear rate of 0.2311 mm It is observed that the wear rate is high at the beginning stage and the material removal is taken place by abrasion when it reaches the bond layer. The wear rate slows down when the removal is by adhesion. It is clear from the experimental conditions of applied load and time; the pin is not penetrated into the substrate for the coated specimens tested. If the pin is penetrated down to the base alloy substrate, the material removal rate is high, that is revealed in the uncoated specimen. The Rockwell hardness test revealed that the sample B1 has the highest hardness of 94 HRB and least wear rate of 0.03612 The author (s) provides no conflict of interest for publishing this manuscript.