The transport of Tm(III) through a dispersion supported liquid membrane (DSLM) consisting of polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (PVDF) as the liquid membrane support and dispersion solution concluding HCl solution as the stripping solution and 2-ethyl hexyl phosphonic acid-mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (PC-88A) dissolved in kerosene as the membrane solution, has been studied. The effects of pH value, initial concentration of Tm(III) and different ionic strength in the feed phase, volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution, concentration of HCl solution, concentration of carrier, different stripping agents in the dispersion phase on transport of Tm(III) have also been investigated, respectively. As a result, the optimum transport condition of Tm(III) was that concentration of HCl solution was 4.0mol/L, concentration of PC-88A was 0.16mol/L, and volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution was 40:20 in the dispersion phase, and pH value was 5.1 in the feed phase. Ionic strength had no obvious effect on transport of Tm(III). Under the optimum condition studied, when initial concentration of Tm(III) was 1.0×10−4
                     mol/L, the transport percentage of Tm(III) was up to 92.2% during the transport time of 155min. The kinetic equation was developed in terms of the law of mass diffusion and the theory of interface chemistry. The diffusion coefficient of Tm(III) in the membrane and the thickness of diffusion layer between feed phase and membrane phase can be obtained to 4.42×10−8 and 17.99μm, respectively. The results obtained were in good agreement with the literature data.effective area of membrane (m concentration of metal ion in the feed phase (mol/L) concentration of metal ion in the diffusion layer between the feed phase and membrane phase (mol/L) concentration of metal ion in the membrane (mol/L) concentration of metal ion in the feed phase when time concentration of metal ion in the feed phase when time concentration of carrier PC-88A (mol/L) thickness of diffusion layer between the feed phase and membrane phase (m) thickness of the membrane (m) diffusion coefficient of the metal ion in the membrane (m diffusion coefficient of metal ion in the membrane (m extractant/carrier PC-88A concentration of H membrane flux (m forward reaction percentage constant at the left interface of the membrane backward reaction percentage constant at the left interface of the membrane forward reaction percentage constant at the right interface of the membrane backward reaction percentage constant at the right interface of the membrane extraction equilibrium constant distribution ratio of metal ion permeability coefficient of metal ion (m/s) thulium–carrier complex volume of the feed phase (m porosity of the membrane tortuosity of the membrane transport resistance due to diffusion by aqueous feed boundary layer (s/m) transport resistance due to diffusion through the membrane (s/m) feed phase membrane phase organic phase stripping phase Industrial effluents containing highly toxic and nonbiodegradable heavy metal ions are generated in hydrometallurgy, electroplating, and electrochemical industry. For the purpose of environmental conservation and resources recycling, the removal and recovery of these heavy metals have become increasingly stringent Recently, many attentions have been attracted to liquid membrane (LM) techniques due to their specific characteristics. LMs can carry out extraction and stripping processes simultaneously, and they show advantages of nonequilibrium mass transfer and up-hill effect, where solute can move from low-to-high concentration solution In order to overcome these above difficulties in the conventional LM systems, a new liquid membrane technique, named dispersion supported liquid membrane (DSLM) These advantages are very attractive, nevertheless, more studies are needed for the application of DSLM in industry. Otherwise, scaling-up for the new liquid membrane configuration will fail unless there is a complete understanding of the efficiency parameters, which is reported in such a way that a concise and global insight of the separation characteristics of a given system can be easily drawn. For example, the behavior of transport of single cation and a new permeability coefficient equation should be studied because the diversity of transport behavior of ions is objectively present in the two systems of traditional SLM and DSLM. Secondly, more works concerning the separation of two or more competitive solutes are required in order to solve more practical separation problems. This study is concerned with the technical feasibility of transport of metal ions by DSLM. The effect of various experimental parameters on the transport of rare earth Tm(III) ions was investigated. Although the metal ions transport by SLM containing the same carrier (PC-88A) has been extensively studied, there was little research about it by DSLM. The transport of Tm(III) through a DSLM consisting of polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (PVDF) as the support and dispersion solution concluding HCl solution as the stripping solution and 2-ethyl hexyl phosphonic acid-mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (PC-88A) dissolved in kerosene as the membrane solution, has been studied. The effects of pH value, initial concentration of Tm(III) and different ionic strength in the feed phase, volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution, concentration of HCl solution, concentration of PC-88A, and different stripping agents in the dispersion phase on transport of Tm(III) have also been investigated, respectively. The comparison with DSLM and conventional SLM was conducted. A kinetic equation for DSLM process derived from the law of mass diffusion and the theory of interface chemistry was also developed. All the reagents such as Tm Tm(III) stock solution Tm(III) was prepared by dissolving Tm Tm(III) feed solution was prepared with a certain amount of the Tm(III) stock solution diluted with 0.01 Arsenazo III (C Stripping solution was prepared with a required amount of HCl dissolved and diluted with deionized water to a known concentration. PC-88A solution was prepared by diluting a calculated amount of extractant with kerosene. The measurements of transport percentage for the DSLM were performed as follows: the experiments were accomplished at 25  Tm(III) diffuses from the feed phase to the interface A. On the feed side interface of the SLM, the extraction of Tm(III) from feed solution with carrier PC-88A (can be as (HR) The metal-complex (TmR At the stripping side interface B, the TmR Carrier PC-88A returns from B to A. In this mechanism the transport of Tm(III) across DSLM is described by considering only diffusion coefficient of Tm(III), because the complex reaction between the Tm(III) and PC-88A at the interfaces is much faster compared to the diffusion in the feed phase and membrane phase The flux of feed phase can be written as The extraction equilibrium constant The transport flux of diffusion layer between the feed phase and membrane phase can be written as In view of distinct character of different membrane, tortuosity and porosity of membrane impose an effect on the transport flux of membrane. The greater the porosity of membrane is, the higher the flux is, and the greater the tortuosity of membrane is, the lower the flux is. So considering correction coefficient, Eq. Based on the steady state assumption, all of these above individual transport fluxes can be taken for equality Combining Eqs. Based on the definition of permeability coefficient, transport flux of membrane can also be written as:  The Eq. In Eq. Then, The transport percentage of Tm(III) is obtained by determination of d Considering and integrating Eq. The effect of volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution in the dispersion phase on transport of Tm(III) was studied. The assumed experimental conditions chosen were chosen as in the certain pH value in the feed phase, which was adjusted to 4.0. Initial concentration of Tm(III) was 1.0 Under 50:10 and 40:20 conditions, the transport percentage of Tm(III) were above 70.6% and 68.3% respectively. These transport percentage was near, because under these conditions renewal efficiency of membrane solution, the rate of complexation reaction and stripping rate was near, but under volume ratio of 30:30, 20:40 and 10:50 conditions transport percentage were lower. It indicates that the transport percentage of Tm(III) increases with the increasing of the volume ratio in the dispersion phase. When volume ratio in the dispersion phase increases, the droplets of the dispersion solution disperse obviously in the membrane phase and the chances of contacting between PC-88A and Tm(III) increase. In this way, the mixing between the membrane phase and dispersion phase provides an extra stripping surface and renewal percentage of liquid membrane, which leads to extremely stripping percentage for the target species from organic phase and prolonging life of liquid membrane. Therefore it enhances the transport percentage of Tm(III). Considering saving membrane solution as well as increasing transport rate, we chose 40:20 as the optimum volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution in the dispersion phase during the following experiments. The stripping reaction in the dispersion phase plays a vital role in the transport of metal ion from the feed phase to the stripping phase. Thus the effect of the concentration of HCl solution in the dispersion phase on transport percentage of Tm(III) was studied. All the other parameters, such as pH value, initial concentration of Tm(III) in the feed phase, volume ratio and concentration of PC-88A were adjusted to 4.0, 1.0 Based on mechanism of mass transfer process, the concentration difference between feed phase and dispersion phase is the driving power of mass transfer process. In the feed phase the lower the H Effect of initial concentration of Tm(III) on transport percentage of Tm(III) was studied in the Tm(III) concentration range from 0.5 The stripping agent at the membrane-dispersion side plays a vital role in transport of metal ions from feed phase to stripping phase. So the effects of different stripping agents in the dispersion phase on transport of Tm(III) were studied. All the other parameters, such as pH value, initial concentration of Tm(III) in the feed phase, volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution and concentration of PC-88A in the dispersion phase were adjusted to 5.1, 1.0 Concentration of PC-88A in the membrane phase and dispersion phase also plays a significant role in transport of Tm(III). Effect of concentration of PC-88A on transport percentage of Tm(III) was studied in the PC-88A concentration range from 0.036 Under the optimum condition, the effect of ionic strength in the feed phase on transport percentage of Tm(III) was studied. The results are shown in Based on the data of effect of pH in the feed phase, and the relationship is developed between It indicates that the relationship between The new kinetic equation is determined by using And when H The transport of Tm(III) through a dispersion supported liquid membrane (DSLM) was studied. The effects of pH value, initial concentration of Tm(III) and different ionic strength in the feed phase, volume ratio of membrane solution and stripping solution, concentration of HCl solution, concentration of PC-88A, different stripping agents in the dispersion phase on transport of Tm(III) have also been investigated. We drew some conclusions as below. Optimum transport condition of Tm(III) in the DSLM system was that the concentration of HCl solution was 4.0 The kinetic equation that describes the transport of Tm(III) in DSLM was derived: DSLM, owing to a large number of membrane solution was used in the dispersion phase, can renewal the losing carrier of supported liquid membrane. As a result, the transport percentage of Tm(III) was increased, the stability of membrane was enhanced, and the life span of the membrane was extended. This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 90401009) and Research Fund for Excellent Doctoral Thesis of Xi’an University of Technology (602-210805).