External skeletal fixation is an important minimal invasive procedure in the management of fractures at the distal end of the radius. Attention to detail is important not only in the recognition of indications and function of the external fixator but also in its specific application. To improve anatomical restoration (e.g. palmar tilt) multi-planar ligamentotaxis is recommended. The demonstrated dynamic fixator is easy to apply and the double ball joint facilitates reduction after mounting by multi-planar ligamentotaxis. This transarticular unilateral external fixation system permits restoration of anatomy with the wrist in neutral or extension, thereby allowing full flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joints, with fingers and wrist extensor tendons relatively relaxed. Multi-planar ligamentotaxis, combined with a limited approach for supplementary procedures (fixation of articular fragments and/or bone grafting) and with early wrist motion, offers an encouraging treatment option in the management of unstable distal radial fractures by providing better anatomical restoration, especially of the palmar tilt and reduces the risk of wrist and finger stiffness.In unstable dislocated distal radius fractures treatment aims at anatomical reduction as the incidence of sequelae of fractures healed in anatomical position is lower than in malunited fractures. Functional results are directly correlated to the residual deformity Closed reduction of Colles' fractures even when unstable normally is straight-forward, retention of the fragments being the challenge. The classic reduction according to Charnley follows three steps: under continuous longitudinal traction the fracture is disimpacted and dorsal angulation is increased, followed by the Robert–Jones manoeuver: the “reducing” hand forces the distal fragment to the volar side under continuous traction while the “stabilizing” hand holds the proximal radius. In the last step of the manoeuver the result of the reposition is maintained by pronating the distal fragment and traction can be stopped Our retrospective analysis of 103 unstable distal radius fractures showed maintenance of the radial length and radial angle even after removal of the unilateral wrist fixator We changed our reduction manoeuvre according to the results of Gupta This was described by Gupta who stated that flexion in the midcarpus does not control the dorsally tilted distal fragment because of the mainly proximal insertion of the dorsal wrist ligaments on the proximal carpal row Restoration of the dorsal tilt of the distal radius appears to be the major factor in regaining normal wrist function after fracture We recommend external fixation of distal radius fractures using three-dimensional ligamentotaxis as a minimally-invasive technique to gain anatomical reduction in unstable distal radius fractures. In severe articular comminution supplementary augmentation and internal fixation should be used to avoid secondary loss of correction. Further studies should be performed to prove better outcome in longterm functional results with this technique.