The aim of this retrospective clinical study is to present the clinical experience of using dermis-fat interpositional grafts in the surgical management of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) ankylosis in adult patients. Eleven adult patients who presented with ankylosis of the TMJ were identified and included in the study. All patients underwent a TMJ gap arthroplasty which involved the removal of a segment of bone and fibrous tissue between the glenoid fossa and neck of the mandibular condyle. The resultant gap was filled with an autogenous dermis-fat graft procured from the patient’s groin. All patients were followed up for a minimum of 2 years. Five of the 11 patients were found to have osseous ankylosis while 6 patients had fibro-osseous ankylosis. Two patients had bilateral TMJ ankylosis that were also treated with costochondral grafts which were overlaid with dermis-fat graft. The average interincisal opening was 15.6mm on presentation which improved to an average of 35.7mm following surgery. Patients were followed up from 2 to 6 years post-operatively (mean 41.5 months) with only 1 re-ankylosis identified out of the 13 joints treated. This study found that the use of the autogenous dermis-fat interpositional graft is an effective procedure for the prevention of re-ankylosis up to 6 years following the surgical release of TMJ ankylosis.Ankylosis release is the oldest form of TMJ surgery that evolved from procedures during the 19th century which consisted of simple bone division to separate the ramus from the cranial base Not surprisingly, T The first interpositional graft was developed by Eschmarc in the latter half of the 19th century who described the pterygomasseteric sling technique of suturing together the masseter and medial pterygoid muscles across a divided mandibular ramus Dermis-fat grafts are most commonly utilised as orbital implants in anophthalmic sockets in paediatric patients A retrospective clinical study involving adult patients who presented with radiological evidence (i.e., CT scan) of true ankylosis of the TMJ was undertaken. Only those with true osseous ( The donor site in the groin was repaired by primary closure after the graft was dissected free-hand from its tissue bed ( Physiotherapy to help mobilize the joint was commenced 7 days post-operatively and continued for 4–6 weeks. Patients were treated by various physiotherapists, some which utilised the Roccobado method while others also used adjunctive aids such as ultrasound over the surgical site. Patients were then followed up on regular but increasingly spaced visits. In this group of patients, pain was not a significant factor so the only parameters measured were maximum (interincisal) mouth opening (MMO), patient satisfaction and chewing ability. Eleven patients were identified with true ankylosis of the TMJ ( Six patients had osseous TMJ ankylosis ( The pre-operative inter-incisal mouth opening (MMO) ranged from 9 to 20 The average follow-up period after surgical intervention was 41.5 months with the shortest follow-up 2 years and the longest 6 years ( All patients in this study were followed up for at least 2 years after their surgery to release the ankylosis. All nine of the unilateral cases had some degree of mandibular deviation to the operated side on maximum mouth opening ( As for the two bilateral cases, despite the costochondral grafting, major restorative dental work was required to resurrect the occlusion as both patients declined further orthognathic surgery to correct their significant malocclusion (i.e., anterior open bite). Mandibular opening in the bilateral ankylosis patients was symmetrical following surgical release and each was pleased with the outcome once the occlusion was corrected. Chewing ability also improved significantly following the completion of restorative dentistry. Apart from the re-ankylosis in case no. 4 ( Ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is a rare phenomenon that results in chronic and severe limited mouth opening. In Western nations, trauma is the most common cause, particularly in untreated cases of severe comminution of the condylar head Iatrogenic causes of ankylosis may arise from cytotoxic medication, repeated TMJ surgery and irradiation. Repeated TMJ surgery emerged as a dilemma largely confined to Western countries following the introduction of the concept of internal derangement and disk displacement which acted as the catalyst for unmitigated surgical intervention in TMJ disorders during the 1970s and 1980s Six patients had osseous and 5 patients had fibro-osseous ankylosis of the TMJ. Only 1 of the 13 joints studied in this case series developed re-ankylosis during the follow-up period ( As mentioned previously, surgery plays an integral role in the management of TMJ ankylosis which is determined by the age of the patient and the aetiology of the ankylosis. The two primary objectives of surgery are: To establish jaw movement and jaw function by surgical release of the ankylosis. To prevent relapse by interpositional grafting, early jaw mobilisation and intensive physiotherapy. At present there is no ideal interpositional graft Whilst dermis grafts and, to a lesser extent, full-thickness skin grafts In cases where condylar reconstruction is not undertaken, most surgeons prefer to begin mobilisation of mandible immediately following surgical release Coronoidectomies are especially important if temporalis flaps are to be used as interpositional grafts, since the utilisation of temporalis grafts may result in scar contracture of this muscle which may further exacerbate the trismus In 1990 K Multiple failed surgical procedures which result in TMJ ankylosis may lead to abnormal illness behaviour in these patients making them bitter, yet paradoxically, totally dependent on the health care system which created the problem in the first place. These patients must be carefully evaluated and managed from a psychological stand-point in the peri-operative phase of care as undiagnosed depression can be a significant obstacle in the patient’s rehabilitation following ankylosis release. Two of the 6 iatrogenic cases in this study were under the care of psychiatrists for depression related to long standing TMJ pain and dysfunction. Therefore, patients with iatrogenically induced ankylosis may require additional counselling and psychotherapy to ensure a successful outcome In this study there were too few cases and no comparative data to draw any firm conclusions apart from the fact that the use of the dermis-fat graft is a safe and effective procedure in the management of TMJ ankylosis. In order to establish further credible support for this technique, future studies should focus on the fate of the dermis-fat grafts under functional load conditions. Even comparative clinical studies between this technique and the current standard practice of temporalis interpositional grafts in the management of TMJ ankylosis may be useful in determining whether this grafting technique should be universally adopted in the armamentarium of TMJ ankylosis management.