 E-mail: Professor Heinz Konietzky is a graduate (Dipl.-Ing. 1987; Dr.-Ing. 1989; Dr.-Ing. habil. 2001) of the TU Bergakademie Freiberg in the field of Geotechnical Engineering. In 1987, he has started his career as project engineer at the scientific-technical research center of SDAG Wismut (uranium mine enterprise), where he has developed a seismoacoustic monitoring system including seismic signal interpretation and source parameter determination for a 2000 m deep mine. In 1990, he moved to the Ruhr-area and joined MESY-SOLEXPERTS for 2 years. He conducted borehole measurements worldwide for civil engineering and mining projects and has specialized in hydrofrac stress measurements including numerical stress field analysis, for instance for infrastructure projects in Hong Kong, coal mines in Germany and Great Britain, nuclear waste projects in Switzerland or several tunnel projects in Germany and Austria. He was also involved in the Deep Continental Drilling Project (KTB) in Germany. In 1992, he switched to the French subsidiary of Itasca and in 1993 he founded the German Itasca subsidiary in Bochum and Gelsenkirchen, respectively. He worked as company manager until 2005. During that time he has developed unique skills in numerical modeling not only in the field of geotechnical engineering, but also in material sciences, mineral processing and process engineering. Close cooperation was set-up with both the industry and different research organizations including universities all over Europe. His work covered a quite broad spectrum in rock and soil mechanics like nuclear waste storage, mining, civil engineering including tunneling, slope stability and foundation engineering. During that time he was heavily involved in research projects for nuclear waste projects in Germany, Switzerland, France, Spain, Japan and Czech Republic and in several big tunnel projects in Germany. He has made major contributions to numerical stress field modeling and the use of particle-based numerical approaches to understand the behavior of geogrids (soil-geogrid interaction). Already at that time he has started to work as reviewer for radioactive waste storage projects, later also for projects in civil engineering, mining and petroleum engineering. In December 2005, he was appointed as full professor for rock mechanics at the Geotechnical Institute of TU Bergakademie Freiberg and in 2010 Professor Konietzky was elected as Director of the Geotechnical Institute. In addition he is furthermore working as senior consultant for Itasca Germany. Also, he is working as reviewer and consultant for several mining authorities and mining companies in Germany as well as for NAGRA in Switzerland. Professor Konietzky is author of more than 100 international papers, editor of two books ( Since adoption of the position as university professor at TU Bergakademie Freiberg, he has continuously further developed numerical simulation techniques, but also concentrated on sophisticated static and dynamic HTM-coupled rock mechanical laboratory testing procedures. Currently he and his team focus on the following topics: Damage and fracture mechanical simulations and laboratory testing at the grain size level including life-time prediction for rocks and concrete; Simulations as well as laboratory and field investigations of HTM-coupled processes for Enhanced Geothermal Systems (Deep Geothermal Energy) including investigations concerning induced seismicity; Renovation of stone monuments and historical buildings: numerical simulations, laboratory testing and treatment in-situ; Innovative mine design and dimensioning including dimensioning of support systems; Numerical back analysis of sophisticated rock mechanical laboratory tests. Ph.D., Professor Coal Mining and Designing Branch, China Coal Research Institute, Beijing, China E-mail: Professor Hongpu Kang graduated from Shanxi Mining College in 1985, and obtained his MS and Ph.D. degrees from China University of Mining and Technology in 1988 and 1991, respectively. He began his mining engineering career in Beijing Mining Research Institute, China Coal Research Institute in 1991. He was appointed as senior engineer in 1993, and then professor in 1999. He spent one-year study at the Department of Mineral Resources, the University of Nottingham, UK from 1996 to 1997. He served as dean of Roadway Support Division in Beijing Mining Research Institute (1998–2012). He is the chief scientist in China Coal Research Institute, and vice director of Coal Mining and Designing Branch. He is also vice director of State Key Laboratory of Coal Mining and Clean Utilization, China Coal Research Institute. Professor Kang is a researcher and teacher on rock mechanics and strata control technology. His research interests cover the following three aspects: (1) the in-situ geomechanics measurements for coal and rock masses, the distribution laws of in-situ stresses, strength and structures in underground coal mines, and application of geomechanics measurement results to coal mining engineering; (2) roadway support theory and technology, including deformation and failure characteristics of rocks surrounding roadways, the relation between surrounding rocks and supports, support design of various underground excavations, rock bolting technique, grouting materials and techniques for fractured rocks, monitoring methods and instruments for roadway support states and safety; (3) hydraulic fracturing technique for hard and stable roof control and destressing of roadways with high stresses, including hydraulic fracture propagation and influential factors, fracturing tools and rigs, fracturing monitoring and evaluation technique. He is the author of three books, Professor Kang has managed and participated in 14 national scientific research projects, which were funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China, National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program), National High Technology Program of China (863 Program), and National Key Technology Support Program of China. He also participated in and completed more than 50 research projects from China coal industry and enterprises. He has published more than 120 papers associated with roadway support technology, geomechanics measurements for coal and rock masses, and hydraulic fracturing technology. He was authorized 10 national patents. He was awarded 4 Natural Science and Technology Progress Awards, and more than 20 Provincial Science and Technology Awards. Professor Kang is the vice editor-in-chief of Professor Kang is an executive member of Chinese Society for Rock Mechanics and Engineering, vice chairman of Chinese Sub-society for Soft Rock Engineering & Deep Disaster Control, Chinese Sub-society for Rock Anchorage and Grouting, and Chinese Sub-society for Technical Advisory. He is an executive member of China Coal Society, and chairman of Rock Mechanics and Support Committee. He is chairman of Underground Mining Expert Committee of China Coal Industry Technical Committee, vice group leader of Coal Mine Support Committee of Chinese Coal Industry Association. He is a member of the ISRM Commission on Crustal Stress and Earthquake. Professor Kang won the Award for Young People of Guanghua Engineering Science and Technology (2010), Energy Award of Sun Yueqi Science and Technology Education Fund (2007), and Chinese Youth Science and Technology Award (2001). He was honored with Outstanding Professional and Technical Personnel (2002), Top Ten Outstanding Youth of Centrally Administered Enterprises (2002), and the National Labor Model (2000). Ph.D., D.Sc. (Physics & Mathematics), Professor, Corresponding Member of Russian Academy of Sciences Director, Institute for Applied Mathematics, Far Eastern Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, Vladivostok, Russia E-mail: Professor M.A. (Alexandrovich) Guzev is a physics graduate of the University of Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg, 1984). He began his scientific career at the Institute of Physics, Leningrad University in 1984. After commencing his Ph.D. (Physics & Mathematics) in 1987, he continued his work as a researcher of Pacific Oceanological Institute, Far Eastern Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences (FEBRAS), Vladivostok, Russia, from 1987 to 1991. In 1991, he joined the staff of Institute for Automation & Control Processes, FEBRAS, Vladivostok, Russia, as senior researcher in Solid Mechanics. After commencing his D.Sc. (Physics & Mathematics) in 1999, he became leading researcher and main researcher (2002). He also worked at the Department of the Mathematical Modeling and Information, Far Eastern State Technical University, Vladivostok, Russia (1992−2000). In August 2003, he was appointed as deputy-director of Institute for Automation & Control Processes, FEBRAS and served until 2005. He also served as professor and director at Institute of Mathematics and Computer Science, Far Eastern National University, Vladivostok, Russia (2000−2010). In August 2005, Professor Guzev was appointed as Chief Academic Secretary of Presidium of FEBRAS, Vladivostok, Russia. After retiring from that position in 2008, he became director of Institute for Applied Mathematics, FEBRAS, Vladivostok, Russia, and is working now. Professor Guzev has wide experience as a researcher, teacher and writer in applied mathematics, mathematical modeling of materials with the structure defects and processes of wave propagation in random media. He has continuing research interests in the construction of non-classical models of rocks and rock masses. He is the co-author with Vladimir Makarov of the book, Professor Guzev is the vice editor-in-chief of Professor Guzev was elected as a corresponding member of Russian Academy of Sciences in 2003. He was awarded the State Grant of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Mechanics and Engineering in 2000, the Russian Science Support Foundation Grant for Young Doctors of Science in 2001, and the President of the Russian Federation Grant for Young Doctors in 2002. Ph.D., D.Sc., Professor, Corresponding Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences Head, Department of Extreme States of Materials and Structures, Institute for Problems in Mechanical Engineering of the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS) Director, the Research Centre of Dynamics of the St. Petersburg State University (SPbSU) E-mail: Professor Yuri V. Petrov (born January 27, 1958) graduated from Leningrad (St. Petersburg) State University in 1980. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from Leningrad (St.-Petersburg) State University in 1985 and D.Sc. degree from the Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS) in 1995. In 2006, Professor Petrov was elected to serve as a Corresponding Member of the RAS. Currently he holds the positions of the head of Department of Extreme States of Materials and Structures, Institute for Problems in Mechanical Engineering of the RAS, Director of the Research Centre of Dynamics ( He began his scientific career as a research fellow of Leningrad (St. Petersburg) State University. Later he also joined the Institute of Problems in Transportation of the RAS and the Institute of Problems in Mechanical Engineering of the RAS. After receiving his Ph.D. in 1985 and D.Sc. in 1995, he was appointed full professor of Mechanics at SPbSU. In 1999, Professor Petrov organized and headed “Research Centre of Dynamics”, a joint laboratory of the RAS and SPbSU that had swiftly evolved into leading Russian center for investigation of transient processes in solids (dynamic fracture and deformation, dynamic plasticity, phase transformation in transient conditions, etc.) and other media (detonation, electric discharge in liquids and gases, etc.). Main scientific interest of Professor Petrov always was in the area of mechanics and physics of continuum media. He authored or co-authored several monographs, many book chapters and more than 270 scientific publications in this area. At the same time, Professor Petrov is also an author of numerous publications in other areas of mechanics and physics. These include dynamic plasticity, electrical breakdown, initiation of detonation in gaseous media, cavitation in liquids, phase transformations, etc. Main research results of Professor Petrov are connected with development of constitutive equations and criteria for reliable prediction of conditions leading to fracture and other abrupt changes in media that is subjected to dynamic highly intensive thermomechanical loads. Professor Petrov is an author of new approach for prediction and modeling of these phenomena. He put forward an idea of material incubation time (taken as a scale level dependent material constant) as the primary measure of reaction of materials and continuums subjected to dynamic loading. Utilizing this approach, Professor Petrov together with his students and colleagues successfully studied a big variety of different phenomena (brittle fracture, plasticity, electrical breakdown, cavitation in fluids, detonation, etc.). He developed a new incubation time based approach for dynamic characterization of rocks and a nonlocal fracture criterion to predict behavior of short cracks in ceramic materials. Professor Petrov also put forward an idea of tempo-spatial hierarchy of scale levels in fracture mechanics based on a notion of upper- and lower-boundaries of a scale level. A big part of his work was connected to prediction of fracture and deformation of quasi-brittle heterogeneous materials (rocks, concretes, mortars). Professor Petrov studied this class of materials in his theoretical work as well as in a large number of experimental studies utilizing different experimental techniques to create high-rate load (split Hopkinson bars, wire explosion, electromagnetic way to create load, etc.). Professor Petrov is a chairman of several international conferences and organizing/program committee member of many renowned international conferences. He is a chairman of technical committee (TC5 “Dynamics of fracture and structural transformations”), an active member of the ESIS (European Structural Integrity Society) and also an active EUROMECH (European Mechanics Society) member. He is a member of editorial board of several international scientific journals. In 1997, he was elected to be a member of Russian National Committee for Theoretical and Applied Mechanics. He is a chairman of Dynamic Problems section of the RAS council on the Problems of Mechanics of Deformable Solids, member of the RAS united council on the Problems of Strength and Material Sciences, and chairman of Northwest Branch of the RAS council on the Problems of Detonation and Flame. He is also a member of expert board of the Russian Foundation for Fundamental Research and a member of expert board of the Russian Ministry of Education and Research.