LiFePO4/C composite with carbon core structure was successfully prepared by using araldite as carbon source. The microstructure and morphology of LiFePO4/C composite were confirmed by X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopic observation. The experimental results show that this structure is entirely different from carbon coating. The LiFePO4/C composite forms a common core structure in which carbon is used as line core and carbon core is covered by nano-LiFePO4 grains. Moreover, the LiFePO4/C composite exhibits higher tap density of 1.66 g cm−3, shows higher capacity about 162 mAhg−1 applied 30 mAg−1 current, excellent cyclic ability and rate capability about 139 mAhg−1 applied 700 mAg−1 current at room temperature.LiFePO From the above reviews, one can understand the preparation of carbon containing LiFePO LiFePO The crystalline structure and substance phase have been confirmed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Siemens D5000) with Cu Kα radiation. The XRD data were obtained over an angular 2θ range from 15° to 75° with a step size of 0.02° and a constant counting time of 0.2 s per step. The morphology of the composites was observed by Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM, JEM-3010). Conductivity measurement was made on disc-shaped pellet by four-point d.c. method at room temperature, four WC probes were pressed on the surface of disc (12 mm diameter and 2 mm thickness). The prepared powders, acetylene black and polytetrafluorethylene were mixed homogeneously according to a weight ratio of 75:20:5. The mixture was rolled into a thin sheet with uniform thickness, from which pellets were cut as the cathode. In the experiments, the adopted three electrodes battery system consisted of the cathode, lithium foils as counter and reference electrodes, 1 mol L The XRD pattern of the prepared powders is shown in The carbon content in LiFePO   LiFePO This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (50672024) and the Applied Basic Research of Hunan Province (06FJ2006).