Impact fragmentation can be used to disperse nanoparticle-agglomerates. While the fragmentation of openly structured (fractal dimension Df < 2) agglomerates during perpendicular impaction was the subject of several investigations, the fragmentation during oblique impaction is not experimentally investigated so far. During oblique impaction a tangential velocity component acts on the agglomerates leading to an increased fragmentation for the investigated agglomerate structures (with Df = 1.6, 1.8, 2.3, 2.6 and 3.0). For the agglomerates with Df = 1.6. 1.8, 2.3 and 2.6 the degree of fragmentation can be described with the Weibull-statistics using the tangential impact velocity. This shows that the fragmentation during oblique impaction is determined by the tangential velocity component. The reason for the differing behavior of spherical agglomerates could not be elucidated but it is hypothesized, that a transition from sliding to rolling during the impact occurs affecting the fragmentation behavior.
                  The breakage pattern is obtained by analyzing the fragment size distribution as a function of the impact energy. For agglomerates with fractal dimensions of Df = 1.6, 1.8, 2.3 and 2.6 a broad size distribution is observed containing small clusters/primary particles, bigger fragments and intact agglomerates at low impact energies. Increasing the impact energy shifts the whole fragment size distribution to smaller sizes. A nearly total disintegration at high impact energies is reached. The spherical agglomerates fracture into nearly equal sized fragments resulting in a narrower size distribution, which is shifted to smaller sizes at higher impact energies.During gas-phase synthesis of nanoparticles, agglomerates are often formed especially at high concentrations. For some applications, single nanoparticles are required for which an effective dispersion of the agglomerates is necessary. In principle, nanoparticle agglomerates can be dispersed in liquids, which provide a variety of stabilization tools such as electrostatic repulsion or steric interactions. However, especially for high purity applications, liquid dispersion suffers from a tremendous loss in purity. Therefore, dry dispersion is attempted when possible. Stahlmecke et al. Besides the application of hydrodynamic forces, impact loading is also used to fragment/disperse nanoparticle agglomerates The influence of the impact angle on the agglomerate breakage was mostly studied for agglomerates of granules with sizes of several millimeters and primary particles with diameters of several micrometers using discrete element method (DEM) simulations Gensch & Weber The threshold for the onset of fragmentation of agglomerates is related to the minimal bond energy of the interparticle contacts. However, it is known, similar to comminution processes, that only a fraction of the supplied energy is used for breaking interparticle bonds. Recently, Peukert et al. During oblique impaction of the agglomerates, the total volume-specific energy consists of a normal and tangential kinetic energy component (cf. Eq. In this equation ρ Due to the small length (x) of nanoparticle agglomerates high shear rates are obtained during the oblique impaction. The dispersion of particle and nanoparticle agglomerates in shear fields was investigated experimentally For characterizing the fragmentation of nanoparticle agglomerates during impaction processes the degree of fragmentation (F) is used. The degree of fragmentation is the ratio of the number broken interparticle bonds during the impaction to the initial number of interparticle bonds. The number of interparticle bonds is a function of the coordination number and the average number of particles within a fragment/agglomerate. Although there are some empirical correlations deduced from experimental For the synthesis of the agglomerates the same setup as described in Agglomerates consisting of siliciumdioxide (SiO Due to the used low temperatures gas phase synthesis for the used agglomerates it can be assumed that mostly van der Waals forces act between the primary particles. After the synthesis, the agglomerates were charged with an X-Ray neutralizer from TSI (Model 3088) and classified in a differential mobility analyzer (DMA). Behind the DMA, the aerosol was split. One stream was directed to a Faraday cup electrometer (FCE) to measure the concentration before the low-pressure impactor (LPI). The second stream entered the LPI. The LPI consisted of a critical orifice placed upstream, an acceleration nozzle and an impaction plate. For determining the agglomerate size after the impaction, a TEM-grid was placed on the impaction plate and the deposited particles were characterized using a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The impact loading was varied by altering the impact velocities of the agglomerates. Since, the gas mass flow was kept constant through the critical orifice, the impact velocity was varied by adjusting the pressure in the LPI. The experimental sequence was as follows; first a fixed pressure was adjusted in the LPI, which correlates to a chosen impact velocity. Then the agglomerates were classified and impacted on the TEM grid. The collection time was chosen according to the concentrations of the agglomerates. The covered TEM-grids were analyzed with a JEOL JEN2100 transmission electron microscope. For every impact pressure 50 images at appropriate magnifications were taken. The open source program ImageJ was used to analyze the images, where different editing steps were made to discriminate the agglomerates from the background. To determine the agglomerate and fragment size the projection area was measured. The fractal dimension was determined by image analysis or with the method described by Kuetz & Schmidt-Ott The same oblique impactor setup was used as developed by Gensch & Weber The effective impact angles were determined from computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. The flow fields were calculated with the open source program OpenFOAM using a SIMPLE solver with a k – epsilon turbulence model, where the compressibility of the gas was considered. The particle trajectories were calculated with a self-programmed solver, where the flow field is not influenced by the particles (one-way coupling) and no interactions between the particles are considered. In the solver the Cunningham correction was used to consider the reduced drag force of particles in the free molecular regime. For each point the trajectories of 1169 particles homogeneously distributed over the inlet cross section were calculated. To minimize the computational effort only three particle sizes and four geometric configurations of the impactor were investigated with CFD simulation. From the CFD simulations approximation functions to calculate the effective impact angle were obtained. From the analysis of the numerical calculated particle trajectories, the effective impact angles as a function of the Stk number are obtained (shown in The standard deviation of the impact angles decreases with increasing Stk-number. At high Stk-numbers the particles are focused on the middle axis of the nozzle, leading to a thinner particle beam, which results in a narrower spatial distribution, thus in a narrower impact angle distribution. At lower Stk-numbers, the particles are more broadly spatially distributed and therefore experience accelerations in different direction, which leads to broad impact angle distribution. To obtain the tangential and normal velocity component of the impacting agglomerates the applied geometric angle needs to be corrected. For this, a function was fitted to the determined effective impact angles for the used geometries. The used fit function was of the following form, where E, F and G are fit parameters. It represents the best match to the obtained impact angles. The parameters for the investigated L‘/D ratios are given in The average projection areas are measured as a function of the kinetic impact energy (shown in An increase of the kinetic impact energy decreases the projection area, when the threshold energy for fragmentation is exceeded for all investigated agglomerates as shown in Furthermore, a clear influence of the geometric impact angle can be seen. A more oblique impact leads to more pronounced reduction of the projection area, i.e. to increased fragmentation for all investigated agglomerates and structures. The fragment size decreases with increasing impact energy. The smallest achievable fragments of the Pt – agglomerates are somewhat larger than primary particles indicating the occurrence of some strong interparticle bonds, which cannot be destroyed within the range of applied impact energies. For the Pt – agglomerates with a fractal dimension of D To examine to which extent the fragmentation during oblique impacts depends on tangential and normal velocity components, the degree of fragmentation for Pt – agglomerates with D When Eq. From the experimental data, the onset velocity for fragmentation and the Weibull-parameter k are obtained and mentioned in For the spherical silica agglomerates the parameters k and u In addition to the degree of fragmentation, which is a measure of the size reduction, the fragment size distributions are analyzed. From the evolution of the size distribution with increasing impact energy conclusion of the breakage pattern can be drawn. Depending on the breakage pattern the fragment size distributions evolve differently as a function of the impact energy. According to Thornton & Liu In At low impact energies, smaller clusters are formed but also undamaged agglomerates exist. The broad distribution of the smaller clusters and the presence of primary particles reveal a disintegration of the dispersed agglomerate parts. Fractal-like agglomerates usually consist of loosely and more densely structured areas, which are weakly connected, indicated in Spherical agglomerates show a different evolution of the fragment distribution with increasing impact energy. When fragmentation starts, the fragment distributions are shifted to smaller sizes but the broadness does not increase significantly indicating a fracturing of the mother agglomerate into nearly equal sized fragments, which become smaller with increasing impact energy. This fragmentation pattern differs from the fractal-like (D In the present work, the effect of the obliquity during the impaction on the fragmentation behaviour for differently structured agglomerates is investigated in a low-pressure impactor. The obliquity induces a tangential impact velocity component causing additional shear stress on the agglomerates. A more oblique impact enhances the size reduction of all investigated agglomerate structures (D The financial support of this work by the