Direct quantitative measurements of the particle trajectories on the surface of an air bubble were obtained using a CCD high-speed video camera system. Rupture of the intervening water film between the hydrophobic particle and air bubble surfaces with the consequent formation of a three-phase contact was observed. Surface forces had little effects on the motion of the particles with a water film over the bubble surface until the film rupture occurred. The bubble–particle sliding attachment interaction is not satisfactorily described by the available theory. The corrections to the available attachment models were discussed.effective Hamaker function [J] van der Waals interaction energy [J] charge of electron [C] electrical double layer force [N] hydrophobic force [N] van der Waals force [N] correction factor to the Stokes law; separation distance between a bubble and a particle [m] pre-exponential constant for the empirical hydrophobic force, Eq. pre-exponential constant for the empirical hydrophobic force, Eq. Boltzmann constant [J/K] mass of the particle [kg] number per unit volume of the electrolyte ions of type particle Reynolds number [–] bubble radius [m] particle radius [m] inter-centre distance between a bubble and a particle [m] absolute temperature (in Kelvin) [K] reference time [s] particle velocity [m/s] liquid density [kg/m permittivity of vacuum [C relative permittivity (the dielectric constant) of the solution ( Debye constant, Eq. decay length for the empirical hydrophobic force, Eq. decay length for the empirical hydrophobic force, Eq. liquid viscosity [kg/m/s] particle density [kg/m bubble surface (zeta) potential [V] particle surface (zeta) potential [V] In the mineral processing industry froth flotation is widely used to selectively separate mineral particles according to their surface properties. In the flotation process the ore is first crushed and finely ground to less than about 200 μm to liberate the minerals, before reagents are added to alter the mineral surface properties. Usually, the surface of the wanted minerals is rendered water-repellent (hydrophobic), which allows the particles to attach themselves to air bubbles while leaving the surface of the unwanted particles water-wetted (hydrophilic) not attachable to air bubbles. The attached particles are separated from the suspension of unwanted minerals by the bubble rise. A key element of the effectiveness of the recovery of the valuable minerals via the flotation process is the interaction between particles and air bubbles in water. The bubble–particle interaction involves a number of microprocesses, which can be divided into encounter (collision), attachment and detachment. Despite recent advances, these microprocesses are still not well understood from a quantitative viewpoint. The bubble–particle encounter interaction is determined by the physics of the particle and bubble motions and the hydrodynamics of liquid flow, and has been studied most extensively The bubble–particle attachment and detachment interactions are, on the other hand, less understood in terms of their underlying phenomena because they are essentially controlled by a number of factors, including chemistry and physical chemistry of the particle and air bubble surfaces The bubble–particle attachment is strongly controlled by the surface properties described in terms of surface forces and the thinning and rupture of the water film formed when the bubble and the particle are very close together. The surface force interaction between a hydrophobic particle and a gas bubble are significantly contributed by the intermolecular (van der Waals), the electrical (double layer), and the hydrophobic forces, which are now investigated with technologies such as atomic force microscopy An alternative approach to yield the vital knowledge of the bubble–particle attachment interaction is to simulate the particle motion with a thinning water film over the bubble using experimental data. This approach however critically depends on the quality of the experimental data and the appropriateness of the theoretical models. It appears that the experimental data suited to the simulation will be that determined directly from the bubble–particle interaction measurements. In this paper, we used a CCD high-speed imaging photography system to obtain direct quantitative measurements of the particle motion with a thinning water film over a bubble held stationary on the top of a tube in an aqueous solution. Detailed measurements of the particle trajectory were used to determine the time of the water film thinning for characterising the attachment interaction and comparing with the available models for describing the motion of the particles over the bubble surface at the attachment. The discrepancy between the obtained data and the models was observed and will be discussed. The required corrections to the available attachment models will be outlined. A schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in An air bubble with a desired diameter was produced and captured on the top of a hydrophobised glass tube connected a motorized gas-tight syringe. From the feed tube, particles are allowed to settle down by gravity to the bubble surface. The whole experimental apparatus was mounted on a stable PerformansPlus platform free from vibrations in and around the work area. A three-dimensional MicroFlex micropositioner was used to move the bubble (i.e. to drive the tube holding the bubble) and to drive the tube for feeding the particles to the desired position where the bubble–particle interaction was expected to occur. The experiments focused on the visual record of the particle motion over the bubble surface using a high-speed video camera. High-speed images were necessary because the events of the bubble–particle collision and the rupture of a water film are very rapid, of order of milliseconds. Both the events were determined from the pictures due to the rapid change in the bubble–particle inter-centre distance. This distance remained nearly constant between the events since the film thickness was relatively smaller than the bubble and particle radii. However, the polar coordinate of the particle changes. The attractive surface forces produced the film rupture. Glass beads with diameter of 50–150 μm were used. The particle surface was macroscopically smooth. Hydrophobicity of the particle surface was closely controlled by a process of silanation. The contact angle was measured on glass plates hydrophobised in the same place and at the same time with the particles. Zeta-potential of particles was measured with the test solution using commercially available zeta-meters. All experiments were carried out using high purity water treated by a Millipore microfiltration unit. Simple inorganic electrolytes such as KCl and NaCl were used at different concentrations to control the electrical double layer force. pH of the test solutions were regulated by H A typical experimental result for the particle radial position relative to the bubble surface is shown in To quantify the bubble–particle attachment the contact and induction times are introduced and developed in the flotation theory For simplicity the available theory on the sliding time assumes the inertia-free motion of particles over the bubble surface and does not consider the influence of surface forces on the particle sliding. These assumptions were analysed. The inertial motion of particles over the bubble surface was described using the extended Basset–Boussinesq–Oseen (BBO) equation with the inclusion of surface forces. As fluid dynamics aspects of the bubble–particle interaction are simplified in the experiments using a bubble captured on the tube in a stationary liquid, the BBO equation yields Three surface forces were considered and included in Eq. The electrical double layer force, The hydrophobic force, Other surface forces, such as hydration force and steric force, are also important under specific conditions but were not considered since the water film rupture occurred at distances larger than the range these forces. The surface force term in Eq. Surface forces had little effects on the particle motion with the water film over the bubble surface until the film rupture occurs. This numerical result is physically consistent with the fact that the water rupture occurred at the film thicknesses (about 1 μm) larger than the range of surface forces. Since surface forces had little effects on the particle sliding until the film rupture occurs, the transient theory developed based on Eq. Thus, it was concluded at this point that the discrepancy between the available theory and the measured data could not be explained on the basis of the transient behaviour of the sliding attachment interaction and the influence of surface forces. The next aspect, which might cause the discrepancy, was the influence of the hydrodynamic interaction between the particle and bubble surfaces on the particle motion, which has not been accounted for in the prediction of the sliding interaction. The hydrodynamic interaction increases the drag on the particle and reduces the particle velocity. This short-range hydrodynamic interaction has not been included in the extended BBO Eq. Direct quantitative measurements of the particle motion with a thinning water film over a bubble were obtained using a CCD high-speed video camera system. With the hydrophobic particles, the film rupture and the formation of a three-phase contact were observed. Surface forces had little effects on the motion of the particles with a water film over the bubble surface until the film rupture occurred. The bubble–particle sliding attachment interaction is not satisfactorily described by the available theory and seems to be controlled by the short-range hydrodynamic interaction between the particle and the bubble with adsorbed surfactants used in flotation. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council and the Research Management Committee of the University of Newcastle for financial support.