The leaching behavior of metals from pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite was studied using a selective chlorination–leaching process with ferrous chloride tetrahydrate as chloride agent. The effects of parameters in selective chlorination and leaching process were investigated. It was found that the optimum conditions for selective chlorination were chloride agent addition of 40wt.% and time of 150min at 460°C. Liquid/solid ratio in leaching process, leaching time and temperature had little influence on metal extraction. As the initial pH value of leaching solution decreased from 6.85 to 1.00, the extractions of Fe, Ni, Co, Al, Cr and Mn increased slightly while that of Mg increased from 36.98% to 43.23%. Under the determined conditions, 91.78% Ni, 87.64% Co, <2% Fe, 2.53% Al, <1% Cr, 36.98% Mg and 63.04% Mn were leached by water. The chlorinated ore and leaching residue were characterized by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscope.Limonitic nickel laterite is an important reserve of nickel and cobalt, which is rich in iron in the form of goethite and has low contents of aluminum, chromium, manganese and other elements. Goethite is the main nickel-bearing mineral in the laterite ( A new reductive roasting–selective chlorination–water leaching process for limonitic nickel laterite has been presented in our previous works ( The experimental results in the previous works show that nickel and cobalt can be selectively chlorinated and leached by water while iron is effectively rejected as hematite. The behavior of other metals in the process, however, has not yet been described, which is essential for subsequent steps, such as leaching solution purification, valuable metal recovery, waste water treatment and reuse. In the present work, chlorinated ore was obtained from the selective chlorination of pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite. And ferrous chloride tetrahydrate was selected as chloride agent for three reasons: (a) simplicity and feasibility of experimental process using a solid chloride agent; (b) high efficiency of hydrogen chloride generation through Eq. A limonitic laterite ore from the Philippines was analyzed by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) which gave the results shown in The selective chlorination of the reduced ore was carried out in a muffle electric furnace. As an experimental procedure, 20.00 The contents of metals in the leaching solution (Fe) and the residue (Ni, Co, Al, Cr, Mg and Mn) were analyzed by AAS (Fe, Ni and Co) and ICP-AES (Al, Cr, Mg and Mn) with standard procedure. Combined with chlorinated ore composition, the metal extractions were calculated with the mass balance principle. The samples of chlorinated ore and leaching residue were characterized by XRD and scanning electron microscope (SEM). To determine chloride agent addition on metal extraction, experiments were carried out by varying ferrous chloride tetrahydrate addition from 10 to 50 The effect of roasting time on metal extraction was investigated with the chloride tetrahydrate addition of 40 For selective extraction of nickel and cobalt, the optimum conditions of chlorination roasting at temperature of 460  The results of leaching with various initial pH values are listed in The samples of leaching residue and solution were obtained from the water leaching of the chlorination ore with the L/S of 3. The chemical analysis results of the samples are listed in The leaching behavior of metals from chlorinated limonitic nickel laterite was described. The effects of chlorination roasting conditions and leaching parameters were investigated. Chlorinated ores were obtained from the selective chlorination of pre-reduced limonitic nickel laterite using ferrous chloride tetrahydrate as chloride agent. With temperature of 460 The financial support from the