A large-scale investigation into the effect of increased aeration on heap leaching of a pyrrhotite-rich pentlandite ore was commenced at the Terrafame mine in Finland. The typical reference air feed amount in operation is approximately 0.05 m3/metric ton/h, fed from one direction of the 330 to 350 m wide heap. In the current study approximately 62% higher air feed vs. reference operation was trialed by installing another layer of aeration from the opposite direction of the heap. The hypothesis was that air distribution across the ore would be improved and that the increase in air feed would result in faster oxidation of pyrrhotite, leading ultimately to improved recovery of valuable metals. The heaps were observed for 150 days after stacking. The results revealed an increase in the leaching rates of several metals: manganese, magnesium, iron, nickel and zinc leached 14, 171, 142, 1932, and 1309% more in the presence of extra aeration during the observation period. In addition, applying the extra air showed a 324% increase in the generation of acid within the heap.The only heap leaching operation for nickel and zinc in the world is located in northern Finland. The operation is run by Terrafame and production of nickel and zinc in 2017 was 20,864 and 47,205 metric tons in 2017, respectively ( The effect of acidity on the leaching of the raw material in question has been tested and reported in laboratory scale stirred tank reactors ( Heap leaching in general can be divided into two periods of influence: during the construction of the heap and during the operation of the heap. The effects are described in During the operational phase of heap leaching, the main variables that can be controlled are air feed, irrigation, and the acidity of irrigation. There are phenomena that take place and will have an effect on the leaching process such as formation of precipitates and a range of over-wetting types of damage in the agglomerate structure. Extreme weather conditions can also play a role, which is a feature that separate large-scale heap leach operation from laboratory testing. A series of papers describing different sulfide (bio) heap leach operations have been published in the last 30 years, where aeration has been one of the topics studied. Most studies were conducted in columns and furthermore with small amounts of raw material (in the range of kilograms) rather than metric tons. Also, the investigated ore type varies greatly, with most having significantly lower sulfides to oxidize compared to Terrafame. Both In contrast, These two formulas suggest that oxygen mass transfer from gas to solution is increased by the irrigation rate and decreased by increased particle size, increased temperature (both a decrease in solubility of oxygen to water and an increased in water vapor in the gas phase, which decrease the partial pressure of oxygen), and increased liquid hold-up in the heap. The amount of oxygen (air) was not directly mentioned in contributing to the mass transfer.  While pyrrhotite heap leaching studies are not abundant, the self-heating properties of the mineral have been tested. The postulation for this article is that the main demanding oxidation reactions can be accelarated by higher air (oxygen) feed, thereby speeding up the recovery of valuable metals in the process. The effect of increased aeration on the leaching behavior of pyrrhotite-rich pentlandite ore was investigated at an operating heap leaching plant (Terrafame, Finland). The test was planned on one section of the heap, splitting it into two parts: one with typically installed aeration of approximately 0.05 Nm The dimensions of the investigated heap parts were approximately 350 m wide (toe-to-toe) and 9.5 m (height). The part with a typical aeration (Part 1) was 613 m long whereas the part with higher air feed (Part 2) was 589 m long. Part 1 was laid with 3,689,301 metric tons of ore and Part 2 with 3,546,269 metric tons of ore. The whole heap was constructed between July 23rd and December 12th 2017, with the part one ending October 2nd.  Air lines were installed in the heaps across their 350 m width. In the first part of the heap, they were installed in two layers with the lower designed to be installed at an elevation of 1 m in the heap and the higher at 4.5 m elevation. The pipe-to-pipe distance at both elevations was designed to be 2.7 m. All the air going to the Part 1 of the heap was fed from the eastern side of the heap. In Part 2 of the heap, the air lines were installed at three heights within the heap: 1, 3, and 6 m by design with again pipe-to-pipe distance designed to be 2.7 m at all levels. The middle pipeline was aerated from the west side of the heap and the bottom and top lines from the eastern side of the heap. All of the pipelines had an internal diameter of 95 mm and exit holes of 5 mm diameter every 2 m along the pipe. The plan was to have a similarly designed air flow through each pipe. In addition to the description above, the configuration of the air line installation for Part 2 of the heap was tested during the construction of Part 1 to ensure that the installation scheme worked with the moving heap construction. Part 1 was installed with 224 lower level pipelines, 39 test installations of middle pipelines and 208 upper pipelines. In contrast Part 2 was installed with 218 lower level pipelines, 203 middle pipelines and 187 upper pipelines. Part 1 had four air blowers with a nominal capacity of 10.8 Nm In order to maintain uniform process performance in the heap, the air distribution in the heap should be as equal as possible. At the beginning of the pipe the pressure is higher than at the end of the pipeline: the kinetic pressure is higher as there is more flow at the beginning and the pressure loss across the pipe has not taken place. The higher pressure enables a higher flow rate through the holes and thereby the flow rate is always higher through the first holes. The pressure loss through the hole increases with a higher flow rate which keeps the difference of flows smaller. The following method was used to estimate the distribution of air through each of the holes in one air pipe: first a flow rate was estimated for the last air hole. Then, the pressure loss through the hole and kinetic pressure in the hole were calculated. As there is no flow in the pipe, the static pressure in the pipeline must be the sum of pressure loss through the hole and kinetic pressure in the hole, as noted by Eq. Then, the second last hole has an increased pressure as there is now kinetic pressure in the pipe from the flow of air in the pipe from the location near the second last hole to the last hole and a pressure loss in accordance with this flow. This increase of pressure is rather small; nevertheless, it contributes to the exiting flow through the second last hole. This is noted in Eq. The calculation was used similarly for all the holes across the pipes from the end to the start. Formula The pressure loss across the holes was calculated by the pressure loss through orifice ( The kinetic pressure in the pipe is naturally according to Eq.  The reason for adding the extra aeration line from the other direction was to level the distribution of air through the width of the heap somewhat. There are at least three alternative options for this: increasing the pipe diameter, increasing the amount of pipe while adjusting the hole size and having a varying hole size throughout the pipe. Increasing the size of the air line is while theoretically appealing, is not very practical, as a larger pipeline installation requires connections while a 95 mm internal diameter pipeline can be installed from a rotary coil and cut rather than connected. Increasing the number of air lines would naturally lead to increased cost of materials and work. Lastly, having a varying hole size in the pipelines could be possible in theory to limit the air going in the first holes. However, the practical challenge would be installation and quality control as the air line is installed from a longer coil and the varying holes should be reliably located in the right spots in the heap. The measured average air amount exiting each air blower is listed in As air blowers 1 to 4 fed Part 1 of the heap, its total air feed rate was 51,200 l/s or 0.050 Nm The drainage material used below the heap was 30 cm in height made up of 16 to 32 mm gravel. Additional drainage pipes in the east to west direction across the width of the heap were installed every 5 m. The pipes had an internal diameter of 95 mm. The heap bottom was at an angle of 0.5% decreasing to the north and 2.5% decreasing to the west. Solution collection wells were installed on the west bank of the heap every 66 m for the purposes of enabling localized sampling with a total of 18 sample wells for outlet solution. The total solution from Parts 1 and 2 of the heap was collected before the pond. Irrigation was split into cells of 35 to 40 m in length and width at the top of the heap. Both Parts 1 and 2 of the heap had 14 irrigation cells installed in them. The design irrigation rate was 5 l/m The irrigation solution content was affected by the set-up of the heap. As there was one irrigation pipeline for the entire test area, Parts 1 and 2, the irrigation was shared by all the irrigation cells. In addition, the first parts of the tested heap sections that were implemented shared irrigation with an old heap, which was gradually reclaimed from the pad to another location. On the other hand, the last parts of the tested heap sections shared irrigation only with other test sections. This phenomenon is illustrated in  It is to be noted that as the construction of the heap took nearly half a year, the observational 150 days from startup of leaching in each meter of the heap had a different ambient conditions as the starting day varied by the meter in the heap. The inlet and outlet solution metal concentrations, pH, and temperatures were measured during the observation period. As described in Other strategies to measure heap performance exist. Lizama measured oxygen concentrations by installing tubes in different locations in a heap ( Solids sampling is similarly challenging as there is variation in both what happens in the heap and the feed quality. Averages could be used; however, the heap remained in place after the observation period and further, unfortunately, there is a lack of automatic samplers used during the process of dismantling the heap at Terrafame, which weakens the reliability of solid sampling at that point in the process. A set of heat measurement cables, as described by the authors before ( Sulfide oxidation generates heat and allows the Terrafame operation to continue heap leaching through the coldest winter in Finland (  The solution samples taken from the wells were analyzed for the following metals: manganese, iron, zinc, nickel, aluminum, sodium, magnesium, copper, cobalt and cadmium. The 18 sample wells were split into four groups for the data to be more presentable within the figures in this section. The groups were: wells 1–5, wells 6–9, wells 10–13 and wells 14–18 of which the first two (wells 1 to 9) represent the normal heap design and the last two (wells 10 to 18) represent the extra aeration area. Manganese resides in the alabandite in the ore. This mineral should be the first sulfide to react in the heap, as seen earlier ( As the manganese in alabandite is the first sulfide to react, its recovery is of particular interest. It can be seen that Mn dissolution initially occurred faster in the absence of extra aeration (Part 1) whereas the final extractions were equally high or higher with additional oxidant present (Part 2). The fact that manganese started reacting faster in Part 1 of the heap could be attributed to the higher amount of aluminum in the feed and hence higher precipitation of aluminum, leading to higher generation of acid to help the leaching of easily dissolvable manganese sulfide; see Iron sulfides, pyrite and pyrrhotite, contribute to the largest amount of sulfides in the ore. As pyrrhotite is very reactive and pyrite is not, it is pyrrhotite chemistry that dominates heap leaching at Terrafame. It needs to be noted that during the early stages of leaching, coinciding with the observation period, nearly all the iron is in ferrous (Fe The interesting point in the behavior of iron is the precipitation period in the early stage of leaching. This would indicate that iron reacts due to the lack of acid in the system and precipitates at first. The lack of acid is due to the rapid reactions of both pyrrhotite (see reaction 9 and the discussion in Zinc resides in the sphalerite in the ore. The leaching of sphalerite demands a higher redox than that of alabandite and pyrrhotite but somewhat lower than that of the nickel sulfides present in the ore ( Zinc followed the expected path from earlier studies ( Nickel resides partially in the pyrrhotite, mostly in the pentlandite and a in small fraction in the pyrite in the ore. Nickel behaved very similarly to zinc and leaching recoveries were again higher in Part 2 with 9.7 and 5.6% nickel leaching recovery of nickel in wells 14–18 and 10–13, respectively while Part 1 had 1.4 and –0.9% leaching recovery in wells 1–5 and 6–9, respectively. As with zinc, the low recovery with low aeration during the observation period signified a 1932% increase in leach recovery for nickel with higher aeration. Aluminum resides in the gangue minerals of Terrafame ore. Of particular interest regarding aluminum is its behavior: the old heap had a higher aluminum concentration and due to the shared irrigation solution in the system, it entered new heap parts in solution, where it precipitated. Wells 1–5, at the beginning half of Part 1 of the heap had the highest initial aluminum concentration (4–5 g/l) in irrigation. This aluminum came from the old part of the heap, as discussed earlier, and was the major reason for resulting higher aluminum precipitation in Part 1. Wells 14–18 only exhibited 0.5–0.7 g/l aluminum concentration in their irrigation initially. Later, in the cycle of wells 14–18, aluminum started to appear again in irrigation as it was brought into the system from other heaps at the Terrafame operation. This phenomenon is related to solution bleed regarding recovery of metals being started from the entire heap. Although aluminum concentration was observed to rise in this stage, there was much less precipitation than in the early days of wells 1–5. It is assumed that acid generation in the heap (Part 2) was at a higher stage in that period of time and, thus the pH was also maintained at a lower level and the heap did not allow as much aluminum to precipitate as in Part 1, despite the higher content in the feed irrigation solution. For comparison of the pH levels and acid consumption, see Sodium is in the gangue minerals of Terrafame ore and it also enters the irrigation solution in the metals recovery plant, where it is added as sodium hydroxide to control the pH. Sodium is a metal of interest, mostly due to sodium jarosite precipitation in the heaps. Sodium appeared to have a quick initial leaching kinetics from the ore (days 20–60 in the whole of the heap) but then at longer operation times it turned towards precipitation. The ore must contain a gangue mineral that releases a small amount of sodium. After the decrease in pH (which is shown in all wells), sodium jarosite precipitation conditions became more dominant, which is evident as seen in Magnesium is present in the gangue minerals of Terrafame ore. Magnesium is an interesting metal as it is not known to precipitate in heaps and therefore represents a cost to the operation – it needs milk of lime in order to be precipitated out of the entire solution circulation as magnesium hydroxide. While valuable metal leaching increased with increased aeration, magnesium leaching was shown to increase also by 171%. This can be seen as a negative consequence of increased oxidation of the heap. Copper resides in the chalcopyrite in the ore, which leaches very late in the process. Copper in the circulation solution easily re-precipitates onto the surfaces of less noble metal sulfides ( It can be clearly seen that copper experienced a metathesis reaction, changing places with the iron in pyrrhotite, through the 150 day observation period. Typical outlet concentrations for copper were close to beyond the detection limit and only up to 10 mg/l copper stayed in solution at the end of the 150-day period. Cobalt resides partially in the pentlandite and mostly in the pyrite in the ore. Cobalt and copper behave very similarly in the process: there was heavy precipitation at the start presumably by metathesis with the iron in pyrrhotite and cobalt barely stayed in solution. The outlet cobalt values were ultimately higher than those of copper, hinting that copper is even more prone to metathesis than cobalt. Cadmium resides mostly with zinc in the sphalerite in the ore, but to a far smaller extent. Cadmium behaved very similarly to cobalt and copper: it precipitated in the heap in the early part of leaching. The change of direction from precipitation to leaching could, however, perhaps be seen by the end of the observation period. The aim was to keep the irrigation pH target at 1.85 to 2.05 during the observation period with the addition of sulfuric acid to the recycled outlet stream going back to irrigation. Acid consumption in the sampling well areas was estimated as follows: pH range of 1.7 to 3.1, which covers most of the results in irrigation and at the outlet, were attributed with a value of g/l relative acid concentration. pH values 1.7, 2.4, 2.7 and 3.1 achieved acid concentrations of 3.7, 1.9, 0.9 and 0.2 g/l, respectively. An exponential function was plotted to formulate Eq. Using Eq. In addition to the acid consumed from the solution there were two sources of acid for the leaching reactions: the precipitation of goethite, jarosites, alunites and similar components and the oxidation of elemental sulfur to sulfate (generating sulfuric acid). The amounts of added acid correspond to 0.9, 0.8, 0.4 and 0.3 kg H The difficulty in approximating the aeration demand in leaching at Terrafame is the multiple reaction paths possible with pyrrhotite and re-precipitation opportunities from solution. As discussed earlier ( It could be argued that reaction The estimation of air and acid demand can be started by looking at the results of dissolved/precipitated metals. Fe, Co, Cu, Cd, Ni, Mn and Zn are estimated first to follow a simple reaction path such as presented in reaction Magnesium does not occur as a sulfide in Terrafame ore. The form is oxidic and does not consume oxygen while leaching. For the purpose of acid consumption, reaction (16) is used. Aluminum precipitated in all the heaps observed. As the pH range was from 1.8 to 3.0, aluminum hydroxides should not be present. For acid balance calculations, alunite was the expected aluminum precipitate and reaction Using reactions Manganese recoveries give an approximation of maximum pyrrhotite reaction rate as pyrrhotite should react after alabandite. This allows for an approximation of the extent of reaction While Interestingly, in the authors' opinion, the results suggest that the metals observed can be grouped into four categories for the observation period: 1) mainly precipitating metals Al, Cd, Co, and Cu; 2) precipitating and leaching metals Fe, Ni, and Zn; 3) mainly leaching metals Mg and Mn and 4) the unique Na. Cd, Co, and Cu are expected to precipitate with an exchange reaction with less noble sulfides The precipitation and leaching of iron, nickel and zinc would appear to match the description of sulfide leaching in the series of nobility for nickel and zinc ( Manganese unsurprisingly exhibited only leaching and no precipitation, as its sulfide, alabandite is the least noble of the known sulfides in Terrafame ore. The interesting difference is between Part 1 and Part 2 of the heap. Part 1 experienced rapid manganese leaching between days 20 to 40, which then slowed down. Incidentally, this happened at the same time as aluminum precipitated into the heap. It would appear that this extremely rapid leaching of manganese obtained the acid it needed for dissolution partially from the precipitating alunite. Part 2 of the heap had significantly lower aluminum in its feed from the start and thus apparently the manganese leaching was limited by acid delivery. This would indicate that the start of heap leaching could benefit from somewhat increased acid feeding. Unsurprisingly, magnesium did not precipitate into the heap, as there are no known precipitates of magnesium in the investigated acidic conditions of the heap. Interestingly, magnesium leaching seemed to attain a higher speed after about 80 days of leaching in Part 2 of the heap with increased aeration. This was assumed to be due to the increased elemental sulfur oxidation generating acid. The behavior of sodium would indicate that there is an easily leaching sodium releasing gangue mineral in the ore. After that has been exhausted, at roughly 80 days in all observed heap areas, sodium precipitation starts to dominate its behavior in the process. Of course, the observed behavior of sodium is net result of leaching and precipitation that happens in the heap – both precipitation reactions (sodium alunite and natrojarosite formation) and leaching reactions take place in the heap. Acid consumption in the heap was shown to be significantly higher than the acid feed into the process. This was especially observed in the extra aerated Part 2 of the heap; where of 10.3 to 10.8 kg of acid per metric tons of ore was used, although only 0.3 to 0.4 kg of acid per metric tons of ore was provided by the irrigation solution. This shows that the heap produced 96.3 to 97.2% of the acid needed in the system. This figure is even a conservative one, as it does not include the pyrrhotite to goethite conversion reaction, which could be argued to be a dual acid generating-acid consuming phenomenon. The estimated oxygen utilization rates were of a similar scale as those estimated earlier ( The increasing air feeding also increased reactions in the heap. The estimated oxygen efficiency did not appear to drop with increased aeration. This suggests there has been a lack of air delivery in the system despite the apparently low efficiency of oxygen (<20%) and also that perhaps the highest possible air delivery has not yet been reached, giving an opportunity to improve in the future. Throughout the 150-days time period observed, pyrrhotite was shown to leach as iron entered the solution and no decline was observed even at the end of the period. As the air feed rate directly increased the reaction rate in this study, it could be argued that the amount of oxygen fed to the system is below the limitation of transfer or reaction rate or that the hypothesis of oxygen reacting in the gas phase with hydrogen sulfide, as indicated by A comparison of recent aeration studies including heap leaching studies is presented in Some notes in comparing the data from these studies:  Aeration was typically presented as m Oxygen efficiency is frequently not mentioned. This should be quite an important set of data for designers of a new leaching operation   Acid consumption in the lab tests of black schist ores are vastly higher: The effect of increased aeration by feeding approximately 62% more air to heap leaching at Terrafame was investigated for 150 days after the stacking of each heap section. The increased aeration led to an increase in the leaching rates for the valuable metals nickel and zinc and also for the impurities iron and manganese. Based on the calculations presented, the oxygen (air) efficiency did not appear to decrease. This indicates that an even further increase in air feed could have an enhancing effect on the performance of valuable metal leaching. The results showed that the metals present in the ore and solution can be divided for the observation period into four groups: 1) mainly precipitating metals: Al, Cd, Co, and Cu; 2) precipitating and leaching metals: Fe, Ni, and Zn; 3) mainly leaching metals: Mg and Mn, and 4) the unique Na, having both precipitating and leaching reactions but in a different order to group 2. Oxygen efficiencies are seldom reported for large scale heap leaching. This study approximated up to 20% efficiency.