A study has been made of the effect of non-lubricated warm die (200°C) compaction on the densification of hydride–dehydride (HDH) Ti powder, pre-alloyed (PA) Ti-6Al-4V and Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al powders, and HDH Ti and V-Fe-Al master alloy powder blends, compared to cold die compaction. Depending on the compaction pressure, which was varied from 200 to 1000MPa, non-lubricated warm die (200°C) compaction was very effective for −100 mesh HDH Ti powder, increasing the green density by 5.0–9.4% theoretical density (TD). Die wall lubrication with stearic acid showed no influence on the green density when compacted at 800MPa. With warm die (200°C) compaction, achieving a green density of greater than 90%TD was straightforward for HDH Ti powder when compacted at ≥750MPa. Accordingly, near pore-free (≥99.5%TD) Ti microstructures were obtained after sintering at 1300°C for 120min in vacuum when compacted at 1000MPa. The resulting increment in the sintered density was between 2.0%TD and 4.4%TD. Warm die (200°C) compaction showed no effect on PA Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al powder and only a small effect on PA Ti-6Al-4V powder when compacted at 1000MPa. However, it was still virtually effective for Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al powder blends made of HDH Ti powder and V-Fe-Al master alloy powder. The observations were compared with literature data and discussed in accordance with the yield strength of Ti, Ti-6Al-4V, Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al and Al3V as a function of temperature.To reduce the cost, which arises from feedstock and manufacturing process, has been the main thrust for the research and development of powder metallurgy (PM) titanium (Ti) in past decades ( Warm compaction, including warm die and/or warm powder compaction, is an established technique to improve metal powder compressibility in the ferrous PM industry ( Lubrication and powder preheating were both employed in these studies. The application of an organic lubricant to the die wall (external) or powder blend (internal) has some unique advantages. For instance, it can effectively reduce the ejection force and eliminate galling when the resulting high-density green compacts are ejected from the die. This not only ensures a long working life of the die but also the dimensional accuracy and consistency of the green compacts. However, lubrication can be problematic for PM Ti because it increases the contamination of carbon, oxygen and nitrogen impurities which are detrimental to the ductility and fatigue properties of as-sintered Ti components. Also, lubrication increases the cost of production as it requires an extra step of degassing or dewaxing prior to isothermal sintering. Preheating powder to the die wall temperature can ensure consistent compaction but similarly adds processing cost. This study presents a systematic study of non-lubricated warm die (200 The starting powder materials used included HDH Ti powder (<150  Cylindrical samples of 10 Sintering was performed in an alumina tube furnace under a vacuum of 10   Warm die compaction increased the sintered density by 2.0–4.4%TD. In other words, to achieve the same sintered density, warm die compaction reduces the compaction pressure by about 200–300 Both Eqs. The equal slopes shown in   The effect on sintering is shown in The effect of warm die (200 Unalloyed Ti softens readily with increasing temperature. For example, the compressive yield strength of Ti (TIMETAL 50A, equivalent to ASTM Grade II) at 200 Also according to The efficiency of warm die (200  Warm die (200 Warm die (200 Warm die (200 Warm die (200 Achieving full densification of HDH Ti powder compacts by pressureless sintering requires the powder compacts having a very high green density (>95%TD for −100 mesh powder). Warm die compaction offers a practical means of facilitating near full densification (>99.5%TD) of HDH Ti powder compacts by pressureless sintering. This work was supported by the