Hydrosols obtained from three Lamiaceae plants (thyme, summer savory and oregano) were evaluated for their antibacterial activity against two Escherichia coli O157:H7 strains inoculated to fresh-cut tomato and cucumbers. Complete inhibitions of both E. coli O157:H7 strains on fresh-cut tomato and cucumber were achieved by all hydrosol treatments in varying treatment periods for low inoculation level (104 cfu/mL) while water wash (control) was inefficient to eliminate the bacterial populations. In the case of high inoculation (106 cfu/mL), hydrosol treatments reduced the populations to undetectable levels on cucumber cuts. Moreover, reductions in E. coli O157:H7 populations of fresh-cut tomato were always higher than 2.50 log cfu/g at this inoculation. The results suggested that hydrosols from Lamiaceae plants have the potential to be used as natural food sanitizers for fresh-cut tomatoes and cucumbers to provide their microbial safety without causing any sensorial defect on treated products or health problems in human.Consumption of fresh fruit and vegetables has been increasing dramatically in the developing countries; because consumers are becoming more conscious about the nutritional aspects of the foods which consumed by they and the potential negative effects of food processing on the health ( A number of outbreaks of infection have been linked to The main steps throughout the minimally processing of fresh fruits and vegetables are washing and disinfection to provide their microbiological safety ( Dried leaves of summer savory ( Volatile composition analysis of the hydrosols was run on an Agilent 7890A gas chromatograph system (Agilent, Avondale, USA) coupled to a mass selective detector (Agilent Technologies, Agilent, Avondale, USA) and HP-5MS column (0.2 mm × 50 m, film thickness 0.25 μm) according to the procedure of Fresh whole tomatoes and cucumbers were purchased from a local supermarket in Kayseri, Turkey, and stored at 4 °C until use. Before the experiment, the vegetables were washed with cold tap water for 2–3 min to remove undesired residues and reduce native microbial load and then cut into pieces (1 × 1 cm In this study, two In this study, the hydrosols were applied as individually (oregano, summer savory or thyme) or double (oregano + summer savory (O + S), oregano + thyme (O + T) or summer savory + thyme (S + T)) or triple (oregano + summer savory + thyme) combinations for decontamination of In the present study, first of all, it was verified that the Lamicaeae hydrosols obtained from thyme, oregano and summer savory leaf were organoleptically (by sensory panel with eight people) acceptable as natural food grade sanitizers to be used for the decontamination of fresh cut tomatoes and cucumbers. Total 10 g of tomato or cucumber sample was weighed and transferred into sterile bottles by a sterile tweezers, combined with 90 mL of sterile maximum recovery diluent solution and shaken vigorously by hand for 1 min. Dilution solution (1 mL) was serially diluted in test tubes containing 9 mL of sterile maximum recovery diluent solution. According to spread plate technique, 1 mL from each dilution of the samples was spread-plated onto Sorbitol MacConkey Agar (Merck, Germany) for enumeration of Bacterial populations were measured as colony forming unit (cfu) and converted to logarithmic numbers. All experiments were repeated two times and values show the means of duplicate determinations for each sample. Data were analyzed with Windows based S.A.S. 8.2 statistical analysis software ( In this study, some characteristics of the hydrosols affecting their antibacterial activity were investigated. The most important parameter which determines the bactericidal effects of the hydrosols is their composition of volatile compound. Analysis of uninoculated fresh-cut tomatoes and cucumbers revealed the absence of both toxigenic and non-toxigenic  As can be seen from Combined antibacterial effects of treatments with Lamiaceae hydrosols on non-toxigenic  In the view of high inoculation condition for both  There are limited data concerning volatile compositions of plant hydrosols while essential oil compositions have been well-reported in the literature. In one of our previous studies, carvacrol and thymol were determined as the major compounds of thyme hydrosol ( When comparing the reported data in the literature with our findings, it can be noticed that volatile compositions of the hydrosols are quite similar to those of essential oils from the same origin. However, it is certain that percentages of the compounds are lower in the hydrosols than that of in essential oils. On the other hand, there are some differences between the reported data in the literature and our findings with regard to amounts of specific volatile compounds. This may be resulted from several factors such as natural origin of plant, harvesting time, genetic structure, plant part and essential oil isolation method ( We also measured pH values of the hydrosols since their antimicrobial efficiency may be affected from their acidity level. Phenolic compounds such as carvacrol and thymol are found mainly in an undissociated form at low pH values. This provides higher antibacterial efficiency for them compared to their dissociated forms ( Consumer preferences are tending toward to ready-to-eat fresh-cut products depending on the increasing health concerns. Primary characteristics of fresh-cut fruit and vegetables are their freshness and convenience. Tissue damage occurred by minimal processing operations such as peeling, cutting and slicing may result in several biochemical defects like browning, loss of texture as well as detriment of nutritional value of the products ( A number of derivatives such as essential oils, extracts and decoctions can be extracted from herb and spices. Among these, essential oils are the most commonly used products for different purposes such as food flavoring and preservation. However, utilization of hydrosols has not been considered sufficiently in food industry until yet. Some researchers have investigated Intrinsic properties of foods like fat/water content and pH affect the antibacterial activity of those compounds. It is a general consideration that high fat content negatively influences the action of essential oils ( Overall, Lamiaceae hydrosols were found to be very effective in eliminating The results obtained in this research indicate that water washing is ineffective to eliminate both toxigenic and non-toxigenic