Studies were carried out for the simultaneous removal of dissolved organic namely di-butyl phosphate (DBP) and tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) as well as uranyl ions from aqueous solutions by using Micellar-Enhanced Ultrafiltration Technique (MEUF). Ultrafiltration (UF), a comparatively low pressure driven membrane separation technique, offers great potential for the separation/recovery/removal of dissolved organic and metal contaminants at low concentration and from large volume of aqueous waste solutions. Throughout the study Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate (SDS), an anionic surfactant was used. The 47 mm diameter Millipore ultrafiltration membranes of 3000, 5000 and 10,000 MWCO pore sizes were used and the pressure of the ultrafiltration cell was kept at 1.7 bar for all the experiments. To optimise the parameters, the effects of membrane pore size, DBP concentration in feed and feed acidity on the recovery/separation of DBP were studied. More than 90% removal of DBP from aqueous solution was achieved while keeping the feed acidity at 0.5 M HNO3, the DBP concentration in feed solution was kept at 720 ppm and by using 3000 MWCO pore size membrane. The interferences from other dissolved organic such as TBP and metal ions like uranium were also studied. The results showed that the technique can be effectively employed for the simultaneous removal of dissolved organic (DBP and TBP) and metal ions (uranium) from the aqueous effluent streams.PUREX and THOREX processes aim at complete recovery of uranium, plutonium and thorium from fission products present in the spent nuclear fuel of the reactor. In these processes, a mixture of 5% to 40% TBP- Micellar-Enhanced Ultrafiltration involves the addition of a surfactant above its critical micellar concentration (CMC) in order to entrap the ionic solute in solution ( In this study, simultaneous removal of dissolved TBP, DBP and uranium from the aqueous medium under different experimental conditions was investigated by Micellar-Enhanced Ultrafiltration using Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate (SDS), as an anionic surfactant and the results are reported. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. SDS, an anionic surfactant, was obtained from M/s Lancaster Synthetic Ltd., England. TBP and DBP were procured from MERCK— Schuchardt, Germany and Fluka AG, Switzerland respectively. Uranium solution of different concentrations were prepared by dissolving weighed amounts of UO Experiments were performed at room temperature using an indigenously developed cell that was stirred constantly by a magnetic motor. The cell capacity was 80 ml and having 50 ml processed capacity. The cell had the membrane of diameter 47 mm. The liquid phase in the cell was stirred at a speed of approximately 200 rpm under controlled pressure. The Shimadzu GC-9A, gas chromatograph using thermal conductivity detector was used for the measurement of TBP and DBP concentration in the feed and permeate. 10% XE-60 column (1.5 m The concentration of DBP in 30% TBP- The feed solutions (50 ml) were prepared by dissolving the appropriate quantity of TBP and DBP. Acidity of the feed solution was adjusted using dilute HNO Commonly used pore models assume that the pores of the membranes are of the same size. If we consider the membrane pores as parallel capillaries, the permeate flux can be calculated from the following equation (  The following reaction can be proposed for the cation adsorption, To find out the effect of feed acidity on the recovery of DBP by Micellar-Enhanced Ultrafiltration Technique, using SDS as surfactant, acidity of the feed solution was varied from pH 8 to1.0 M HNO  To find out the optimum concentration of SDS required for the quantitative recovery of DBP, the concentration of SDS in the feed was varied from 8 mM to 100 mM while keeping the DBP concentration constant at 720 ppm in the feed. The effect of varying the SDS concentration at constant retentate DBP concentration can be seen from At less than its CMC value most of the surfactant should be present in monomers and practically no retention of the metal ions should take place. To see the effect of CMC on rejection experiments were performed at lower concentration (i.e. 8 mM SDS) that is below the CMC of SDS. At concentration lower than the CMC value, no micelles are present in the bulk solution and hence no rejection of the metal ions should take place. However, 24% of the DBP rejection was observed, not 0% as expected. The probable cause for this rejection is the built up of the gel layer at the membrane/bulk solution interface due to the concentration polarisation effects. The concentration of SDS in this gel layer, may well exceed the CMC value whereas the rest of the bulk solution is free from micelles and thus was able to reject some of the DBP. The rejection of DBP was observed 55% while using 25 mM SDS in feed. Though this concentration was far more than its CMC value but the micelles formed with 25 mM SDS may not be sufficiently bigger to be cut off by 3000 MWCO membrane. When the SDS concentration was kept at 50 mM or higher it was observed that more than 90% of DBP was retained. Hence for quantitative recovery of DBP, SDS concentration in the feed should be 50 mM or higher. In order to see the effect of pore size, UF membranes of 3000 MWCO, 5000 MWCO and 10,000 MWCO were used. The feed solution was adjusted to 0.5 M HNO  From the above equation, it is clear that the flux is proportional to the fourth power of nominal pore size of the membrane. Hence increasing the pore size of the membrane had an increasing effect on the flux.  These experiments were carried out by varying DBP concentration in the feed from 720 ppm to 3880 ppm. The result of these experiments showed that the rejection of DBP decreased with its increasing concentration of DBP in the feed. It decreased from 93% at 720 ppm to 85% at 3880 ppm. The results indicated that at higher concentration of DBP beyond 3000 ppm in feed, DBP molecules are not fully solubilised in the micelles. The decrease in the rejection may also be due to complete loading of SDS with DBP (as only 50 mM of SDS was used for all these experiments). The flux also decreased as the concentration of DBP was increased in the feed from 11.66 dm Initially DBP/SDS system was studied to optimise the parameters for the separation of dissolved DBP, from aqueous solutions. The optimum parameters (feed adjusted to 0.5 M nitric acid, concentration of SDS: 50 mM, pore size of the membrane: 3000 MWCO) were applied for simultaneous separation of DBP, TBP and uranium from aqueous solution. Experiments were carried out to see the effect of other dissolved organic, TBP, on the recovery/rejection of DBP. The feed containing 300 ppm of TBP along with the 720 ppm of DBP was subjected to filtration. No significant change in the recovery of DBP is observed whereas almost 99% TBP was rejected along with DBP as shown in In order to investigate the performance of the system for the simultaneous removal of metal ion and organic solute, the experiments were carried out to remove the UO More than 90% of DBP was rejected by using 3000 MWCO pore size UF membrane from aqueous solution while keeping the feed acidity at 0.5 M HNO The authors wish to thank Mr. S. D. Misra, Director, Nuclear recycle group, Mr. P. K. Dey, Head Fuel reprocessing Division, Mr. S. K. Munshi Chief Superintendent Reprocessing Facilities Bhabha Atomic Research centre, Trombay, Mumbai for their keen interest and for their constant encouragement during the course of the work. The authors also wish to thank Dr. R. Kannan, Mr. S. D. Chaudhari and Mrs. M. Bindu for their kind help and support during the course of the study.