This paper describes a method, using sulfuric acid and activated charcoal for leaching Polymetallic sea nodules. Resulting leach solutions were examined for the extraction of copper, nickel and cobalt using LIX 984N and ACORGA M5640 in kerosene. After the removal of manganese and iron impurities from the leach liquor, copper and nickel were co-extracted leaving cobalt in the raffinate. The selective stripping of nickel and copper produces solutions rich in these metals, while regenerating the solvent for reuse.Sea nodules are oxidized ferromanganese ores containing copper, nickel and cobalt in their oxide forms, which are lodged in the lattices of iron and manganese minerals. Breaking up of these lattices is an important step for recovering the valuable metals. This can be done by a combination of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical treatments or purely by hydrometallurgical process ( In the present paper, sulfuric acid along with activated charcoal is used to dissolve up to 98% of valuable metals from the sea nodules at 80–90 For this study, two extractants were used: LIX 984N (COGNIS, Ireland) and ACORGA M5640 (CYTEC-Australia). Both reagents were diluted with commercial grade kerosene. All other chemicals used were A.R. grade from Merck (India). The air-dried polymetallic sea nodules mined from Indian Ocean were obtained from the National Institute of Oceanography, Goa, India. The pH of the solutions were adjusted to specific values with sulfuric acid using an Equiptronic pH meter, Model EQ-611. The metal contents were analysed using AAS (Chemito AA203). The air-dried sea nodules were ground finely with activated charcoal in 5:1 proportions and digested with 50% sulfuric acid (by weight) at 80–90 Equal volumes of aqueous and organic solutions were shaken in a separating flask at room temperature for 5 It was observed that cobalt in the leach liquor is oxidized from cobaltous (II) to cobaltic (III) by bubbling oxygen for an hour through the leach liquor. Complete conversion is essential because cobalt (II) loads onto LIX984N and its stripping becomes very difficult ( Coextraction of copper and nickel from the leach solution of polymetallic sea nodules was carried out with LIX 984N and ACORGA M5640 as given in Selective stripping of nickel and copper from the loaded organic phases of LIX 984N and ACORGA M5640 can be accomplished using 10 The Leach Liquor of Polymetallic Sea Nodules of the Indian Ocean obtained by using sulfuric acid and activated charcoal can be treated by solvent extraction using LIX 984N and ACORGA M5640 as an extractant. The solvent coextracted nickel and copper from the aqueous solution leaving Co(III) in the raffinate. Both the metals were selectively stripped from the organic phase using a mineral acid. Thus the separation of nickel, copper and cobalt from the leach liquor of sea nodules were accomplished with LIX 984N and with ACORGA M5640. We thank Dr. Schwab (COGNIS) and Dr. Shiels Damien (CYTEC) for providing LIX 984N and ACORGA M5640 for the present study. We extend our appreciation to Dr. Shyam Prasad, National Institute of Oceanography, Goa, India, for providing the sample of sea nodules for the study. Thanks are also due to Dr. T. Mukerjee, Director, Dr. A. V. Reddy, Head, ACD, Dr. Meera Venkatesh, Radio isotope division, BARC, Mumbai, India, for helping us in the sample analysis.