The laser particle size analyzer, NMR, SEM/EDS, induction time tests and surface roughness analysis were employed in the mechanism analysis of this investigation. The floatability of lignite was decreased with the pre-wetting increasing from 0 – 5min because the pores and fractures of lignite surface can be filled with water. However, the floatability of lignite was increased with the pre-wetting from 5 – 480min. NMR and SEM indicate that a long pre-wetting process (>5min) polished and rubbed the surface of lignite reducing the amount of macropores and fractures as well as the porosity. The rough lignite surface was also polished to be smooth. As the pre-wetting time increases, the topography of lignite surface, such as porosity, macropores, fractures and roughness decreased, which results in the decrease of water filling negative effects, and hence the floatability of lignite gradually increased with the pre-wetting time over 5min.Flotation technology is a combination of physicochemical method and can effectively recycle the valuable minerals by attaching gas bubbles to the mineral surface. An efficient flotation process depends on the various parameters, such as PH, particle size, temperature and reagent dosage [ In the past decades, several attempts are performed to improve the flotation of lignite, such as pretreatment [ For hydrophobic rough coal surface, the holes and cracks can entrap air to enhance the hydrophobicity of coal. However, for hydrophilic rough surface such as lignite, these holes and cracks may be filled with water resulting in a decrease in the hydrophobicity of coal [ In another study, Runolinna et al. [ At present, the reasons of the pre-wetting time affecting coal flotation are explained mainly from rough and functional groups of coal surface as well as size and shape properties of coal particles. However, the effects of pre-wetting time on pore-fracture (surface topography) of coal particle has not been scarcely reported. Therefore, in this investigation, the flotation behavior of lignite treated by different pre-wetting time was discussed. The low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) measurements as well as surface roughness analysis were used to reveal the mechanism of how the short or long pre-wetting process can affect the pore-fracture and the floatability of lignite particle. The relationship between surface morphology and lignite flotation was combined according to the NMR, SEM, surface roughness measurements, induction time and flotation tests. Low-density lignite bulk samples were obtained from Bulianta Coal Preparation Plant in Inner Mongolia of China. The bulks were crushed by a roll crusher. The crushed lignite was then ground and screened in order to obtain the final lignite sample of 0.25–0.125 In this investigation, all flotation tests were conducted in a standard laboratory 0.5 The particle size distribution of coal samples after 0, 5 and 480 In this investigation, a low-field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Nano Pore Analyzer (NMRC12-010 The 30 In this investigation, 0.25–0.125 The F-Sorb 2400 surface area analyzer (Gold APP Instruments, China) was used to obtain the specific surface area of the lignite samples after 0, 5, and 480 Quanta 250 SEM (FEI, USA) and Bruker Quantax 400–10 EDS were employed to investigate the surface morphology and elementary composition of lignite particles treated by 0, 5 and 480 The porosity and roughness of lignite surface is important for the attachment efficiency between lignite particles and bubbles. In previous literatures, the induction time has been proven to be a factor to assess the efficiency of particle–bubble attachment [ Before testing, about 1.0  In order to investigate whether the size distribution of lignite particles changed during the pre-wetting process, the lignite samples pre-wetted for 0, 5, and 480 In this investigation, the pores of lignite particle were classified into micropore (0–10 The pores and fractures on lignite surface are gradually filled with water if the pre-wetting time is within 5  As shown in The representative EDS pictures are selected to analyze the changes in surface elementary compositions of lignite particles at different pre-wetting times.  The schematic diagram of the single bubble spreading on the lignite surface after different pre-wetting times is shown in The concentrate yield of lignite was decreased with the pre-wetting increasing from 0 to 5 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the