The thermal decomposition of four frothing agents used in the flotation of gold bearing sulfide minerals was investigated, both alone and when adsorbed on activated carbon. Thermal desorption-pyrolysis-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (TD-py-GC-MS) was used to determine the gases evolved from the thermal decomposition. Thermogravimetry (TG), coupled to either a mass spectrometer (MS) or a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscope, was used to determine the temperature range of decomposition as well as confirm the gaseous products. Three of the frothing agents, polypropylene glycol (PPG), the closely related polypropylene glycol methyl ether (PPGME), and methyl iso-butyl carbinol (MiBC), boiled off unchanged when heated. α-terpineol decomposed by about 20%, of which the major compound was the dehydration product, limonene. When adsorbed on activated carbon and heated, PPG, PPGME and α-terpineol all produced a complex range of gases, which included propanal, 2-ethyl-4-methyl-1,3-dixolane, 3,3-oxybis-2-butanol and dioxanes. MiBC again just boiled off the carbon without appreciable alteration. Since the frothing agents all decomposed below 400°C, the usual process temperature of 650°C for the regeneration of activated carbon should be sufficient to remove any adsorbed frothing agent, although for PPG and PPGME there was evidence that not all the decomposition products were volatile. In addition, the evolved gas profile was very characteristic of the adsorbed frothing agents, and should permit identification of any contamination present on unknown plant samples.Activated carbon is widely used for the adsorption of aqueous gold cyanide complexes during the recovery of gold from concentrates. One of the disadvantages of activated carbon is its lack of selectivity. The carbon will adsorb, with various degrees of efficiency, most of the dissolved inorganic or organic compounds present in the leach solution. Thus, some of the active sites are occupied by unwanted compounds, and the quantity of gold that can be adsorbed is diminished. Even when the gold has been dissolved from the carbon by alkaline cyanide solution, the other adsorbents remain on the carbon, and its activity towards gold is diminished. Such carbons are said to be fouled. Recycling of the activated carbon is required due to its high cost. There are two stages to the regeneration step: acid washing to remove inorganic contaminants, and thermal reactivation at around 650°C to remove volatile or unstable organic impurities. It is the organic fouling agents that are of a greater concern in plant circuits, since these cause the largest decrease in activity of the carbon. Organic compounds (oils, greases, process chemicals) are present in most carbon in pulp or carbon in leach (CIP/CIL) circuits as a result of their addition or spillage during mining, milling, flotation, and equipment maintenance operations. The effect of frothing agents, amongst other fouling agents, on the activity of carbon has been previously reported In the current study, the thermal properties of four common frothing agents, namely, polypropylene glycol (PPG) ( A commercial activated carbon derived from coconut fibre, trade name Haycarb, was obtained from the Chemistry Centre of Western Australia. The Haycarb was conditioned before use, using the method described by Ruane et al. The AR grade frothing agents obtained from Acros were PPG, average molecular weight 425, catalog number 19215-5000; α-terpineol, 98%, mixture of isomers, catalog number 42005-5000; and 4-methyl-2-pentanol (MiBC), ≥99%, catalog number 14938-0025. PPGME was obtained from Hoechst chemicals. The pre-treated carbon was ground by hand to <45 The liquid from the filtration was analysed for residual frothing agent by various analytical techniques, thus permitting the amount of frothing agent adsorbed to be calculated. The quantities adsorbed were 29.8, 30.9, 16.9, and 14.1% for PPG, PPGME, α-terpineol and MiBC, respectively. TD-py-GC-MS of the samples was performed using a Geofina hydrocarbon meter (GHM) furnace. The frothing agents were coated onto sodium sulfate, approximately 10% w/w, or adsorbed on Haycarb, and heated from 150–500°C at 25°C Thermal analysis experiments were performed using a Netzsch STA-409 simultaneous TG-DTA apparatus. 10 The MS data was usually recorded in the selective ion monitoring (SIM) mode, which enabled the evolution of a specific amu value to be followed as a function of temperature. The FTIR data was recorded in the Gram Schmidt (GS) mode, which showed infrared activity for all gases between 4000 to 650 The first measurements were made using TD-py-GC-MS, since this technique enabled the unambiguous identification of evolved gases. The total ion chromatogram for the pyrolysis of PPG shown in In the total ion chromatogram (TIC) of the α-terpineol pyrolysis seven peaks were detected. The identity, retention time, and relative peak area of the gases evolved is presented in The thermal decomposition of the four frothing agents were each studied by TG-EGA, at a heating rate of 10°C TD-py-GC-MS was used to identify the gases evolved from each frothing agent adsorbed on activated carbon when heated in an inert atmosphere from ambient to 1000°C. Each pyrolysis experiment produced numerous gases, and for simplicity gases with a peak area less than 10% of the largest peak were excluded from the study. The remaining gases were identified using a mass spectra database and manual interpretation. The gases produced for each pyrolysis, along with their retention time and relative peak area (%), are presented in For the TG analysis, a blank experiment was conducted which involved heating the pre-conditioned carbon from ambient temperature to 1000°C without adsorbed frothing agent. A mass loss of 1.4% was observed from 25–520°C, and a second mass loss of 4.5% occurred above 520°C. TD-py-GC-MS showed that the evolved gases up to 520°C were water vapour, CO and CO The TG curves along with their GS and MS curves for the four frothing agents adsorbed on activated carbon are presented in The amount of frothing agent adsorbed on the carbon is given in The gases evolved from each frothing agent adsorbed on activated carbon were studied by SIM from ambient to 1000°C in argon atmospheres. The gases evolved were monitored via their molecular ions, which had been previously identified by the TD-py-GC-MS analyses. Qualitative analysis was only possible due to interfering fragment ions and/or isotope ions. All the ions monitored in the SIM analyses of PPG, PPGME, and α-terpineol displayed the same curve, that is one broad peak, coinciding with the TG curve. In  The component in the evolved gas stream with the largest relative peak area for the decomposition of PPG and PPGME was propanal, and all other peak areas were small by comparison. The gases with the largest relative peak areas for the decomposition of α-terpineol were propene and propanal, and any other detected gases were small by comparison. In the MiBC analysis, 4-methyl-1-pentene and 2,3-dimethyl-1-butene had the largest relative peak area (these gases have the same molecular weight and thus do not have separate ion signals). However, it should be noted that the high ion abundance of any of the ions monitored by the MS may also be due to the detection of ions from the fragmentation of higher molecular weight gases The GS chromatogram shown in The infrared spectrum of the mass loss is presented in The evidence presented here indicates that the four frothing agents studied displayed one mass loss on heating which for PPG, PPGME and MiBC was associated with being boiled off unchanged. α-terpineol showed some decomposition. When adsorbed on activated carbon, each sample again showed one mass loss associated with the decomposition of the frothing agent, but now there were numerous gases evolved in this one temperature range. Thus the activated carbon had a significant effect on the thermal decomposition of the frothing agents. Although the decomposition temperature increased by 100°C for PPG, PPGME, α-terpineol and MiBC when adsorbed on carbon, the decomposition temperature of below 300°C was still well within the range of decomposition used in regeneration kilns in gold plants. However, there was some PPG and PPGME (and to a lesser extent MiBC) which did not volatilise, suggesting that some residual decomposition product remained on the carbon. This may be one of the reasons why reactivated carbon never regains the activity of a new carbon. The evolved gas profiles from the decomposing frothing agents adsorbed on carbon were sufficiently distinctive to act as diagnostic probes for the presence of contaminants on plant sample of activated carbon. In practice, it is reasonable to look for the major gases evolved, such as propanal which was formed in the decomposition of PPG, PPGME and α-terpineol. Another dominant gas was 3,3-oxybis-2-butanol, which was evolved from PPGME and α-terpineol. MiBC was the only frothing agent that was not significantly affected by adsorption on carbon, and MiBC was still the major product evolved on heating, and hence the most useful gas for detecting its presence. Comparison of the three different analytical techniques indicated that the TD-py-GC-MS technique was required for unambiguous gas identification. This was mainly because many gases were evolved in the same temperature range, and so these gases needed to be separated from one another by GC in order to obtain an MS record that could be easily interpreted. The TG-MS technique provided mass loss data and temperature range of gas evolution, and made it possible to monitor (once the identity of the gases had been established by the TD-py-GC-MS technique) the evolved gases as a function of temperature. The TG-FTIR technique did not require data from other techniques, but on the other hand only the major components could be readily identified. Mr N.G. Fisher would like to gratefully acknowledge the Australian Federal Government for provision of a Commonwealth Scholarship, with additional funding provided by the A.J. Parker Co-operative Research Center for Hydrometallurgy.