In this study, we investigated an alternative to the conventional hydrochloric acid leaching of roasted bastnaesite. The studies suggested that the rare earth oxyfluorides in non-oxidatively roasted bastnaesite can be selectively leached only at elevated temperatures Further, the Ce(IV) in oxidatively roasted bastnaesite does not leach readily at low temperatures, and it is difficult to induce it to form a complex with F− ions in order to increase the leaching efficiency. Moreover, it is inevitably reduced to Ce(III) at elevated temperatures. Thus, the ultrasonically-assisted hydrochloric acid leaching of non-oxidatively roasted bastnaesite was studied in detail, including, the effects of several process factors and the, physical and chemical mechanisms underlying the leaching process. The results show that the leaching rate for the ultrasonically assisted process at 55°C (65% rare earth oxides) is almost the same as that for the conventional leaching process at 85°C. Based on the obtained results, it is concluded that ultrasonic cavitation plays a key role in the proposed process, resulting not only in a high shear stress, which damages the solid surface, but also in the formation of hydroxyl radicals (
                        
                     OH) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Standard electrode potential analysis and experimental results indicate that Ce(III) isoxidized by the hydroxyl radicals to Ce(IV), which can be leached with F− ions in the form of a complex, and that the Ce(IV) can subsequently be reduced to Ce(III) by the H2O2. This prevents the Cl− ions in the solution from being oxidized to form chlorine. These results imply that the ultrasonically-assisted process can be used for the leaching of non-oxidatively roasted bastnaesite at low temperatures in the absence of a reductant.Bastnaesite [(Ce, La)FCO With respect to the conventional oxidative roasting/hydrochloric acid-based selective leaching process for the industrial treatment of bastnaesite, Ce(IV) does not leach readily, whereas the other trivalent rare earth elements dissolve easily in hydrochloric acid at low reaction temperatures. On the other hand, after the addition of a reducing agent, Ce(IV) can be leached by highly concentrated hydrochloric acid at high temperatures. In this manner, Ce can be removed in substantial amounts before the solvent extraction process, which reduces the extraction capacity of selectively separate individual the other rare earth element. However, this selective leaching process does not yield Ce and other elements with sufficiently high purities A new cleaner and environmentally friendly hydrometallurgical process for the hydrochloric acid leaching of bastnaesite has been suggested, as shown in There have been few studies on the non-oxidative roasting of bastnaesite and its subsequent leaching. However, ultrasonically assisted leaching is being used widely in hydrometallurgical processes In this study, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis is used to identify and compare the constituent phases of oxidatively roasted and non-oxidatively roasted bastnaesite ore samples. The dissolution fractions and reaction mechanisms of the oxidatively roasted and non-oxidatively roasted samples are also determined. Finally, the effect of the ultrasonic treatment and its underlying physical and chemical mechanisms are evaluated. The high-grade bastnaesite concentrate used in this study was obtained from the Bayan Obo deposit. Ore from the mine was floated as a mixed rare earth concentrate and then selectively separated into bastnaesite and monazite using potassium alum as the depressant. Details on this process can be found elsewhere The roasting experiments were carried out in a box-shaped atmosphere furnace at 600 XRD analyses were carried out using an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical, The Netherlands) to identify the phases and determine the compositions of the roasted ore samples and the leaching residues. The Ce(III) and Ce(IV) contents of the samples were determined by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration As can be seen from   (In Eqs.  An unusual phenomenon was observed in that the dissolution fractions of Ce and the other rare earth elements reached values as high as 71.06% and 73.95% in a short period of 5 Existing studies have shown that Ce(IV) can complex strongly with F Based on the results of the dissolution fraction measurements for each case and a detailed analysis of the leaching process, the related equations can be simplified as follows: (In Eqs.   The experimental results indicated that oxidatively roasted ore can be leached quickly at elevated temperatures, as shown in Among these oxidants, the hydroxyl radical is one of the most reactive free radicals and one of the strongest oxidants ( It can also be verified that, for the ultrasonically assisted leaching process, the dissolution fractions of the rare earth fluorides are significantly higher than those during conventional leaching at elevated temperatures (see In this study, the mechanism underlying the ultrasonically assisted hydrochloric acid leaching of non-oxidatively roasted bastnaesite was elucidated, and the process was compared with the conventional leaching of non-oxidatively and oxidatively roasted bastnaesite. The dissolution fractions of Ce and the non-Ce rare earth elements in non-oxidatively roasted bastnaesite when ultrasonic agitation was used were significantly higher than those in the absence of the ultrasonic treatment. The physical and chemical mechanisms underlying the enhancing effect of the ultrasonic treatment were investigated. With respect to the physical mechanism, the ultrasonic waves cause extensive shear damage to the solid surface of the bastnaesite ore and facilitate the removal of the passive film. With respect to the chemical mechanism, on comparing the chemical oxidation resulting from the ultrasonic agitation with the conventional leaching of oxidatively roasted bastnaesite, it was found that the Ce(III) on the surfaces of the non-oxidatively roasted ore particles is oxidized to Ce(IV) by hydroxyl radicals during the ultrasonically assisted leaching process. The Ce(IV) then enters the solution and forms a complex with F This work was supported by the