Obtaining of tungstic oxide from wolframite concentrates involves the production of synthetic scheelite and/or tungstic acid as intermediate products. The present work studies the influence of different factors affecting the particle size of these compounds and also investigates the correlation between its granulometry and the final grain size of WO3.
                  The research included as main goals (i) the study of the effect on the synthetic scheelite grain size of the following parameters—concentration and amount of calcium chloride; concentration of tungstate solution and type of mixing and stirring, (ii) the study of the correlation between granulometric sizes of synthetic scheelite and final tungstic oxide granulometric sizes, (iii) the study of the effect of temperature, type of agitation, concentration and amount of hydrochloric acid on the recovery and particle size of tungstic oxide.
                  Conditions to produce WO3 powders with tailor-made micrometric grain size from 10 to 0.5 μm are presented.The direct use of tungsten concentrates is restricted to steel and ferrotungsten production, so its processing to convenient chemical forms as raw materials for hard metal and powder metallurgy is a must, with an important commercial impact. Tungsten oxide is the most common raw material in tungsten powder industry, being used in several pyrometallurgical processes Tungsten powder is produced by the reduction of tungsten oxides with hydrogen at high temperatures according to the following reaction: The equilibrium is shifted to the right as the moisture in the gas is decreased or when the hydrogen flow is raised. The temperature affects the moisture content in the reaction gas, which, in turn, affects the particle size of the reduced powder. According to An empirical equation for the relationship between the particle size of the reduced oxide ( The units of all the parameters are presented in the list of symbols. The influence of the temperature for different depths of the bed on the final particle size of tungsten powder is shown in The tungsten metal powder used in electronic and carbide industries must have a controlled and strict particle size, since it has an enormous influence on the properties of the final products. As an example of this, we may point out that fine powder such as W-2 type is used for cutting tools, while W-5 and W-6 types for fabricating light-weight mill products, and the coarser powder is utilized for direct sintering, heavy mill products or for a metal-infiltrated tungsten matrix. Two flow diagrams The objective of this work was the study of the effect of some process parameters on the particle size of the intermediate compounds CaWO Tests were carried out with a wolframite (Fe,Mn)WO The reagents used in the experiments were commercial grade. The wolframite concentrate was ground in a ball mill and the fraction undersize 200 mesh (74 μm) was selected for the tests. Tungsten extraction by leaching was done on a 300-g scale, using 50% excess of a 400 g/L sodium hydroxide solution, during 10 h at 103±2 °C in a 1 L Parr autoclave model 4531. After filtration, the liquor was analysed for tungsten by the mercurous method. A mother solution with 250 g/L of WO The precipitation of CaWO The calcium tungstate was digested with 300% of the theoretical amount of hydrochloric acid (10 M) at 90±1 °C for 4 h. The stirrer speed was 40 min Tungstic acid was obtained by direct precipitation from the sodium tungstate solution adding hydrochloric acid (10 M) in a 1 L Pyrex Quickfit vessel. Stirring rate was 75 min The calcination of tungstic acid to WO The particle sizes and distributions for the synthetic scheelite, tungstic acid and WO Many factors can affect or influence the calcium tungstate grain size: the way the reactants are mixed, temperature, stirring rate, concentration of reactants, excess of CaCl According to The particle size of a precipitate decreases with the degree of supersaturation, since more nuclei are formed at the beginning  As a general synthesis, it may be stressed that low particle size synthetic scheelite can be obtained by precipitation with calcium chloride from sodium tungstate solutions in selected conditions: (1) high concentration of calcium chloride solution below a maximum critical value depending on the several parameters of the reaction; (2) low reaction temperature; (3) bulk addition of the calcium chloride solution to the tungstate solution; (4) low stirring velocity. Plotting CaWO A reduction in the grain size of the acid of about 30–40% is observed when coarse scheelite particles (>6 μm) are used. The reduction is only about 20% when medium particles of scheelite (2–4 μm) are the starting material. Finally, there is no evident change when fine tungstate particles (<2 μm) are converted to tungstic acid.   The results show a decrease in the WO The WO The main conclusions for the synthetic scheelite route are the following: Particle size of tungstic acid produced by reacting synthetic scheelite with hydrochloric acid depends on the grain size of the initial synthetic scheelite. It was possible to establish a correlation between them using the equation: Particle size of tungstic oxide depends also on the grain size of initial tungstic acid. A linear correlation was established: Tungsten recovery increases with the excess of HCl used and with temperature. Particle size of tungstic acid decreases with HCl excess and increase with temperature. As general conclusion, it may be stressed and was demonstrated in this work that it is possible to produce WO particle size of metal powder (m) particle size of original oxide (m) bed depth (m) total concentration of the substance (kmol/m equilibrium solubility (kmol/m reaction time (s) addition time (s) temperature (K) temperature of cold solution (K) temperature of hot solution (K) stirring rate (min bulk density of oxide (kg/m Funding from Fundação para a Ciância e a Tecnologia, POCTI/36287/ECM/1999, is gratefully acknowledged.