Energy-dispersive X-ray diffraction (EDXRD) spectrometry is being investigated as a means to perform direct on-line quantitative mineral phase analysis on industrial mineral process streams. A laboratory prototype EDXRD analyser has been developed and a preliminary study has been made to determine its suitability for measuring mineral samples. This was carried out by collecting the diffraction spectra of 20 samples each containing six powdered minerals in dry form and using a linear regression analysis model to determine the mass of each mineral component contained in the samples. Using this method it was found that mineral components could be determined to an accuracy of better than 1wt%.Many mineral processing and metal production techniques are sensitive to the mineralogical content as well as the elemental composition of the feedstock fed into the processing plant. On-line elemental analysis techniques for process monitoring and control, including X-ray fluorescence (XRF) ( Off-line mineralogical analysis techniques including conventional XRD ( We have developed a prototype analyser suitable for performing mineralogical analysis of dry powders and mineral slurries. The analyser utilises the X-ray technique known as energy-dispersive X-ray diffraction (EDXRD), which is particularly well suited to this application. This paper describes the first investigation carried out to determine the accuracy with which the EDXRD analyser can quantify the components of samples containing mixtures of different minerals. The atoms in crystalline materials are arranged in such a way that regularly spaced atomic planes can be identified. Coherently, scattered X-rays undergo constructive interference when the scattering angle, An EDXRD spectrometer consists of a polychromatic source of X-rays, typically an X-ray tube, collimators to define the incident and scattered beams and an energy-resolving detector as shown in EDXRD exhibits several significant advantages over conventional XRD for on-line mineralogical analysis: The EDXRD technique uses much higher X-ray energies (up to 120 The use of higher-energy X-rays in EDXRD reduces the effect of microabsorption. This leads to the need for less sample preparation than in conventional XRD. This is an advantage in on-line analysis because it negates the need for complex sample presentation equipment. EDXRD analysers require no moving parts, which reduces both the cost and mechanical complexity of the instrument. The entire diffraction spectrum is collected simultaneously, reducing data acquisition times. Recently developed, high-resolution X-ray detectors based on semi-conductors such as cadmium telluride (CdTe) are particularly suited to this application. Some conventional XRD instruments are capable of measuring the entire diffracted beam simultaneously ( The main disadvantage of EDXRD is its relatively low Twenty samples were prepared, each containing the six minerals corundum, quartz, anatase, rutile, hematite and magnetite. All minerals were synthetic and had particle sizes in the range of approximately 5–150 The diffraction spectrum of each sample was measured using the EDXRD spectrometer. Transmission (0° angle) spectra were also measured. Diffraction spectra were collected at an X-ray tube potential of 120  In an attempt to resolve these overlaps, the diffraction data from the suite of 20 samples were analysed using a simple linear regression technique. Two or three energy ‘windows’ were assigned to each mineral, placed around the clearest and most intense peaks for that mineral. The total number of X-ray counts in each window was determined for each sample. The analysis used the normalised diffraction spectra (the raw diffraction spectrum divided by the transmission spectrum) to account for attenuation of the X-ray beam. Linear regression was used to relate the window count-rates to mineral composition. The linear regression coefficients were determined using 19 of the 20 samples and these were then used to calculate the composition of the 20th sample. This process was followed for each of the 20 samples in turn. Isolating the sample of interest from the training set in this way eliminates the possibility of over-training.  It has been shown that the EDXRD method can be applied to quantitative phase analysis of samples containing mixtures of different minerals. Analysis of 20 samples containing six minerals using a simple linear regression model shows that the mineral components of the samples can be quantified to an accuracy of better than 1