The present work describes the preparation of novel materials based on niobia (Nb2O5)/iron oxides and their use as catalyst on oxidizing reactions of organic compounds in aqueous medium with hydrogen peroxide. These new composites were prepared by mixing natural niobia and iron oxides and were characterized with powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), chemical analyses, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy. Results showed that the main iron oxides so formed were goethite (αFeOOH) and maghemite (γFe2O3) with small particle sizes. The decomposition study was realized with a basic dye as a model molecule: the methylene blue. The analysis of the products, with electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS), showed that the methylene blue was successively oxidized (hydrolyzed) through different intermediate species. These results strongly suggest that highly reactive hydroxyl radicals generated from the H2O2 on the surface of the 1:1 niobia:iron oxide composite act as an efficient heterogeneous Fenton catalystThe Fenton reaction (Fe Many other important materials have been used as catalyst supports or promoters, but this work is particularly focused on niobia, for its natural occurrence and for the relatively high abundance of niobium in the Earth crust, which is about 20 The main purpose of this work was to prepare a new class of material based on a natural niobium oxide (Nb The composites were prepared from a suspension of highly graded niobia (CBMM-Companhia Brasileira de Metalurgia e Mineração, Araxá-MG) in a 400 Three reactions took place in presence of the composite, according to the substrate: (i) the H In an attempt to identify the intermediate formation, the methylene blue decomposition was also monitored with the positive ion mode ESI-MS of an Agilent MS-ion trap mass spectrometer. The reaction samples were analyzed by introducing aliquots into the ESI source with a syringe pump at a flow rate of 5 All oxidation reactions or ion leaching were tested. The ion content in solution was tested by atomic absorption analysis, using a Varian AA 175 equipment. The calculations were carried out with the package Results of the hydrogen peroxide decomposition in presence of niobia/iron oxide composites are shown in The oxidation of methylene blue with H The adsorption process and iron leaching were controlled by measuring the discoloration of the dye solution in a batch adsorption experiment, with the composites and the iron oxide ( Control experiments with the composite in absence of H The reactions of methylene blue with niobia:iron oxide 1:1 composite (the more efficient catalyst for the oxidation among those studied in this work) and hydrogen peroxide were monitored with a UV-Visible spectrometry. Results ( The room temperature Mössbauer spectra of composites and pure iron oxide are shown in The XRD analyses of the niobia/iron oxide composites and pure iron oxide ( The SEM micrographs obtained for the niobia:iron oxide 1:1 composite, the pure niobia and the prepared iron oxide ( Analyses by N Although the hydrogen peroxide decomposition mechanism cannot be completely understood from these data, only. Several electron transfer processes are thought to take place during the reaction. According to the reportedly proposed mechanisms, the reaction initiates by an iron active site on the surface of the composite, with the H A simple competitive mechanism can alternatively be proposed for the hydrogen peroxide reactions in presence of the niobia composites. The reaction initiates by the activation of H Data from this work show that the chemical properties of niobia can strongly be modified when forming composites with iron (hydroxy) oxides. The resulting materials show a remarkable effect in discoloration an organic dye in aqueous medium. ESI-MS studies of the methylene blue oxidation showed the hydroxylation until CO Work supported by CNPq and FAPEMIG (Brazil). Authors are indebted to Dr. Robson (CBMM) for providing the natural niobia samples and to Prof. Dr. C.A. Taft (CBPF) for the computation facilities.