In this study, sourdough samples were collected from different locations and lactic acid bacteria (LAB) and yeasts were isolated, identified and their phytic acid degradation capabilities were investigated. The isolated phytase positive LAB and yeast strains were identified by FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy) and LAB's 16s rRNA gene and yeast's 26s rRNA gene sequencings. Phytase positive strains were used as a starter culture in whole wheat bread production. In order to determine the culture effect on the quality parameters of whole wheat bread samples, some physicochemical, nutritional, sensory, and textural properties were characterized. The spectrophotometric phytase activity was calculated as 703.1–1153.8 U/mL for LAB isolates, and 352.2–943.4 U/mL for yeast isolates. Two different yeast species (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Pichia membranifaciens) and five different LAB species (Weissella viridescens, Pediococcus pentosaceus, Pediococcus acidilactici, Lactobacillus brevis, Lactobacillus parabuchneri) were identified based on the FTIR-based identification and molecular subtyping methods. The phytic acid content significantly decreased in culture added whole wheat breads compared to control one produced with only commercial baker's yeast. The greatest reduction in phytic acid level (43.4%) was observed in the bread produced by S. cerevisiae + Pediococcus pentosaceus culture combination.The use of sourdough fermentation process is one of the oldest biotechnological techniques in cereal based production. Traditionally, sourdoughs have been used to produce different types of bread since ancient times. Although the primary purpose of the sourdough is leavening by yeasts, a simultaneous souring action takes place due to the activities of the lactic acid bacteria (LAB). The sourdough bread is produced from a mixture of flour and water fermented with LAB, which are mostly heterofermentative strains which produce lactic acid and acetic acid in the dough mixture. Thus, it provides a pleasant sour taste and flavor in dough. Sourdough is based on the metabolic activities of LAB ( It has been reported that some bread making procedures designed to reduce the phytate content could be applied to increase the nutritional value of bread. In several studies, fungal, bacterial, and yeast phytases addition resulted in the degradation of phytate which resulted in cereal products with higher mineral bioavailability ( Totally 33 sourdough samples were collected using sterile containers from different bakers in Turkey. Whole wheat flour was purchased from Canberk Food Co. (Ankara, Turkey). The baker's yeast was procured from Piyale Food Co. (Istanbul, Turkey). Ten g of sourdough samples was weighed and transferred into 90 ml of maximum recovery diluent and homogenized for 5 min. After that, serial dilutions were prepared. To perform the LAB isolation, the dilutions were inoculated on MRS (de Man, Rogosa and Sharpe) agar and all samples were incubated for 48 h at 30 °C in an anaerobic jar. The colonies having a color from white to cream were streaked on MRS agar to prepare the purified colonies. To perform the yeast isolation, the prepared dilutions from the sourdough samples were inoculated on DRBC (Dichloran Rose Bengal Chloramphenicol) agar and the samples were incubated for 72 h at 25 °C. The colonies were streaked on MEA (Malt Extract Agar) to prepare the purified colonies. After the isolation of the LAB and yeast colonies, they were stored in MRS broth and MEB (Malt Extract Broth) containing 20% glycerol at −80 °C in a freezer, respectively. A medium was prepared using To determine the extracellular phytase activity of samples, the isolates were activated in broth to stimulate the phytase production. For this purpose, MRS and MEB including 0.1% of Na-phytate and 0.2% of glucose were used. A 0.1 ml of broth including isolates was transferred into the 4.9 ml of medium including Na-phytate and these were incubated at 30 °C for 24 h and 25 °C for 24 h for LAB and yeasts, respectively. After the incubation, the broths were centrifuged at 7400 The isolates having phytase activity were identified by classifying using FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy) method. For this purpose, the yeast isolates were re-activated on PDA (Potato Dextrose Agar) while the LAB were re-activated on MRS agar. After 48 h later, yeast and LAB species were grown on YGC (Yeast Extract Glucose Chloramphenicol) and APT (All Purpose Tween) agar at 27 and 34 °C for 24 h, respectively. After that, the cells were suspended in 100 ml of distilled water. Each suspension was inserted on ZnSe table of FTIR spectrometer and dried at 40 °C. FTIR measurement was performed by a Tensor 27 spectrometer (Bruker Optic GmbH, Germany) equipped with a HTS-XT unit. The data were evaluated by OPUS software (version 2.7) and to compare the spectrum of the species ( To isolate the DNA of the cells, the isolates were activated in MRS broth and MEB for 24 h at 30 °C. The microorganism colonies (1500 μL) were centrifuged at 13000 The identified strains were used as combinations in whole wheat bread production and these combinations and sample codes are given in Whole wheat flour, distilled water, salt and sourdough samples were used as raw materials. The water determined by farinograph analysis (69% over the amount of flour), salt (1.6% on dry matter), the whole wheat flour and sourdough were added to the kneader bowl. Sourdough samples were added as to be 20% over the weight of the dough. Dough preparation and fermentation stages were applied as following; pre-mixing (1 min), kneading (5 min), 20 min pre-fermentation and 3 h main fermentation (30 °C, 90% relative humidity). After the fermentation, the samples were baked in an oven having top and bottom temperatures were 180 and 195 °C, respectively. After cooling the bread samples, the analyses were conducted. A 5 g of the sample was homogenized with 45 ml of distilled water using a magnetic stirrer. pH of the samples were measured using a pH meter (HANNA, Germany). Titratable acidity of sample was determined by titration of samples using 0.1 M of NaOH to an end point of 8.2 pH using a pH meter (HANNA, Germany) and the results were given as mL of NaOH used. The results were given as average of three replicates. A 10 g of the sourdough was homogenized with 90 mL of sterile peptone water (1 g/L). Yeast and LAB were grown using SDA (Oxoid) and MRS agar (Merck) media, and incubated at 30 °C for 48 h and 37 °C for 24 h, respectively. After the incubation, the counting was applied. The results were given as average of four replicates. To determine texture profile analysis parameters, each bread sample was subjected to a compression test using a tissue analyzer (SMS TA.XT2 Plus, UK) equipped with a 5 mm load cell and a 36 mm diameter cylindrical compression probe. The bread samples were sliced at 1.25 mm thickness. The TPA method parameters were as follows: pretest, posttest and test speeds were 5 mm/s, 1 mm/s and 5 mm/s, respectively. 30% compression was applied, and trigger force was 5 g, while the waiting time between the first and second compression cycle was 5 s. The results were given as average of seven replicates. Phytic acid content of the bread samples was determined using the Megazyme kit (K-PHYT, Megazyme, Bray, Ireland). A 0.5 g of dry bread samples was taken and 15 ml of pure nitric acid was added to the sample in a microwave oven at MARS 5 (CEM Corporation). The mineral content of the samples was determined by VARIAN-CCD Simultaneous ICP-AES (Australia). The amounts of Zn, Fe, Mg, Ca and K were recorded as μg/g. The results were given as average of three replicates. Sensory analysis of samples was performed using a hedonic scale by a panel consist of 19 people (10 men and 9 women) who like the sourdough bread samples. For the sensory evaluations, the breads were baked and after the cooling of them, the samples were served to each panelist on a same tray after giving the different three digits codes. The panelists used spring water to cleanse their palates before proceeding to the next sample. After the short training of the panel members about the samples, it was requested from them to evaluate the bread samples according to the external color of shell, internal color, taste and aroma, foreign taste and smell, pore structure, texture, chewability and overall acceptance. The evaluations for each parameter were performed between 1 (Extremely bad) and 7 (Excellent). One-factor variance analysis was applied to the assessed parameters and the differences between the groups by the Duncan multiple comparison test at the significance level of α = 0.05 was performed using SAS 8.0 software system. Totally, 49 LAB and 53 yeasts isolates were obtained from the collected sourdough samples from different locations. Only 13 LAB and 13 yeast isolates did not show any permanent zone on medium added with Na-phytate. The phytase positive isolates were subjected to extracellular phytase activity test to determine the best isolates in the degradation of phytic acid and the results were illustrated in For LAB and yeast isolates showing phytase activity, identification was first performed by FTIR technique to decrease the isolate number for genotypic identification. The cluster groups formed according to the FTIR definitions are shown in Eight yeasts and 8 LAB isolates were selected in each group and they were identified as genotypically and it was found that the yeasts were As shown in pH and titratable acidity values of the samples were tabulated in Bread dough samples prepared using sourdough produced with different culture combinations were also compared with spontaneous fermented bread dough (S10) as well as bread doughs produced with commercial baker's yeast (S11) which is commercially used on an industrial scale. According to the results of pH measurement, it was seen that the highest pH value (6.10) was found in the S11 and the lowest pH value (5.09) was in spontaneously fermented sourdough (S10) (p < .05). pH values were lowered due to fermentation except for S11, which was produced with commercial baker's yeast and no LAB. pH values were lower than those of the other samples in spontaneously fermented sourdough (S10) (p < .05, The pH values of the whole wheat bread samples including sourdough prepared with different culture combinations are also shown in TPA results of the bread samples are given in Phytic acid levels of bread samples and degradation ratios of the phytic acid were illustrated in Some mineral contents of the whole wheat bread samples were tabulated in The results of sensory analysis obtained are shown as graphically in In this study, sourdoughs were used for the resource of phytase active LAB and yeasts. The isolated LAB and yeasts were tested in terms of phytic acid degradation and used as a starter culture in the production of whole wheat bread to provide the increase of bioavailability of some bounded minerals. FTIR technique was used before genotypic identification of the isolates to decrease the expenses and it was seen that it resulted good accuracy with the genotypic identification for especially yeasts. It was observed that different LAB and yeast species having phytase activity were determined in the sourdoughs. The identified microorganisms showed a quite good performance in the degradation of phytic acid of the whole wheat bread. This paper is produced from the PhD thesis of Kevser Karaman and she would like to thank to