Tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) is a key enzyme in the biomineralization process as it produces phosphate from a number of phospho-substrates stimulating mineralization while it also inactivates inorganic pyrophosphate, a potent mineralization inhibitor. We have previously reported on the reconstitution of TNAP on Langmuir monolayers as well as proteoliposomes. In the present study, thin films composed of dimyristoylphosphatidic acid (DMPA) were deposited on titanium supports by the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) technique, and we determined preservation of TNAP's phosphohydrolytic activity after incorporation into the LB films. Increased mineralization was observed after exposing the supports containing the DMPA:TNAP LB films to solutions of phospho-substrates, thus evidencing the role of TNAP on the growth of calcium phosphates after immobilization. These coatings deposited on metallic supports can be potentially applied as osteoconductive materials, aiming at the optimization of bone-substitutes integration in vivo.The osseous tissue is constituted by an inorganic component composed of hydroxyapatite and an organic matrix constituted predominantly of collagen fibers. Like any other metabolic process, osseous histogenesis is regulated by enzymatic pathways from chondro-osteogenic cells, responsible for the control and availability of ions required for the calcification of the osseous matrix (Ca The tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) isozyme is a homodimeric ectoenzyme that releases inorganic phosphate in the extracellular media and controls the extracellular pyrophosphate concentration [ Several techniques can be used for the construction of mimetic models of a cell membrane in order to study its interaction with biological macromolecules. Among them, Langmuir monolayers [ Langmuir monolayers and LB films are advantageous as membrane models as it is possible to control at molecular level each step of the construction of those templates. The composition (amount and proportion), the number of layers, and polarity of the surface (hydrophobic or hydrophilic depending on the top layer) can be easily regulated by using these techniques [ Taking into account the enzymatic diversity and the high complexity of the osseous matrix mineralization, the LB films are a possible option to immobilize and analyze key enzymes involved in ossification, such as TNAP [ While the immobilization of TNAP in LB films [ All solutions were prepared using dust-free ultrapure deionized water from a Milli-Q TNAP was obtained from osteoblasts primary cultures as previously described by Simão et al. [ Titanium discs (13 mm × 1.5 mm – REALUM – Brazil) were used as supports for LB films deposition. The arithmetic roughness of the surfaces, determined by atomic force microscopy, was 32 ± 3 nm. They were cleaned during 15 min under ultrasound using a detergent solution, followed by ethyl alcohol and finally with acetone. Before use, they were treated in KH The π–A isotherms were obtained at 25 ± 2 °C in a 216 cm In order to investigate the rheological properties of the monolayers, the compressional modulus ( The more compacted the monolayer, the lower its fluidity and consequently the higher is the Cs The DMPA and DMPA:TNAP monolayers were morphologically analyzed by BAM microscopy (BAM2 Plus-Nanofilm Technologies Germany) equipped with a 10× magnification objective, and incident laser at 53.1° from the surface of the air-liquid interface of a Langmuir KSV-Nima trough (Biolin Scientific), reducing the surface-area with 2 movable barriers at 10 mm min LB films containing pure DMPA were transferred from the pre-built monolayers, from the emersion of the Ti supports. This ensured a contact of the surfactant polar-head with Ti-surface, along with the hydrophobic tails oriented to the outside of the solid support. LB mixed films of TNAP:DMPA were deposited over this pre-built DMPA film at π = 30 mN m The amount of DMPA and TNAP deposited per LB-layer was estimated using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) by the deposition of the monolayers on piezoelectric gold-covered quartz crystal (10 MHz ICM crystals). The changes in oscillation frequencies (Δf) due to the mass deposited are related according to the Sauerbrey equation [ The phosphohydrolytic activity of TNAP in homogeneous media was estimated continuously through the hydrolysis of the synthetic substrate p-nitrophenylphosphate (pNPP), by spectrophotometry (Agilent/HP 8453) with the aid of quartz cuvettes (1 cm optical length). The enzymatic activity was followed by the changes in the intensity of the UV–Vis absorption band at 410 nm assigned to the formation of In order to determine the activity of TNAP immobilized onto the LB films deposited on Ti, the supports were incubated in 1.5 mL of the reaction media at a 24-well microplate, and the activity was estimated by UV–vis spectrophotometry [ The propagation of minerals was evaluated in the presence of a synthetic nucleation complex made of amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP) combined with calcium–phosphate–lipid complexes (PS-CPLX) adapting the procedure described by Genge et al. [ The chemical groups were identified by Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) coupled to an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) accessory (Shimadzu-IR Prestige-21). The morphology of Ti surfaces modified with the mixed DMPA:TNAP LB films after 6 days of exposure to SCL was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Zeiss-EVO 50 microscope. The samples were coated with gold before the analysis. The osteoblasts proliferation on the modified Ti surfaces was evaluated through the MTT assay, by the colorimetric analysis of the formazan dye, produced from the tetrazolium salt [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetra-zolium bromide], a reaction dependent of the NADH reduction, as already described [   The values of the molecular areas were calculated from the extrapolation of the tangent of the π-A isotherm to the x-axis. The minimum molecular area is the area occupied per lipid molecule at π = 30 mN/m, the surface pressure used to the film transference. The choice of a Ca The transference of the pure-DMPA monolayers to solid supports was carried out. The LB film deposition ratio was 47 ± 15 and 240 ± 42 ng layer The salt concentration used in this study was higher than the concentrations generally used for DMPA Langmuir monolayers [  The morphology of the monolayers on the subphase containing 70 mmol L The addition of TNAP to the monolayer promoted the adsorption of the enzyme into the DMPA matrix, even at no-compression state (with π = 0), with stretched structures until a homogeneous monolayer at π = 30 mN m There are no significant changes of C Mixed lipid-enzyme LB bilayers presented a homogeneous coating of Ti surface and TNAP transferred mass differing by changing DMPA:TNAP molar ratio. The quantification of the total mass transferred to the solid supports in the mixed LB films was carried out ( While the monolayer containing 1430 molecules of DMPA for each TNAP resulted in the transference of 48 DMPA for each TNAP, the monolayer containing only 670 DMPA for one TNAP molecule gave rise to LB films containing 295 DMPA molecules for TNAP. In other words, for the LB film containing 1430:1 DMPA:TNAP (molar ratio), the composition of the film is 80% (wt.) assigned to TNAP, while for the 670:1 DMPA:TNAP (molar ratio) TNAP is responsible by only 40% (wt.) of the total mass. This result evidences that increased amount of TNAP at the air-liquid interface does not guarantee its transfer do solid supports. The first DMPA layer constructed over Ti was accomplished with a transfer ratio of 0.5, evidencing the roughness of the Ti surface that promotes heterogeneous LB film over its surface, despite the homogeneity of the DMPA monolayer at π = 30 mN m The phosphohydrolytic activity of TNAP immobilized on these LB templates was measured trough the pNPPase activity under optimal conditions. The results are shown in The enzymatic activity was stable as a function of time, similarly to that observed for the phosphohydrolytic activity of TNAP at homogeneous media (Supporting Information, Once TNAP exhibited stable phosphohydrolytic activity immobilized at the LB template composed of DMPA, the mineral formation induction in this heterogeneous media was verified after incubation with SCL buffer. The ATR-FTIR spectra of the mixed LB-films after 6 days of SCL media exposure are shown at The formation of a mineral phosphate phase is evidenced by the narrow band at 1030 cm The optimal condition for phosphorylated substrates hydrolysis by TNAP activity is not the best condition to this enzyme induce the mineral formation [ The SEM images of the Ti surfaces modified with the mixed LB films after 6 days of exposure to the SCL media are shown at The osteoblasts proliferation over the modified Ti surfaces as a function of time is shown in The interaction between DMPA and TNAP at the air-liquid interface was studied by means of the Langmuir techniques. The presence of the enzyme changed the packing and the rheological properties of the lipids monolayers. The higher compressibility values in the presence of Ca We thank The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at