Silver nanoparticles (nps) selectively loaded in the lumen cavity and outer surface of halloysite (Hal) nanotubes were realized through the simple impregnation strategy. The Hal mineral was pre-treated through leaching by sulfuric acid followed by calcinations. The silver nps have been loaded on both sides of the Hal nanotubes when nitrate was used as the raw source, while the nps were found only in the lumen cavity when acetate was used. The formation of Ag nps on both sides of the Hal tubes has partially destroyed the wall structures. Those Ag nps at outer surface showed the relatively higher efficiency to the HCOH oxidation, 6.9% of the organic molecular have been oxidized at 125°C, while Ag nps loaded in the lumen cavity only showed 1.0% in the same conditions. The physico-chemical properties of the two sides of the tubes determined the affordability of acid treatment, which induced the surface defects in the cavity; while the electron affinity, ionization energy and steric configuration of the ionic radical of the raw sources have showed differed coordination manner with outer surface of the Hal tubes, induced the selective adhesion of metal cations, and resulted in the selective formation of Ag nps.Halloysite (Al One of the aspects in the study to Hal is very interesting. Since the Hal is naturally occurred nanotubes, how to effectively take advantage of the pipeline morphology, and what is the key mechanism that will affect the functionization of the Hal based materials are still in hot debate. In the aforementioned literatures, some of the efforts have focused on the selective modification of interior or outer surface of Hal, such as the modification of Hal lumen by octadecylphosphonic acid have driven the absorption of ferrocene into the pipeline cavity We present in this article a theory based on the defect and radical coordination effects, which have been proposed to affect the assembly manners of nanoparticles (nps) onto Hal nanotubes. Silver was chosen as the guest that will be assembled onto the Hal surface, because Ag nps have attracted broad attentions in antibacterial Halloysite nanotubes were obtained from Chenxi, Hunan province in China, due to their relatively high thermal stability For the purpose of expanding diameter of the lumen and thus facilitating the assembly of metal resources into, an acid leaching to the Hal raw mineral was conducted. In typical procedure, 1.0 Silver acetate (C Phase of the samples were characterized by a DX-2700 powder diffractometer with CuKα-radiation (λ The catalytic oxidation of formaldehyde test was performed in a 4 Morphology of the Hal nanotubes and the distribution status of the Ag nps on the Hal surface or in the lumen were explored by TEM technique. According to the TEM images in While, in the A-Hal-Ag-2 sample, which was prepared through loading and decomposing silver nitrate solution, the nps are located both in the interior lumen and on the outer surface of the nanotubes, TEM images acquired in many sight fields have confirmed the successful loading of nps on the two sides ( XRD pattern of the raw Hal in The Ag nps in the A-Hal-Ag-2 sample are different with those found in the A-Hal-Ag-1, based on the similar synthesis procedures and other resources as well as the pretreatment to the minerals, the difference in locations of the silver nps in the products should be ascribed to the changed silver resource. A mechanism to interpret the reason of the selective decoration processes are tentatively illustrated in In the case of halloysite coordinate with these two radicals, as have been declared before, some defects and [AlO On the other hand, the outer surface of the Hal nanotubes was composed of [SiO The ethic of the theory of ionic radical mediated surface coordination stands for: The charge density, electric affinity, polarity as well as acidity of the ionic groups in the raw sources determine their coordination ability with surface sites of matters with deviated surface structures, such as the halloysite mineral with stereotype differed components on the two sides of the tubes. Artificial regulations to the target sites are also acceptable to facilitate the bonding or adhesion between the guest ions and target sites. Therefore, one can manipulate the surface functionization through choosing the type of the ionic radicals or regulating the target sites to obtain the desired materials. FTIR spectra of the Hal mineral after calcinations at 500 On the IR spectrum of A-Hal-Ag-2 sample, the vibration bands are more simple than the other two. Hydroxyls and surface water cannot be detected any more on the sample, the band fringes have been merged into three main and broad bands. The band at 470 Raman shifts in the samples were also acquired in the experiments in order to consolidate with the corresponding IR spectra. Raman shifts at 854 MAS NMR spectra of After silver nps have been assembled into lumen of Hal, the positions of NMR bands for To evaluate the catalytic performances of decomposition to carboxyls by the Hal loaded silver nps on different positions, a comparative experiment was conducted to the two samples. The GC spectra of HCHO gases before and after blowing over the two A-Hal-Ag samples are shown in Halloysite nanotubes can be selectively decorated by silver nps in the lumen or on the surface after partial etching the [AlO The authors want to thank Dr. Shengming Jin, CSU, for his kindly helping in the discussion of electric structure of surface ions. This work was supported by the