Non-evaporable getter (NEG) thin films for residual gases control in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) cavities after sealing are considered. For this study, several getters are deposited and analyzed in terms of sorption performances, microstructure and activation mechanism. Compared to single layer evaporated titanium reference, the addition of a chromium sub-layer is shown to decrease the activation temperature of the NEG. Moreover, when activated under 0.2mbar of N2, nitrogen diffusion in the titanium layer is enhanced by sub-layer addition. Effective pumping of nitrogen is monitored by residual gas analysis (RGA). Transmission electron microscopy investigation of as-deposited thin film getters reveals Ti layer microstructure modification due to platinum sub-layer addition. Furthermore, activation under nitrogen atmosphere is shown to induce microstructure modifications for both getters. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and depth profiling monitoring of NEG activation under high vacuum conditions (10−8
                     mbar) shows the dissolution of the NEG surface oxide in the getter bulk, along with the formation of carbide and nitride compounds. These results are in good agreement with already published results on getter alloys.For many micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), packaging under controlled atmosphere is a way to enhance their performances and reliability Getter materials are chemical pumps, able to chemisorb active gases on their surface. Barium, titanium, and zirconium are the most commonly used getter materials, often as alloys The integration of NEG thin films inside MEMS cavities faces several issues In this paper, we investigate the properties of NEG thin films made of a bi-layer of different metals in terms of microstructure, nitrogen pumping behavior, gaseous exchanges and activation mechanisms. The purpose of this study is to establish the relationships between NEG thin films elaboration parameters (materials nature and thickness), their resulting microstructure and their gettering performances (sorption capacity and gaseous exchanges). NEG thin films are deposited on natively oxidized Si wafers by e-beam evaporation, using a Plassys MEB 550S equipment. Depositions are performed at room temperature, at a base pressure of 5 Surface morphology of NEG thin films is investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on a Hitachi S-5000 equipment (using secondary electrons and acceleration voltage of 30 NEG pumping performances are characterized by the glass ampoule sealing technique. First, a soda-lime glass ampoule, with a stainless steel ball inside for pressure measurements, undergoes a thermal treatment at 450 Gases inside glass ampoules before and after NEG activation are investigated by residual gas analysis (RGA) in a tailor-made test bench. Ampoules are broken under ultra high vacuum conditions (10 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and depth profiling analyses of surface and volume chemical modifications during activation are carried out with an M-XPS spectrometer from Omicron Nanotechnology equipped with a monochromated Al Kα source ( During Ti NEG activation, titanium and silicon native oxides are reduced and oxygen diffuses in the getter layer thickness Sorption curves for 5 thicknesses of single layer Ti NEG thin films are presented on  In spite of the difference of activation protocol, sorption capacity analysis shows the influence of sub-layer on NEG pumping performances. Thus, adequacy between NEG activation temperature and MEMS cavity sealing process temperature can be obtained by appropriate sub-layer addition. Gas exchanges for a Cr/Ti NEG during activation were investigated by RGA. The mass spectrum of the ampoule without NEG exhibits a strong nitrogen signal (atomic mass unit 14 and 28), which corresponds to the initially injected N Activation of the getter sample results in the effective pumping of N In order to confirm this mechanism, same ampoules are prepared and thermally treated, but without stainless steel ball inside. Resulting mass spectra are presented on As expected, hydrogen signal for the ampoule without NEG sample is lower than for the previous ampoule with the stainless steel ball. Remaining H Effective pumping of N NEG morphology was investigated by AFM, for roughness measurement, and SEM, for grains size measurement, for single layer Ti getters. Microstructure analysis by TEM was performed on as-deposited single layer Ti NEG and multilayered Pt/Ti NEG. Single layer Ti NEG ( Multilayered Pt/Ti NEG also shows a columnar structure with a strong Ti (0 Microstructure analysis by TEM was also performed on single layer Ti and bi-layered Pt/Ti NEG after a thermal treatment at 450 The TEM observations either for Ti monolayer or for Pt/Ti stack before and after getter activation give evidence of a microstructure evolution. Moreover, it is important to emphasize that after activation, the grain size of the Ti getter is about half the one of the Pt/Ti stack where the (0 Single layer Ti NEG activation was investigated by in situ XPS. The sample was first analyzed after air-exposure. Then in situ activation was performed by successive 1-h heatings at 200, 300 and 400 Air-exposed NEG surface is covered by an oxide layer, as shown by the Ti 2p doublet peak at binding energy (BE) 459.3 and 465.0 First annealing at 200 Second annealing at 300 Last heating at 400 Species diffusion in single layer Ti and multilayered Cr/Ti samples was investigated by XPS depth profiling. In both cases, analyses were performed on the air-exposed samples, after in situ activation (under high vacuum conditions), and after activation in glass ampoule (under 0.2 Surface oxide layer for the air-exposed samples is observed on both NEG ( Profiles after in situ activation indicate effective surface oxygen diffusion inside getter bulk ( After activation under 0.2 Single layer Ti and multilayered Cr/Ti and Pt/Ti NEG thin films were investigated for under controlled atmosphere MEMS packaging applications. Chromium sub-layer addition to titanium getter was shown to reduce NEG activation temperature by 75 During thermal activation, surface oxide layer of NEG thin films is dissolved in the getter bulk. At the same time, carbon containing adsorbates are transformed into carbides. This activation mechanism is in good agreement with the already described one for getter alloys The authors thank the Nano-technological platform for upstream research (PTA, Grenoble, France) for its support in metals deposition.