To predict real-time distribution curve of dense medium cyclone in the Taixi coal preparation plant, a new method based on field data was presented. A group of uniformly designed single machine checks (sampling test of a dense medium cyclone) were carried out for modeling field operating parameters and distribution curve indexes. Then three real-time indexes could be predicted by onsite sensor values, and the present distribution curve model was able to be calculated. Predicting part of the method was also compared with the usual approximate formula method based on the proposed models. The models were proved to be acceptable as the RMS accuracy reached 0.73%, 0.77%, and 0.90% respectively in the training set and 0.76%, 0.63%, and 0.51% for the test example. The predicting results were also verified to be better and more reasonable than the approximate formula method.Dense medium cyclone (DMC) is one of the most important cleaning units in coal washery. It essentially separates coal particles in the light of their differences in density, and is capable of realizing sharp separations and heavy loads at the same time ( Although DMC research has made a tremendous development in the last four decades focusing on size design ( Once an industrial DMC goes into operation, both the body sizes and process flow are fixed, therefore, operating parameters are the only practical element affecting the separating performance or product quality when the properties of the raw coal do not change significantly with time. However, it is quite surprising that — to our knowledge — there is little literature studying the models between the operating conditions and DMC indexes on the basis of field data. There are two bottlenecks restricting the development of integrated automation in DMC processes. The first is the fast gauging of raw coal material. There seems to be two approaches solving this bottleneck. 1) analyzing a month comprehensive material of float-and-sink tests of raw coal to make an estimation ( Usually, the separation indexes of DMCs cannot be monitored directly. Therefore, soft sensor modeling is adopted. A soft sensor comprises a group of measurement signals and a model to estimate an immeasurable parameter. Soft sensors can thus provide a tool for supporting or replacing the potentially difficult and expensive measurements. It has been used successfully in measuring the coal moisture ( In this paper, a new soft sensor modeling method for predicting real-time distribution curve of dense medium cyclone in the Taixi coal preparation plant by field operating parameters was proposed. A group of specially designed single machine checks were carried out for modeling field operating parameters and distribution curve indexes. Then real-time indexes could be predicted by onsite sensor values, and the present distribution curve model was able to be calculated. An additional experiment was arranged for testing the method and illustrating the prediction process. Based on the models, the method was also compared with the approximate formula method. Uniform design (UD) is established on the uniform distribution in number theory. Following UD, experiment points are scattered uniformly within the factor range for obtaining more information by less experiments. UD just takes into account uniform, so the points have a better representative. As orthogonal design, UD provides various experimental tables for users. For example, U Raw coal, clean coal, middings and gangue are sampled simultaneously from a three product dense medium cyclone. It lasts 20 The four samples are transported to a laboratory for further sample splitting to 30 To plot a partition curve, the modified logistic model is adopted ( The least square model identification method is utilized to reckon the above coefficients by the float-sink test data, and the partition curve can be got. Four factors, i.e. density of dense medium suspension ( To rebuild the distribution curve model as shown in Eq. According to the curve points and corresponding work conditions, The models are data-driven models depending on single machine checks following UD. For predicting real-time distribution curves in daily production, The non-pressure-feeding DMC typed 3GDMC1300/920 as shown in The common scope of each parameter was 1.520–1.620 Single machine checks were carried out twelve times, once a day and before daily production. Another one was arranged for testing. In each experiment, the DMC circuit was manipulated to make the sensor values approximate to the corresponding row of Take single machine check under the first condition in Another single machine check was carried out for testing the models, the details were shown in To predict the real-time distribution rate, field operating parameters were gathered first by sensors, for example, Absolute errors between the AFM and actual distribution rate were listed in The method is a data-driven method which relies on factory data. UD makes the times of single machine check as less as possible. The models are proved to be acceptable as the RMS accuracy reaches 0.73%, 0.77%, and 0.90% respectively in the training set and 0.76%, 0.63%, and 0.51% for the test example. Although the predicting distribution curve seems to be close to the actual one, the maximum absolute error between the predicting rate and actual distribution rate is 9.7% in 1.75 The authors would like to thank the