Blasting is one of the key elements of open pit mining. However, explosive usage may cause an environmental problem such as blast-induced seismic vibration. One of the solutions to the problem may be opening an artificial discontinuity as a barrier to shock waves. Such a phase is formed by lightly charging the barrier holes and firing them. This research is aimed at investigating the effect of empty barrier holes alone on seismic vibration. For this purpose, a series of field experiments were conducted in a dragline panel, Seyitomer Coal Enterprise, Kütahya, Turkey. In order to form a barrier at the centre of the panel, 30 holes were drilled on three parallel rows. The spacing between the rows was 1m. In each row, 10 holes 1m apart were drilled. The barrier holes were not charged and they were left empty. On the other hand, blast holes were charged and fired for rock fragmentation. Progress direction of the operation was from the ends of the panel toward the centre. At each firing, peak particle velocity (PPV) values were measured by two instruments located just in front of and behind the empty barrier holes. In this way, it could be possible to see how the empty barrier holes act. In total, 121 PPV values were recorded and analysed. Besides, in a number of experiments the barrier holes were filled with water. Analysis of data has revealed that a decrease in PPV of up to 18% has been detected just behind the barrier holes.Blasting is a key component of mining, quarrying, dam and tunnel construction works. Rocks are fragmented by the energy released after blasting. However, it has been determined that only 20–30% of the energy is used for fragmentation; the rest appears in the form of ground vibration, air-over pressure, and fly rock A trench is another form of discontinuity as a barrier to the seismic waves. Prakash et al. In the present study, the effect of empty barrier holes alone has been investigated even when they are not charged and fired. For this purpose, 30 holes were drilled in three parallel rows and a series of experiments were conducted in a dragline panel of a coal mine. The experiments were performed in the dragline panel of Seyitomer Coal Enterprise, Kütahya, Turkey. The panel height was 24 There were two villages around the district. Residents complained due to the vibration. In order to solve the vibration problem, the charge per delay was decreased. The dragline panel under investigation was about 1000 On the other hand, blast holes for rock fragmentation were drilled initially at the end points of the parts. Progress of blasting direction was from ends of the parts towards the centre. The distance between the first blasting point and the barrier was about 270 During the experiments, 70 blasts were monitored. Although two instruments were employed at each blast, some records could not have been held healthy and excluded in the tables. So, the tables do not have equal number of records. At each experiment, two blast holes were fired. This was the minimum number allowed by the coal enterprise in order not to violate the production program. Blast holes were neighbour hole pairs and on the same line. The distance to the monitors was measured from the nearest hole for all blasts. Total charge amount of the blast holes was the same for all cases. Although the best results could be handled by single blast holes, two blast holes have been accepted in tolerance limits. Recorded data were evaluated by considering scaled distance ( The following equation, developed by USBM, was used in Fifty-five measurements were made in the first part (    It is obvious that In the second part, beside empty barrier holes, water-filled holes were utilised. In this way, the difference between empty and water-filled holes was examined. The distance between the stations and blast points were 193–110  The figure represents that In order to statistically state if there is a difference between the Regression model and  However, the As a conclusion for second part, the barrier holes slightly decrease vibration as it was found for the first part (maximum 9% for water filled+empty holes). In this research, the effect of barrier holes alone on blast induced vibration was investigated. Three 1-m-spaced parallel rows, each of which includes 10 holes spaced 1 The results have also been confirmed by statistical analysis. When the two data sets taken in front of the barrier and behind it are gathered, the The authors are grateful to the staff of the Seyitomer Coal Enterprise for their hospitality and kind support during the field investigations. They also express their thankfulness to Dr. Sema Behdioglu at Dumlupinar University, Industrial Engineering Department, Kutahya, Turkey, for her kind supervision and support for statistical analyses.