Combination of KOH with each of Na2SiO3, Na3PO4 and NaAlO2, formed three different coating solutions to produce plasma electrolytic oxidation (PEO) coatings on the surface of AM50 magnesium alloy. The surface morphology, cross section, chemical composition, corrosion resistance and structure of each of the coatings were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The results showed that different anions, i.e., SiO3
                     2−, PO4
                     3− and AlO2
                     −, influence the coating characteristics such as thickness, chemical composition and coating structure. The results showed that thicknesses of the Si-, P- and Al-coatings are 8, 4 and 1µm, respectively. Moreover beside MgO existing in structure of all three coatings, specific phases namely Mg2SiO4, Mg3(PO4)2 and MgAl2O4 were formed in the structure of the Si-, P-, and Al-coatings, respectively. It was revealed that usage of SiO3
                     2− instead of PO4
                     3− or AlO2
                     − led to formation of a coating layer with better corrosion protection properties. The better performance of the Si-coating compared to P- or Al-coatings is considered to be due to the fact that the thickness, the number of open pores and the resistance of the barrier layer are formed under such optimum conditions which result in a higher corrosion resistance.Plasma electrolytic oxidation (PEO) is a novel process which produces a stable oxide layer on the surface of a number of metals, such as aluminium, titanium and magnesium. The layers thus generated offer a unique combination of excellent wear and corrosion resistance. Such an improvement of the corrosion and wear resistance is especially beneficial for magnesium which is highly susceptible to failures resulting from either corrosion or wear — or both. In order to develop effective coatings based on the PEO process, an understanding of the mechanisms of this process and of the parameters affecting the PEO coatings is essential. So far, a number of studies had been performed addressing different aspects of the PEO process and the role of effective parameters in the coating process. Thus, some publications deal with fundamentals of the formation mechanism of a coating layer in order to explain possible physical and chemical reactions occurring during the plasma formation In the present study, the role of silicate, phosphate and aluminate salts was investigated on the formation of coatings by PEO process. The combination of these salts with one or more additives is typically used to prepare a PEO coating on magnesium alloys AM50 magnesium alloy (4.4–5.5 Three different electrolytes were prepared with the following compositions: Na The passivation behaviour of the substrate in the various coating solutions was also examined. To this end, the bare substrate was polarized with a scan rate of 12 To evaluate the corrosion resistance of the PEO coatings both polarization and EIS tests were employed using fresh samples for each of these tests. Prior to the measurements, the samples were immersed in the test solution for 30 To identify the open pores, the coated samples were immersed in a solution containing 60 Scanning electron microscopy (Cambridge Stereoscan 250) was employed to observe the surface morphology of the coatings. The thickness of the coatings was measured using an eddy-current coating thickness measurement gauge (Minitest 2100, Electrophysik, Germany) and by cross-sectional images of the coatings and the substrate. To prepare the cross sections for SEM observation, the samples were ground with various grades of silicon carbide papers from 800 to 2500 grade. Subsequently, polishing, etching and gold sputtering were employed. Further, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using a Siemens diffractometer D 5000 operating with Cu K The surface morphologies and the cross sections of the three types of coatings obtained are shown in  Unlike the two other coatings, the structure of the Al-coating exhibits a remarkably different type of surface morphology. Pores are typical defects that strongly influence the properties of the PEO coatings. Hence, the fraction of the oxide layer covered by the pores and the pore density were measured. The data of the open pores and the total number of pores are summarized in The phases of the PEO coatings were determined by XRD and the corresponding patterns are illustrated in The passivation behaviour of the substrate in different coating solutions was studied by the electrochemical polarization technique. The polarization curves presented in Further examination of the nature of the passive layer was performed by immersing the bare metal in Na The corrosion resistance of the PEO coatings was evaluated by both potentiodynamic polarization and EIS methods. Morphology of the corrosion attack and polarization plots of the coated specimens are shown in The electrochemical corrosion behaviour of the untreated AM50 alloy and the coatings in 3.5% NaCl are shown in As mentioned before, morphology, thickness, chemical composition and structure are considered to be the major parameters influencing the final performance of the PEO coating. The behaviour of these parameters with respect to the three different anions is discussed in the following sections.  As mentioned in the previous section, the beneficial effect of SiO The SEM images show that the cross sections of the three types of coatings differ from one another. For instance, it is seen that unlike the Si-coating, the cross section of the P-coating shows a more porous structure. According to Curran and Clyne It should be kept in mind that the layers have the characteristics of a dielectric material. Therefore, the coating process would be stopped if a defect free layer formed on the surface Therefore, as the solution can penetrate easier into the discharge channels through the larger openings compared to the narrow ones, the holes with larger diameters could be more beneficial for the formation of the coating. This may explain why the Si-coating has a coarse surface morphology with big holes but its cross section shows less evidence of porosity or defects. It could also explain what happens to the surface morphology and cross section of the P-film. As The measurement of the open pores also shows a good consistency with the cross section results. It can be seen that the Si-coating with an open pore density of 13 The cross sections of the coatings show that the thicknesses of the Si-, P- and Al-coatings are about 8, 4 and 1 An earlier investigation of PEO coatings showed that the structure of a PEO coating is composed of an inner barrier layer and an outer porous layer The formation of the barrier layer is a consequence of the reaction between metal ions, in this case Mg From the “anodic dissolution” point of view, the study of the passive layer on the metal surface, Another evidence of the formation of a more stable oxide layer in the Si-solution could be the final voltage of the PEO process. Several authors showed that the increase of the voltage during the PEO process is due to the resistance of the oxide layer against the passing current Further, the effect of conductivity on the film formation process was examined. Guo and An reported that the rate of film formation increased when anions with higher conductivity were introduced to the coating solution The chemical composition of the PEO coating is among the parameters which influence the corrosion resistance of the final coating The XRD results showed that the anions are involved in the formation process and produce different phases in the coatings. Apart from MgO which is commonly detected in the coatings, depending on the electrolyte type, specific phases form during the coating process. The results of the present study show that Si-, P- and Al-solutions respectively introduce Mg Liang et al. compared the corrosion resistance of two coatings. The first was mainly composed of MgO and Mg To determine the fraction of the phases, the coatings were characterized by considering the intensity of the main peaks of each phase in the XRD patterns. The ratio of the intensities was used to calculate the relative variation of the phases existing in the coating. Thus, the ratios of The electrochemical properties of the coatings were examined using electrical equivalent circuits representing various elements of the coatings. The equivalent circuits employed for curve fitting of the Si-, P- and Al-coatings are illustrated in The experimental and fitted results are illustrated in  The fitting results for the Al-coating presented in The low thickness and the high number of open pores in the Al-coating make the layer so weak and porous that the electrolyte passes through the thickness within a short time and easily reaches the substrate. As the diffusion of H As a result, corrosion products such as Mg The equivalent circuit shown in  The results showed that the surface morphologies and cross sections of the coatings were affected by the anions. The Si-coating had a rough and porous surface morphology but less pores in the cross section. The P-coating had a fine surface morphology including tiny pores. The cross section of the coating also contained some pores. The Al-coating had a non-uniform and porous structure, and its cross section was uneven and thin. The different thicknesses of the Si-, P- and Al-coatings which were about 8, 4 and 1 The presence of SiO The results showed that the anions directly contributed to the coating formation process. Apart from MgO which is a common phase in the coatings, specific phases, i.e. Mg Based on the curve fitting results, the structures of the Si-, P- and Al-coatings can be represented by two time constants, Warburg and inductive elements, respectively. These results indicated that the corrosion process of the P-coating was controlled by diffusion but that of the Al-coating led to the local corrosion and pits. The presence of SiO The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical supports extended by Mr. U. Burmester and V. Heitmann. One of the authors (A.G.) expresses his sincere thanks for the financial support received from the