Applications of a complex surfactant developed in-house to in-situ leaching of low permeable sandstone uranium deposits are described based on results from agitation leaching, column leaching, resin adsorption, and elution experiments using uranium containing solution from the in-situ leaching site. The results of agitation leaching experiments show that adding surfactant with different concentrations into leaching solution improves the leaching rate of uranium. The maximum leaching rate of uranium from agitation leaching reached 92.6% at an added surfactant concentration of 10mg/l. Result of column leaching experiment shows that adding surfactant with varying concentrations into leaching solutions increased the permeability coefficient of ore-bearing layer by 42.7–86.8%. The leaching rate of uranium from column leaching increased by 58.0% and reached 85.8%. The result of kinetic analysis shows that for the extraction of uranium controlled by diffusion without surfactant the apparent rate constant 0.0023/d changed to 0.0077/d for the extraction with surfactant controlled by both diffusion and surface chemical reactions. Results from resin adsorption and elution experiments show that there was no influence on resin adsorption and elution of uranium with an addition of 50mg/l surfactant to production solution from in-situ leaching. The adsorption curve, sorption capacity of resin, recycling of resin remained the same as without adding any surfactant. Introducing complex surfactant to leaching solution increased the peak concentration of uranium in eluents, reduced the residual uranium content in resin, and promoted the elution efficiency. The method of using a complex surfactant for in-situ leaching is useful for low permeable sandstone uranium deposits.Uranium is the key element and the raw material to fuel nuclear reactors for the use of nuclear energy. It is a challenge for the uranium mining and processing industry to provide an adequate supply of nuclear fuel to sustain the nominal growth rate for nuclear power ( In recent years, abundant sandstone uranium deposits have been explored in Xinjiang, Yunnan, Shanxi and Inner Mongolia ( Surfactants have been widely applied in many fields such as mining, petroleum, industrial, agriculture, food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical ( Although many applications of surfactant were discussed in literatures, little information on the application of surfactant for extraction of uranium from low permeable sandstone uranium deposits is available in detail. Surfactant influence on the resin adsorption and elution of uranium has not been studied and reported even though it is an important aspect of the production process. This paper reports the findings of using a compound surfactant for increasing the permeability and the leaching rate of uranium in low permeability sandstone in in-situ leaching at a mining field of Xinjiang, China, by agitation leaching and column leaching experiment. The uranium deposit, located west of the southern margin of Yili basin, Xinjiang, China, is a sandstone roll-type deposit associated with an interlayer oxidation zone. The ore-containing stratum in the deposit is a Shuixigou Group of lower-middle Jurassic. The ore belt in east–west extension is 2800 All samples were collected from the drilling at the wings of the ore body. They are medium-fine sandstone in color of gray to dark gray with inequigranular texture and massive structure. The uranium minerals are mainly pitchblende (98%) and with minor coffinite and brannerite in clay and silty cement, in the forms of scattered or small disseminated deposits. Other metal minerals are pyrite, hematite, goethite, and sphalerite. Nonmetallic minerals with the average volume fraction are quartz 70%, feldspar 12%, kaolinite 8%, illite 5%, and montmorillonite 3%. Carbonate mineral content is generally low except in a few locations is relatively higher.  For this experiment The pore volume and surface area of different pore size were calculated from measuring the mercury content of uranium ore pore space after degassing treatment under external pressure. The experimental apparatus is fully automatic mercury porosimeter Autopore IV 9510. Three sandstone samples from a leaching uranium mine in Xinjiang are numbered as T-202, T-1406, and T-206. Although the porosity of the uranium ore is not very low (between 19.47% and 23.40%), the average pore size is small (33.0–104.9 A complex surfactant (CS) was prepared in house for experiments. It was a product mixing from octyl-phenyl polyoxyethylene ether (OP-10) and perfluoroalkyl sulfuryl fluoride (FSO) in a certain proportion. Surface tension of solution with different concentrations were measured by a JZHY-180 interfacial tensiometer using circular ring heave liquid membrane method at a temperature of 20 In the agitation leaching experiment, the sample T-202 was used to investigate the effect of the complex surfactant with various concentrations on the leaching of uranium. The surfactant with varied concentrations from 0 to 300 In the column leaching experiment, the sample was loaded into a pmma column, In the resin adsorption and elution experiments, an organic glass exchange column ( A three-cycle dynamic adsorption experiment of resin adsorption was conducted with the transformed resin from hydrometallurgy factory. The resin contained remnants of the uranium content 0.8 For the first column, no surfactant to the adsorption solution was applied. For the second and the third column, surfactant 10 This procedure was repeated in three continuous cycles. For the first and the second cycle, the column was eluted with eluents from the hydrometallurgy factory in a volume of 20–30 times. The volume of elution solution collected was measured and the content of uranium was determined. The total adsorption of uranium and resin adsorption capacity for each cycle was calculated. For the third or the last cycle, the column was placed upside down, then flushed with wash bottles after the resin adsorption saturated. The resin was collected into a 40 The elution experiment of resin adsorption was conducted with saturated resin transformed from hydrometallurgy factory. The resin contained the uranium content 56.61 The uranium concentration in the solution was measured using the titanium reduction - ammonium vanadate titration procedure. The nitrate was analyzed by the volumetric method and the spectrophotometer method. Permeability coefficient This experiment confirms that introducing a small amount of complex surfactant increased the permeability of uranium ore significantly. The flow of fluids in porous rock is influenced by the capillary mechanism. The fluid flow driven force, Δ  The surfactant wets the surface of the uranium ore, reduces the fluid film thickness of the uranium ore, enhances the mass transfer, and increases the permeability. The leaching rate of uranium ore changes with the concentration gradient of the complex surfactant and reaches its maximum in the range of 5–10   The leaching rate of uranium and the maximum of uranium concentration of extracting solution with surfactant are higher than those without surfactant by 58.0% and 18.6%, respectively. The leaching rate of uranium with surfactant is higher than that without surfactant at all time during the column leaching experiment. The leaching of uranium is correlated with the wetting ability of a leaching liquid to the ore. The wetting effect of the liquid to a solid surface is related to the surface tension of the liquid. The surface tension is expressed by Young's equation or wetting equation ( The spreading coefficient equations can be derived from wetting equations: According to the above two equations, the wetting ability liquid to solid depends on its surface tension. The smaller surface tension, the stronger wetting ability. Introducing surfactant into a leaching solution reduces the surface tension of the leaching liquid, thus improves the wetting ability of the ore significantly, and eventually increases the leaching rate of uranium. The dissolution of minerals is affected by the spread of the reactive components. This includes diffusion of reactive components from the leaching solution to the ore surface and dissolution of diffusive constituents from the ore surface to the leaching solution. According to the principle of Nernst, the spread speed can be approximately expressed by the following steady state equation: The mineral surface liquid membrane is a consequence of high energy surface adsorption. The adsorption film finally states the molecular adsorption trends of the ore on the leaching liquid and the internal balance between molecular force bindings in the leaching solution. The addition of surfactant destroys the balance trend, increases the concentration gradient of the liquid film on both sides, reduces the thickness of liquid film, thus results in an increased rate of diffusion and promotes the leaching of uranium. Adding an appropriate surfactant to leaching solution reduces the surface tension of the solution. This serves three folds: The first one improves the ore wetting ability of the leaching liquid. This is expressed in the Young's equation or the wetting equation. The second one brings down the ore surface liquid film thickness and increases the mass transfer rate. This follows the principle of Nernst. Based on the capillary pressure phenomena and theory, the third one increases the porosity and the permeability of the ore-bearing layer to reduce the capillary tension and to infiltrate more to the tiny pore space. These eventually help to improve the dissolution of uranium and to increase the leaching rate of uranium. The extraction operation of uranium is controlled by diffusion of reactant and/or by surface chemical reaction, according to the extraction kinetic models and the nonlinear dynamics of flow reaction coupling of ore ( For the reaction controlled by the diffusion through the boundary layer of solution and through a layer of solid reactive product, the simplified rate equation is: For the reaction controlled by the surface chemical reaction, the rate equation is: When the leaching rate of uranium is controlled by the diffusion (Eq.    The results of agitation and column leaching experiments show the complex surfactant prepared in house increases permeability and leaching rate significantly. The mean permeability coefficient increased 86.8% to 7.08 The complex surfactant changes the kinetic mechanism of uranium leaching reaction. The extraction of uranium controlled by the diffusion only without surfactant turns to by both diffusion and surface chemical reaction with surfactant. There was no adverse effect to both resin adsorption and elution. In fact, the efficiency of elution was improved. In addition to uranium in-situ leaching production from the low permeability sandstone, the complex surfactant can be used for unplugging and recovering production of in-situ leaching plant. This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91026015). We thank both reviewers for their valuable and constructive comments.