The kinetics of nickel leaching from spent NiO/Al2O3 catalyst was investigated using sulfuric acid as leaching reagent. Leaching experiments were carried out for two different particle sizes of coarse (−8+18mesh) and fine (−400mesh). Based on the leaching results, a two stage leaching process was observed for the fine particles, one at low Ni recovery (less than 40%) and the other at high recoveries (greater than 80%) while the leaching of coarse particles takes place in a single stage. Kinetic study was performed by fitting the three rate equations proposed in the shrinking core model (SCM) to the leaching data. A new approach was suggested to determine the rate controlling mechanism by applying a constrained multi-linear regression analysis using the least square technique. This technique takes into account all three possible rate controlling mechanisms for leaching processes (i.e., chemical reaction, diffusion through product layer and liquid film mass transfer) simultaneously and determines the controlling step(s) on its own. Results of kinetic study by this method showed that the rate of the first stage of fine particle leaching is controlled by diffusion through the liquid film and the second stage is controlled by chemical reaction on the unreacted core surface. In the case of coarse particles, only chemical reaction control mechanism was observed.Nickel oxide/alumina (NiO/Al Many researchers have investigated the recovery of nickel and other valuable metals from spent catalysts using pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes. The hydrometallurgical process has received special attention for treatment of these wastes and various aspects of this method have been discussed. Determining the kinetic aspect of any chemical reaction is an essential part in designing a chemical process and this is true for leaching systems as well as for the nickel leaching from spent catalyst, in case of designing a recovery unit for these wastes. Based on numerous studies on different oxidation, reduction, roasting and regeneration systems, it can be concluded that the shrinking core model is the best simple representation for the majority of reacting fluid–solid systems. This model was also used for kinetic investigation in this study. Leaching of nickel from spent NiO/Al Spent nickel oxide catalyst used in this study was obtained from the reforming unit of Kharg Petrochemical Complex, Iran. The spent catalyst was roasted at 500 Chemical analysis of the spent catalyst was carried out using Perkin-Elmer 2100 atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) (USA) and the result for particles before leaching is shown in All leaching experiments were performed in 1000 Nickel in the spent catalyst can be considered in the form of nickel oxide which reacts with sulfuric acid as follows: The catalyst matrix, which is composed of α-alumina, is completely inert towards inorganic acids ( The particle is spherical and its diameter remains constant during the leaching process The concentration of solid reactant in the unreacted core is assumed to be constant The reaction assumed to be first-order with respect to the fluid reactant A and a zeroth-order with respect to the solid reactant Effective diffusivity of components is constant throughout the process. The SCM for particles of unchanging size consists of the following steps: Diffusion of the leachant through the liquid film surrounding the particle Diffusion of the leachant through the product layer at the surface of the unreacted core Chemical reaction of the leachant at the surface of the core. It is common to assume that one of these steps is significantly slower than the others, thus, the rate of leaching can be determined by this controlling step. Share of each of the above mentioned steps in the kinetics of leaching can be revealed by fitting the experimental data to Eq. Subject to τ Eq.  As mentioned above, leaching of Ni from coarse particles occurs in a single stage.  In order to study the kinetics of the first stage of leaching of fine particles, the low recovery data (less than 40%) were used. Results of fitting these experimental data to Eq. The same type of data processing was done for the second stage (recoveries greater than 80%) of leaching of fine particles. Eq.  Comparing As described above, the kinetics of leaching of coarse particles is controlled by chemical reaction throughout the process while in the case of fine particles, initially the controlling mechanism is diffusion through the liquid film which transfers to the chemical reaction at higher recoveries. This difference between kinetic behaviors of different sizes of particles can be attributed to the difference between their structures as well as different components existing in the catalyst. In the case of coarse particles, the particles can still be considered porous, as expected for a catalyst, that diffusion of the reactant through the particle becomes considerably faster than the chemical reaction. As a result, since the acid is in excess, both chemical reactions (dissolution of NiO and NiAl As mentioned before, the method developed in this work has the advantage of identifying the rate controlling mechanism in a single stage calculation even in cases where it is difficult to make a deduction from traditional method. In the above, the reaction was assumed to be first order with respect to sulfuric acid. This assumption was checked in the present work by the method of initial rates. This method involves measuring the rate of reaction at the beginning of the reaction. The experiments were done at various initial concentrations of acid and initial rate of reactions were estimated by differentiation. By plotting initial rate against initial concentration of acid in a full logarithmic scale diagram, a line is obtained whose slope is equal to the order of reaction. Such a plot is shown in The kinetics of nickel leaching from spent NiO/Al About 99% of Ni recovery was achieved at 85 A single stage leaching process was observed for the coarse (− A new approach was developed based on constrained multi-linear regression analysis using the least square technique to investigate the kinetics of leaching. This technique takes into account all three possible leaching mechanisms in the SCM (i.e., chemical reaction, diffusion through product layer and liquid film mass transfer) simultaneously and determines the controlling step(s) on its own. In the case of coarse particles, liquid film resistance is negligible due to the large particles and diffusion of the reactant through the solid product is fast because of the porous structure of the catalyst. In this case, chemical reaction on the surface of unreacted core of particles with activation energy of 65.1 It was found that in the leaching of fine particles, liquid film resistance controls the rate in the first stage and chemical reaction on the surface of the unreacted core with activation energy of 56.7 The reaction order was determined by the method of initial rates and it showed that it is first order with respect to sulfuric acid.  stoichiometric coefficient concentration of sulfuric acid (kg/m initial concentration of sulfuric acid (kg/m molecular diffusion coefficient (m effective diffusion coefficient in porous structures (m reaction rate constant (s mass transfer coefficient of the liquid film (m reaction rate constant at the particle surface (s initial rate of consumption of sulfuric acid (kg/s.m initial radius of particle (m) ideal gas law constant, 8.314 (J/mol.K) correlation coefficient temperature (K) time of reaction (min) start of second stage (min) fraction of reacted nickel fraction of reacted nickel at time fraction of reacted nickel at time density (kg/m constrained regression function time for complete dissolution by liquid film control (min) time for complete dissolution by product diffusion control (min) time for complete dissolution by chemical reaction control (min) The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable comments of Dr. A. Azaad-Mehr and the help of Mr. E. Vahidi during the experimental part of this work.