Purpose
                  This study aims to evaluate whether volar locking plate was superior over non-locking plate in the treatment of die-punch fractures of the distal radius.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 57 patients with closed die-punch fractures of the distal radius were included and analyzed. Of them, 32 were treated by non-locking plate (NLP) and the remaining 25 were treated by volar locking plate (VLP). Preoperative radiographs, computer tomographs and three-dimensional reconstruction, radiographs taken at immediate postoperation and at last follow-up were extracted and evaluated. Patients' electronic medical records were inquired and related demographic and medical data were documented. The documented contents were volar tilt, radial inclination, ulnar variance, grip strength, Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) and visual analog scale (VAS) scores and complications.
               
                  Results
                  VLP group demonstrated a significantly reduced radial subsidence of 1.5 mm (0.7 versus 2.2 mm), during the interval of bony union (P < 0.001), compared to NLP group. Larger proportion of patients (88% versus 62.5%) in VLP group gained acceptable joint congruity (step-off <2 mm) at the final follow-up (P = 0.037). No significant differences were observed between the groups in the measurements of volar tilt, radial inclination, DASH, VAS and grip strength recovery at the last follow-up. There was a trend of fewer overall complications (5/25 versus 10/32) and major complications that required surgery interventions (1/25 versus 4/32) in VLP than NLP groups, although the difference did not approach to significance (P = 0.339, 0.372).
               
                  Conclusions
                  VLP leaded to significantly better results of reduction maintainance and the final joint congruity than NLP, while reducing overall and major complications. However, the results should be treated in the context of limitations and the clinical significance of the difference required further studies to investigate.Fractures of the radius or ulnas are the most common fracture type, accounting for approximately 1/6 of fractures in adults Die-punch fracture was initially proposed by Scheck et al., in 1962, and was regarded as the dorso-medial fragment separated from the lunate fossa in distal radius Most of die-punch fractures of distal radius were significantly displaced (>2 mm), commonly accompanied by multi-fragments in articular surface, which presented a great challenge for clinical surgeons. In a study investigating outcomes of AO C3-type distal radius fractures, Earp et al. reported 8 cases of postoperative reduction loss, and most (5 cases) were involved in lunate fossa Regarding the optimal fixation type for treatment of Die-punch fracture in the distal radius, there remains no consensus although various techniques were applied, such as closed reduction and a mini-external fixator, percutaneous fixation with K-wires, open reduction internal fixation with volar locking plate (VLP) or non-locking plate (NLP) and wrist arthroscopy. However, up to now, there are no studies that investigate the comparative outcomes between VLP and NLP in the treatment of Die-punch fractures of distal radius. Given this, we performed this retrospective study to identify which is the better alternative for treatment of Die-punch fractures. The primary outcomes were radial subsidence at the period of bony union and articular step-off at the last visit; the secondary outcomes were volar tilt, radial inclination measured from radiographs; grip strength recovery (% of the contralateral uninjured hand) by physical examination; subjective DASH for daily activities and VAS scores for pain and complications documented from patients' electronic medical record (EMR) system. This comparative study was approved by institutional review board of the Third Hospital of Hebei Medical University. Two trained surgeons independently retrospectively reviewed the databases including EMR system for medical files and Picture Archiving and Communication Systems (PACS) for radiographs, from January 2007 to March 2015. Inclusion criteria were: 1, patients were skeletally mature with age of 18–60 years; 2, closed die-punch fracture of distal radius was diagnosed by preoperative standard digital radiograph (DR) and computer tomography scanning or three-dimensional reconstruction; 3, postoperative immediate DR and serial DRs were available for review until fracture union; 4, fractures were treated within 2 weeks from injury. Patients with pathological fracture, previous wrist operation or disabled wrist, radiocarpal arthritis, aged above 60 or below 18 years, open fractures and delayed presentation over 2 weeks were excluded. Patients' preoperative data on age, gender, handedness, injury mechanism, side of injury and fracture pattern according to AO/ASIF classification system were documented. Preoperative radiographs (posteroanterior, lateral, and oblique), CT scanning and three-dimensional reconstruction were used to diagnose the die-punch fractures and evaluate the severity extent of articular surface. Patients with definite diagnosis of Die-Punch fractures were treated by VLP or NLP through the volar approach, based on surgeons' discretion and availability of plates. Patients were followed up routinely at 2 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year postoperatively. X-rays taken at immediate postoperation and at last follow up were used to evaluate articular step-off, radial subsidence, volar tilt, radial inclination Data on bone and soft tissues-related complications during follow-ups were collected and documented, including infection, tendinitis, tendon contractures, carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), implant failure (plate fracture or screw loosening), delayed union, non-union, early postoperative arthritis from radiographs and late traumatic arthritis from patients' complaint of articular pain and image findings (marked joint-space narrowing with osteophyte formation in the radiocarpal or radioulnar joint). All other complications were identified based on presenting symptoms and physical examination findings. Patients' characteristics including age, volar tilt, radial inclination, grip strength and radial subsidence were reported as continuous variables and expressed in mean and standard deviation (SD). Status of normality distribution of these variables was explored and confirmed, based on which two study groups were compared using the Student's From January 2007 to March 2015, a total of 71 Die-punch fractures were treated in our department. After aforementioned rigorous inclusion and exclusion criteria, 57 patients with complete follow-up data were included in this study for analysis. Patients were followed up at a mean of 14.8 months (12–24 months). Of them, 32 were treated by NLP, mostly in 2010 and before (28 cases) and sporadically after that (4 cases), the remaining 25 cases were treated with VLP from 2010 up to now. In NLP group, 13 females and 19 males were included, and the mean age was 40.3 ± 13.6 years. Accordingly in VLp groups, 9 females and 16 males were included with the mean age of 38.9 ± 12.8 years. Falls from height and electric bicycle accidents are predominant causes of injuries, either in NLP or VLP group. Most fractures were AO type C fractures (82.5%), indicating the severity extent of Die-punch fractures. No significant differences were observed in any variable between both groups ( During the follow-ups, patients in both groups all achieved bony union. As shown in Radial subsidence was used to evaluate the quality of reduction, the value was the higher and the effect of maintenance of reduction was worse. According to the above-mentioned definitions, we firstly measured the ulnar variance from radiographs at immediate postoperation and the last follow-up, and then difference value (D-value) was equivalent to radial subsidence. The NLP group demonstrated radial subsidence of 2.2 mm in the interval of bony union, leaving the ulnar variance of 1.8 mm at the final X-ray. In contrast, radial subsidence was confirmed as 0.7 mm in VLP group, and the ulnar variance came into being 0.9 mm. The difference approached to significance (P < 0.001), the result was presented in Step-off as the important parameter to judge joint congruity was closely related to functional recovery. Comparison of both methods showed that, VLP could result in a significantly improved articular step-off at the last-visit radiographs, with 3 cases (12%) of significant step-off in VLP and 12 (37.5) in NLP group. The difference approached to significance (P = 0.037). As described in Patients treated by NLP developed more overall complications than those in VLP group (10/32 versus 5/25), but the difference did not approach to significance (P = 0.339). Likewise, for major complications requiring reoperation, VLP group did better than NLP group (1/25 versus 4/32) and the difference was not significant (P = 0.372). Two cases of screws loosening developed in NLP group; one was solved by removing device in advance and the other by fixation through reoperation. Two patients in the NLP and one in VLP group complained of persistent regional wrist pain due to prominent hardware and relieved after hardware remove. There were 2 and 1 cases of postoperative traumatic arthritis in the NLP and VLP groups, respectively. Three cases of subjective finger stiff occurred in NLP group and 1 in VLP group and one patient in the VLP group had a finger flexor tendon contracture, all of them restored to normal after active rehabilitation training. Superficial radial nerve irritation developed in one patient in VLP while median nerve lesion developed in one patient in NLP group, both recovered without intervention ( Complex intra-articular radial fracture is still a challenge for surgeons due to poor functional outcomes and increased complications. Die-punch fracture of distal radius was a specific intra-articular fracture type, characterized by particular mechanism and subsequent fracture patterns. The current study was conducted to investigate the comparative radiographic and clinical results of Die-punch fracture in those treated by either NLP or VLP. Results from the final follow-ups demonstrated that, there were no significant differences between both groups in term of volar tilt, radial inclination in radiographic measurements; DASH for daily activities, VAS for subjective pain and grip strength in functional measurements. However, regarding the maintenance of reduction and final joint congruity, VLP group demonstrated the better results. In addition, patients treated by VLP developed more complications than those treated by NLP, mainly for major complications that required operative intervention. From the view of anatomy, surface area of the lunate facet is slightly larger than that of the scaphoid facet in the study by Mekhail et al. Regarding the functional parameters including DASH, VAS and grip strength, no significant differences were observed. This might be due to the follow-up, because patients in our study were followed up at least one year and the measurements were all obtained at the last visit. One year and more was enough for patients to obtain functional recovery and pain relief, if no great residual joint incongruity, malunion or symptomatic traumatic arthritis occurred. In our study, most complications including nerve, tendon and implant issues were solved within 1 year and therefore, it was not difficult to understand the non-significance of functional parameters between both fixations. Traumatic arthritis was a severe complication that affected patients' wrist motion and daily activities. In NLP group, two patients developed traumatic arthritis and one in VLP group. Notably, the 3 cases began complaint of their symptoms at the postoperative 1–1.5 years, which we thought was not merely a coincidence. More interesting, 3 cases were all preoperative AO type C2 or C3 fractures and all accompanied by joint step-off >2 mm. Thus, it is not difficult to explain this finding from the view of the relationship between traumatic arthritis and joint incongruity and the evolution process of cartilage degeneration. Freeland et al. Although reported high incidence of tendon rupture in literature There are several potential limitations to this study. Firstly, the design of this study was retrospective and the data were subject to confounding variables including different levels among surgeons, incision size, soft tissue stripping extent and underlying diseases in patients, which might lead to selection bias. Besides, although the data were retrieved from an EMR system, at each follow-up patients might supply us with the most obvious or severe symptoms that they feel and unconsciously hide unimportant adverse events; symptoms and complications that relieved and disappeared before long after short-term physiotherapy or oral drugs might be forgotten by patients. All of them might were likely to generate recall bias. Secondly, this study was limited by the small number of patients included. Thirdly, designed as a comparative study but it was not homochronous, which might reduce its validity. Before 2010 year, NLP was the predominant treatment selection for Die-punch fracture in our institution and afterwards, we applied VLP due to the reported improved outcomes. From then on, NLP was sporadically used predominantly in consideration of patients' demanding due to lower cost and slightly-different reported functional results. Consequently, it is impossible to design a double-blind prospective study and make decision purely on the basis of the fracture configuration or the surgeon's preference and experience. Despite those, some advantages should be mentioned in this study. Based on our clinical practice, patients sustaining intra-articular distal radius fractures should be routinely scanned by CT and 3D reconstruction, in order to obtain detailed information on joint incongruity especially for suspected lunate fossa fractures. Although the interval between the both fixations application was long (approximately 5 years), the preoperative data were not significantly different indicating the good comparability. In addition, postoperative management and rehabilitation exercises for patients were similar. Patients' age was restricted as 18–60 years, corresponding to the predominant age of this injury, which avoided the detrimental effect produced by bone growth and osteoporosis. Therefore, we are confident that, these measures guarantee the validity and reliability of the results. In summary, results from this retrospective comparative study demonstrated that, VLP group demonstrated better results than NLP in term of maintainance of reduction and final joint congruity. There were no significant differences in term of volar tilt, radial inclination in radiographic measurements; DASH for daily activities, VAS for subjective pain and grip strength in functional measurements. In addition, patients treated by VLP developed fewer complications than those treated by NLP, especially for major complications that required operative intervention. Up to now, this is the first study to investigate the comparative results of Die-punch fractures of distal radius between VLP and NLP, expecting it as the paving stones for further researches on this topic. No ethical approval was given because this is a retrospective study and all the patients were anonymous. No organization sponsored the research. Xiong Zhang and Bing Zhang designed the study; Kunlun Yu and Jiangbo Bai abstracted and documented the data; Bing Zhang and Chunhe Hu analyzed and interpreted the data; Xiong Zhang wrote the manuscript and Bing Zhang approved the final version of the manuscript. All the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest with any organization that sponsored the research. Bing Zhang. We are grateful to S Li and Y Zhao of the Department of Orthopedics, and to S Liu and Q Zhang of the Department of statistics and applications for their kind assistance.