The measures and estimates of the uniaxial compressive strength ( The direct methods are required preparation of high quality core samples to be used in the laboratory. However, these testing procedures are costly and include time consuming procedures. Also, In the indirect approach the empirical equations for strength parameters are usually derived from mineralogical-petrographic analyses or simple tests such as Schmidt hardness, point load index, tensile strength, porosity, unit weight, and P-wave velocity Traditionally, statistical methods such as simple and multiple regression techniques are used to found prediction models Although carbonate rocks are one of the most abundant rock types and encountered in many engineering projects worldwide, there are few general prediction models for the uniaxial compressive strength and modulus of elasticity of carbonates in the literature Each data set contains the parameters of the uniaxial compressive strength and modulus of elasticity of intact rocks as predictable parameters and porosity The uniaxial compressive tests were conducted on 72 Asmary carbonate core samples were taken from the geotechnical boreholes. For this purpose, the All genetic algorithms use populations of individuals, select individuals according to fitness, and apply genetic operators. In recent years, different systems have been developed so that this powerful algorithm could be practical to a wide spectrum of problem domains. Structurally, genetic algorithms can be subdivided in three fundamental groups Genetic algorithms with individuals consisting of linear chromosomes without complex expression. In these systems, chromosomes survive based on their own properties. The algorithm invented by Holland Genetic algorithms with individuals encoded in linear chromosomes of fixed length which are afterwards expressed as ramified structures of different sizes and shapes. In these systems, chromosomes survive by virtue of causal effects on the ramified structures Genetic algorithms with individuals consisting of ramified structures of different sizes and shapes and therefore, capable of assuming a richer number of functionalities. In these systems, ramified structures also survive by virtue of their own properties. The algorithm developed by Koza The concept of genetic programming is borrowed from the process of evolution occurring in nature in which the species survive as per the principle of ‘survival of the fittest’. GP creates a random population of individuals (program) typically encoded as tree structures, select individuals (as parents) according to fitness, introduce genetic variation using one or more genetic operators such as mutation and crossover, and finally yield ‘offsprings’. This procedure is repeated until the best program is produced or further till another specified number of generations are created Producing an initial population of program or expression trees which is a random combination of the problem-specific function sets and the terminal sets. The function set can include any arithmetic functions ( Calculating the fitness of programs. The fitness of each program is a major measure to evaluate it. In this paper, the sum of the absolute error ( Choosing parent individuals to create a new population of computer programs. In GP these parents are selected according to various sampling methods. Tournament method which is used in this study, selects each parent by randomly drawing a number of individuals from the population and selecting only the best of them Creating new offspring programs using genetic operators, named, crossover and mutation. The option of which of the mentioned operators can be used is probabilistic. Their probabilities of application are called operator rates. It’s better to implement an automatic adaptation procedure for the genetic operator probabilities of the occurrence. After a new offspring individual is produced by any of the genetic operators, it must be checked that these individuals do not violate the level (depth) or node limit. The level of a node is the number of edges that need to be traversed to reach the node starting from the tree's root node which is assumed to be at level 0. The depth of a tree is the depth of its deepest leaf. If this happens genetic operators just reproduce the original tree into the new generation The best computer program that achieved from this process, the best-so-far solution, is designated as the result of genetic programming. In this research, the aim of GP modeling is to find a logical expression to explain the relation between In the first stage of GP modeling, each of input variables was individually chosen as terminal node (input variable). Target is to find the relational expression between each input variable and the As an example, to illustrate how the genetic programming models conduct, establishment of     In the following, in the prediction of Final reports of all achieved expression trees and their corresponding equations for elasticity modulus and uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock are summarized in Regression techniques are of the prominent methods in rock mechanic literatures to establish prediction models among the relevant parameters of the rocks. The general task of regression analysis is defined as identification of a functional relationship between the independent variables (porosity, density, and P-wave velocity) and dependent variables ( There are two main regression analyses named simple and multiple regression models. In this study, both regression models were employed. The most widely used regression models for the estimate of the To found the regression models, the learning data that were applied to train the GP models were employed. The equation of the best-fit line, the standard error of the estimate, and the determination coefficient were determined for each regression model by using the statistical software package SPSS for Windows. In the first stage, the empirical equations based on simple regression method for predicting the The statistical significance and validity of the derived models were checked by using some test statistics. The Multiple regression analysis was performed in the expectation of obtaining more significant relations than that of the simple regression. To do multiple regression analysis, at first, all nonlinear functions were converted to multiple linear regressions with the aid of transformed variables, as be shown in Backward stepwise regression is a technique for choosing the terms (variables) to include in a multiple linear regression model. Backward stepwise regression starts with all the terms in the model and removes the least significant terms (the one with the lowest F statistic or highest The testing data that were chosen to validate the generalization capability of the GP prediction models were employed to evaluate the prediction execution of the regression models and specially make a comparison between two methods. The test results of the best achieved regression equations for Considering the numerical measures of the goodness of the fit statistics from On the basis of On the basis of The multiple power regression models for both As be seen from The relation between the measured and the predicted values by best multiple regressions and best GP models for all 72 data cases are illustrated in This research evaluated the applicability of one of the latest soft computing tools called genetic programming to build predictive models of the uniaxial compressive strength and modulus of elasticity of carbonate rocks collected at Asmary formation of Iran. From the gathered data, several equation-based regression models as well as GP prediction models were also conducted. In the present application, it was noticed that the results of GP models were generally more admissible for predicting