Although some studies have been conducted to simulate the dynamic response of bridge piers under barge impact, several essential modeling issues (e.g., reasonably exerting permanent loads and simplifying FE models) are not well examined. Hence, high-resolution FE models are meticulously developed in this paper to simulate barge collisions with a typical four-span continuous girder bridge. Numerical results highlight the importance of the gravity load for barge impact-induced responses. A simplified bridge model is proposed to improve computational efficiency. The proposed simplified method is found to be more accurate than that of the one-pier two-span (OPTS) model. Also, it is observed that although the peak impact force increases with impact energy, the impact-induced displacement does not always increase. It is attributed to the fact that the spectral characteristics of the impact force-time history have a significant influence on the impact-induced responses. To improve the impact resistance, three strengthening methods based on ultra-high-performance fiber-reinforced concrete (UHPFRC) are investigated and compared. It is found that strengthening columns with two-end UHPFRC jackets is superior to other strengthening methods when considering cost-benefit ratio. Finally, a multi-objective optimization design procedure is presented for the UHPFRC-strengthened columns.A growing number of catastrophic accidents on vessel collisions with bridges have been reported recently around the world ( Bridge design specifications ( The majority of the high-resolution FE simulations were only used to determine vessel impact loads rather than structural behaviors in the current studies. Compared with vehicle collisions with bridges, limited studies employed detailed FE simulations to investigate the nonlinear dynamic performance of bridge structures under vessel collisions. On the other hand, all accidents shown in Ultra-high performance fiber-reinforced concrete (UHPFRC) is defined as an advanced engineering material with a compressive strength no less than 150 MPa and a tensile strength no less than 8 MPa ( In this context, this study aims to develop the FE modeling method of bridge structures under barge collision scenarios and to evaluate the barge-impact-resistant performance of UHPFRC-strengthened columns using the developed analysis method. Some essential modeling issues (e.g., the influence of gravity loads) are examined. To improve computational efficiency, a new simplified bridge model is proposed and compared with the one-pier two-span (OPTS) model reported in the previous studies. Based on the proposed model, different collision scenarios are considered to explore the barge-impact resistance of RC piers. The barge-impact-induced responses of a bridge structure are discussed based on structural dynamics. To improve the impact resistance of RC columns, three different strengthening methods with UHPFRC jackets are investigated and compared. A detailed parametric study is conducted for the recommended solution with two-end UHPFRC jackets to examine the influences of reinforcement ratios, length, and thickness of UHPFRC jackets. In addition, a multi-objective optimization design procedure is developed to find the optimal configuration of the strengthened RC columns for barge impact. Refer to the Jiujiang Bridge shown in  Murray et al. ( The Jumbo Hopper Barge, which is defined as a typical vessel in AASHTO (  Based on the aforementioned bridge and barge models, detailed FE models ( Many studies ( As shown in It is crucial to improve the computational efficiency of vessel-to-bridge collision analysis, particularly for high-resolution FE simulations based on nonlinear contact-impact algorithms (e.g., as shown in The OPTS model and the full-bridge model are adopted to simulate the same barge-collision event (i.e., 2000-ton barge with an initial impact speed of 3.0 m/s) in this study. An alternative simplified model is proposed in this study to overcome the limitations of the OPTS model. As illustrated in Overall, both the OPTS model and the proposed simplified model can be used for bridge designs under vessel impact loading. Compared with the full-bridge model, the proposed method can improve the calculation accuracy but requires some additional spring and beam elements. Due to the complexity of bridge structures, FE analysis is usually needed to determine the boundary parameters in both the OPTS model and the proposed model. Hence, no significant modeling efforts are added in the proposed method, because the modeling on the additional spans and bearings in the proposed model is also required in the OPTS method to determine the boundary parameters. On the other hand, because a limited number of beam elements and discrete elements are added, the proposed model is almost as computationally efficient as the OPTS model. Several collisions with different barge mass and impact velocities are simulated using the proposed simplified FE model to evaluate the barge impact-resistant performance of the RC pier. Before the occurrence of a collision incident, the gravity load has been imposed on the bridge structures. Two typical collision cases of 2000-ton barges with initial impact velocities of 2 m/s and 4 m/s are examined and compared to understand the response of the RC piers subjected to barge collisions. Similar to After the internal members of the barge bow buckled, there is an abrupt decrease in the contact stiffness of the barge. As a result, the impact force begins to decrease until the force plateau is achieved (i.e., plateau force phase). By combining with the energy conversions shown in With respect to the impact-induced displacements of the bridge piers at the impact zone, as shown in  In addition to the above typical cases, a parametric study is performed to investigate the influence of barge mass and velocity on the impact force and impact-induced response. The corresponding results are presented in To improve the barge impact resistance of bridge columns, several different kinds of UHPFRC-strengthened columns are investigated in this section. A proper strengthening method using UHPFRC is also presented. The drop-hammer impact tests were conducted in the previous study (  For the waterway that a bridge locates, water levels usually change with time. As a result, the barge impact position is uncertain in engineering practice. For this reason, further comparisons should be conducted for the impact-resistant performance of Column-I and Column-E, considering the uncertainty of impact position due to the water level change. Three-meter shifts (positive and negative) of the water level is considered herein to investigate the influence on the barge impact-resistant performance. As illustrated in Multi-objective optimizations are conducted to seek the optimal design of the potential strengthening solution in this section. The surrogate models are presented and validated. The sensitivity of primary design parameters, including the length ( For the optimization of the UHPFRC-based strengthening solution, the objectives are to maximize the impact-resistant performance and minimize economic input (i.e., cost). As discussed above, the residual strengths (denoted by It is unrealistic to directly apply detailed FE simulations in the multi-objective optimization of the UHPFRC-strengthening method because of the high demand in computational resources and time. For this reason, surrogate models are developed to reduce the number of FE simulations. Response surface method (RSM) has been extensively employed in the multi-objective optimization to generate the surrogate models, which can be expressed as It is essential to examine the accuracy of the developed surrogate model before applying to the multi-objective optimization. The maximum relative error ( The Box-Behnken design (BBD) widely used in the previous studies (  The 3D plots of the residual axial strengths with respect to pairs of design parameters are presented in The verified surrogate models instead of the FE simulations are employed to estimate the values of After iterating for 200 generations, the Pareto front of the optimization problems for barge collisions is obtained, as shown in An FE modeling method for bridge structures under barge impact is developed in this paper. Based on the verified numerical models, the barge impact-induced responses of the bridge columns are thoroughly examined and interpreted. Also, the UHPFRC-based strengthening methods are proposed and extensively investigated for improving the barge-impact resistance of RC columns. Based on the detailed FE studies, the following conclusions can be drawn: The influence of the initial permanent load (structural gravity) on the performance of the pier under barge collision is investigated. The results indicate that the gravity of the superstructure improves the resistance of the pier under barge collision. This is attributed to the fact that the presence of the initial permanent load not only induces the confinement effect and compressive arch action for the impacted column but also improve the overturning resistance of the bridge superstructure by providing additional rotational restraints to the pier top. A simplified bridge model retaining the whole girder is proposed and compared with the entire bridge model and the OPTS model. Both the OPTS model and the proposed simplified model exhibit acceptable accuracy in the estimation of barge-impact-induced responses. As compensation for a small increase in the boundary definition and the number of the beam or discrete elements, the oscillation behavior of the superstructure is better captured by the proposed model, and its accuracy is improved. Several barge-bridge collision scenarios are simulated to investigate the process of the collision and the behavior of the impacted columns. It is found that the peak impact force increases with the initial kinetic energy. However, the impact-induced responses (e.g., displacement) of the impacted columns do not always increase. It is because the spectral characteristics of the impact force-time history have a significant influence on the impact-induced responses. Three different strengthening methods based on ultra-high-performance fiber-reinforced concrete (UHPFRC) are investigated for barge impact. Consideration is also given to the change of the water level. Results show that the strengthened column with two-end UHPFRC jackets is more promising than the other considered methods in terms of efficiency and costs. A multi-objective optimization design procedure is developed for the UHPFRC-strengthened columns under barge collision. The problem is defined to increase the residual axial load capacity and reduce the costs. The developed response surface models are demonstrated to be capable of accurately predicting the performance indictors under various design parameters. The Pareto front is obtained using NSGA-II, and some typical optimum results are examined and confirmed through detailed FE simulations.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at