Recently, straw–bitumen pellets have been proposed as an alternative fuel. In this paper, a comprehensive model for steady state combustion of straw–bitumen pellets in a bubbling fluidized bed is presented. The combustor is divided into three sectors: a dense bed zone, a splashing zone and a freeboard zone. Relevant phenomena including volatile release and segregation, char comminution and elutriation, bed particles ejection, and post-combustion above the bed have been taken into consideration. Energy equations for the splashing and freeboard zones have been established.
                  Model results indicate that about 53% of volatile burns within the bed while 60% of total heat is released. On the other side, fraction of heat released in the splashing zone is about 33% whereas the remaining part (7%) is released in the freeboard zone. Ejected sand particles, however, recover back to the bed about 83% of the heat released in the two latter zones.
                  Model calculations yield axial concentration profiles of different species along the whole length of the combustor. In particular, the model furnishes an axial temperature profile for the splashing and freeboard zones which is characterized by two maxima. A small peak occurs in the splashing zone whereas the second maximum develops in the freeboard zone with relatively much higher overheating above the bed temperature. A parametric study demonstrates that overheating in the freeboard zone may be controlled by increasing bed temperature and excess air, and decreasing fluidization velocity. Bed temperature among others is found to have the highest impact on the combustion performance. Model predictions are shown to be in good agreement with measurements.bed cross-section area, m cross-section area of splashing zone, m Average concentration of coarse chars in the bed, kg/m Average concentration of fine chars in the bed, kg/m Archimedes number for bed materials molar concentration, kmol/m exponential decay constant, m specific heat capacity of gases, J/(kg K) specific heat capacity of sand, J/(kg K) average diameter of chars, m initial average size of char, m average size of bed particles, m maximum overheating in freeboard, °C Excess air factor Fraction of heat recovered by ejected particles, % Fraction of heat released in bed, % Fraction of volatile burned in bed, % acceleration of gravity, m/s overall heat transfer coefficient through the combustor wall, J/(m heat transfer coefficient to an ejected sand particle, J/(m expanded bed height, m bed height at minimum fluidization, m heat of reaction, J/kmol coefficient of mass interchange between bubble and emulsion phases, s char reaction rate constant, m/s CH CO reaction rate constant, m mass transfer coefficient, m/s peripheral of splashing zone section, m molecular weight, kg/kmol mass flux of ejected particles, kg/(m initial mass flux of ejected particles, at the bed surface, kg/(m fuel feeding rate, kg/s particle multiplication factor due to primary fragmentation particle multiplication factor due to secondary fragmentation molar flow rate of gases, kmol/s local releasing rate of species, kmol/(s m) cumulative rate of species release, kmol/s species releasing rate from fuel, kmol/s local heat transfer rate between ejected particles and gases, J/(s m) local heat transfer through wall, J/(s m) specific rate of char combustion, kg/(m char combustion rate, kg/s fine generation rate, kg/s reaction rate, kmol/(m hydrocarbon reaction rate, kmol/(m CO reaction rate, kmol/(m universal gas constant, J/(kmol K) sensitivity index temperature, K ambient temperature, K bed temperature, K char temperature, K temperature of ejected sand particles, K temperature of gas in splashing zone, K time, s bubble rise velocity, m/s superficial gas velocity in emulsion phase, m/s minimum fluidizing velocity, m/s superficial gas velocity, m/s gas velocity in splashing zone, m/s volume fraction of ash in char load of char in the bed, kg mass fraction of constituent in fuel molar fraction of hydrogen height above gas distributor, m coefficient in Eq. fitting factor for CH fitting factor for CO oxidation rate constant in Eq. voidage fraction at minimum fluidization Combustion efficiency, % char initial porosity char critical porosity char density, kg/m density of bed particles, kg/m fraction of bed in bubble bubble char emulsion expanded bed ejected fuel fixed carbon gas minimum fluidization initial overall sand particle splashing wall There is growing interest in the utilization of biomass energy for reducing greenhouse effect as well as lessening dependence on fossil fuels. In many cases, however, there are some difficulties including cost, availability and/or quality that limit the use of biomass. Co-combustion with fossil fuel seems to be a more concrete option to overcome those difficulties and to economically expand utilization of biomass fuel Recently, co-combustion of biomass with bitumen has been performed by Okasha et al. In pioneer modeling work on fluidized bed combustion of high volatiles solid and liquid fuels, a diffusion-based plume model was proposed by Park et al. Miccio et al. In this paper, a comprehensive model for fluidized bed combustion of straw–bitumen pellets is proposed. The model considers important aspects including volatile release and segregation, char combustion and comminution, bed particles ejection, and post-combustion in the splashing and freeboard zones. Model calculations yield axial concentration profiles of species along the whole length of the combustor. In particular, the model furnishes an axial temperature profile for the splashing and freeboard zones. A one dimensional model for fluidized bed combustion of straw–bitumen pellets is described. The combustor is axially divided into three sectors: the dense bed, the splashing zone and the freeboard zone. Gases in the three zones, including the emulsion and bubble phases, are assumed to be in plug flow. Mass conservation equations of chemical species are expressed for the three zones. Five chemical species (CH The bed is modeled according to the two-phase theory of fluidization The splashing zone is located above the dense bed where more effective mixing is established due to bubbles bursting Previous studies It is more likely that those embryonic bubbles formed due to volatiles release are engulfed by the well developed bubbles generated at the air distributor. In view of that, volatiles are assumed to be released in the bubble phase according to a distribution function of bed height, Two-step reaction is applied for volatile combustion. Volatile primarily reacts to carbon monoxide and water vapor. The rate of hydrocarbon conversion is determined by an expression developed by Dryer and Glassman In the second step CO reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide. An expression developed by Howard et al. According to Hayurst and Tucker Char inside the bed is consumed by combustion and due to comminution impacts. The char burning is described by a shrinking particle model, assuming CO Char temperature is assumed to be uniform and is calculated by the following empirical correlation. It was obtained based on numerous measurements carried out on a single large char of different biomass fuels in fluidized bed combustors Combustion rate of char particles with a load, Burning char particle yields fines due to fragmentation by peripheral percolation and surface abrasion. For high volatile biomass, generation of fines is proportional to the carbon-burning rate at the particle surface. Fines generation rate may be expressed as Eq. The dense bed is considered isothermal where the two phases have uniform temperature, namely, bed temperature. The axial variation in species concentrations may be described by the following differential equations. Mass balance of the species In Eqs. A mass balance on the coarse char may expressed as A mass balance of species, An axial profile of gas temperature may be obtained by solving an energy balance that takes into consideration energy of reactions, convective transport of gases, energy exchange with ejected sand particles and energy loss through the combustor wall. According to calculations carried out by Chirone et al. Energy exchange with ejected sand particles can be expressed as Heat loss per unit height through the combustor wall is given by In these simulations, there is no a distinct limit between the splashing and freeboard zones. However, the section at which flux of ejected sand particles decays to 0.001 is considered an upper limit for the splashing zone. Therefore, mass and energy equations derived for the splashing zone are still applied for freeboard zone. The numerical solution starts with calculating average values for the bed hydrodynamic characteristics and an initial flux of ejected sand particles. For each integration step along the combustor height, rate of each process involved is calculated by the corresponding submodel. A solution for the differential Eqs. In the present model, two adjustable parameters have been regulated via compromises between predicted profiles and measurements. These are distribution function of volatile release and exponential decay constant for ejected sand particles. Predicted axial concentration profiles of CO, O Steady state combustion experiments have been carried out using an atmospheric bubbling fluidized bed combustor. More details of the unit can be found elsewhere The used fuel is pellets made of rice straw and bitumen. A well mixed blend of rice straw and bitumen is pressed in a cylindrical die under pressure of 150 bar. The combination mass ratio of straw to bitumen is 1:1. The pellet has a diameter of 15 mm and a length of 15 mm. Continuous combustion experiments have been carried out under base case conditions. The superficial gas velocity was adjusted to 1.0 m/s and the bed temperature was maintained at 850 °C while the excess air factor was kept at 1.2. Model calculations have been conducted considering the base case conditions as well. After being the two adjustable parameters regulated as discussed above, the predicted and experimental results are plotted in   In the splashing zone, concentration profiles exhibit very fast changes since gases leaving the two phases are assumed to be completely mixed at the bed surface. As shown in Measured concentrations of O An estimated axial temperature profile is shown in Concentrations of coarse and fine chars in the bed are presented in For the applied fuel, initial and critical porosities ( A parametric study has been carried out to assess influences of operating parameters on the combustion performance. One parameter was varied while the others were being kept at the base case values. The effects of excess air factors on combustion performance are reported in Gas temperatures in the splashing zone are practically the same whatever the excess air factor is (see Influences of bed temperature on combustion performance are presented in In the splashing zone, gas temperature is maintained close to the operating bed temperature for all the cases considered as shown in  The influence of fluidization velocity on temperature profile is shown in A comprehensive model has been presented to simulate fluidized bed combustion of straw–bitumen pellets. Phenomena of particular importance including volatile release and segregation, char comminution and elutriation, bed particles ejection and post-combustion above the dense bed have been considered and simplified. Energy equations for the splashing and freeboard zones have been established and solved. Although the model is rather simplified it satisfactorily describes the combustion performance. The model estimates that about 53% of volatile burn within the dense bed while 60% of total heat is released. On the other side, fraction of heat released in the splashing zone is about 33% whereas the remaining part (7%) is released in the freeboard zone. Ejected sand particles, however, recover back to the bed about 83% of the heat released in the two latter zones. Model calculations yield an axial temperature profile which is characterized by two maxima. A small peak is created in the splashing zone as ejected sand particles recover the great part of the heat released inside. A second maximum develops in the freeboard zone where the flux of ejected particles turns out to be very weak and its impact on gas temperature becomes insignificant. Overheating of the second maximum is relatively much higher. Combustion efficiency is always very high, greater than 99.5%. Concentration of chars in the bed is estimated to increase with bed height. This finding is in line with previous experimental results. The parametric analyses show that overheating in the freeboard zone may be controlled by increasing bed temperature and excess air, and decreasing fluidization velocity. Bed temperature among others is found to have the highest impact on combustion performance. Model predictions are compared with measurements and good agreement is obtained.