Reverse ballistic experiments were conducted using gold long rods impacting cylinders of silicon carbide to study the effect of failure kinetics in ceramic penetration. Some of the early experiments impacted off-centered due to the dynamics of the barrel and sabot. Nevertheless, the data appeared to be in good agreement with centered impact, although conventional wisdom suggested that penetration resistance should decrease due to lateral confinement effects. Numerical simulations of the experiments were conducted to investigate and to quantify the influence of lateral confinement as a function of impact velocity for the ceramic targets. Above 3.0km/s, close proximity to a lateral boundary results in less than a 2% increase in the penetration velocity.Experiments were conducted using gold long rods impacting SiC-B and SiC-N cylinders to study the effect of failure kinetics in ceramic penetration. The experiments were conducted in the reverse ballistics mode, with the ceramic “target” impacting a gold rod suspended in the flight path. The tests were imaged using flash radiography to measure impact location, depth of penetration, and residual rod length. Four X-ray shadowgraphs were produced for each experiment. The penetration velocity was calculated from the position–time data Because the launch package had to be redesigned to achieve higher launch velocities than could be achieved by Orphal and Franzen 20-mm-diameter SiC-B cylinders confined by a titanium sleeve; 15-mm-diameter SiC-B cylinders; 15-mm-diameter SiC-N cylinders. The first target set was supplied by D. Orphal, and were identical to the targets used in Ref. The projectiles were rods of pure (99.99%) gold (Au) instead of pure (99.95%) tungsten (W) used in Ref. The results for the penetration velocity, Some of the early experiments impacted off-centered due to the dynamics of the barrel and sabot. The experimental arrangement in- and outside the impact tank is shown in  The X-ray data yield the impact velocity Numerical simulations, using the multi-material Eulerian wavecode CTH The Mie–Grüneisen equation of state was used to represent the thermodynamic response of the materials. The Steinberg–Guinan viscoplastic model The first numerical study examined the effect of confinement and impact velocity on the penetration velocity. For these simulations, the two-dimensional (2-D) axial symmetry option of CTH was used. Confinement was varied by changing the ratio of target diameter ( To quantify the effect of a finite extent of the lateral boundaries, the percent change in the penetration velocity The next set of simulations examined off-centered impact of the cylindrical targets. The simulations were three-dimensional (3-D) calculations, with one plane of symmetry. Results were calculated for impacts at the 0 (centered impact), 1/4, 1/2, and 3/4 the distance between the center and the radial boundary. Again, the simulations used a 15-mm-diameter target and a 0.75-mm-diameter projectile. Thus, as in the 2-D baseline simulations, the normalized target diameter, A plot of the penetration at 10 Lastly, simulations of the three experiments denoted in Least-squares regression lines are shown through the three sets of data: the experimental results, the centered-impact results, and the off-centered impact results. The regression coefficients for each are 0.9999 or greater. The computational constitutive model for SiC does not exactly reproduce the experimental data at all impact velocities, but does capture the overall trend very well It is realized that the ceramic constitutive model used for the simulations overly simplifies the mechanics, even though the agreement between simulations and experiment is quite good. The model does not account for large fracture/cracking observed in experiments Some early Au into SiC experiments had off-centered impacts. Nevertheless, the off-centered impact results seemed to lie within the data scatter of the tests that had nominally centered impacts. A computational study, using an idealized computational model for the SiC that had previously been shown to reproduce quite well long-rod experiments into SiC