The mechanical properties of sediment inputs to subduction zones are important for understanding rupture propagation through the accretionary prism during megathrust earthquakes. Clay minerals strongly influence the frictional behavior of fault gouges, and the clay content of subduction input materials varies through a stratigraphic section as well as for subduction margins globally. To establish the frictional properties of the shallow Cascadia subduction zone and place the results in a global context, we conducted high velocity rotary shear experiments on ODP core samples retrieved from Cascadia input sediments (35-45% clay) and a suite of individual clay species. We compared our results to a compilation of published high velocity experiments conducted on samples of wet gouge, dry gouge, and intact rock. For each sample type, three trends were identified with increasing normal stress: 1) the stress drop (
                        
                           
                              τ
                           
                           
                              p
                           
                        
                        −
                        
                           
                              τ
                           
                           
                              s
                              s
                           
                        
                     ) increases linearly, 2) the characteristic thermal weakening distance (
                        
                           
                              D
                           
                           
                              t
                              h
                           
                        
                     ) decreases as a power law function except for wet clay-rich gouges, and 3) the fracture energy (
                        
                           
                              W
                           
                           
                              b
                           
                        
                     ) shows no dependence. However, fracture energy does vary with sample type. Clay-rich gouges under wet conditions have the lowest fracture energy, and fracture energy for both dry and wet gouges is at least an order of magnitude lower than estimates from intact rocks. Therefore when clay-rich lithologies are present, they may minimize spatial variations in frictional behavior, allowing earthquakes to propagate to the trench. For Cascadia input sediments, there is little variation in the fracture energy between lithologies, but the fracture energy of Cascadia sediments is around an order of magnitude higher than input sediments from other subduction margins. The high fracture energy of Cascadia sediments relative to other subduction margins may inhibit large amounts of shallow earthquake slip and dynamic overshoot.The 2004 Sumatra (M Earthquake fracture energy has been defined as the work done during dynamic weakening ( Seismological estimates of fracture energy (hereafter At the Cascadia subduction zone, little is currently known about the frictional behavior of the shallow part of the megathrust. Paleoseismic records indicate a history of M Core samples were obtained from two Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) sites near the Cascadia subduction zone: Site 888 of Leg 146 ( Three samples were selected for high velocity friction experiments to represent the input section to the Cascadia subduction zone: 1) core sample 146-888B-62X-2 (Leg-Site-hole-core-section) is a hemipelagic mudstone recovered from an approximate depth of 534.17 m beneath seafloor (mbsf), 2) core sample 168-1027B-03H-3 is from a layer with sand-sized grains within the interbedded turbidites (17.45 mbsf), and 3) core sample 168-1027B-53X-2 is a hemipelagic mudstone (493.55 mbsf). Sample composition was determined from X-ray diffraction and Rietveld refinement (see supplement for methods) and shows all three samples contain the same clay species, but there are variations in the clay content between lithologies (Table S1; Fig. S1). The Site 1027 sandstone contains 35% clay-sized fraction with the remainder split between quartz (30%) and feldspar (35%), while the Site 888 and 1027 mudstones both contain 45% clay-sized fraction, 20% quartz, and 35% feldspar. The uncertainty of these percentages is on the order of 5%. Smectite (montmorillonite), illite, and chlorite were identified in the clay fraction of all three samples (Fig. S2), but the lack of crystallinity prohibits a quantitative analysis of the proportions of phases in the clay fraction. Friction experiments were conducted in the servo-controlled low to high velocity rotary shear apparatus ( For the annular sample holder, linear slip velocity varies from the inner to the outer diameter, so an equivalent slip velocity may be defined for analysis. Assuming shear stress is not dependent on velocity, the total frictional work on a fault is High velocity experiments were also conducted on five samples of commercially available clay-rich materials. The principal clay components for these powders are illite, pyrophyllite, montmorillonite, sericite and talc. The purity, accessory components, and the sources for each gouge type are listed in Table S2. All mineralogical components were identified by X-ray diffraction using Rietveld refinement. The uncertainty of the percentages is on the order of 5%. Individual clay species experiments were conducted on a high velocity rotary shear apparatus at Kochi/JAMSTEC (for details see supplement and All tests were run at a nominal Fracture energy can be estimated from high velocity friction experiments as proportional to the product of shear stress and slip weakening distance. We estimated the breakdown work ( All of the high velocity experiments ( For all three samples, Experiments conducted on samples of individual clay species followed the same overall trends in mechanical behavior as the Cascadia samples and the frictional behavior of each clay species was generally similar (also see The experiments on Cascadia core samples demonstrate that the breakdown stress drop ( To further explore the effect of normal stress and understand the role of clay content in the frictional behavior of fault rocks at high slip rates, we compiled laboratory estimates of peak and steady state shear stress, slip weakening distance, and fracture energy from 233 experiments conducted on 5 different machines reported in 20 previous studies ( The linear scaling of   Finally, there is a strong dependence between The compiled data suggest that The majority of the compiled experiments were conducted on the high velocity rotary shear machine at Kochi/JAMSTEC (“HVR”), but some experiments were conducted on other machines at Kochi/JAMSTEC, Kyoto University, Hiroshima University, and INGV in Italy. Significant differences in boundary conditions between rotary shear machines, such as sample dimension and thermal conductivity and permeability of sample holders, may lead to some variation in the experimental results ( The compiled data indicate that, in general, dynamic weakening during seismic slip is influenced by the clay content, the presence of water, and the material state (i.e. gouge or intact rock). Clay content controls the initial strengthening ( Breakdown work ( Seismological fracture energy ( The experimental data we compiled exhibits a scaling between The possibility of rupture to the trench at the Cascadia subduction zone depends on the degree of locking at the margin as well as the frictional behavior of the sediments hosting the décollement. The upper limit of the seismogenic zone is thought to extend to the trench based on elevated temperatures at the deformation front exceeding the 100 Using our measurements from Cascadia samples and the compiled data, we are able to compare the frictional behavior of a diverse set of subduction zone sediments and other fault rocks in detail. Breakdown work ( Tsunami earthquakes rupture slowly beneath the shallow part of accretionary prisms at some margins and are characterized by low radiation efficiencies, High velocity rotary shear experiments on input sediments from Cascadia, individual clay species, and experiments on other gouges and intact rocks compiled from the literature have shown that: Mudstones and sandstone from the input sediments at Cascadia are relatively strong ( For all sample types, breakdown stress drop increases linearly with normal stress and thermal weakening distance decreases according to a power law dependence on normal stress For all sample types, breakdown work is independent of normal stress due to a tradeoff between increasing breakdown stress drop and decreasing thermal weakening distance Breakdown work varies by several orders of magnitude between wet gouges (0.0001-4 MJ/m There is an order of magnitude difference in the frictional behavior of input sediments from different subduction margins where wet, clay-present gouges show both the greatest range of breakdown work as well as the lowest values. At Cascadia, lithology plays a limited role in discriminating the structural level in which an earthquake is likely to propagate due to the lack of variability in the frictional behavior and breakdown work between mudstones and sandstones. The relatively high frictional strength and moderate breakdown work of the input sediments from the Cascadia margin suggest that it may be less susceptible to hosting very large amounts of shallow slip or dynamic overshoot, although this may be mediated by more frictionally unstable behavior of the gouge and a greater amount of elastic stored energy at shallow depth due to the higher strength of the gouges. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research used samples and data provided by the Ocean Drilling Project (ODP) from the Gulf Coast Repository (GCR) at Texas A&M University ( Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.