Characterisation of a range of Victorian low-rank coal (VLRC) based and commercial adsorbents under continuous flow conditions was conducted in down flow fixed-bed columns. The effect of bed depth, hydraulic loading and initial concentration of the adsorbate 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) was studied. Prediction of the performance of the columns using bed-depth/service time analysis showed good agreement with the experimental results. The VLRC-based activated carbons gave lower service times for removal of 4-NP compared with the coconut-based commercial activated carbon Picactif. However, they showed comparable efficiency in terms of bed volumes treated and carbon usage rate (CUR). The VLRC-activated power station char (APSC) showed the lowest CUR of 0.57g/L in comparison with 0.62 and 3.61g/L exhibited by the commercial carbons Picactif and Hydraffin, respectively. The power station char (PSC) and Auschar gave poor CUR of 11.23 and 75.36g/L, respectively. Three adsorbents were evaluated for the removal of natural organic matter (NOM) from aqueous solution. The breakthrough behaviour indicated that the pore size distribution of the adsorbents is an important physical characteristic for the adsorption of the NOM. There was a non-adsorbable fraction of the NOM that was a function of the type of adsorbent. In the presence of NOM, Picactif gave longer service time for the removal of 4-NP compared with APSC, consistent with the trend obtained in the absence of NOM. However, lower breakthrough times (at 10% C
                     0) of 44 and 47% were obtained for APSC and Picactif, respectively. Further removal (35%) of 4-NP was achieved over extended operation of the beds, however more frequent backwashing was required as a result of the biological growth exhibited in the presence of NOM.activated briquette char activated Loy Yang brown coal activated power station char concentration of adsorbate initial concentration of adsorbate breakthrough concentration carbon usage rate bed depth critical bed depth dissolved organic carbon empty bed contact time flow rate granular activated carbon rate constant adsorption capacity natural organic matter 4-nitrophenol power station char service time of adsorption column service time at effluent concentration bed volume victorian low-rank coal bulk density of granular activated carbon Activated carbons produced from Victorian low-rank coal (VLRC) are of low hardness (and so may result in high-mass losses during regeneration) which has hindered their use in fixed-bed adsorbent columns. However, this deficiency may be offset by the low unit cost of the substance due to use of open cut mining technology or waste products. For example, power station char (PSC) is a waste product produced by incomplete combustion of VLRC in the generation of electricity and is used to produce activated power station char (APSC). Most importantly, VLRC-based carbons are of a heterogenous pore structure which enables their use in the production of activated carbons with different characteristics tailored to suit specific applications. The potential of using VLRC-based carbons as adsorbents has been shown by other studies ( The presence of background organic matter, i.e., NOM, in water to be treated may exert a significant effect on the adsorption capacity and removal rate of targeted trace organic compounds (commonly referred to as micropollutants). This effect was found to vary widely with the type of the NOM, the target trace compound and the activated carbon ( The VLRC-based adsorbents used comprised two chars: Auschar and PSC, and three activated carbons: activated briquette char (ABC), activated Loy Yang (ALY) and APSC. The commercially available carbons used were Picactif, derived from coconut shells, and Hydraffin, derived from German low-rank coal. All chemicals and reagents used were of analytical grade (99+% purity). The sample of NOM was concentrated from river water using the anionic exchanger MIEX Three glass columns of 2.6 The concentration of 4-NP and NOM was determined by spectrophotometry at 315 and 254 The dynamic flow behaviour was studied at bed depths of 20, 30 and 60 APSC and PSC have a larger proportion of pores in the macro- and meso-range ( A comparison of the activated adsorbents in terms of service time, for example for an influent concentration of 150 Overall, the service time, effluent volume and bed volumes treated (effluent volume treated per bed volume) obtained for the different adsorbents at identical operating conditions exhibited the following descending order: This trend is consistent with the micropore surface areas ( CUR, the mass of GAC required per unit volume of polluted water treated ( The results obtained for all adsorbents showed that for any fixed flow rate ( Overall, the adsorbents showed the following order for increasing CUR: As all the activated adsorbents gave linear bed depth-service time (BDST) curves, a simple model ( Consequently, the design equation at other flow rates is given by The validity and efficiency of the BDST analysis method was evaluated for Picactif, ABC and Hydraffin. The BDST design equation obtained at 60 The BDST parameters The breakthrough curves obtained for APSC, ALY and Picactif at bed depths of 30, 60 and 90 It was noted that an initial steady removal rate was not apparent for Picactif for all bed depths tested, indicating that they were shorter than the critical bed depth for this carbon for this DOC under these conditions. For ALY a steady removal rate was observed only briefly for the bed depth of 90 The results showed that APSC is the most efficient adsorbent for the removal of the DOC. Although water treatment by activated carbon is usually preceded by pretreatment steps to remove particulates and reduce the NOM level, the fractions of NOM remaining have been found to affect the efficiency of removal of trace organic compounds. There have been many hypotheses (e.g., competition for adsorption sites, reduction of the affinity of target compounds for adsorption by enhancing their solubilities) that have attempted to explain the mechanism behind the observed effects on the removal of a target compound or treatment efficiency for GAC systems ( The adsorptive affinity of a trace organic compound relative to the background compound(s) plays an important role in determining the service life of the bed. As the adsorption affinity of a trace organic compound increases relative to that of the DOC, the service time increases. However, the service life of a fixed bed column for removal of 4-NP was found to decrease in the presence of NOM. This can be attributed to components of the NOM that can penetrate deep in the GAC particles and therefore reduce the adsorption capacity of the carbon ( The removal of 4-NP in the presence of NOM (7 Complete exhaustion of the beds was not approached after a long service time ( The performance of the activated VLRC-based materials for the removal of 4-NP under dynamic conditions in terms of service time or effluent volume treated was lower than that for Picactif, the coconut-based commercial carbon tested, yet comparable to that for Hydraffin, the German low-rank coal-based commercial carbon. However, a comparison based on CUR showed that APSC had better performance than Picactif and Hydraffin. The adsorbent APSC, which had a large proportion of meso and macropores, showed the best performance for the removal of NOM due to the combination of its high surface area and wide pore size distribution making it suitable for the removal of low as well as high molecular weight compounds. The presence of NOM caused a reduction of almost 50% in the fixed bed service life for removal of 4-NP under the conditions tested due to fouling effects. The presence of NOM contributed to biological growth in the adsorption column leading to low effluent concentration of adsorbate over an extended period. APSC gave a lower service time for the removal of 4-NP in the presence of NOM compared with Picactif, which follows the same trend observed for the removal of 4-NP as a single adsorbate.