Effects of collectors (butyl xanthate (BX), O-isopropyl-N-sulfur ethyl carbamate (Z-200) and emulsified kerosene), dereagent (sodium sulfide) and depressant thioglycollic acid (TGA) on the flotation of chalcocite and molybdenite were investigated through flotation. The first principle theory was adopted to understand the difference of their surfaces and reaction between minerals and reagents. Results of flotation tests revealed that selectivity of emulsified kerosene is the best of three collectors in separation of chalcocite and molybdenite, though the others also display excellent collecting properties. Sodium sulfide can effectively remove collectors adsorbed on chalcocite surface, and TGA is an effective depressant of chalcocite at pH 8–9. Through first principle study, molybdenite displays relatively stronger covalence property while bonding interaction between copper atoms in chalcocite enhanced its ionicity. Bonding interaction is weaker in reaction of TGA and molybdenite, so it shows higher hydrophobicity and better flotability. Therefore, TGA is an effective inhibitor in the separation.Although as an important strategic metal in the industrial sector since 2004, molybdenite concentrate is commonly obtained as a by-product in the treatment of copper porphyry ores in which the molybdenite is a minor constituent Shirley, Sutulov and Hernlund had summarized some of the factors that might affect the floatability of molybdenum from porphyry ores at industrial scale, they were: mineralogy of ore deposits, slime coatings, optimizing copper metallurgy at the expense of molybdenum, grinding, liberation and flotation reagents Depressant is another important factor in the flotation Simulation is widely considered as a useful complement to experimental techniques, because it allows direct observation of atomic-scale phenomena in complete isolation, which cannot be achieved in current experimental studies. To ascertain the difference of the minerals surface, the first-principle calculation is used and the results can provide important insight into the mechanism. Many other minerals such as chalcopyrite, sphalerite, marmatite and their adsorption properties, oxygen adsorption on galena, have been studied with the first-principle theory to understand the mechanisms and flotation behaviors, and the effects of crystal structure on flotation Chalcocite and molybdenite used in the experiment as single mineral samples were derived from Yuanyang copper-molybdenum deposit in Yunnan province. After hand-picked, the relative high-purity minerals were crushed to −3 mm to meet the feed size requirement of porcelain ball mill. The mineral grindings were sieved to obtain −0.074 mm product as flotation specimen. The sample was stored in nitrogen atmosphere to avoid oxidation. Chemical analysis of the chalcocite sample, using X Ray Fluorescence (XRF), showed Cu 60.32%, S 29.45%, and the molybdenite sample contains Mo 27.21%, S 58.82%. The reagents used in this study are all of chemical pure grade. Distilled water was used throughout the experiment. The micro flotation test was executed in a Plexiglas cell (40 mL). 2 The calculations were performed using the Materials Studio program Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) developed by Payne, which is a first-principle pseudo potential method based on density-functional theory (DFT) The space group of chalcocite is P63/MMC, and the crystal parameters are Valence electron configurations of chalcocite involved in the calculation include Cu 3d Structure and geometry optimization and quality calculation of molybdenite are basically the same with chalcocite. Valence electrons configurations of molybdenite considered in the study include Mo 4d Three kinds of common sulfide collectors, butyl xanthate (BX), O-isopropyl-N-sulfur ethyl carbamate (Z-200) and emulsified kerosene, were employed to evaluate their performance in separation of chalcocite and molybdenite as a function of pH. The results can be found in Chalcocite and molybdenite both show better flotability in the presence of BX and Z-200 within the whole pH range of 2–12 ( Moreover, the recovery of chalcocite is slightly lower in alkaline, which can be explained by the enhanced hydroxide and thus hydrophilia substance formation Considering the whole separation process of the minerals, BX is employed as collector in the first stage flotation due to its excellent collecting property; emulsified kerosene is used as the collector for the second-stage flotation, and pulp pH is controlled at 8–9. According to the flotation process, collectors absorbed on mineral surface in the first-stage flotation should be removed for the following separation of chalcocite and molybdenite. The flotation behaviors of chalcocite and molybdenite as a function of TGA dosage are indicated in Generally, pH value exerts effect on the reaction between reagents and minerals, so does the suppression of TGA. To verify the impact of pH on the flotation process, the test is carried out with TGA 7.0 Structure optimization was carried out before the calculation. Experimental and calculation values of lattice constant and band gap of chalcocite and molybdenite are illustrated in Band structures of chalcocite and molybdenite are shown in Density of states can be seen as another presentation of energy band structure, but is more perceptive and thus make a wider application. It is used to deduce the density construction of electron at Fermi level. Therefore, atoms of substance reactivity can be comprehended since reactivity of electrons at Fermi level is among the highest. Density of states of chalcocite and chalcocite (1 As is shown in Partial density of states of molybdenite and molybdenite (001) was shown in Anionic collector reacts with Mo atom on molybdenite surface theoretically. From the surface structure of molybdenite, molybdenum atom isn’t exposed on unit cell surface. It is necessary for collector to overcome steric-hindrance to interact with molybdenum atom, which is due largely to the flotation system condition such as pulp pH and electric potential. Further insights into the nature of the two minerals can be obtained through the Mulliken population analysis. Valent electron configurations of chalcocite are S 3s As shown in The electron density differences of chalcocite and chalcocite (1 Herein, electronic bond exists inter-cooper atom due to scarcely overlap of electron clouds. The overlap between copper and sulfur is markedly less than the overlap between molybdenum and sulfur, which indicates the covalence between copper and sulfur is stronger. As for the charge distribution, electron clouds are centralized surrounding sulfur atom, and thus make sulfur negatively charged and copper atom positive charged. Such the case can also be found in molybdenite. These trends are in accordance with the analysis of the Mulliken. Surface energy can be calculated by Eq. As for chalcocite, Adsorption energy can be expressed by the following Eq. As shown in Models of TGA adsorbs on mineral surfaces are depicted in The results obtained in micro flotation study show that selectivity of emulsified kerosene is the best among the three collectors in the separation of chalcocite and molybdenite, though the others also display excellent collecting property. In addition, collector-removal test of sodium sulfide ensures the dereagent effect is remarkable for chalcocite when the dosage is 2.8 Anionic collector reacts with Cu and Mo atom on chalcocite and molybdenite surface respectively in flotation through analysis of band structure and density of states. Taking surface structure of molybdenite into consideration, collectors need to overcome steric-hindrance to interact with molybdenum atom, which is due largely to the flotation system condition such as pulp pH and electric potential. Molybdenite displays relatively stronger covalence property while bonding interaction between copper atoms in chalcocite enhances its ionicity. Furthermore, surface energy of chalcocite is less than molybdenite’s, indicating that chalcocite surface is more stable than molybdenite. Bonding interacts between sulfhydryl group and carboxy group of TGA and copper atom of chalcocite and thus makes chalcocite hydrophilic and be suppressed. Simultaneously, bonding interaction is rather weak in the reaction of TGA and molybdenite, hence it shows high hydrophobicity and better flotability. As a result, TGA is an effective inhibitor in the separation. Financial supports for this work, provided by the