Human saliva contains numerous molecules that play a variety of roles. Among them there are proteins which serve as biomarkers of various physiological and/or pathological conditions. Compared to other body fluids, saliva is the most convenient material for investigations, and especially for monitoring the disease conditions. Presently, there is an increasing need to develop a noninvasive method to identify the time of ovulation in humans to ensure successful fertilization, and for evolving strategies for family planning. The present investigation has been an attempt to identify one or more proteins in the human saliva that would be an indicator(s) of ovulation. SDS-PAGE of salivary proteins showed seven prominent bands during the different phases of the menstrual cycle. Particularly, the 14.5kDa band was highly expressed during the ovulatory phase. Eleven proteins were identified in this band of which ten were highly specific to the ovulatory phase. Among those proteins the intense expression of Cystatin-S was validated using immunoblot analysis (p<0.05). The functional annotation of salivary proteins revealed a high percentage of proteins that engage in binding and regulatory activities. The present results indicate that salivary proteins, particularly those present during the ovulatory phase, might be used as biomarkers for impending ovulation.Human saliva contains major, minor and gingival crevicular secretions from parotid, submandibular and sub-lingual glands, which play pivotal roles in digestion of food and maintaining the oral health The salivary gland secretion is regulated by the autonomic nervous system. The sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems effectively regulate flow rate and composition of saliva. The parasympathetic system facilitates secretion of a high volume of saliva containing fewer proteins, whereas the sympathetic system has the opposite effect Ovulation is a biological process wherein the mature ovarian follicle ruptures so as to discharge the ovum, and this happens under the influence of luteinizing hormone (LH) surge. The LH surge triggers a series of proteolytic processes which control ovulation Over the past decade, proteomics have been considered as one of the best approaches for identification of biomarkers for various diseases The chemicals and reagents used in this study were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise stated. Sample collection from women volunteers and all experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Ethical Committee (IEC) (Approval No: DM/2014/101/38), Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, India. All procedures were carried out in accordance with the approved guidelines. Written consent was obtained from the volunteers who participated in the study. The saliva was collected between 8.00 and 9.00am from 30 healthy female volunteers (mean age The saliva samples were obtained during the three phases of the menstrual cycle, namely the preovulatory (days 6–12), ovulatory (days 13 and 14) and postovulatory (days 15–26) phases, according to the estradiol concentrations and physical changes of fern pattern (Fig. S1) The salivary proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA)-acetone method. The saliva samples were mixed with 10% TCA-acetone and 10 To identify the salivary proteins SDS-PAGE was carried out on 12% gel with medium-range molecular weight marker (Merck-Geni, Bangalore) used as reference standard. The salivary protein preparation from each volunteer (30 After the electrophoresis, the gels were immersed in distilled water for 2 Trypsin digestion was conducted according to Muthukumar et al. Trypsin-digested protein samples were subjected to analysis in HCT-Ultra ETD II (Bruker Daltonics, Billericia, Bremen, Germany) using water-saturated acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. A mass spectrometer coupled with an Agilent 1100 HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography) system and equipped with C18 column (Supelco) was used for the analysis. A typical LC linear gradient was set from 90% H The acquired protein masses were processed further for monoisotopic peptide masses using FLEX analysis software, and the peptide masses were allocated according to the database search. SWISS-PROT database entries of MASCOT search engine ( The salivary proteins of the pre-ovulatory, ovulatory and post-ovulatory phases (n Antimicrobial activity of the whole saliva was assessed by well-diffusion method according to the National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards (NCCLS). Mueller-Hinton agar (MHA) plates were inoculated with 12 The salivary proteins of the ovulatory phase were further analyzed to retrieve their cellular location, molecular function and biological process by STRAP 1.5 online database ( The protein concentrations and relative band intensity values corresponding to the ovulatory, pre-ovulatory and post-ovulatory phases are represented as mean The estradiol concentrations differed to significant levels through different phases of the menstrual cycle (p In 12% SDS-PAGE, the salivary proteins were separated into an array of protein bands ranging in molecular weight from 70 to 14.5 The differentially expressed 14.5 Cystatin-S was identified with a higher number of peptide matches during the ovulatory phase. Therefore, the intense expression of Cystatin-S was validated by Western blot analysis using anti-Cystatin-S antibody with β-actin as the control. Cystatin-S was highly expressed during the ovulatory phase compared with other phases ( The antimicrobial activity of saliva was investigated against five test bacterial strains, of which two were gram-positive ( The proteins identified in the saliva during ovulatory phase were classified on the basis of biological process, cellular location and molecular function using STRAP database ( A typical fern/crystallization pattern has been observed in cervical mucus due to increased level of NaCl (Sodium chloride) under the influence of estrogens The functional annotation of the proteins identified in the saliva was obtained from STRAP database. We found most of the identified proteins to be associated with binding property and regulatory function. In addition, these extracellular proteins would play critical roles during the period of ovulation. It is to be noted that binding proteins are present along with volatiles in body fluids of mammals and facilitate chemical communication during estrus In a previous preliminary report from our group The Cystatin gene family has 14 genes, and seven Cystatins (Cystatin-A, Cystatin-B, Cystatin-C, Cystatin-D, Cystatin-S, Cystatin-SA and Cystatin-SN) are present in the saliva In summary, this is the first study of salivary proteins as biomarkers of ovulation in the human. The ovulation-specific proteins have been listed of which the cystatin-S was identified as the highly expressed protein. Antibacterial activity was high in saliva during the ovulatory phase due to the large number of antimicrobial proteins. Functional annotation of salivary proteins indicated that they were mostly extracellular proteins participating in regulatory functions. Since contemporarily intensive search for noninvasive biomarkers for different applications is going on, the discovery of this study, though preliminary, can go a long way in bringing up a noninvasive biomarker for ovulation. The authors declare no conflict of interest. G.S. (lead author), P.P. and G.A. designed the study; G.S. (lead author), D.R., S.M. and G.S. performed research; G.S. (lead author), S.M., D.R., M.A.A. and B.G. analyzed and interpreted the data; G.S. (lead author), S.M., D.R., and G.A. wrote the manuscript. M.A.A. edited the manuscript. All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards. G.S. (lead author) thanks the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR-New Delhi, India; No. 45/5/2014-BIO/BMS) for the Senior Research Fellowship. G.A. thanks the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: