In this work, we have successfully anchored Ag3VO4 (AV) onto P and S co-doped g-C3N4 (PSGCN) to prepare high-dispersible AV/PSGCN photocatalyst via a deposition-precipitation method. The P and S co-doped g-C3N4 was synthesized via thermal polycondensation using hexachlorotriphosphazene (HCCP) and thiourea as precursors. AV/PSGCN was characterized using various spectral techniques. The atomic force analysis indicated that the thickness of AV/PSGCN was less than 3.0 nm. The zeta potential and Tyndall effect experiments ascertained formation of the well-dispersed suspension of AV/PSGCN in water. The co-doping resulted in lowering optical band gap of g-C3N4. The photoluminescence and electrochemical impedance analysis indicated suppression in recombination of photogenerated electron and hole pairs in AV/PSGCN. The photodegradation of phenol followed pseudo-first order kinetics. Hydroxyl radicals and holes were the two main reactive species for photodegradation of phenol. The COD, HPLC and LC-MS analyses confirmed mineralization of phenol in 6 h. Unlike conventional slurry type photo-reactors, AV/PSGCN was not magnetically agitated during photocatalytic reactions. AV/PSGCN exhibited significant antibacterial activity for E. coli disinfection. The photodegradation of phenol and bacterial disinfection occurred through hole and hydroxyl radical formation mechanism.In the modern era, aquatic pollution has become the most arduous challenge to the human with increasing industrialization and civilization. Fortunately, as a novel green technology, a semiconductor-mediated photocatalytic process is believed to be a promising approach to mitigate environmental pollutants under solar light As a polymeric, metal free and most stable allotrope of covalent carbon nitride, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C In recent years, monoclinic scheelite Ag Herein, we report a novel photocatalyst comprised of Ag All the chemicals used in this work were of analytical grade. Typically, 2 g of thiourea was dissolved in 30 mL of distilled water and magnetically stirred for 30 min. To this solution, 0.06 g of HCCP was added and sonicated for 10 min to form a homogeneous solution, followed by heating for 20 min at 100 °C to remove water from the reaction solution. After cooling, the product was milled and annealed at 520 °C for 2 h (at a rate of 5 °C min AV/PSGCN was fabricated X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed using Panalytical’s X’Pert Prodiffractrometer with CuK-α-1 (45 kV/100 mA). Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) analysis was performed on Perkin-Elmer Spectrometer (Spectrum RX-l) with KBr pellet. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was done on PHI Versa Probe II with AES using 24.63 W Al Kα radiations. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were recorded using model Nava Nano SEM-45 (USA) system. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were obtained under vacuum conditions using model FP/5022-Tecnai G2 20 S-TWIN (USA) operating at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The optical absorption performance was performed using diffuse reflectance spectrometer (UV 3600, Shimadzu). The BET surface area of AV/PSGCN was analyzed using nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms on Coulter SA3100 instrument. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra of samples were recorded on FLS-920 (Edinburgh Instrument). The thickness and lateral size of AV/PSGCN were analyzed by atomic force microscopy (Dimensional Icon system (Bracer make). Zeta potential was measured using Zetasizer Nano ZS90. The degradation fragments during mineralization process were identified using high-performance liquid chromatography analysis (Water HPLC, Austria) with Rheodyne manual injector kit and C18 column (5 µm, 25 cm length and 7 mm diameter). 10% of methanol was taken as eluent during the analysis. The LCMS results were recorded on JEOL GCMATE II GC–MS with a high resolution data system. The phenol was selected as a model pollutant to investigate the photocatalytic activity of AV/PSGCN. The slurry type photoreactor was used to explore phenol degradation under visible light The XRD spectra of the synthesized photocatalyst are shown in To explore chemical composition and oxidation states of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulphur, silver, oxygen, and vanadium, XPS and EDX analyses were performed, and results are represented in The presence of seven elements C, N, O, P, S, Ag and V with their normalized weight percentage of 21.25, 48.19, 16.73, 3.42, 6.30, 3.50 and 0.62 confirmed the formation of AV/PSGCN photocatalyst (  The optical properties of GCN, AV, PSGCN, and AV/PSGCN were analyzed using UV–visible diffuse reflectance spectroscopy ( The photoluminescence analysis is helpful for the exploration of charge separation efficiency. PL emission peaks of GCN and PSGCN were found at 455 nm ( The thickness of AV/PSGCN was examined by atomic force microscopy. The AFM pictures and corresponding height profiles are shown in The screening experiments were performed to evaluate the photocatalytic activity of as-prepared photocatalysts, namely AV, GCN, PGCN, SGCN, PSGCN, and AV/PSGCN. ln(C During photocatalytic degradation of aqueous phase pollutants, hydroxyl radicals (OH Simultaneously, photogenerated holes can migrate from VB of AV to VB of PSGCN. This certainly retards the recombination of photogenerated electron and hole pairs, leading to the formation of type II photocatalyst. Therefore, the overall efficiency of photocatalyst is improved. The holes and hydroxyl radicals are the main reactive species during AV/PSGCN assisted degradation of phenol. On the basis of above results, a possible mechanism for photodegradation of AV/PSGCN photocatalyst was proposed in The effect of catalyst dose on photocatalytic reaction was investigated by altering the amount of photocatalyst from 10 mg/50 mL to 70 mg/50 mL. The results are given in The electron-hole pair recombination is one of the major drawback assisted with a photocatalyst. In this work, photodegradation of phenol investigated under H The mineralization ability of photocatalyst is an important parameter for real time application of photocatalyst. Using AV/PSGCN photocatalyst, 99% of COD was removed during mineralization of phenol in 6 h ( The antibacterial activity of AV/PSGCN was tested against In summary, AV/PSGCN photocatalyst with improved photocatalytic activity was fabricated for wastewater remediation. The P and S co-doping of Ag Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 