Abnormal crystallization was observed in Al86Ni6Y4.5Co2La1.5 metallic glass powder at about 20 °C below its glass transition temperature (T
                     g, 271.5 °C) during spark plasma sintering (SPS). The crystallization product, identified to be a hexagonal-structured Al5Co2 phase, was not detected in the same powder when annealed in a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). Nor was it detected in other Al-based metallic glasses of similar compositions which were annealed around their T
                     g temperatures by conventional heating. SPS is effective to introduce a unique nanometric intermetallic phase in the amorphous matrix. The abnormal crystallization is attributed to the high applied pressure and non-thermal effects of SPS.Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) continue to attract significant attention due to their unique properties compared to their crystalline counterparts As for the size limitation, powder metallurgy (PM), particularly the spark plasma sintering (SPS) technique, offers an effective solution to the fabrication of large, fully dense BMG preforms It is thus possible to address the two intrinsic problems that have long faced BMGs by adopting a PM approach such as SPS. This constitutes an important reason why SPS of BMGs has received increasing attention in recent years. Previous studies, however, have mostly focused on achieving fully dense and amorphous BMGs through optimising the SPS parameters (i.e. temperature, holding time and pressure) Apart from offering a fast heating rate and a high applied pressure, some non-thermal effects caused by the direct current during SPS could also be significant The Al Nitrogen gas-atomized Al The SPS experiments were conducted on an SPS-1030 model (SPS SYNTEX INC, Japan). A tungsten carbide (WC) die was employed. The isothermal sintering temperature was selected to be 248.5 °C according to a previous study To compare the crystallization products of the powder and the SPS-consolidated BMG samples, DSC (Netzsch A409C, sample weight is fixed at 30 mg) was used to anneal the powder, which was heated to 238.5 °C, 248.5 °C and 258.5 °C at 40 °C/min and kept at each temperature for different times from 20 to 120 min. The powder was cooled to room temperature in the DSC furnace after each isothermal hold and subsequently characterized using XRD. The XRD patterns obtained from the SPS-processed Al To clarify if the crystallization of Al To understand the phase changes at each temperature during isothermal holding, interrupted DSC experiments were conducted and the XRD patterns obtained are shown in   The present SPS conditions thus resulted in the formation of a totally unexpected nanometric Al TEM analysis confirmed the formation of a nanocrystalline Al This work was funded by the