The Lang Vai ore district, located in the central part of the Lo Gam domain in the Northeast Vietnam, contains at least three deposits: Khoun Puc, Lang Vai, and Lung Luong. The general paragenetic sequences for these deposits may be represented by the following mineral associations (from early to late): (i) arsenopyrite, pyrite, native gold, sphalerite; (ii) Bi-rich Pb-Sb sulfosalts; (iii) Bi-poor Pb-Sb sulfosalts; (iv) Sb sulfosalts; (v) Sb-rich minerals, native antimony; and (vi) Pb-rich Sb sulfosalts (as a distal mineral association). Three major types were recognized within the primary fluid inclusions based on the phases present at room temperature, including: V-type, vapor-rich inclusions; L-type, liquid-rich inclusions; and C-type, CO2-rich inclusions. The early Au-As stage quartz crystals contain the V- and L-type fluid inclusions. The results indicate that the initial ore-forming fluid belonged to a (CO2-CH4)–H2O–NaCl system characterized by high temperatures (290–352 °C) and variable to moderate salinities (3.16–13.89 wt% NaCl), which are analogous to reduced intrusion-related ore-forming fluids that exhibit high homogenization temperatures and moderate salinities. The quartz crystals from the Bi-Pb-Sb mineral paragenesis (occurred only at the Khoun Puc deposit) contain both V- and L-type fluid inclusions and characterized by high temperatures (mainly 304–340 °C) and moderate salinities (6.28–8.22 wt% NaCl equiv.). The quartz crystals from the middle hydrothermal stage contain the V- and L-type fluid inclusions that yield moderate homogenization temperatures (240–290 °C) and variable salinities (3.3–8.2 wt% NaCl equiv.). These features indicate that the fluid evolved into an (CO2 ± CH4)–H2O–NaCl system at moderate temperatures, lower CH4 concentrations, and variable salinities, thus indicating changing physicochemical conditions. In the last Sb stage (the Lang Vai deposit) and Pb-Sb stage (the Lung Luong deposit), the ore-forming fluid belongs to CO2–H2O–NaCl system, which is characterized by low temperature (180–240 °C), enrichment of CO2, and medium-low salinity (1.12–9.5 wt% NaCl equiv.), that corresponded to typical fluids which formed the Sb-, and distal AgPbZn veins of the IRGS deposits in the Tintina Gold Province of Alaska USA and Yukon Canada. The fluid inclusion studies and laser Raman spectroscopy suggest that the early fluids were dominated by CH4, whereas the late fluids, by CO2. Our study suggests that the fluid boiling and accompanying decrease in the solubility of gold-bisulfide complex played an important role in gold deposition at the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai deposits. The trapping pressures estimated from the boiling fluid inclusions were 123–343 MPa during the ore-forming process. This suggests an alternating lithostatic–hydrostatic fluid system controlled by a fault-valve activity at a depth of 12.9–15.2 km. The characteristics of the S isotopes and fluid inclusions suggest that the ore-forming fluids were of magmatic origin. During mineralization process, the fluid–rock interaction between the fluids and host rocks resulted in the increase of δ34S values of the fluids as reflected in the range of sulfur isotope from the different deposits. On a plumbotectonic diagram, the sulfides show correlations between 206Pb/204Pb and both 207Pb/204Pb and 208Pb/204Pb, which suggest a two-component mixing between a high radiogenic end-member and another low radiogenic end-member. The δ13CPDB vs. δ18OSMOW study clear show that C and O in the Khoun Puc ore-forming fluids were most likely to be derived from the magma with limited contribution from the carbonate host rocks (predominantly magmatic origin of hydrothermal fluids). Wherein, the calcite separates from the Lang Vai and Lung Luong deposits have δ18OSMOW values higher than those of the Khoun Puc, suggesting that the carbonate host rocks may have provided more C and O for ore-forming fluids in these deposits. The results, combined with existing data on the regional geology, ore geology, ore geochemistry, age of mineralization, and tectonic setting, indicate that the Lang Vai ore district is an intrusion-related gold system.Intrusion-related gold deposits (IRGD) are composed of several styles of hydrothermal mineralization that are genetically related to the emplacement and cooling of granitic plutons ( Gold deposits, genetically related to granitic intrusions, have been identified worldwide, however the best studied examples of this type form part of the Tintina Gold Province of Alaska and the Yukon Territory (e.g., Fort Knox, Donlin Creek, Dublin Gulch; The most distinctive styles of gold mineralization in reduced IRGD are sheeted arrays of parallel quartz veins which are found over 10 s to 100 s of meters preferentially situated in the pluton’s cupola. These veins are unlike multidirectional interconnected stockworks characteristic of porphyry systems or antithetic tensional vein arrays typical of orogenic deposits ( Northeast Vietnam belt is a part of the North Vietnam – South China continental block, comprising several regional tectonic units, such as the Song Chay Dome, the Lo Gam and Phu Ngu Palaeozoic fold belts, and the Song Hien – An Chau Late Permian – Mesozoic intra-continental rift system ( The Lo Gam domain (early Paleozoic intracontinental West Viet Bac orogenic belt according to Based on the geological setting, mineral composition, ore geochemistry, and elemental signature, we proposed that the Lang Vai ore district is an intrusion-related gold system. The ages of mineralization at the Lang Vai and Lung Luong deposits are ca. 240 Ma and ca. 236 Ma, respectively, and are similar to the reported ages (ca. 254–245 Ma) for the Phia Bioc granite complex, suggesting a possible genetic relationship between the mineralization and intrusions ( The aim of this contribution is to use fluid inclusion and stable isotope data to complement and expand upon the preliminary studies of The Lang Vai ore district is located in the central part of the Lo Gam domain and includes the Khoun Puc, Lang Vai, and Lung Luong deposits, controlled by anticlines and synclines ( The mineralization within the Khoun Puc deposit is distributed into 5 ore zones up to 1400 m long and 150–350 m wide each. The ore zones are represented by slightly altered and crushed host rocks. Each of these ore zones comprises a few ore bodies ( According to our recently study ( Mineral assemblages in the Khoun Puc deposit nave been divided into three paragenetic stages ( The gold-sulfide stage (Au–As metal association) is the earliest paragenetic stage and is characterized by the widespread occurrence of quartz veins with arsenopyrite, pyrite, and minor sphalerite. The second stage shows a Bi-Pb-Sb metal association represented mainly by sulfosalts and carbonates as the main gangue minerals. During the ore-formation process, the evolution of mineral assemblages is observed. The early formed sulfosalts are characterized by a Bi- and Pb-rich composition. These were followed by Bi-poor, Sb-bearing minerals such as zinkenite and chalcostibnite. Sb-rich minerals (stibnite, berthierite, and/or native antimony) in the Khoun Puc deposit are not observed ( Within the Lang Vai deposit, mineralization occurs as 5 parallel ore zones, which comprise 32 ore bodies. The ore zones occur as linear crushed structures that are 500 to 1400 m long and vary from 100 to 600 m wide. The ore bodies extend vertically over 200 m ( The ore-forming stages are also similar for the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai gold deposits ( The Lung Luong deposit is located approximately 14 km from the Lang Vai and Khoun Puc deposits. The Lung Luong deposit includes two mines. The first is the Lung Luong mine, which comprises several Sb-Pb ore bodies. The second is the Pu Bo mine, which is characterized by lead mineralization with minor antimony ( The dominant ore minerals are pyrite, sphalerite, and boulangerite, which are accompanied by minor heteromorphite and accessory bournonite. Native gold occurs rarely. The secondary minerals from the oxidized zones include bindheimite, galena, valentinite, covellite, and goethite. The paragenetic relationships suggest an initial deposition of pyrite and sphalerite assemblages, followed by the deposition of sulfosalts (heteromorphite, boulangerite, and bournonite). Our previously study ( Samples for fluid inclusion study were collected from the dumps of underground mines. Doubly polished thin sections (about 0.20 mm thick) were made from 22 quartz samples associated with different stages from three deposits. Fluid inclusion petrography involved careful observation of the shapes, characteristics of spatial distribution, genetic and composition types, and vapor/liquid ratios. 17 typical samples with abundant and representative fluid inclusions were selected for microthermometric measurements and laser Raman spectroscopy analyses. The determination of inclusion paragenesis was according to the classification of primary, pseudosecondary, and secondary as outlined by Various inclusions in quartz were selected for microthermometry based on the distribution, size, types, and textural relationships of them. The microthermometric study was carried out at the V.S. Sobolev Institute of Geology and Mineralogy of the Russian Academy of Sciences (IGM SB RAS) using a Linkam THMSG-600 heating–freezing stage with a temperature range of −196 °C to + 600 °C. The estimated precision of the measurements is ±0.2 °C for temperatures lower than 31 °C, ±1°C for the interval of 31–300 °C, and ±2 °C for temperatures higher than 300 °C. The salinities of inclusions were calculated using the final melting temperatures of ice ( δ Sulfur isotope analyses were obtained from twelve samples of pyrite and ten samples of arsenopyrite. Pyrite and arsenopyrite were separated by hand picking under a binocular microscope and the sulfur isotopic ratios were analyzed. The separation of SO For lead isotope ratios sulfides were separated from the ore specimen under a microscope using needle or micro drill. Sulfides were dissolved in dilute mix solution of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid. The lead isotopic compositions were measured on Triton mass spectrometer (method TIMS) with the standard sample NBS 981 (206Pb/204Pb = 16.9374, 207Pb/204Pb = 15.4916, 208Pb/204Pb = 36.7219). The lead isotope analysis was carried out at the Center Isotopic Research in VSEGEI, St. Petersburg, Russia. The analytical precision of Pb isotope is better than ±0.05‰. Petrographic observations indicate that the fluid inclusions are widely distributed in quartz veins from the Khoun Puc, Lang Vai, and Lung Luong deposits. Different types of the fluid inclusions were distinguished according to the phases present at 25 °C and their volume proportions. Fluid inclusions were classified as primary, secondary, or pseudosecondary according to the definitions of V-type inclusions have two phases (liquid phase and 50 to 95 vol% vapor phase) at room temperature. They show rounded or negative crystal shapes and generally vary from 5 to 20 μm in size ( L-type inclusions have two phases (liquid phase and 10 to 40 vol% vapor) at room temperature, and homogenize to liquid phase ( C-type inclusions have three phases at room temperature, consisting of L According to The second stage shows a Bi-Pb-Sb metal association formed by mainly sulfosalts and carbonates as main gangue minerals. During the ore-formation process, there is evolution of mineral assemblages. The early formed sulfosalts are characterized by Bi- and Pb-rich composition ( According to the paragenetic sequence of the Khoun Puc deposit ( The early stage at the Lang Vai deposits is characterized by the assemblage of quartz, arsenopyrite, pyrite, and sphalerite and has Au-As element association ( The second stage at the Lang Vai deposit has a Pb-Sb metal association and characterized by the widespread occurrence Pb-Sb sulfosalts and Sb-rich minerals. The ore formation process started with Ag-tetrahedrite and Pb-bearing sulfosalts, such as jamesonite and zinkenite deposition ( Later, during the second stage, Sb-rich minerals have been formed. This mineral association is characterized by the widespread occurrence of stibnite, berthierite, and minor native antimony ( Paragenetic relationships at the Lung Luong deposit ( To constrain the fluid inclusion compositions, representative samples of the three different hydrothermal stages were examined using laser Raman microspectroscopy ( Analyses of the fluid inclusions from the gold-arsenic ore identified the gas phase as binary composition of CO The representative fluid inclusions in quartz were measured using Laser Raman spectroscopy to constrain their gas compositions. The analyses of the V-, L-, and C-type fluid inclusions show that the CO The carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions of 16 samples of calcite and 3 samples of limestone from the ore zone of the Khoun Puc, Lang Vai, and Lung Luong deposits together, with data from the Pb-Zn deposits fromthe Lo Gam domain are given in The calcite separates from the Khoun Puc deposit have δ The hydrothermal calcite separates have relatively uniform C and O isotope compositions with δ The analytical results of sulfides are given in The δ The Pb-Sb sulfosalt separates from the Lung Luong deposit exhibit δ The data show the following features: (i) the pyrite and arsenopyrite are commonly paragenetic and have a similar sulfur isotopic composition. The stibnite, in contrast, exhibits a slightly higher δ The analytical results of lead isotopic composition of the arsenopyrites and Pb-bearing sulfosalts are listed in The lead isotopic compositions of the metallic minerals from the Lang Vai district show that The ore-forming process started with the deposition of the gold-sulfide assemblage (Au–As metal association), which is the earliest paragenetic sequence at the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai deposits. The early stage quartz crystals contain V- and L-type fluid inclusions that exhibit high homogenization temperatures (339–352 °C and 290–345 °C for the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai deposit, respectively) and moderate salinities (8.22–13.89 wt% NaCl equiv. and 3.16–7.95 wt% NaCl equiv. for the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai deposit, respectively) ( The quartz crystals from the Bi-Pb-Sb mineral paragenesis (occurred only at the Khoun Puc deposit) contain both V- and L-type fluid inclusions. The ore-forming fluid characterized by high temperatures (mainly 304–340 °C) and moderate salinities (6.28–8.22 wt% NaCl equiv.) ( The last ore-forming stage that occurred at the Lang Vai deposit is represented by antimony ore. Based on observations of phase transitions during heating experiments of the L- and V-Type fluid inclusions in quartz crystals from this stage, the ore-forming fluids are characterized by low temperatures (180–230 °C) and variable salinities (1.12–9.29 wt% NaCl equiv.). The volatile complex is representative of the CO Fluid inclusion studies and laser Raman spectroscopy suggest that the ore-forming fluid in the three gold deposits have a few similar chemical and physical features. The results indicate that the initial ore-forming fluid belonged to the (CO The quartz crystals from the middle hydrothermal stage contain the V- and L-type fluid inclusions that yield moderate homogenization temperatures (240–290 °C) and variable salinities (3.3–8.2 wt% NaCl equiv.). These features indicate that the fluid evolved into an (CO During the last Sb (the Lang Vai deposit) and Pb-Sb stages (the Lung Luong deposit), the ore-forming fluid evolvedto the CO Since at the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai deposits native gold is in paragenesis with arsenopyrite and pyrite ( These features indicate that the mesothermal, volatile- and Au-rich ore-forming fluid moved upward through fractures, thus altering the primary characteristics of the ore-forming fluid ( The existence of the boiling fluid inclusion assemblages in quartz of the middle stage permits reliable estimation of pressure conditions of fluid trapping during the ore formation. According to the microthermometric data (such as clathrate melting temperatures, CO The pressures in the range of 281–339 MPa were obtained in the Bi-Pb-Sb stage and 222–267 MPa in the Pb-Sb stage for the Khoun Puc gold deposit. If these pressures are lithostatic, given 2.65 g/cm The trapping pressures of the fluid inclusions for the Lang Vai deposit were estimated to be 279–343 MPa, 239–294 MPa, and 161–224 MPa for the Au-As, Pb-Sb, and Sb stages, respectively. Given the density of upper crust rocks is about 2.65 g/cm The pressure, estimated for the Pb-Sb stage of the Lung Luong deposit, is 123–205 MPa, based on homogenization temperatures of 185–240 °C and CO The orebodies in the deposits within the Lang Vai gold district are structurally controlled by brittle–ductile shear zones and faults ( The primary ores from the Lang Vai ore district are composed chiefly of arsenopyrite, pyrite, sphalerite, stibnite, and Pb-Sb-sulfosatls. The lack of sulfate minerals in the ores suggests that the δ The sulfur isotopic values of the arsenopyrite from the auriferous ores in the Khoun Puc deposit are between −3.8‰ and +1.1‰, with an average value of −0.7‰ ( Insignificant increase of the δ The isotopic composition of sulfur in the sulfide minerals from the distal Pb-Sb-sulfosalt and sphalerite mineralization from the Lung Luong deposit is listed in The δ In the δ The δ It is clear that calcite separates from these three deposits have δ The Pb isotopic compositions of ore minerals in gold deposits can provide important restriction on the sources of the ore-forming Pb ( On a plumbotectonic diagram ( The Pb isotopic compositions of different sulfide minerals from the Lang Vai district can be interpreted to reflect a mixture of two different lead sources: the host rocks and the ore-forming magmatic fluids. The lead isotopic compositions for these sulfides lie beside the orogenic line ( Although some controversy exists about intrusion-related gold deposits, there is a general consensus that magmas are the source of fluid, metals and energy in the granite-related mineral system ( Our analyses suggest that the ore-forming fluid in the Lang Vai district evolved from a CH The δ The S isotope values of the sulfides from the Lung Luong deposit (from +1.8‰ to +6.5‰) are higher than those of the sulfides from the Khoun Puc and Lang Vai deposits, indicating that the sulfides are unlikely to have formed from magmatic hydrothermal fluids, and that their genesis cannot be explained in terms of a magmatic–hydrothermal system. We suggest that increase of the δ The calcite separates from the three deposits have δ The isotopic compositions of the sulfides (S and Pb) and calcites(C and O) suggest a source of the initial ore-forming materials from the magmatic fluids and mixed source ore-forming fluids at the last stage with increase role of the fluid-rock interaction ( Previous studies have shown that the ages of the gold deposits in the Lang Vai ore district are ca. 236–240 Ma (Triassic) as determined by sericite/muscovite The Lang Vai ore district contains intrusion-related gold deposits (IRGS) that bears many similarities to worldwide examples. We characterized the Lang Vai district with regard to fluid inclusion geochemistry, metal zonation, and lead isotopic analyses. The following underscores our results: The initial ore-forming fluid belonged to a (CO The final Sb (Lang Vai deposit) and Pb-Sb stages (Lung Luong deposit), ore-forming fluid belongs to CO The characteristics of the S–Pb isotopes and fluid inclusions suggest that the ore-forming fluids were of the magmatic origin. During this process, the fluid–rock interaction between the fluids and host rocks resulted in the increase of δ The Pb isotopic compositions of different sulfide minerals from the Lang Vai district can be interpreted to reflect a mixture of two different lead sources: the host rocks and the ore-forming magmatic fluids. The lead isotopic compositions for these sulfides lie beside the orogenic line, indicating some affinities to orogenic lead reservoir, which is consistent with the tectonic evolutionary history of the Lo Gam domain. The δ Integration of the regional geology, ore geology, fluid inclusion data, C–O–S–Pb isotopic data, timing of mineralization, and tectonic setting indicates that the Lang Vai ore district is an intrusion-related gold system. The work was supported by the Grant of President Russian Federation (MK-7305.2016.5), the Project KC08.14/11-15 of