The purpose of this of study was to investigate the confined vibration method to produce alumina beads for the study of stress wave propagation in granular media. The method produces beads with desirable shape (i.e. oblate, prolate, and tri-axial ellipsoid), microstructure (level of porosity), and size (5mm to 3cm in diameter). This environmentally friendly approach to process beads involves preparing a slurry with a small amount of PVA binder and dispersant. After drying, the pre-formed material is a shear-reversible soft-solid, which flows under applied stress with limited strain recovery. This rheological behavior is sufficient for the alumina paste to be processed into rounded shapes with a confined shaker table and to maintain the shape for sintering of the alumina beads.Early work by Hertz In terms of bead size, forming methods such as single and multiple needle systems This motivated our team to design a new processing technique to make ceramic beads using a modified version of the vibration molding method. The colloidal vibration molding method was previously introduced by Franks et al. The vibration kept the material sufficiently soft enough to deform and hard enough to cause the spheres to bounce around randomly, helping to round them out. As the beads slowly dried, they retained their spherical shape. In an effort to improve the quality and reproducibility of alumina beads, processing parameters were optimized for the original forming process. This work demonstrates how different parameters such as the slurry formulation and processing variables of paste rheology affect the formation of the alumina beads. More specifically, this work focuses on: 1.1 Optimizing the alumina slurry formulation by changing the amount of binder. 1.2 Evaluating the rheological behavior of the paste to understand the bead shape evolution from non-spherical to spherical. 1.3 Standardizing the vibration process to make beads reproducibly. 1.4 Evaluating the performance of the alumina beads in terms of breaking force and number of rotating cycles. The experimental procedure to make alumina beads involves four main steps: preparation of the slurry, drying of the slurry, formation of the paste, and calcination/sintering of the beads as shown in The experimental procedure to make ceramic beads started with the procurement of alumina powder (A 152 SG Almatis Premium Alumina, Bauxite, AR) with particle size of 1.2 An alumina slurry was prepared in two steps. First, 55 The rheological behavior of the suspensions was analyzed to gain an insight into the slurry characteristics, which eventually helped to obtain reproducible, consistent behavior. The rheological behavior of the suspensions was measured with a controlled stress (CS) rheometer (CS10, Bohlin Gemini, Worcestershire, UK), in which the apparent viscosity was measured as a function of shear rate. The controlled stress rheometer was fitted in a concentric cylindrical geometry (CS 25, Bohlin Gemini, Worcestershire, UK). The rheological behavior of the alumina paste was analyzed to evaluate the material response and to gain a better understanding of the bead forming evolution. In order to probe the viscoelastic properties, alumina paste samples were subjected to simple shear deformation with an AR-G2 rotational rheometer (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE). A 40 The alumina paste was poured onto the bottom plate and the top plate was lowered to make contact with the sample. The top plate was then slowly lowered while being slowly rotated by hand so that the sample would completely fill the gap. The sample was trimmed with a spatula around the end of the plate for proper filling. A solvent trap with distilled water was loaded over the top plate to prevent evaporation from the sample. For consistent results, samples were subjected to a prescribed deformation history after loading and before rheological characterization: A shear stress of 100 To identify the range of strains for which a linear viscoelastic response would be observed, an oscillatory strain amplitude sweep was performed at the highest frequency to be tested. The subsequent frequency sweeps were then performed at a strain which fell within the linear viscoelastic regime of the initial strain sweep. Shear creep and recovery experiments were also performed using the same experimental setup to determine the steady state viscosity as well as the recovery response. After the loading procedure, a particular shear stress was applied for 120 The alumina paste was placed on the vibrating table and a series of dividers were used to contain individual pastes to keep them from sticking together and also to make a large quantity of beads simultaneously ( Calcination (thermal treatment process) was conducted on the green bodies (beads) to remove the unwanted organic materials that were introduced during the forming process of the beads. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a Netzsch STA 409 CD (Netzsch Instruments, Selb, Germany) was conducted to observe the water evolution and decomposition of the organic materials during the calcination stage. These studies were conducted at a temperature ranging from 25 Sintering was conducted to fuse the particles and create a solid ceramic body The density, breaking force, and number of rotating cycles with microstructure analysis were used to analyze the mechanical properties and performance of the beads. First, the density of each sample was measured following the Archimedes method Comminution of the ceramic beads was performed in a tumbler to observe the loss of material and reduction of the bead diameter as the number of rotating cycles was increased. This test provided the mass and diameter wear rate of the sintered alumina beads prepared by the vibration method. Friction between the alumina beads during ball milling causes wear in the material when the beads are rolling and sliding over each other Similarly, the diameter wear rate As a last characterization step, the eccentricity of the ceramic beads was measured. The eccentricity Based on Eq. One of the advantages of the bead forming method is the ability to recycle the dry material, so this method is environmentally friendly because it requires only a small amount of binder and dispersant. The original formulation previously used for slip casting was modified by changing the amount of binder added to the suspension. To improve the formulation, three different amounts of PVA binder were used: 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5 To test each formulation, all of the alumina slurries went through the same dehydration process (water removal) to form pastes. Through physical observations of the alumina paste when exposed to the vibrating table, the following were determined: (a) with 0.1 High quality ceramic green (body) beads were formed with the modified vibration molding method with the 0.2 During oscillatory measurements, strain amplitude sweeps demonstrated that on time scales of ten seconds or less, alumina paste with 0.2 The results of linear viscoelastic frequency sweeps performed at a strain amplitude of 0.1% can be seen in The creep and recovery responses of alumina paste containing 0.2 The steady state viscosity data for stresses in the range of 10 to 1000 We conjecture that the primary rheological requirement for vibration processing is to behave as a solid at low stress on the relevant timescales to retain shape and behave as a nonlinear plastic material exhibiting limited strain recovery at higher stress to enable formation into rounded shapes. A yield stress would characterize this transition, and the required/target yield stress would need to lie within a particular range, depending on processing conditions and desired final shape of the bead. If shear-thickening is relevant, it may serve the secondary role of limiting the deformation of the paste during the largest impacts during processing. This may reduce the statistical variability of strains induced by vibration impacts and result in smoother beads. Here we have characterized what rheology is Thermal analysis for calcination and sintering of the beads were conducted: First, TGA results confirmed that there was an initial ∼9% weight loss decrease at 100 During sintering, the ramp-up rate was increased to 5 The samples (five beads were measured and tested per condition) sintered at 1650 The comminution results as a function of milling time provided more information (i.e. mass and diameter wear rate) on the performance of the alumina beads. In addition, As the final characterization step, the eccentricity using Eq. (3) was calculated in the The vibration method proved to be effective in producing alumina beads having tailorable size ( This work was funded by the