The influence of equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) on the microstructure, texture evolution and mechanical properties of extruded Mg-5.0Zn-0.5Ca-0.3Mn (weight percent) alloy has been systematically investigated in the current study. A typical ultra-fine grained (UFG) structure is obtained in the as-ECAPed alloy for 4 passes, due to a completed recrystallization process. With the increasing ECAP pass, the conventional basal texture can be gradually changed to an asymmetric non-basal texture with its basal plane inclined to normal and transverse directions ∼45°, which is related to the typical shear mode, leading to an obvious increase of Schmid factor for the activation of basal slip system. The room-temperature tensile yield strength, microhardness and ductility of extruded alloy are simultaneously improved by successive ECAP processing, which is derived from the grain refinement and texture modification.In recent years, magnesium (Mg) and its alloys have attracted widespread attention in aerospace, automobile and biomedical industries, due to their low density, high specific strength/stiffness, low cytotoxicity and superior biocompatibility [ Unfortunately, pure Mg components with poor mechanical properties are not strong enough to maintain their structural integrities [ Except for the alloying, conventional thermomechanical processes, such as extrusion, rolling or forging can improve the mechanical properties of Mg alloys, through grain refinement, elimination of casting defects and microstructure homogenization [ The enhanced strength of Mg alloy is generally accompanied by the sacrificial ductility, because dislocation slip can be hindered by grain boundaries, precipitates or crystalline orientation. Therefore, how to achieve the combination of enhanced strength and ductility is always a hot topic in Mg alloy research field. Oh-ishi et al. [ Up to now, the “structure–texture–property” relationship of fine-grained Mg alloy fabricated by ECAP processing remains unclear. The intrinsic contradiction between the strength and ductility has not been solved, and the detailed strengthening and toughening mechanisms also need the in-depth clarification. In the current study, the microstructures, texture evolutions and mechanical properties of the extruded Mg-Zn-Ca-Mn alloys during the ECAP process have been systematically investigated, aiming to simultaneously improve the strength and ductility. The corresponding deformation mechanisms will be further demonstrated, which may pave a new avenue for the design of high-performance Mg alloys in the coming future. Pure Mg (99.95%), Zn (99.90%), Mg-30%Ca and Mg-3.0%Mn master alloys were used to prepare the Mg-5.0Zn-0.5Ca-0.3Mn (wt.%) alloy, via conventional gravity casting under a SF The as-cast alloy was extruded at 300 °C with an extrusion ratio of 10 and extrusion rate of 0.1 mm s The as-extruded and as-ECAPed alloys were cut along longitudinal sections (parallel to ED and normal direction, ND) for microstructural observation. The mechanically polished samples were etched by the solution consisting of 2 g picric acid, 33 ml ethanol, 10 ml acetic acid and 5 ml distilled water. The microstructure was observed using an Olympus optical microscope (OM), Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Philips Tecnai-F20 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 200 kV. The average grain size was calculated by Image-Pro Plus 5.0 software with grain number more than 1000. The elongated coarse grains (≥8.0 μm) and fine equiaxed grains (≤3.0 μm) were identified as unDRX and DRX grains, respectively, the corresponding area ratio was used to calculate the volume fraction of recrystallization. Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) tests were conducted on a JEOL FESEM JSM-7000F scanning electron microscopy equipped with TSL MSC-2200, to obtain the information of micro-texture and orientation evolutions. The global texture analysis was measured by a neutron diffractometer TEX-2. The Vickers microhardness (HV) was measured using a FM700 tester on the cross sections of Mg samples, with a load of 2.0 N. Five measurements were taken on each specimen to calculate an average value. The dog-bone shaped flat samples with the gauge dimensions of 6.0 × 2.0 × 25 mm  After ECAP for 1 and 2 passes, the heterogeneous grain structures are observed, with a large number of elongated coarse grains and much finer DRX grains (∼1.8 μm), which exhibits that the DRX behavior occurs (  In order to further investigate the microstructural evolution of the extruded alloy during the ECAP,   ECAP processing usually generates a non-basal texture component, which is quite different from the intensive basal texture from conventional thermomechanical treatment. After ECAP for 1 pass ( In order to overcome the locality from the EBSD micro-area texture analysis and further investigate the macroscopic texture evolution during the ECAP process, the global textures of Mg alloys measured by neutron diffractometer are shown in  The effects of ECAP deformations on the room-temperature tensile properties of the extruded alloys are more complicated ( Generally speaking, the large accumulated strains during the ECAP processing contribute to the microstructure and texture evolution of Mg alloys, which will strongly influence their mechanical properties. Hence, clarifying the essential relationship between microstructure and mechanical properties (hardness, strength and ductility) of Mg alloys fabricated via ECAP technology, and thoroughly understanding the strengthening and toughing mechanisms, are significant to design the rational deformation approach of Mg alloys with superior mechanical properties in the coming future. In the current study, a good balance between the strength and ductility is achieved in Mg-Zn-Ca-Mn alloy, via grain refinement and texture modification during the ECAP process, and the corresponding mechanisms will be further discussed as follows. It is well known that the microstructure evolution of Mg alloy during the hot deformation is usually derived from the dynamic recrystallization behavior, and the appropriate deformation temperature and critical strain are required [ After ECAP for 1 pass, the extruded alloy experiences a new round DRX process. The lower deformation temperature (250 °C) contributes to the formation of many fine DRX grains, through hindering the grain growth. Unfortunately, the strain is calculated as ∼1.05 during each pass, which cannot achieve a completed recrystallization behavior, exhibiting a bimodal grain size distribution, with coarse elongated unDRX grains embedded inside fine DRX grains. With further ECAP processing, the consecutive deformations can provide the additional large strains (∼4.2 after 4 passes), which is benefit to a complete recrystallization, and a large number of equiaxed fine grains are gradually formed within the Mg alloys. In addition, the increased number fraction of misorientation angle with increasing pass also proves that the formed LAGBs during the ECAP processing can be gradually translated into HAGBs, leading to a homogeneous UFG structure. Therefore, it can be concluded that the grain refinement after ECAP is related to the low-temperature progressive recrystallization process. Compared with single hot extrusion, the multi-pass ECAP processing can offer the sufficient strains for recrystallization behavior, and therefore the uniform grain refinement is achieved. Moreover, fine Ca The poor ductility of Mg alloy at room temperature can be attributed to its low number of easily activated slip systems. The critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) for non-basal slip systems of Mg can be gradually decreased with increasing deformation temperature. Therefore, the ECAP process needs to be carried out at elevated temperature, in order to accommodate severe plastic deformation through activating non-basal slip systems [  During the ECAP for 2 passes, the processed billets are pre-rotated 90° along ED for route Bc, which will redistribute the as-received texture components with their basal planes inclined ∼45° to TD ( In general, the room-temperature mechanical properties of Mg alloys are mainly dependent on the grain size, texture and precipitation. The yield strength (or microhardness) of polycrystalline materials obeys the classical Hall-Petch relationship [ With increasing the ECAP pass, the evolution of SF value is progressively less obvious and retains ∼0.267 in the as-ECAPed alloy for 4 passes, because the intensive non-basal texture represents a good stability after repeated ECAP. Both the microhardness and TYS values are increased by ∼5% compared with that of extruded alloy, exhibiting an approximately linear relation with average grain size, which can be attributed to the grain refinement. Compared with the weak texture evolution, the intensive grain boundary strengthening effect hinders the dislocation movement and dominates the improvements of yield strength and microhardness. Furthermore, the evolution of Ca It is noteworthy that the elongation of extruded alloy has been remarkably improved (increased by 60%) after ECAP processing, achieving a good balance between the strength and ductility, and the fracture surfaces of ruptured specimens are shown in Up to now, the extruded Mg-Zn-Ca-Mn alloys have experienced a series of repeated ECAP process at 250 °C, achieving the fabrication of UFG Mg alloys, and their yield strength (hardness) and ductility can be simultaneously improved. Although the ductility of extruded alloy is increased by ∼60%, the improvement degree of yield strength is not outstanding (∼5%), because the basal texture is sharply weakened after ECAP. Therefore, the as-ECAPed alloy for 4 passes still retains an excellent ductility in this study, which means that the additional yield strength improvement will be anticipated to be realized at the expense of its ductility for the specific application fields, via a probable texture design of post-processing, and the corresponding study is undergoing. In summary, the ultra-fine grained Mg-Zn-Ca-Mn alloys with simultaneously enhanced yield strength, hardness and ductility have been successfully fabricated via ECAP processing, and the corresponding strengthening and toughing mechanisms are systematically investigated. It will open a new window for deformation processing of wrought Mg alloys, and the main conclusions are demonstrated as follows: The ECAP processing promotes the dynamic recrystallization behavior of extruded Mg alloy, leading to an obvious grain refinement, and a homogeneous UFG structure with average grain size of ∼0.9 μm has been obtained after 4 passes. The conventional basal texture in the as-extruded alloy is transformed to a non-basal texture after ECAP for 1 pass, with (0002) plane inclined to ED ∼45°. With further ECAP processing, the typical rotation feature results in the asymmetric texture, most of basal planes are gradually inclined to ED and TD. The yield strength of extruded alloy is remarkably decreased in the as-ECAPed alloys for 1, 2 and 3 passes, because the formed non-basal textures facilitate the activation of basal slip system. After ECAP for 4 passes, the progressively enhanced grain refinement restricts the basal dislocation movement, leading to the improvement of yield strength. The ductility of extruded alloy has been notably improved by ECAP processing, and the transformation from cleavage step to ductile fracture mechanism is mainly influenced by the homogeneous grain structure and texture modification. The authors are grateful to the financial aid from the