Five coals from different parts of the world were ground and sieved into four size fractions (3.35–4.7, 6.7–9.5, 9.5–19, 19–22.4mm), respectively. The vitrinite reflectance of the coals ranged from 0.35 to 0.76% and the vitrinite content ranged from 55 to 96% (on a volume percent basis). Approximately 300 grams of each size fraction were heated in a TE010 single mode microwave cavity operating at 8 kW with an exposure time of 0.1s. These settings were chosen to represent industrially viable operating conditions, i.e. sufficient microwave power density power and low residence times. The paper reports quantitative data which assesses for the first time the influence of the microwave pretreatment on grindability in a batch Bond ball mill at potentially economic microwave energy inputs. The paper demonstrates that grindability increases significantly as a result of pretreatment with the specific rate of breakage (S
                     
                        i
                     ) increasing by an average of 100%.The mills operating at coal fired power stations use a significant amount of energy Microwave heating can induce thermal fracture through differential heating of the various phases in a material The thermally induced stresses and strains in coal are caused not by the carbon in the coal responding to the applied electromagnetic waves but the inherent moisture present inside each particle. The loss factor for coal (at 2.21 GHz and 25 The authors have shown in a previous publication that treatment of coal particles in a single mode microwave cavity operating at an applied power level 8 kW and at a frequency of 2.45 GHz coupled with an exposure time of several seconds had a significant impact on the grindability of a UK steam coal This paper extends previous work by the authors and other workers by looking at grindability of five different world coals used in the power industry. These coals were treated at high power density and low residence time (0.1 Five coals were selected for these tests and dry sieved into the following size fractions 3.35–4.7, 6.7–9.5, 9.5–19 and 19–22.4 Microwave energy was generated using a variable power (3–15 kW), microwave generator manufactured by Sairem Ltd of France. The samples were exposed in a TE To achieve very short exposure times, the residence time was controlled by using a pneumatic piston in which the speed of the return stroke could be controlled. Samples were placed in 250 A 12       Thus the breakage selection function Jacobs Ranch and Roto B are the lowest rank coals with the highest moisture content. They are clearly the most grindable coals when untreated across the four size ranges with significantly higher values of As mentioned previously all the coals show large changes in grindability, with It is clear that the relationship with moisture and petrographic composition is a complex one. Coal behaviour during rapid internal gas expansion must be critical. More work will be necessary to try and establish a relationship between susceptibility to changes in grindability (as a result of microwaving) and coal properties. Based on averages in The trends for each coal, however, are not linear with increasing particle size. With hindsight the 9.5–19.0 The likely reason for the decrease in specific rate of breakage with particle size is that as the particle size becomes smaller the surface area becomes large as a function of volume. This means that the particle loses heat from its surface at a similar rate to that with which it is being applied. Therefore small particles have to be heated at a faster rate than large particles to achieve the same level of internal damage. For all tests in this paper 0.3 However, this result is a worst case scenario. The cavity used for the testwork was generic in nature and not specifically designed for the treatment of coal. It is highly likely that the residence time for a set power level could be reduced even further if the electric field distribution was optimized for the treatment of such a material. During the execution of the experiments for this paper tests were carried out at an applied power level of 15 High power microwave treatment of coals for very short residence times (0.1 During heating, most samples produced visible quantities of moisture which condensed in the container after treatment. Since moisture content does not appear to decrease significantly despite visible moisture release during treatment which implies that coals could be treated multiple times to further propagate cracks in structure. The rapid expansion of moisture when vapour is formed within the particles is clearly the reason of the formation of the cracks. As a result microwave treatment increased the specific rate of breakage ( Further work will be needed to establish whether microwaves can be applied to small particles (e.g. less than 1 At present a non-optimised cavity operating at non-optimised power settings have been shown to make any coal particle >3