The present work deals with the synthesis of NiO/SiO2 nanocomposites fabricated by embedding nickel oxide particles, obtained from hexahydrated nickel nitrate (Ni(NO3)2·6H2O), in a silica matrix, through sol–gel method based on hydrolysis and condensation of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) alkoxide. Due to the various factors, e.g. pH, EtOH/TEOS/H2O ratio, Si/Ni ratio, etc., influencing the gelation time of the solutions, Taguchi robust design method of system optimization was used to determine the percent of contribution (%ρ) of each factor. It was found that the pH of the solutions had the most influence on the gelation time (68.76%) and the Si/Ni atomic ratio stood in second place (12.95%). It was illustrated that the molar ratio of EtOH/TEOS had the least influence on the gelation time.Matter can be subdivided into progressively smaller parts, fragments or particles, until the dimensions of molecules, ions and atoms are reached. The subdivision process produces matter of progressively smaller particle size. In the size range much larger than the atomic range but much smaller than particles observable with the naked eye, the physical and chemical properties of the surface of these particles assume a preponderant role in the behavior of the system Nanocomposites have generated profound interest because of the new physics of nanoparticles and many potential applications based on improved physical properties and superior mechanical properties. Furthermore, materials composed of metal particles dispersed in ceramic or vitreous matrices are well known to chemists because of their early applications in heterogeneous catalysis as is shown in Ref. Up to date, one of the most common and well-studied methods of synthesizing Ni/SiO The materials used in this work are tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) (Merck, 98%) as the SiO The sol–gel precursor solution was obtained by mixing tetraethyl orthosilicate and ethanol with different molar ratios of ethanol to TEOS. In another container the hexahydrated nickel nitrate (Ni(NO In this study, the gelation time is defined as the time between pouring the mixed solution (after the second stirring time) in the container and the time at which the solution ceases to discernibly flow under the influence of gravity. In order to confirm the formation of NiO and SiO In the present work, the molar concentration ratio EtOH/TEOS was chosen to be 2 or 4 and, for simplicity, the concentration of TEOS was fixed at 0.06 The design of experiments is an approach for systematically varying the controllable input factors and observing the effects of these factors on the output product parameters. The assumption used in this study was that the individual effects of the input factors on the output product parameters are separable. That means the effect of an independent variable on the performance parameter does not depend on the different level settings of any other independent variable. Normally, in the case of eight factors with two levels, 2 The S/N ratios are differently according to the type of characteristic and are classified into three groups As can be seen in The purpose of the ANOVA is to investigate which process parameters significantly affect the gelation time of the solutions. This is accomplished by separating the total variability of the S/N ratios, which is measured by the sum of the squared deviations (SS) from the total mean of the S/N ratio ( The analysis of variance (ANOVA) for S/N ratio of the gelation time is shown in As The final step in the Taguchi method is to predict and verify the improvement of the quality characteristic using the optimal level of the design parameters. The predicted S/N ratio using the optimal level of the design parameters can be calculated as By using these values, the above equation can be written as predicted S/N The XRD patterns have been shown in NiO/SiO