Introduction
                  Rotational type ankle fractures with a concomitant fracture of the posterior malleolus are associated with a poorer clinical outcome as compared to ankle fractures without. However, clinical implications of posterior malleolar (PM) fracture morphology and pattern have yet to be established. Many studies on this subject report on fragment size, rather than fracture morphology based on computed tomography (CT). The overall purpose of the current study was to elucidate the correlation of PM fracture morphology and functional outcome, assessed with CT imaging and not with –unreliable- plain radiographs.
               
                  Methods
                  Between January 2010 and May 2014, 194 patients with an operatively (ORIF) treated ankle fracture, were prospectively included in the randomized clinical EF3X-trial at our Level-I trauma center. The current study retrospectively included 73 patients with rotational type ankle fractures and concomitant fractures of the posterior malleolus. According to the CT-based Haraguchi fracture morphology, all patients were divided into three groups: 20 Type I (large posterolateral-oblique), 21 Type II (transverse medial-extension) and 32 Type III (small-shell fragment). At 12 weeks, 1 year and 2 years postoperatively the Foot and Ankle Outcome Scores (FAOS) and SF-36 scores were obtained, with the FAOS domain scores at two years postoperative as primary study outcome. Statistical analysis included a multivariate regression and secondary a mixed model analysis.
               
                  Results
                  Haraguchi Type II PM ankle fractures demonstrated significantly poorer outcome scores at two years follow-up compared to Haraguchi Types I and III. Mean FAOS domain scores at two years follow-up showed to be significantly worse in Haraguchi Type II as compared to Type III, respectively: Symptoms 48.2 versus 61.7 (p = 0.03), Pain 58.5 versus 84.4 (p < 0.01), Activities of Daily Living (ADL) 64.1 versus 90.5 (p < 0.01).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Posterior malleolar ankle fractures with medial extension of the fracture line (i.e. Haraguchi Type II) are associated with significantly poorer functional outcomes. The current dogma to fix PM fractures that involve at least 25–33% of the tibial plafond may be challenged, as posterior malleolar fracture pattern and morphology - rather than fragment size - seem to determine outcome.In 2006 Haraguchi et al. [ Although some authors still debate the size of the PM fragment that requires fixation [ Multiple studies reveal that ankle fractures with a concomitant PM fracture may be associated with a poorer clinical outcome, as compared to patients without [ The overall purpose of the current study was to elucidate the correlation of PM fracture morphology and functional outcome, assessed with CT and not with plain lateral radiographs as in previous studies [ The primary aim of this study was to evaluate if PM ankle fractures that extend into the medial malleolus (Haraguchi Type II) are associated with poorer clinical outcomes as compared to the spectrum of posterolateral oblique (Types I and III) PM ankle fractures. Our Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved for the use of anonymized CT images of operatively treated ankle fractures from the prospective randomized clinical EF3X-trial [ Between January 2010 and May 2014, 194 patients with an operatively treated ankle fracture, were prospectively included in the randomized clinical EF3X-trial at our Level-I trauma center [ The current study included 73 of the total 194 patients from the EF3X-trial, all suffered from a rotational type intra-articular ankle fracture with a concomitant fracture of the posterior malleolus. Interestingly, eleven patients were excluded because they did not fulfill the inclusion criteria: the posterolateral part of the posterior malleolus was intact and therefore these patients could not be stratified according to the Haraguchi classification and were beyond the scope of the current study. All patients were divided into three groups by two observers registrar and fellow (first and senior authors: RPB and JND) according to an assessment of the CT scans based on the classification criteria defined by Haraguchi et al. [ The primary study outcome: functional outcome, was evaluated according to the Foot and Ankle Outcome Score (FAOS) [ SPSS version 23.0 software (SPSS Inc. Chicago, Illinois) was used for data analysis. After normally distributed data were ensured, continuous variables were reported using means and standard deviations (SD). Count variables were described by using frequencies with accompanying proportions. Analysis of the primary study outcome was performed using multivariate regression analysis to identify differences in FAOS scores between the three groups. Adjustment for potential confounders (gender and age at surgery) was performed. Due to the repeated data structure of the study design (12 weeks, 1 year and 2 years postoperatively) and missing data (12 weeks: 95%, 1 year: 80% and 2 years: 100% follow-up), a mixed model analysis was performed to investigate the differences between the groups in the secondary outcomes The total study group of 73 patients included thirty males (41%). The mean age at the time of surgery was 48.0 years (SD 17.1). Group 1 (i.e. Type I: large posterolateral-oblique PM fractures) consisted of twenty patients; mean age was 49.9 years (SD 14.8) and ten (50%) were male. Group 2 (i.e. Type II: transverse medial-extension PM fractures) consisted of twenty-one patients; mean age was 47.9 years (SD 17.1) and three (14%) were male. Group 3 (i.e. Type III: small-shell PM fragment) consisted of thirty-two patients; mean age was 46.1 years (SD 11.6) and seventeen (53%) were male. Patients were treated according to the general principles of the AO (Arbeidsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen) [ Eight of the twenty (40%) patients with a Haraguchi Type I PM ankle fracture were treated with direct fixation of the PM fragment. Of the eight patients with fixation, three (7.5%) patients were treated with an additional syndesmotic screw. The remaining twelve (60%) patients had no fixation of the PM fragment. But of these twelve patients, six had fixation of the ankle syndesmosis. All Type I fractures also had a fibula fracture (Weber B/C): all treated with a lag screw and standard one-third tubular plates (average 7 holes, range: 5–9). In six of the twenty-one (29%) patients with a Haraguchi Type II PM ankle fracture both fragments (posterolateral and posteromedial) were directly fixed, each fragment with a separate antiglide plate. In five (24%) patients only the posterolateral fragment was operatively fixed and in two of these patients an additional syndesmotic screw was placed. In two (10%) patients only the posteromedial fragment was directly fixed. In one (5%) patient only two syndesmotic screws were placed. In the remaining seven (33%) patients there was no fixation of the syndesmosis nor PM fragments. Nineteen (90%) patients also had a fibula fracture (Weber B/C): all treated with a lag screw and standard one-third tubular plates (average 7 holes, range: 5–9). One of the thirty-two (3%) patients with a Haraguchi Type III PM ankle fracture had direct fixation of the PM fragment. In twenty (63%) patients the syndesmosis was treated with a syndesmotic screw(s). Twenty-seven (84%) patients also had a fibula fracture (Weber B/C): all treated with a lag screw and standard one-third tubular plates (average: 7 holes, range: 5–9). Since there were a high number of surgeons involved in the care of these patients, the postoperative rehabilitation protocol was up to surgeons’ surgical preferences. However, all patients were immobilized and non-weightbearing in a short-leg cast for six weeks. After six weeks, all patients visited a physiotherapist to start with range of motion exercises and (partial) weightbearing. For every single FAOS domain score, patients with a Haraguchi Type II PM fracture had significant lower outcome scores two years after surgery compared to Haraguchi Type III PM fractures. Two years postoperatively the FAOS domain scores Symptoms and Activities of Daily Living were significantly lower in Haraguchi Type II compared to Haraguchi Type I fractures. The remaining three FAOS domains (respectively: Pain, Sports and Quality of Life) did not show a significant difference between Type II and Type I PM ankle fractures after two years follow-up. Patients with Haraguchi Type II PM ankle fractures showed significantly lower SF-36 domain scores at two year postoperative compared to Haraguchi Type III fractures: 71.7 (95% CI: 59.3–84.0) versus 85.7 (95% CI: 78.6–92.9) for Physical Functioning and 65.0 (95% CI: 42.9–87.1) versus 90.7 (95% CI: 80.8–100) for the Role of Physical Related Problems (p = 0.03 and p = 0.02, respectively). At two years follow-up there were no significant differences in SF-36 domain scores between Haraguchi Type II and Type I fractures. Except the Symptoms domain, all the FAOS domain scores at two years after surgery were significantly lower in Haraguchi Type II compared to Haraguchi Type III. After one year follow-up the FAOS domain Symptoms showed a significantly lower score in Haraguchi Type II compared to Haraguchi Type I. At 12 weeks follow-up there were no significant differences in FAOS domain scores between the three groups.  Haraguchi et al. [ The outcomes of this present cohort study should be interpreted in the light of several limitations including: eight different General Trauma- and Orthopaedic Trauma surgeons decided on PM fragment fixation according to their discretion without a standardized protocol to address these posterior malleolar ankle fractures. Although this may influenced clinical outcome (unfortunately the numbers of surgeons and fixation strategies were too low for sound statistical sub-analysis), it does correspond to actual daily practice allowing us to evaluate the current general understanding and respective surgical strategies of a heterogeneous group of surgeons for PM fractures in a cohort study. Strengths of the current study include: 1) heterogeneity of the patients with rotational type ankle fractures that signifies daily practice with a broad range of Haraguchi fracture types represented in this cohort (twenty Type I, twenty-one Type II and thirty-two Type II); 2) CT images were used to stratify the posterior malleolar ankle fractures according to the fracture pathoanatomy described by Haraguchi et al. [ It is generally accepted that patients with rotational type ankle fractures that involve the posterior malleolus have worse clinical outcome than patients without [ Another issue regarding fracture morphology is that we found it challenging to distinguish posterolateral oblique orientated fractures in the spectrum of Haraguchi Type III to Haraguchi Type I fractures: A recent Q3DCT-based study of our group on the pathoanatomy of posterior malleolar fractures revealed: 1) that there is a spectrum of posterolateral-oblique fracture lines ranging from small shell -Type III- avulsion fractures to larger -Type I- fragments; and 2) that there is a separate group of fragments with posterolateral to posteromedial -Type II- transverse extension [ Although our understanding of the concepts of pathoanatomy of PM fracture patterns is currently evolving, the majority of clinical studies to date still rely on plain lateral radiographs [ Evers et al. [ Suggested reasons for poorer clinical outcomes in Haraguchi Type II ankle fractures are: 1) poor judgment of fracture morphology due to plain radiographs [ In conclusion, the FAOS domain scores in Haraguchi Type II compared to Types I and III PM ankle fractures demonstrated significantly poor clinical outcome after two years of follow-up. These findings should alert surgeons for the medial extension of the fracture line in Haraguchi Type II ankle fractures, as it seems to be under recognized and therefore the posteromedial fragment may be undertreated. Therefore, we agree with Tenenbaum [ Diederik T. Meijer and Job N. Doornberg were supported with an unrestricted research grant from the This study represents a great deal of effort in obtaining complete objective- and subjective outcome data, and manually rendering all computed tomography scans for quantification of three-dimensional models. All authors have participated in a material way to at least two of the five elements below: Study design: RPB, DTM, RJOdMK, SAS, GMMJK, JCG, JND Gathered data: EF3X-trial study group, RPB, DTM, RJOdMK, INS Analyzed data: RPB, DTM, RJOdMK, INS, SAS, JND Initial draft: RPB, JND Ensured accuracy of data: EF3X-trial study group, RPB, DTM, RJOdMK, SAS, TS, GMMJK, JCG, JND. Diederik T. Meijer and Job N. Doornberg were supported with an unrestricted research grant from the Marti-Keuning-Eckhardt Foundation. For the remaining authors none were declared. No funding was received in direct support of this study.