Fractures of the proximal forearm are complex injuries. The complicated anatomy about the elbow along with the thin soft-tissue envelope requires meticulous attention to detail. The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the anatomy of the proximal forearm and review the management of olecranon, coronoid, and radial head fractures.Fractures about the elbow are broadly categorized to those that are proximal to the elbow joint (i.e., distal humerus fractures) and less commonly to ones that are distal to the elbow joint. Management of fractures of the proximal radius and ulna is difficult and complicated for several reasons. The anatomy of the proximal forearm is complex and involves three articulations: the ulnotrochlear, radiocapitellar, and the proximal radioulnar joints (PRUJ). The thin soft-tissue envelope about the elbow requires particular attention to minimize complications. The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of fractures of the proximal ulna and radial head/neck. The proximal ulna consists of the olecranon process posteriorly and the coronoid process anteriorly. The articulating surface of the proximal ulna is covered with cartilage, except for a bare area that separates the olecranon from the coronoid. The coronoid is divided into the tip, body, and anteromedial and anterolateral facets. The radial head articular surface consists of a concave surface and a spherical rim. The concave surface articulates with the capitellum and is fully covered with articular cartilage. The spherical rim articulates with the lesser sigmoid notch and is covered with a 280° arc of articular cartilage. Evaluation of a patient with a proximal forearm fracture should begin with a thorough history and physical examination. Examination of the soft-tissue envelope and a thorough neurovascular examination should always be performed. In higher energy trauma, there should be suspicion for neurovascular injuries. Compartment syndrome is rarely seen with proximal forearm fractures; however, it has been reported in the pediatric population. Initial imaging should include anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the elbow. On the lateral radiograph, the PUDA and radial head translation should be evaluated. Radial head translation is measured by the radiocapitellar ratio (RCR) as described by Rouloeu. Olecranon fractures account for approximately 10% of all upper extremity fractures in adults. Olecranon fractures result from either a direct blow or an indirect pull of the triceps tendon. With a direct force, the olecranon is driven into the distal humerus, generally The most common classification system used for olecranon fractures is the Mayo classification first described by Morrey, In rare occasions, olecranon fractures can be treated without surgery. The best candidates for nonoperative management are low-demand elderly patients with minimally displaced fractures. Transverse simple fractures proximal to the midpoint of the greater sigmoid notch or the bare area are considered stable and can be treated with a traditional tension-band wire (TBW) construct ( TBW constructs should not be used for unstable fracture patterns, including comminuted fractures or those extending distal to the greater sigmoid notch. They do not provide enough stability and may cause overcompression at the articular surface, causing joint incongruity. In these cases, anatomic reduction and rigid stabilization with plate fixation are required. This is performed using a direct posterior approach. Articular fragments should be anatomically reduced. There is often an intermediate fragment between the proximal and distal piece that plays an important role in restoration of the articular surface. One technical difficulty of plating olecranon fractures is the amount of fixation possible in the proximal fragment. The traditional AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen) technique for olecranon plating recommended a nonlocking, one-third tubular plate contoured to the proximal ulna. Very rarely, olecranon fractures with extensive comminution or bone loss may not be amenable to plate fixation. In such instances, the comminuted fragments are excised and the triceps tendon is advanced. Tendon-grasping sutures are placed in the triceps and passed through a bone tunnel in the distal piece. This technique should be reserved for elderly patients with low demand. The amount of olecranon that can be removed is a matter of debate. Gartsman et al. showed in a clinical study that up to 80% of the olecranon could be removed without significant functional loss. Postoperative rehabilitation is specific to the surgeon and depends on the state of the soft tissue and the quality of fixation. The elbow is generally immobilized in relative extension (45°) for 1 Outcomes after olecranon fixation have historically been good. The literature available is mostly a collection of small case series. The Mayo Elbow Performance Score has been shown to be good to excellent in most patients. Karlsson et al. reported good-to-excellent results in 94% of patients in a group of 73 patients with an average follow-up of 19 Hardware prominence is the most common complication, and hardware removal is reported in 18–62% of patients. Posttraumatic arthritis has been reported in 20–48% of patients. Olecranon nonunions are uncommon and reported in 1% of cases, with higher energy fractures being more prone. Infection after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of olecranon fractures is a challenging problem. The soft tissue about the elbow is thin, and any superficial infection could rapidly become deep. Therefore, there should be a low threshold for surgical intervention when there is suspicion of infection. Oral antibiotics are generally not acceptable for the management of infection with any presence of drainage. Some authors recommend irrigation and debridement, with or without application of an external fixator, followed by 6–12 Heterotopic ossification (HO) is an uncommon complication reported in less than 1% of patients. Coronoid fractures are generally caused by axial compression of the trochlea on the coronoid process. Isolated fractures are rare and are often associated with other The posterolateral rotatory mechanism is the most common cause of elbow dislocation and is caused by a supination force on an outstretched axially compressed arm. The body causes a valgus and posterolateral rotation force around a planted elbow, tearing the stabilizing ligaments of the elbow from lateral to medial direction with the anterior band of the MCL being the last ligament to fail. A fall on an outstretched hand may also cause a varus posteromedial rotatory injury pattern. Transolecranon fracture-dislocations occur because of traumatic injuries to the greater sigmoid notch either through an anterior or posterior force. The coronoid is generally fractured at the base and can be accessed through the olecranon fracture. Regan and Morrey described the initial classification system used for coronoid fractures, Treatment of coronoid fractures is based on the pattern of injury. The injury is infrequently seen in isolation, and an assessment of elbow stability is made. When the elbow is deemed stable, nonsurgical management is preferred. Transverse fractures are generally a result of valgus posterolateral force and are associated with an elbow dislocation and radial head fracture (the so-called terrible triad). The average size of the transverse coronoid fracture is 39% of the coronoid height. When associated with complete elbow dislocation, AMF fractures are usually too small to be fixed with screws or plates. These are commonly O’Driscoll Type II, Subtype I or II fractures. Coronoid base fractures usually result from anterior or posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocations. Anterior transolecranon fracture-dislocations produce large coronoid base fragments that can be fixed with dorsal plates and screws. The coronoid base reduction can be assessed through the olecranon fracture or via a separate medial approach. Posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocations are more complex and are often associated with osteoporosis. There may be multiple separate fragments, including an anteromedial, central, tip, and a lesser sigmoid notch fragment. Transverse tip fragments are fixed using drill tunnels with suture. A medial plate can be used in addition to a dorsal plate for additional fixation. If the surgeon believes that the final construct is not reliable, then a hinged external fixator should be used for additional stability. Rehabilitation after coronoid fixation should be personalized based on the reliability of fixation. In the setting of a compliant patient and reliable fixation, passive elbow exercises can be started immediately after surgery. Active exercises begin soon thereafter. Ulnar nerve palsy may occur after coronoid fixation. This is partly because of dissection and handling of the nerve during surgery and partly because of sequelae of trauma (swelling, scarring, callus formation, contractures). Development of ulnar nerve palsy usually causes a setback in patient’s rehabilitation, including diminished elbow motion and increased pain. Elbow stiffness is a common complication after traumatic elbow injuries and could be due to various causes, including excessive scar formation, instability, hardware impingement, ulnar neuropathy, and HO. Management generally involves surgical treatment of the underlying cause. In the case of HO, resection can be performed as soon as the bone is mature and scar is mobile, usually by 4 Slight joint incongruity, not subluxation or dislocation, is common after surgical treatment of coronoid fractures. This is treated with active elbow exercises and avoidance of varus stress with abduction. Other complications include arthritis and infection of the elbow. Elbow arthrosis is directly related to the quality of reduction and elbow stability. Studies have demonstrated that superior outcome is achieved in the setting of a stable elbow as opposed to an unstable elbow. Recurrent instability may stem from inadequate fixation, nonunion, or ligamentous laxity. Treatment depends on the underlying cause of the instability and may require ligament reconstruction, revision of fixation, and possible bone grafting. A hinged external fixator is usually necessary. Radial head fractures ( Mason described the original classification for radial head fractures. The first step in the management of radial head and neck fractures is to determine whether the injury is stable or unstable. Most fractures are stable nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures of the radial neck or the anterolateral portion of the radial head. Nondisplaced or minimally displaced radial head fractures not associated with the instability patterns stated above are considered stable fractures. These injuries are nonoperatively treated unless there is a mechanical block to elbow motion. Some authors have advocated elbow aspiration with or without anesthetic injection for pain relief and assessment of block in range of motion. Treatment of stable radial head fractures should focus on avoidance of elbow stiffness. The authors generally place patients in a sling and ace wrap and advocate early elbow range of motion. Randomized trials have shown no difference between a brief period of immobilization followed by mobilization and immediate mobilization. Operative intervention is only indicated when there is mechanical block to motion, which is rare. Unstable radial head/neck injuries generally result from higher energy mechanisms and, as mentioned earlier, are associated with other injuries such as elbow dislocations, Essex-Lopresti lesions, and Monteggia injuries ( The literature on treatment of unstable radial head fractures is not conclusive. For the most part, they require surgical treatment in addition to treatment of associated bony or ligamentous pathology. In a systematic review, Struijs et al. concluded that there is insufficient evidence to draw a definitive conclusion on the optimal treatment of Mason Type II–IV radial head fractures. Some authors advocate excision as a treatment for some fractures. However, recent biomechanical studies highlight the importance of the radial head as a secondary stabilizer of the elbow. Therefore, excision in the setting of elbow or forearm instability should not be performed. The goal of ORIF is to obtain a stable construct and to restore the joint congruity. Small (1.5 or 2.4 The lateral aspect of the radial head that corresponds to the area in between the radial styloid and Lister’s tubercle with the arm in neutral rotation. The lateral aspect of the radial head with the forearm in neutral rotation. The most posterior aspect of the radial head with the forearm in full supination. Several authors have reported good outcomes after internal fixation of partially displaced radial head fractures. Comminuted radial head fractures involving more than 30% of the articular surface for which satisfactory ORIF is not possible should be treated with radial head replacement. This has been shown to offer more predictable outcomes. To expose the radial head, we utilize the extensor digitorum communis (EDC)- splitting approach or the interval between the EDC and the extensor carpi radialis brevis. Postoperative rehabilitation depends on associated injuries, stability of surgical repair, and patient compliance. Patients are generally immobilized in a splint for the first 10–14 Proximal forearm fractures are complex injuries. Complications after these injuries can be devastating, and revision surgery is generally challenging. Appropriate treatment requires careful patient examination, thorough evaluation of imaging, and adequate preoperative Most of the literature of proximal forearm fractures involves retrospective reviews. Future work should focus on large prospective trials evaluating areas such as treatment of small AMF fractures, benefit of prophylactic ulnar nerve neurolysis when treating AMF fractures, ORIF versus radial head replacement, and outcome of various replacement prostheses for radial head fractures.