A key aspect of the design of long distance ore concentrate pipelines is the need to properly predict maximum pressures. This is traditionally done by means of transient analysis, thus predicting the possible impact of slurry hammers, which may occur during operation in a potentially uncontrolled manner in case of power outages. In this technical note, it is shown for typical ore slurry and pipeline characteristics, that in long distance systems with routes having inclined sections, the plug formation mechanism may become a dominant factor in system overpressures. A dimensionless number expressed as the ratio of the Joukowski and the plug overpressure value, suggests that a scale for the critical plug length above which maximum pressures are controlled by the plug mechanism rather than the transient flow is between about 150m and 500m, or a few percent points of the overall pipeline length in common long distance systems. A critical dependence on the solids initial concentration and the product of the static friction factor and the solids settled concentration is addressed.Long distance ore and tailings pipelines have the inherent complexity of dealing with shutdown and startup operations. In the former situation, the sedimentation of the solid matter occurs not only on the plane normal to the pipeline axis, but also parallel to it, with the potential implication of the formation of pipeline obstructions at low points ( A comprehensive description of the water hammer phenomenon may be achieved using standard approaches to solve the equations of continuity and momentum. Common numerical techniques to reproduce operational details include the method of characteristics or finite difference schemes of the governing equations ( The overpressure caused by a plug in a horizontal line, or a segment symmetrical to the bottom point (e.g. a U-shaped one with inclined sections) may be related to the static friction between the solid matter trapped on it and the inner surface of the pipe. For a complete plug into the pipeline, The conditions represented in a simplified manner by In most long distance pipelines, it is hardly possible to avoid zones with steep slopes in the route, and thus upon system shutdown it is most likely that there will exist a certain plug length. The relative impact of slurry hammer and pipeline plug may be assessed by estimating a certain allowable plug given a route and operational rationale. A critical condition would be that which equates  The critical plug length, The overall effect of the aforementioned variables, given a reasonable range slurry-like parameters, is the definition of a critical plug length, Despite the present results are merely referential, they give an order of magnitude picture of the need to (a) effectively measure both the angles of slide and repose, where in the former case it is required to reproduce the real slurry-pipeline wall properties and (b) carefully choose the route to maximize operational robustness in terms of water/energy efficiency and/or operational variability requirements ( The author gratefully acknowledge support from the Chilean National Commission for Scientific and Technological Research, CONICYT, through Fondecyt Project No. 11110201.