The Appearance function, also known as breakage distribution function, is used to describe the breakage characteristics of an ore impacted with a certain energy. It is the bedrock of comminution modelling. The range of applicability of the majority of existing appearance functions is limited to coarser sizes above a few millimetres. In the previous work, a 4D (four dimensional) appearance function model was developed based on JKRBT test data, but its applicable range was not sufficiently broad at −24.4+7.3mm. In order to develop a more versatile appearance function model that can be used for a wide range of energy levels and feed particle sizes, drop weight tests for smaller particles with sizes ranging from 425μm to 16mm were carried out with the Mini JK drop weight tester. Combined with data up to 63mm from Standard JK Drop Weight Tests, the outcomes were fitted to two types of 4D appearance functions - the P80-m based 4D model and the P80-m-q based 4D model. The proposed 4D models are more accurate and scalable than existing models. Most importantly, they can be used for a wide range of conditions, with feed particle size ranging from 425μm to 63mm and input specific energy from 0.1 to 2.5kWh/t in the initial test data.Comminution, including crushing and grinding, is an energy intensive process in the mining industry. For example, the energy used in the comminution of gold and copper ores accounts for 0.2% of global and 1.3% of Australia’s electricity consumption ( Ore breakage characterisation involves laboratory breakage testing work that provides the establishment of an appearance function. Among the various laboratory breakage tests, single particle breakage tests are widely used to determine the comminution characteristics of ore particles. The first single particle breakage test was the Bond Crushing Work Index Test ( The appearance function, also known as the breakage distribution function, is used to describe the size distribution of the breakage progeny as a function of input energy. It is an important sub-model in a generic model structure for tumbling mills ( The JK t An important concept proposed by Narayanan and Whiten is the family of t In From the above t The appearance function of a certain ore is also dependent on the feed particle size and the breakage mode ( Eq. A more recent breakage rate model for generating appearance function, the JK Mpq model was proposed to solve this problem (     X is the initial geometric mean particle size (m);    As can be seen, the breakage appearance model, Eq. Both JK t In order to develop an accurate appearance function model that cover a wide range of test conditions, single particle breakage tests at a wide range of experimental conditions were conducted. The standard JK drop weight test (standard JKDWT), which was first developed at the JKMRC in 1992 ( The Mini JK drop weight tester is a vertical drop weight impact system with an electromagnet to hold the drop weight ( The control of required energy level for breakage is implemented based on gravitational potential energy calculation. The schematic diagram of the Mini JKDWT is shown in The breakage energy is (  Eis is the input specific breakage energy (kW M h  With a given drop weight and the required energy level, the height of the drop weight can be predetermined. The maximum drop height difference and the maximum energy which this tester can provide are around 61 For small particles, it is impractical to use even this mini JKDWT over the desired energy ranges as the drop weight would have to be tiny. A dispersed monolayer impact method was applied to overcome this shortcoming. A dispersed monolayer of particles was used to minimise particle interaction while allowing many particles to be broken with a single impact. An air level was used to ensure the drop weight face is parallel to the anvil so as to provide an even energy input across the particles. The assumption of the equivalence of the monolayer multiple particle breakage versus the single-particle breakage was tested, as described below. The ore samples used in the mini JKDWT were from the Cadia gold mine in Australia, and they were the same as those used in the standard JKDWT. The samples were sized into 8 size fractions: −16 The breakage product for each size-energy combination was collected and sized to get the product size distribution. For −2 Ideally, if the drop weight is parallel, the energy of the drop weight can be evenly distributed to each particle in the dispersed monolayer multiple particle breakage method if the particles have the same shape and size. However, the shapes and sizes of particles are different in reality. Consequently, energy is not evenly distributed among particles, especially at very low impact energy. It can be envisaged that some smaller particles may not be impacted by the drop weight while the particles with larger height support the drop weight. It is reasonable to believe that the error caused by uneven energy distribution is more indistinctive when the size difference is less, and the specific breakage energy is higher. To show whether there is a significant difference between single particle breakages and monolayer multiple particle breakages, the rocks at −4 The procedure for Mini JKDWT was as follows: Prepare the test samples with crushing or grinding. Choose a size-energy combination. For the specific size class, choose a drop weight and calculate the pre-determined height. Conduct a series of drop weight tests for the given size-energy combination. Collect all the products and size them to get product size distribution. Choose another size-energy combination and go to step 3 until all combinations are completed. Some typical test results are shown in 45 sets of Mini JKDWT data and the existing 15 sets of standard JKDWT data were collected. There was an overlap of the two test results for X Each set represents a product size distribution for a combination of size and energy. The product size distribution P is related to the original sizes of feed ore X (mm), ore characteristics, and input specific comminution energy Ecs (kW All the data from JKDWT and mini JKDWT can be shown in a virtual 4D graph ( In order to obtain better fitting which not only covers the raw data but also describes the data varying trends, the raw data were interpolated before developing a 4D model, which was verified against raw data after development. By interpolating along Ecs-axis, X-axis, and x-axis, the following graphs were obtained as shown in In fact, the 4D graph ( There are two parameters, P80 and m in Eq. The P80 values can be derived from the experimental data using reverse-interpolation method and m values can be fitted using Eq. Given the known P80, m, X, Ecs, which are directly measured and calculated from experiments, the original data were plotted on 3D graphs (P80-X-Ecs and m-X-Ecs graphs) and the relationships between P80 and X-Ecs and between m and X- Ecs were analysed. Exponential functions and polynomial functions were used in a trial and error method to fit the model. The detailed forms of Eqs.  where α, β, γ, and δ are parameters, X Ecs X is the original size of feed ore (mm), X Ecs is the specific energy (kW Ecs The dimensionless forms of the feed size and the specific energy make the model more scalable. Thus we have developed two groups of parameters: one group (α, β, γ, and δ) for P80 and the other group ( After transposition and taking the logarithm of both sides of Eqs. P80 size is often used as a measurement for product size in the industry. A smaller value of P80 indicates a finer product size. “m” determines the shape of the product size distribution. A larger “m” indicates a steeper product size distribution curve. When the original feed ore size X increases and the specific energy Ecs decreases, P80 will increase, which means coarser products were measured ( When the dimensionless feed size X Eqs. The P80-m Weibull distribution (Rosin-Rammler distribution) is widely used in industry to describe comminution product size distribution, especially where the product size distribution curve is not so steep. However, when the feed ore size X is smaller, and the specific energy is lower (e.g. X: −2 In a 4D graph, each column represents a product size distribution under a combination of X and Ecs. This distribution can be described with P80-m-q relationship Eq. Eqs. “q” can be determined from It is proved in the next sections that 4D-mq model can provide a better description of product size distribution overall compared with 4D-m model, especially when the product size distribution curve is very steep (e.g. at smaller sieve sizes and lower specific energy). In order to compare the results of the 4D appearance function models and traditional t Based on 59 sets of experimental raw data, a series of t With the above data, if t With the A-b relationship Eq. King’s t The product size distributions from the 4D appearance function model and the three t It is apparent that the 4D models have better prediction accuracy than t The comparison between the experimental data and the 4D models are presented in Except for Generally speaking, both the 4D-m model and 4D-mq model can predict the experimental data well. However, the 4D-m model underestimates the cumulative percentages passing at smaller sieve sizes (e.g. x The 4D-mq model was proposed to reduce the error of the 4D-m model in the range of low energy and smaller feed sizes. It can significantly lift the curved end of the 4D-m model ( In this work, two versions of the 4D appearance function model, 4D-m and 4D-mq, were developed based on a wide range of breakage test data of mini JKDWT and standard JKDWT. The 4D appearance function models can successfully characterise the breakage of different size-energy combinations (feed size from 425 μm to 63 Compared with the 4D appearance function model developed based on the JKRBT breakage test data ( The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Commonwealth Scholarship from the Australian Government and Scholarships from the University of Queensland. The authors wish to acknowledge the partial financial support on supervision from AMIRA P9P project. The reviews and advice on this paper by Dr Marko Hilden and Dr Grant Ballantyne are highly appreciated.