Estimating phosphorus export from the lowland polder areas is a critical step for controlling phosphorus loading of a watershed. However, most existing models assumed lowland polder area to be a freely draining catchment, and did not adequately represent its phosphorus dynamics. To better estimate the phosphorus sink and source of the polder systems, a process-based Phosphorus Dynamic model for lowland Polder systems (PDP) consisting of six modules was developed to simulate the daily phosphorus exchanges between lowland polder systems and their surrounding rivers. The unique pattern of water and phosphorus dynamics in polder systems (i.e., manual operation of water exchange between the polder and its surrounding rivers and the phosphorus dynamics in the water area) was accounted for in PDP. Based on a dataset collected from Polder Jian located in Lake Taihu Basin, China during 2014, seven sensitive parameters in PDP were identified based on sensitivity analysis, and were optimized using Genetic Algorithm. A k-fold cross-validation method was used to assess model goodness-of-fit, and resulted in an acceptable model with an r
                     2 (coefficient of determination) value of 0.594. The case study in Polder Jian showed the reliability of PDP to estimate the phosphorus source and sink from polder systems. Such estimation is helpful for water managers to identify the phosphorus source, and thus take corresponding measures to control the aquatic eutrophication.Polder systems are generally considered as closed areas enclosed by dikes to protect lowland areas from flood ( A large number of models, such as SWAT, TOPMODEL, HSPF and AGNPS, have been developed and applied in modeling hydrological and P dynamics of a catchment ( The water exchange between polder systems and surrounding rivers involves several manually-controlled processes, such as irrigation, culvert and flood drainage ( During non-heavy rainfall events, the runoff water from farmland and residential area may be manually kept in the water areas (ponds and ditches) for agricultural use, rather than exported out of polder systems in short term. Such water retention in polder may change its P concentration significantly due to the complex physical and biological processes (e.g., particulate phosphorus settling and phosphorus uptake by plant) in the water area. These processes could be important factors influencing P export, because the water area generally constitutes a large ratio of polder area. From these perspectives, the manual water-management practice and P dynamics in the water areas, are needed to account for in a P dynamic model for polder systems. The aim of this study was to develop a process-based Phosphorus Dynamic model for Polders (PDP) for better estimating the P source and sink of lowland polder systems. The detailed processes, reflecting the unique properties of water exchange and P dynamics in polder systems, were described in the following section. A one-year dataset collected from Polder Jian, China in 2014 was collected for model calibration and validation. Sensitivity analysis was firstly implemented to identify the sensitive parameters in PDP. Genetic Algorithm was then used to obtain the optimal combination of these sensitive parameters. A A Phosphorus Dynamic model for Polders (PDP) model was developed based on a PLMP used a constant P removal coefficient to represent the P removal by water areas (ditches and ponds). However, P removal by water areas varied significantly in a year, affected by many physical and biological processes. This weakness was overcome in PDP by describing P dynamics in the water areas, including P uptake by plant, P mineralization, P setting to the sediment, P releasing and resuspension from sediment. PLMP described the flood drainage. However, in addition to flood drainage, culvert drainage also played an important role for water exchange between polder and its surrounding rivers, and was thus added in PDP. Fertilization and crop harvest were described in PDP to evaluate P sources and sinks for polders. These processes would improve our understanding of P balance in polder systems, and were not included in PLMP. In PDP, physical and biological processes in the water area were accounted for using a daily time step. PDP was developed based on mass conservation, and included six modules: water-area water balance module, residential-area water balance module, paddy-land water balance module, dry-land water balance module, water management module and phosphorus balance module ( Four modules (water-area water balance module, residential-area water balance module, paddy-land water balance module and dry-land water balance module) were developed to describe the water balance in four land-use areas (residential area, water area, paddy and dry lands). The processes of precipitation, infiltration, evaporation and runoff were accounted for in these four modules. The precipitation process was a water source of the polder system, and was generally represented by the monitoring data. Infiltration occurred in condition that soil water was saturated in paddy and dry lands (Eqs. 3.4 and 4.4 in Crop evapotranspiration in paddy and dry lands was estimated based on crop factors and daily reference evapotranspiration calculated by the Penman–Monteith method proposed by During the rainfall periods, runoff occurred when the water storage was larger than the maximum water storage of the paddy and dry lands (Eqs. 3.6 and 4.5 in Different from freely draining catchment, the water exchange between polder systems and surrounding rivers was manually controlled. The manual control of water included the processes of agricultural irrigation, flood and culvert drainage. To better describe these processes, four threshold water levels, as well as a culvert to control the water exchange between the polder system and its surrounding rivers, were proposed in the water management module ( During the rice season, an irrigation event would occur when the water level was as low as Phosphorus balance module described the P transport based on the water transport in the polder system using Eqs. 6.1–11 ( Different from freely draining catchments, the long retention time of runoff water in ponds and ditches implied the need to describe P dynamics in the water areas. The existing mechanism, representing physical and biological processes in aquatic ecosystems, was used in the phosphorus balance module ( Based on the conceptual and mathematical descriptions above, the coding and integration work were implemented using the programming language of Python. This programming language has been widely used in scientific computation, and was recognized to be well suited for model integration due to its extensive libraries (e.g., NumPy and SciPy) supporting modeling practice ( All these six modules in PDP were described using a daily time step. The phosphorus balance module was adapted based on the P-related processes used in the existing software (named iLake) for modeling P dynamics in shallow lakes ( The implementation of PDP was a jointed endeavor with other contributions from the water managers and local farmers. Water managers provided the experiences on the manual operations of irrigation, flood and culvert drainage for polder systems, which were not adequately described in previous literatures. Agricultural regulations for describing the water and P dynamics in PDP were provided by local farmers lived in Polder Jian, China. The data collected from Polder Jian in China during Jan. 1, 2014–Dec. 31, 2014 were used to test the performance of PDP. This section discussed the P exchange between Polder Jian and its surrounding rivers in 2014 based on the simulation results with calibrated parameters. Polder Jian, covering an area of 10.6 PDP requires the inputs of land use, vegetation coverage, meteorological and water quality data. The simulation period in this study was between Jan. 1 and Dec. 31, 2014. Brief information of the data collected in this study was listed in The land use of Polder Jian was interpreted using the method of supervised classification based on the satellite image obtained on May 22, 2014, and was validated with field surveying ( The water quality data included dissolved phosphorus (DP) and particulate phosphorus (PP) in various water ( The calibration and validation practice for PDP included the procedures of sensitivity analysis, parameter optimization, cross-validation and goodness-of-fit assessments ( PDP included 24 parameters. These parameters were determined based on literatures, field measurement and optimization practice ( Due to the large amount of parameters in PDP, a sensitivity analysis method (one-at-a-time) was carried out to screen the sensitive parameters affecting the target variables significantly. Although PDP included five state variables, PP and DP of the water area were highly concerned due to their direct relationship to aquatic eutrophication. Thus, total phosphorus (TP, the sum of PP and DP) was used as target variable for sensitivity analysis. To implement sensitivity analysis, each parameter value was increased or decreased by 10%, while all other parameters were kept fixed. A total of 2 All parameters were firstly initialized from literatures, and then adjusted by the traditional trial-and-error method until model simulations satisfactorily agreed with the measured data. Seven sensitive parameters (     Repeat steps 2–4 until the number of generation reached the maximum number of 20. After a number of iterations, the model fit differences of the individuals in a generation were expected to be small. Further details about GA implementation could be found in A As proposed by Based on the annual statistics, seven parameters in PDP had a sensitivity value higher than 0.1, and were identified as sensitive parameters. The maximum resuspension rate of particulate phosphorus from sediment ( Monthly statistics were carried out to investigate the sensitivity dynamics in a year ( During the 20 generations of parameter optimization using Genetic Algorithm, the model performance was significantly improved with the average RMSE value reducing from 0.033 The TP in the water area was well simulated with a Based on the optimal model ( Both water and P showed high temporal variation in a year. Flood drainage mostly occurred in Jul. and Aug. 2014 with a high frequency of heavy rain events ( The water sources of Polder Jian in 2014 were from precipitation and irrigation, with proportions of 89.6% and 10.4%, respectively. The water was exported out of the polder by infiltration, evaporation, culvert and flood drainage ( Although farmland fertilization and crop harvest data were not required for PDP, their data were collected from Polder Jian to analyze the annual P import and export of the polder system. The annual fertilization resulted in 5.67 The P sink due to irrigation was highly depended on precipitation during rice season. P imported by irrigation would be larger in dry year than that in wet year, because large amount of water from surrounding rivers would be imported for paddy irrigation particularly in dry year. However, the simulation period (2014) in this study was a wet year with a precipitation of 1377 Compared with the surveyed case studies for aquatic modeling by The main weakness of PDP was that some TP peaks were not well simulated ( The sensitivity analysis results (Section PLMP (previous version of PDP) was a conceptual model to describe P loss, and was not calibrated and validated based on measured data. Compared with PLMP, PDP (developed in this study) was improved by including adequate mechanisms to describe the key features of P dynamics for a polder system. The validation results of PDP implied that it was justified to describe the behaviors of P dynamics in Polder Jian. However, the failure to simulate TP peaks implied that uncertainties still existed in PDP. These uncertainties may be due to the weaknesses of process simplification and inadequate parameter optimization in PDP.   The P dynamics in polder system involved complex interaction of physical, chemical and biological processes. The model developed in this study (PDP) described the water and P transport of the polder systems in a more realistic way. It showed a little step toward better description of P dynamics in a polder system, and could be potentially used for mechanism study and water management by the intended users of water resource modelers and managers. Mechanism study. PDP described the underlying processes of water and P balances in a polder system. Different from the existing watershed models, water management practice (e.g., irrigation, culvert and flood drainage) was accounted for, and P dynamics (e.g., PP settling and P releasing from sediment) in water areas were coupled together. Such descriptions in an explicit manner had the potential to improve our understanding of P dynamics in polder systems. It could thus be used for water resource modelers to quantify underlying processes, test scientific hypotheses and analyze cause-effect relationships, such as the response of P dynamics to changes of environmental variables and human activity. Water management. PDP established a quantitative cause-effect relationship between a polder system and environmental conditions, and better estimated the P exchanges between a polder system and its surrounding rivers. It could thus be potentially applied to new water management questions, such as “what were the main factors controlling P export from polder systems?” and “how to minimize P export from polder systems using possible water management strategies?”. Although PDP was developed based on the data and experiences obtained from Polder Jian, China, the water management practice described in PDP was widely used in other lowland polder systems. Therefore, PDP could be potentially used/adapted to estimate the P export from other polder systems. Although PDP was promising for mechanism study and water management of a polder system, it is important to note that PDP was not a general phosphorus dynamic model for all polder systems. PDP included the water balance modules (Section To implement a case study using PDP, the required dataset was intensive and may be difficult to obtain in polder systems, because the research in polder scale was not as popular as that in the field scale. Moreover, some data from polder systems were more challenging to obtain than that from freely draining catchments. For example, it is difficult to collect the runoff water samples from polder systems during heavy rainfall events, because runoff water may be mixed with the water in the ditches and ponds. To alleviate the data requirement of PDP, several tips were discussed to make better use of the measured data from previous studies. P from wet deposition has been intensively observed worldwide ( The event-based data of P in agricultural runoff have been measured in lowland fields due to their large contributions to freshwater inputs ( The amount of irrigation water for paddy and dry lands was widely studies ( From the water management perspective, the strategies to control P export amount from polder systems, rather than the P dynamics, were more highly concerned. The annual P export intensity in Polder Jian (1.14 P fertilization constituted a high proportion (87.2%) in the P import terms of Polder Jian, and resulted in a net surplus of P (3.07 Among the seven most sensitive parameters in PDP, four parameters were in the phosphorus balance module ( Some successful strategies (e.g., sediment dredging and permanent fixation) from lake and wetland managements could be potentially used to improve the net P retention in water areas ( A process-based model (PDP) was developed to describe the unique processes (e.g., water management practice and P dynamics in water areas) of water and P dynamics in lowland polder systems. The model was calibrated and validated based on the dataset collected from Polder Jian, China. The sensitivity analysis results highlighted the necessity of describing the manual water-management practice and coupling P dynamics in the water areas for PDP. The goodness-of-fit assessment indicated that PDP was acceptable for simulating P dynamics in polder systems. The case study demonstrated the potential of PDP in better estimating the P sources from polder systems, forecasting the responses of P export to different water management options, and improving our understanding of P dynamics in polder systems for research purposes. These advancements have the potential to support better decision-making in water management practice. The project was financially supported by 