We would like to reply to the comments made by Paparazzo on our recent paper There have been many studies on the characterisation of the properties of iron oxide surfaces. The main purpose of writing the paper was to demonstrate the extent to which the selection of input parameters for curve fitting can affect the results of the quantitative analysis, and to use this analysis to develop more consistent, reproducible and quantitative methods of analysis of these data. We turn to the specific points raised by Paparazzo. Paparazzo is correct in pointing out that XPS 2p and 3p spectra are made up of contributions from a number of different phenomena, some of which he outlines in his discussion. It was never the intention to infer in our paper that the 3p spectrum was formed as the result of only one of these contributions, and it is unfortunate if our paper gave this impression. Fe 3p has the components of Fe 3p Paparazzo claims he improved his quantitative analysis when he included the Fe 2p satellite peaks. In our case, the Fe 3p peak has a satellite peak around 63.5 The use of a single asymmetric Voigt function in our analysis does not imply that the asymmetry arises from a single chemical species. We have acknowledged in the statements above that there is clearly more than one contribution to the overall signal or “peak”. The Voigt function is a widely used, convenient means of mathematically describing the shape of the peak. In relation to our use of O1s binding energy as the reference for the BE values for Fe The paper by Haber et al. [27] is quoted to support the argument that the BE values for the O 1s vary linearly with the oxidation state of the transition metal cations. The data used to support this assertion is drawn from a number of different sources, which are summarised in Table 2 of ref. [27]. The only O 1s BE data quoted for M We note that shifts in O 1s BE values have been observed by Paparazzo for ion-bombarded surfaces. Our view is that this is the result of the production of highly disordered oxygen deficient surfaces. This view is supported by the XPS and LEED observations by Lad and Henrich [28], who state that “the surface phase produced by ion bombardment … were quite different from that predicted by the bulk Fe–O phase diagram.” In other studies, McIntyre and Zetaruk [2] showed that the presence and gradual removal of OH from the materials results in an apparent shift on the O 1s spectrum. In our study, we used high purity metal followed by high temperature oxidation to prepare our samples, ensuring well-ordered crystalline structures, the absence of OH and by fracture in vacuum the absence of contamination. The iron oxides consist of close-packed arrangements of oxygen atoms resulting in tetrahedrally and octahedrally coordinated interstitial sites that are occupied by the metal cations [29]. To date there is no convincing evidence that the O 1s peak position is significantly affected by cation site occupancy, or the oxidation state of the ions occupying particular sites in these oxides. In the light of these arguments, we believe the methodology we have used in ref.