By means of the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), an examination was performed of the fracture surfaces (including their vertical sections) of both Fangshan gabbro and Fangshan marble specimens fractured at the loading rates 
                        
                           k
                           ̇
                        =10−2∼106
                      MPa m1/2 s−1. The results showed that one or more branching cracks near the fracture surfaces of dynamic rock specimens were clear and the cracks increased with increasing loading rates. However, such branching cracks were rarely seen near the static fracture surfaces. In addition, with the aid of the Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) testing system and a high-speed framing camera, the energy partitioning in the dynamic fracture process of a short rod (SR) rock specimen was analysed quantitatively. The total energy W
                     L absorbed by an SR specimen in the dynamic fracture process mainly consisted of the fracture and damage energy W
                     FD and the kinetic energy W
                     K of flying fragments. The energies W
                     L and W
                     K could be quantitatively calculated through stress wave measurement and high-speed photography in the SHPB testing system. Thus, the fracture and damage energy W
                     FD could be obtained. The results showed that: (1) the energy W
                     K increased with an increase in the impact speed of the striker bar or the loading rate; (2) the energy W
                     FD for dynamic rock fracture was markedly greater than that for static rock fracture, and the W
                     FD increased with an increase in the impact speed of the striker bar or the loading rate; and (3) the value W
                     L/W
                     B (W
                     B is the energy input into the loading system) in the case of dynamic fracture is much lower than that in the case of static fracture. In addition, the ratio decreases with an increase in the loading rate or the impact speed of the striker bar. This means that the energy utilisation decreases when the loading rate or the impact speed of the striker bar rises. Finally, some application problems are discussed in the paper.static fracture toughness in mode I; rock fracture at the loading rates dynamic fracture toughness in mode I; rock fracture at the loading rates time interval from the start of loading to the point when the critical state of a crack is achieved loading rate, impact speed of the striker bar in dynamic fracture kinetic energy of the striker bar or the energy input into the loading system energy of the incident stress wave energy of the reflected stress wave energy of the transmitted stress wave energy absorbed by a rock specimen fracture and damage energy of a rock specimen kinetic energy of flying fragments International Society for Rock Mechanics Scanning Electron Microscope Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar Short Rod specimen Substantial studies of the effects of loading rates or strain rates on rock strength have been performed for a few decades Moreover, in current percussive drilling, blasting, crushing, and grinding, the effective energy used in rock breakage is found to be quite small in comparison with the total input energy. For example, in rock cutting and drilling it is estimated that only 10% of the input energy is used to fracture rock, while most of the input energy is wasted as heat or other forms of energy Hakalehto The energy absorbed by a specimen in dynamic fragmentation consists, in fact, of several parts, such as the surface energy consumed in the formation of fragments and the kinetic energy of fragments. In addition, it has been found that there is much inner cracking or damage in the fragments, such as branching cracks near the fracture surface and micro-cracks within the fragments produced under dynamic loading Up to now, various experimental observations of dynamic rock fragmentation have indicated that most fragments fly at a certain speed, which increases with increasing loading rates This paper continues the research reported in reference The rocks in this paper are the same gabbro and marble as in Ref. All experiments were performed with a number of rock specimens fractured within a wide range of loading rates covering static and dynamic loading. The specimens with 30 mm diameter and 44 mm length are similar to an SR specimen suggested by ISRM In the condition of high loading rates, the fracture testing was done with an SHPB system and such fracture is called dynamic fracture. In the specimen the incident stress pulse ( In the middle of the input bar a pair of electric resistance strain gauges were fixed at diametrically opposite positions in order to cancel the effect of any bending waves. Similarly, two semiconductor strain gauges were fixed on the output bar at a distance of 500 mm from the specimen, so that the faint transmitted wave could be recorded. The outputs of the two pairs of strain gauges were amplified by a strain amplifier and fed to the inputs of a six-channel transient memory TCL, and then to a computer. The sampling frequency was 1/μs, and the recording time was 4096 μs in each channel. The detailed static and dynamic experimental methods are described in Ref. A high-speed framing camera was used to record the fracture process of some specimens in the dynamic fracture tests, and mainly to take a set of photos showing the motion of the specimen or its fragments. The framing speed was 350 times per second, i.e. the interval of two neighbouring photos was 2.857 ms. Some of the photos for two tests are shown in Altogether 27 tests were performed and evaluated for the energy analysis, 22 with gabbro and five with marble. In 12 of the tests high-speed photography was used. All of the specimens for micro-fracture examinations were those investigated in Ref. To examine the vertical section of a specimen, the fracture surface of one of its fragments must be protected from mechanical damage induced by later machining. Firstly, a small Bakelite plate was firmly bonded on the fracture surface of the fragment. Secondly, the fragment was cut along its axis through the notch tip. The section of the fragment was perpendicular to its fracture surface. Finally, the section was abraded flatly and polished (see The characteristics of the fracture surfaces were examined by means of an SEM S-250MK3. The observations showed the following: There were mainly two types of cracks: (i) micro-cracks such as intercrystalline cracks (IE, cracking on the boundaries of the neighbouring crystals) and intracrystalline cracks (IA, cracking within a crystal); (ii) macro-cracks. Here we call the macro-cracks secondary cracks (SC) (see An intercrystalline crack was the principal cracking form in the fracture surface of a statically fractured specimen, and the other damage forms, such as intracrystalline cracks, appeared to be fewer than the former. For example, on the fracture surfaces of specimen m09 and m11, fractured under static loading and shown in It appeared that intracrystalline cracking was the chief cracking form in the fracture surface of a specimen fractured by dynamic loading, even though there were some intercrystalline cracks simultaneously. See A few secondary cracks, like the one shown in It looked that the roughness of a fracture surface was strengthened with increasing loading rates (see In order to examine the mechanisms and characteristics of rock fracture further, it is necessary to investigate the characteristics of cracking on the cross-section of a specimen. In this investigation cracking inside rock specimens were examined by using SEM. The SEM photos of the sections of the fractured surfaces of some specimens are shown in The branching crack on the sections of the specimens is connected with the loading rates, i.e. branching cracks are rarely found on the sections of the specimens fractured by static loading. For example, almost no branching crack can be found on the sections of specimens C01 and C04. However, one or more branching cracks can be clearly seen on the sections of the specimens fractured under dynamic loading. Moreover, the higher the loading rate is, the clearer is the branching crack. When the loading rate was up to 10 The angle between a branching crack and the fractured surface, which is less than or equal to 90°, also increases with the loading rates (see No. 12, No. 23, No. 24, and No. 35 in According to the experimental system shown in The kinetic energy of the striker bar The energy of the incident stress wave The energy of the reflected stress wave The energy of the transmitted stress wave The values of the energies It is evident from The energy The energy Under the condition of the loading rates Because a specimen was always divided into two halves after fracture at the loading rates According to the data in From Because the framing speed of a high-speed camera is often limited, it is difficult to catch the instantaneous speed of the fragments at failure. So the flying speed of the fragments measured in the study is lower than the true speed at failure. Thus, the kinetic energy determined above is also smaller than the true kinetic energy. However, the higher the framing speed, the closer is the measured flying speed to the true flying speed. Therefore, it is necessary to employ a camera with a higher framing speed in the future than that we used in this study. According to The micro-experimental examination shows that the cracking damage (including branching cracks and micro-cracks) on the vertical section of a gabbro specimen is related to the loading rate at which the specimen was fractured. In other words, the higher the loading rate, the more serious is the cracking damage. This is one of the main reasons why the dynamic fracture toughness increases with the loading rates, because the energy supplied to a specimen fractured under dynamic loading is much more than the energy supplied to a specimen fractured under static loading. It can be inferred that extra energy (except for that used for producing the main crack surfaces of a specimen) in dynamic fracture is mainly used to produce more branching cracks (or a longer branching crack) and more micro-cracks.  Loading rates have a great impact on crack branching and micro-cracking in the vicinity of the fracture surfaces of a rock specimen. Therefore, rock excavation with lower loading rates is possibly a better choice from the viewpoint of stability and safety. In addition, an interesting phenomenon should be noted. In the specimens fractured at the loading rate According to the experimental results above, the ratio  Micro-examinations showed that (a) there were two main types of cracks: micro-cracks (such as intercrystalline cracks and intracrystalline cracks) and macro-cracks, i.e. secondary cracks on the fracture surfaces or branching cracks on the cross section of the gabbro and marble specimens; (b) the branching cracks near the fracture surfaces of dynamically loaded gabbro specimens increased with the loading rates. However, there were rarely such branching cracks near the static fracture surfaces. The energy W The value The kinetic energy The experimental study in this investigation was carried out at the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China. The analytical work was accomplished at Luleå University of Technology. The financial support from the National Committee of Science and Technology of China, the Ministry for the Metallurgical Industry of China, and SKB in Sweden was greatly appreciated. The authors would like to thank Dr Finn Ouchterlony for his valuable comments for part of the manuscript, and Mrs Yu Jie, Mrs Qiu Baoqin, Mr Wang Desheng and Mr Wang Chunkui for their help with the experiments.