Sludge treatment and disposal have become important environmental issues in China. Mechanical dewatering is widely used to reduce the amount of sludge to be disposed and relieve the rapid growth pressure of waste sludge. In comparison to traditional sludge dewatering processes, pressure electro-osmotic dewatering has many advantages on sludge dewatering efficiency, low conditioner dosage and concentrated cake are both beneficial to further recycling of waste sludge. In general, complex electrochemical effects (eg. electrochemical oxidation, ohmic heating and pH gradient effect) are accompanied by the pressure electro-osmotic dewatering process. These electrochemical effects will inevitably cause solubilization and/or degradation of key constituents of wastewater sludge - extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). In this study, the effects of voltage, pH and ionic strength on sludge electro-osmotic dewatering performance and electrochemical effects were investigated. The solubilization and degradation of EPS were analyzed by examining the variation of dissolved organic matter (DOM) in the filtrate, and the relationships between microstructural properties of sludge cake and DOM and electro-osmosis dewatering performance in electro-dewatering process was examined. It was found that electro-dewatering properties were improved by raising the operating voltage or decreasing the pH value, while dewatering rate initially increased at low ionic strength it decreases with increased ionic strength. In addition, the porous structure of cathodic cake was more plentiful than that at the anode. At the cathode, the EPS dissolution was mainly related to alkalization, while the oxidation and acidification were responsible for release of EPS at the anode. Meanwhile, electrophoresis effect was able to promote migration of EPS toward the anode. The average electro-osmotic dewatering rate at the anode (R2.>0.79, p < 0.02) and at the cathode (R2.>0.87, p < 0.03) strongly correlated with the volume of pore of sludge cake. There was no correlation between the total content of anodic DOM (R2<0.31, p>0.08) and electro-osmotic dewatering rate at the anode, however, the content of cathodic DOM (R2 > 0.62, p < 0.09) negatively correlated with average electro-osmosis dewatering rate of cathode. Since cathode is the main water-permeable side in sludge electro-dewatering, and the sticky biopolymers (proteins and humic subtances) could not be converted into small molecules, higher EPS release was associated with worse sludge filterability. As for the anode, the biopolymers were degraded into small molecules due to electrochemical oxidation, which greatly reduced the impact of DOM on dewatering effect. Therefore, the operating conditions (voltage, pH and ionic strength) caused changes in electrochemical effects, which played a crucial role in compartmentalization of sludge EPS dissolution and consequently sludge electro-dewatering behavior.Wastewater treatment processes produce large quantities of sludge commonly containing over 90% water ( Electrically assisted mechanical dewatering processes are especially suited to the dewatering of materials insufﬁciently treated by conventional methods for the reduction of water content ( The electro-osmotic dewatering mechanism is principally based on the interplay between the applied electric ﬁeld and the electric charge density of ions existing in the liquid close to the particle surface. Thus, under the effect of the electric ﬁeld, water displacement is ensured by the propagation of ionized mobile liquid on a solid liquid interface, which drives the neutral liquid in the central channel through viscous momentum transfer ( The mechanism of pressurized electro-osmotic dewatering process (PEOD) of activated and anaerobically digested sludge is very complex due to the high number of factors inﬂuencing the process behavior, such as sludge characteristics, type of ﬂocculants used, electrical treatment parameters, and regimes, electrodes shape and material, electrochemical reactions, etc. Moreover, the construction and characteristics of separation/dewatering equipment (diaphragm ﬁlter-press, belt ﬁlter-press), electrodes position, ﬁlter cloth type and dewatering parameters (pressure, duration) may also be inﬂuential ( Therefore, the major objectives of this study are to (1) explore the effects of different operating conditions (voltage, pH and ionic strength) on sludge electro-osmotic dewatering rate, electro-osmotic effect and solid content of sludge cake; (2) measure the morphological characteristics of sludge cake at two electrodes using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and BET. (3) investigate solubilization and degradation of EPS under electro-osmotic dewatering processes; (4) determine the relationship between morphological properties, dewatering performance and the dissolved organic matter (DOM) content in electro-osmotic dewatering processes. Activated sludge was taken from the Beijing North creek sewage treatment plant in China. The sewage treatment plant uses membrane bioreactor (MBR) with a handing capacity of 200,000 m Experimental setup for mechanical dewatering (MD) or pressurized electro-osmotic dewatering is presented in Initially, 200 mL of activated sludge was poured into the cylindrical laboratory ﬁlter-press cell, and a beaker was placed on each of the two precision balances to collect filtrate. The data were collected by computer simultaneously. In addition, the current variation and temperature were monitored during electro-dewatering process. Sludge samples were reacted with NaCl for 5 min by using magnetic stirrer. The pH of sludge was adjusted by using H The sludge cakes formed at the two electrodes were cut from both sides of the cake with a thin blade, and sludge samples were prepared through low temperature drying at 50 °C for 24 h followed by freezing. After samples were dried through freezing, FE-SEM and BET analyses with a HITACHI SU8020 FE-SEM and an ASAP2020HD88, respectively. In this test, the sludge was filtered at each electrode through a 0.45 μm filter and the filtrates wee collected in glass beakers for DOM analysis. The DOM content was indicated by Total Organic Carbon (TOC) analyzer (Shimadzu, Japan). Fluorescence EEMs were measured on a Varian Eclipse ﬂuorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi F7000, Japan) in scan mode. EEM spectra were gathered with scanning emission Em spectra from 220 to 550 nm at 5 nm increments by varying the excitation Ex wavelength from 200 to 400 nm at 5 nm increments. The spectra were recorded at a scan rate of 12000 nm/min, using excitation and emission slit bandwidths of 5 nm. The voltage of the photomultiplier tube PMT was set to 500 V for low level light detection ( Molecular weight (MW) was determined by a Waters liquid chromatography system that consisted of a Waters 2487 Dual λ Absorbance Detector, Waters 1525 pump system. A Shodex KW 802.5 gel chromatography column (Shoko, Japan) was used for organic materials separation. The mobile phase, namely Milli Q water buffered with 5 mM phosphate to pH 6.8, and 0.01 M NaCl, was filtered through a 0.22 μm membrane, and then degassed for 30 min by means of ultra-sonication before use. A 600 μL sample was injected at a flow rate of 0.8 mL min The pH was measured by a pH meter (pHS-3C, Shanghai, China). Zeta potential measurements were performed on a Zetasizer (Zetasizer, 2000; Malvern, UK). Other sludge parameters, including Total suspended solids (TSS), volatile suspended solids (VSS), were analyzed following APHA-AWWA-WEF (1998).   zeta potential, According to equation   It was noted that there was strong correlation between electro-osmotic effect (R  It was evident that the ohmic heating effect can be enhanced with an increased electric resistance. According to equations According to the report of Novak and Huang (1988), the clogging or blinding of pores in the ﬁlter cake was primarily responsible for the deterioration in ﬁltration rather than the blinding of the ﬁltering media. The sludge cakes at both electrodes were cut from both sides of the sludge cake with a thin blade, and the sludge samples were processed with freeze-drying treatment. It was observed from  Many studies have suggested that EPS is the major factor affecting sludge dewatering behavior (    In the electro-osmotic dewatering process, the DOM concentration presented different regional distribution characteristics at varying operating parameters. It influenced the content and composition of DOM through affecting the effects of electrochemical and electro-osmotic effects. At the cathode, the EPS dissolution was mainly related to alkalization, which caused dissolution of EPS due to the de-protonation of anionic functional groups. As for the anode, the oxidation and acidification were responsible for the release of EPS, and the degradation of EPS released might happen at the same time, and the alkalization process had a more important role in EPS dissolution. On the other hand, electrophoresis effect also could promote EPS migrated to anode. Fluorescence excitation-emission matrix (EEM) spectroscopy is a highly sensitive and selective tool and had been extensively utilized to characterize natural organic matter (NOM), especially from microbial activity ( At different pH conditions, the fluorescent intensities of Peak A, Peak B and Peak C both increased as pH raised, the intensities of Peak A, Peak B and Peak C of anodic DOM were 209.8, 201.3, 112.4 when pH was 4, and they were increased to 547.1, 379, 132.2 and 1188, 1894, 159.6 when pH increased to 7 and 10, the intensities of protein and humic acid in anodic DOM were decreased under acidic condition. According to Zhang et al. report, the anodic oxidation was enhanced under acid condition ( The fluorescent intensities of Peak A, Peak B and Peak C of anodic DOM both decreased with increasing ionic strength, the fluorescent intensities of Peak A, Peak B and Peak C decreased from 547.1, 379, 132.2 to 182.2, 153.5, 65.69 with ionic strength increased from 0.13 g/L to 4.29 g/L. The anodic oxidation effect was significantly enhanced with increased ionic strength, and the protein and humic acid substances were both significantly degraded. However, at high NaCl concentration, the protein and humic substances from EPS dissolution increased and accumulated near the cathode side, which caused blockage of filter media and cake structure. For the interpretation of size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) chromatograms three main molar mass fractions can be distinguished: a macromolecular weight fraction (>4000Da)-mainly consisting of carbohydrates and proteins, a mid-molecular weight fraction (1000–4000Da)-consisting of humic substances and peptides, a low molecular weight fraction (<1000Da) - consisting of building blocks and organic acids (  It is well known that the harmful pollutants such as organic contaminants and heavy metals in wastewater were always removed through interaction with EPS, e.g., through the hydrophobic effect, electrostatic effect and complexation adsorption, etc. As mentioned above, EPS solubilization and degradation showed obvious regionalization features in electro-dewatering cell, which would inevitably cause the release of organic contaminants and heavy metals. Therefore, further investigations are required to understand the migration and transformation of harmful pollutants in different regions of electro-dewatering cell. In this study, the effects of voltage, pH and ionic strength on sludge electro-osmotic dewatering rate and electro-osmotic effect were evaluated, and the relationship between microstructural properties of sludge cake and DOM and electro-osmotic dewatering rate was established in wastewater sludge electro-dewatering process. The operating conditions (voltage, pH and ionic strength) caused changes in electrochemical effects, which played a crucial role in compartmentalization of sludge EPS dissolution and consequently sludge electro-dewatering behavior. The average electro-osmotic dewatering rate at the cathode correlated well with electro-osmotic effect. Both of them were enhanced with increased operating voltage or decreased sludge pH while they improved initial and then deteriorated with an increased ionic strength. In the electro-osmotic dewatering process, because the electrophoresis effect promoted sludge flocs migration toward anode, the porous structure of cathodic cake was more plentiful than that at anode. The stronger the electro-osmotic effect, the greater porous structure difference of sludge cake between both electrodes. In the electro-osmotic dewatering process, the EPS dissolution was mainly related to alkalization at the cathode, while the oxidation and acidification were responsible for release of EPS at the anode, and the degradation of EPS release might happen at the same time. The average electro-osmotic dewatering rate at the anode (R This study was ﬁnancially supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at