Sulphuric acid leaching of spent hydrodesulphurization catalyst was carried out to investigate the extraction behavior of molybdenum, cobalt and aluminum. Composition of the spent catalyst used was: 2.24% Co, 9.93% Mo, 24.09% Al and 9.12% S. Major mineral phases were CoS, CoO, MoO, MoS, Al2O3 and elemental S. Extraction of molybdenum, cobalt and aluminum by direct leaching with only H2SO4 was very low (21.3%, 56.11% and 8.2%) and this was due to the dissolution of oxide minerals. It was required to add oxidants to dissolve elemental sulphur and sulphide minerals. Various oxidants were examined to improve metal extraction. Based on the extraction efficiency, they could be ordered as; H2O2
                     >HNO3
                     >NaClO3
                     >FeCl3
                     >NaOCl. The characterization of different samples (original and residue) was examined by XRD to investigate the dissolution behavior of the spent catalyst. The particle size of ground spent hydrodesulphurization catalyst appeared to be a critical factor on enhancing the metal extraction efficiency. Under optimum leaching conditions (pulp density 1% (w/v), [H2SO4] 0.5M, [H2O2] five times stoichiometric, particle size 51–70μm, temperature 50°C and time 2h), the extraction of molybdenum, cobalt and aluminum were 99.87%, 96.25% and 11.03% respectively.Extensive exploitation of primary sources of metal and its depletion leads to the processing of secondary sources to recover the valuable metals. The secondary sources basically include the waste materials and byproducts. Among all secondary resources, spent catalyst is the most vital one containing valuable metals like Mo, V, Ni, Co, Al, etc. ( Molybdenum and cobalt are regarded as one of the vital strategic commodities and have the major demands for their application in alloy steel, manufacture of armor, aircraft parts, industrial motors, filament and various grades of pigments ( In addition, few studies are reported relating to the leaching of metal from Ni/Co–Mo/Al Reagents such as H This work aims at describing a new recovery process based on simultaneous leaching of molybdenum and cobalt from CoMo/Al Waste spent petroleum catalyst (CoMo/Al Leaching experiments were conducted using a 1000 X-ray analysis of the original sample was carried out using a powder diffractometer, Rigaku (model RTP 300 RC, France). The X-ray diffraction patterns of the original sample are shown in Scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectrometer (SEMEDX) was performed in order to investigate the mineralogical species present in the spent catalyst. As shown in All the aqueous samples that resulted during leaching study of the spent catalyst were analyzed by ICP-AES (JOBIN-YVON JY 38). The original spent catalyst was subjected to complete digestion with concentrated HF followed by dilution and analysis. The metal ion concentration of the above digested solution was measured by ICP-AES. The C and S contents of the spent catalyst was determined by LECO SD-423 Analyzer following standard procedure. The elemental compositions of the original spent catalyst are listed in The leaching behavior of spent catalyst as a function of time was investigated using two different sizes of spent catalysts such as nonground (original) and ground form (average particle size is at about 150 The leaching behavior of both metals (Co and Mo) followed dual kinetics i.e., initially fast then a slow period for both cases and the results are shown in The effect of stirring speed on leaching of Mo and Co was examined in the range of 200 to 800 The experiments were carried out by varying the concentration of sulphuric acid from 0.5 The kinetic of the leaching was very fast at the initial progress of the reaction (within 10 In order to obtain an effective recovery of the metal such as cobalt and molybdenum from the spent catalyst the influence of temperature in the range of 50 to 80 In a former study it was concluded that the overall recovery of molybdenum and cobalt was low. This leads to examination of the effect of different oxidants such as H Of these oxidants, H From the above results, it is evident that the combination of H The effect of duration of leaching was studied up to 2 The reason for the quick attainment of extraction equilibrium for both metals (Mo and Co) is the same as explained in the previous section The leaching efficiency of the spent catalyst was examined by varying the temperature in the range of 50 to 80 The study on the dissolution of spent catalyst was carried out by varying the different particle sizes (μm) i.e. 50–71, 71–100, 101–150 and 150–300 at 50 The process of extracting both molybdenum and cobalt from spent hydrodesulphurization catalyst was developed. Direct leaching of spent catalyst with H This work was supported by the One of the co-author, P.K. Parhi is grateful to