The recovery of ferrochrome (FeCr) alloy from fine (<600μm) ferrochrome slag typically involves the use of gravity concentration, amongst other physical separation techniques. This study demonstrates the value of utilising mineralogical methods both to determine alloy composition and liberation and to assist in setting up partition surface models for a shaking table. A Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) was used to measure size, density, shape and liberation data of each alloy and mineral in a set of shaking table products. The amount of detailed data gathered by the MLA was sufficient to generate particle tracking analysis (PTA) data in order to simulate the recovery of alloy and mineral phases. Two flowsheet configurations were evaluated to ascertain the possibility of producing a high grade product (>97.5% metal content) comparing shaking table and Reflux Classifier performance. The results of this study show that an approach of using particle characterisation by MLA, coupled with surface partition modelling, may be a useful technique to model gravity separation of fine particles, especially where both valuable and gangue phases contain common elements in their composition.In many instances chemical assays per size fraction together with mass flowrate data may be sufficient to model mineral deportment around a minerals processing flowsheet. However, in this instance of evaluating the recovery of variable composition metallics from FeCr slag, both the alloy phases and slag phases present contain common elements. This implies that assays alone are insufficient to distinguish alloy phases either from each other or from the gangue (slag) phases present. This paper demonstrates the use of various forms of mineralogical characterisation data to model individual physical separation processes followed by simulation of an integrated flowsheet. Chromite (Fe, Mg) (Cr, Al, Fe) The slag sample used for this study is typical of the South African ferrochrome industry, which treats very high proportions of agglomerated fine chromite ores by conventional AC furnace smelting ( alloy lost as entrained droplets in the slag partially converted chromite lost to the slag For this paper the discussion will be focussed on only the alloy phases, noting that recovery of PAC may also be a value driver. A saleable target product containing >97.5% metal content was required as one part of the over-arching objective of maximising the economic Cr unit recovery from all minerals and phases remaining in the FeCr slag sample. The scope of work for this study is depicted in The bulk sample collected was 100% finer than 20 The first of three phases of mineralogical characterisation was done to identify the phases/minerals present and to allocate chemical compositions and relative densities to each. A representative sub-sample of the <2 Groupings of the various alloy phases present were defined according to EMPA average compositional data, MLA semi-quantitative analysis and compositions calculated based on chemical assay of ferrochrome slag products and data on the expected Cr/Fe ratio. For each sample, EMPA was conducted on ∼50 grains of each phase respectively. Note that counting times were varied according to each elemental detection limit as given in Mineral phases identified by EMPA and their standard deviations, is given in Four distinct ferrochrome phases were identified by EMPA and cluster analysis according to their Cr:Fe ratios and were labelled alloy 1 to alloy 4 as shown in The density of each mineral was based on the primary mineral type and the establishment of a mineral database file while the density of each alloy was estimated from EMPA composition and supported by the MLA database. The second phase of mineralogical characterisation focussed on determining the coarsest appropriate liberation size for milling prior to physical upgrading Two representative polished section mounts were prepared for each size fraction, carbon-coated and quantitatively analysed using the MLA. This instrument is a scanning electron microscope (SEM) that combines backscattered electron (BSE) images with X-ray analysis.   The final choice of grind size was therefore driven by secondary considerations, namely, maximum barren slag liberation coupled with minimisation of excessive <20 After dry milling in a batch ball mill, a 4 A total of nine product streams consisting of four concentrates, two middlings, two tailings streams and slimes were collected for evaluation. These products were individually dried, weighed and prepared for particle tracking analysis (PTA). During this investigation 10 Particle characterisation data pertaining to mineral types/compositions, particle size, density, area of particle, shape factor, circularity, and perimeter of each particle, were ascertained during offline processing ( As a default, equivalent circle diameter (ECD) was used to represent the size of each particle. The ECD was calculated as the diameter of a circle with an equivalent cross-sectional area to that of the particle. No stereological correction was made to allow for 2-dimensional to 3-dimentional sizing in accordance with the findings of The MLA data for each shaking table product were mathematically sorted into 14 specific density classes ranging from 2.60 to 7.40 and into 8 size classes ranging from 850    It is necessary before it is employed for concentration of an ore. The  for CC for 1.75 for 1.50 for 1.25 for CC In the present example using  The overall shaking table performance, using mineralogical data and mass distributions, is presented in The data in  The performance of the shaking table was modelled using a modified form of the Weibull model ( Two flowsheet configurations (   The integration of detailed mineralogical data with physical separation modelling was demonstrated for the gravity recovery of fine FeCr alloy from slag. Although four alloy phases were identified in the sample by EMPA, only one had a Cr:Fe ratio higher than that of typical UG2 chromite, while the remaining three types were highly enriched in Fe content. The partition surfaces depicting the performance of a shaking table were derived for each of 8 mass pulls to product using a modified form of the Weibull model. Through the use of particle tracking analysis, the recovery by size of each alloy phase present could be modelled. Using a library of such models, a conceptual flowsheet for the production of saleable grade of FeCr metal was simulated – in this case showing preferential recovery of high-Cr alloy. The results of this study have shown that an approach of using particle characterisation by MLA, coupled with surface partition modelling, may be a useful technique to model gravity separation of fine particles, especially where both valuable and gangue phases contain common elements in their composition.