This paper investigates the adsorption of copper on process dust from the production of olivine aggregates as a function of pH and the concentration of copper in solution. The olivine process dust, containing more than 90% forsterite, was retrieved from the dust removal system at A/S Olivin’s processing plant at Åheim in western Norway. Following characterisation of the material, batch adsorption experiments were conducted at 25 °C at an ionic strength of 0.05 M using a fixed adsorbent dose of 10 g/l and initial copper concentrations ([Cu]i) ranging from 20 to 600 μM (i.e. 1.27–38.1 mg/l). The final pH in solution (pHf) was varied from approximately 4 to 6. The obtained results show that the olivine process dust is capable of greatly reducing the concentration of copper in solution, even when exposed to relatively high initial copper concentrations. A linear multivariable regression model (LMVR model) was fitted to the logarithmically transformed experimental data. The good fit of the LMVR makes it possible to estimate retention as a function of pHf and the final copper concentration ([Cu]f), or, alternatively, [Cu]f as a function of pHf and [Cu]i. From an environmental engineering point of view, the latter would often be of greater interest since the success criteria usually are related to the resulting concentrations in solution.A wide variety of waste materials, comprising both tailings and process dusts, are produced daily in vast quantities from mineral processing plants throughout the world. Although their chemical and mineralogical composition can be very diversified, the bulk of these waste products consists predominantly of silicate minerals. As demonstrated by a number of investigators ( By utilising the heavy metal retaining capacity of silicate tailings and process dusts, low-cost in situ containment and treatment applications could be designed. These solutions could offer both economical and environmental advantages. One possible application is described by This paper investigates the adsorption of copper on process dust from the production of olivine aggregates as a function of both pH and copper concentration. The adsorbent has previously been described by When investigating adsorption to a given surface area (i.e. a given adsorbent dose), the initial metal concentration and the pH are the master variables. Thus, preliminary adsorption experiments are usually conducted by varying the pH and the initial metal concentration, while the chemical composition of the aqueous phase, the temperature and the ionic strength are kept at a constant level. The data from such experiments are usually presented in an ‘amount adsorbed versus pH’ format or in the ‘fraction adsorbed versus pH’ format recommended by The simple model outlined in the previous paragraph is not based on a theoretical mechanistic foundation, and is therefore not designed to provide mechanistic interpretations. It does, however, provide a simple way of presenting and visualising large data sets, as well as facilitating extrapolation of the original data and the use of a wider range of statistical tools. Prior to use, all glassware, bottles and containers were thoroughly cleaned with detergent before being left to soak in 10% nitric acid (HNO All pH measurements were performed using a Meterohm 744 pH meter with a combined electrode. The instrument was calibrated prior to each series of measurements using suitable Meterohm buffer solutions. All the reagents used in this study were of pro analysis quality. Only deionised water was used for dilution and dissolution. 0.01 M solutions of divalent copper ions (Cu A 1 g/l copper stock solution for the atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) analysis was made by using a Merck Titrisol® standard solution (1.000±0.002 g Cu as CuCl This study investigates the performance and characteristics of a fine-grained mineral material originating from the production of olivine aggregates. The material was supplied by the A/S Olivin production plant at Åheim in western Norway. A/S Olivin produces more than 2.5 million metric tonnes of olivine material each year, which is used primarily in the metallurgical industry. The material used in this study consists of dust retrieved from the dust removal system and is referred to as olivine process dust. After samples of the process dust had been retrieved, the material was given no additional treatment prior to its use in the adsorption experiments. The approximate mineral phase composition of the olivine process dust is given in The size distribution of the process dust were obtained from laser diffraction analysis using a Coulter LS 230 particle size analyser, whereas specific surface area was determined using the N Batch adsorption experiments were performed using a number of 100 ml polyethylene bottles by first equilibrating 1.00 g of adsorbent with a defined volume of a solution containing deionised water, a chosen amount of 0.5 M nitric acid and the amount of 1 M sodium nitrate required to keep the ionic strength in the final solution fixed at 0.05 M. The volume of the solution was adjusted so that the subsequent addition of the copper solution would yield a total volume of 100 ml. In order to obtain data from the desired pH interval the amount of acid added differed in each bottle. When fixing the ionic strength, the contributions from the conjugate base of the acid added and the ions leached from the adsorbent were both accounted for according to the procedure given by Subsequent to their preparation, the suspensions were conditioned for 24 h by orbital agitation at 25±0.1 °C, using a thermostatic agitator. After the initial conditioning, defined volumes (0.200–6.00 ml) of 0.01 M copper solution were added to the bottles to obtain initial copper concentrations in the range of 20–600 μM (i.e. 1.27–38.1 mg/l). Concentrations of this magnitude are frequently found in strongly copper contaminated effluents such as acid mine drainage ( Each suspension was eventually sampled by extracting and filtering a volume of 10 ml using a syringe and a 0.45 μm syringe filter. At the same time, the final pH of the suspensions was measured. The filtrates were collected in glass vials and acidified using 20 μl of 65% nitric acid. Finally, the filtrates were analysed using AAS and a GBC Avanta The amount of copper retained by the olivine process dust is calculated as the difference between the initial amount of copper added and the amount of copper remaining in solution at the end of the 24 h reaction period. The degree of copper retention, represented by Provided that the final pH at the end of the 24 h reaction period, hereby referred to as pH To assist in the interpretation of the obtained results a logarithmic transformation of the data set was performed. This was done by first defining the distribution coefficient In order to facilitate prediction and the construction of classical isotherms showing retention versus the final concentration of copper, a LMVR model was fitted to the experimental data. The LMVR model was based on the distribution coefficient defined in Eq. Prior to the employment of the LMVR model, only data points residing within the pH As is apparent from both When studying The isotherms presented in In this study copper retention was studied at a fixed adsorbent dose of 10 g/l. Under otherwise similar conditions, one would expect a higher adsorbent dose to yield a higher absolute amount of copper retained. When employing the investigated mineral processing dusts in order to solve a given problem (i.e. a contaminated solution with a given chemical composition), isotherms like the ones of The adsorption of copper on olivine process dust was investigated as a function of the final pH (pH The olivine process dust is capable of retaining significant amounts of copper, even when exposed to relatively high initial copper concentrations. As expected for cation adsorption, the degree of retention exhibits a strong positive correlation with the solution pH. The experimental data points obtained from the upper part of the investigated pH interval are located approximately 1 pH unit to the left of the theoretical solubility isotherm of copper hydroxide, thereby suggesting adsorption as the predominant mechanism of retention. At an initial copper concentration of 100 μM, 50% retention occurs just below pH 5. Under the prevailing experimental conditions, the material is capable of removing far more copper from solution than can be achieved by precipitation alone. Prior to the regression analysis, the original data set was limited to 4⩽pH Employing LMVR resulted in a good fit, especially in the central part of the investigated pH interval. The employed LMVR model is equivalent to the well-known Freundlich isotherm. The good fit of the LMVR model to the logarithmically transformed experimental data makes it possible to estimate retention as a function of pH This work was undertaken as part of R.A. Kleiv’s Ph.D. research at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) under the supervision of Professor K.L. Sandvik. The authors would like to thank A/S Olivin and the Norwegian Research Council for the funding. The authors would also like to thank Associate Professor M. Thornhill at NTNU for checking the manuscript for grammatical errors.