This chapter will examine how transport interacts with children’s physical wellbeing. The discussion is organized by intrinsic, access, and extrinsic influences. Intrinsic influences primarily focus on gains from active travel, though other impacts are evident. Access influences discuss how transport can facilitate children reaching locations and the tension between the high mobility of cars to reach disparate locations, and local destinations that children can reach independently on their own time. Literature on extrinsic influences primarily focus on collisions, emissions, and noise. However, other extrinsic impacts include the barrier effect which prevents children from reaching a destination, and the effect of occupying a space that could otherwise be used for physical activity such as local streets. Studies from sociology and urbanism have researched the idea of streets as playgrounds, but the notion is less well studied in transport. Finally, although grouped together as active travel, the chapter distinguishes differences between walking and cycling with their impacts on physical well-being.Introduction Transport and physical activity Transport and indicators of physical fitness Transport and access to physical activity Externalities of transport on children’s physical health Transport processes, mobility and physical health implications Conclusion References Further reading The definition of health has evolved over the past century to include physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or illness ( The Over the past two decades, there has been a lot of research investigating the relationship between children’s transportation behavior and physical activity, focusing particularly on transportation to and from school. Several systematic reviews have summarized the literature on this topic ( Thankfully, this current evidence suggests that children engaging in active transportation to/from school do not do this at the expense of other sources physical activity. In one of the first studies examining the relationship between active transport and objectively measured physical activity, Fewer studies have examined the relationship between active transportation and indicators of physical fitness such as cardiovascular fitness, muscle strength and endurance, and flexibility. Cardiovascular fitness is the component of fitness that has been examined most frequently. Irrespective of physical activity level, children who have better cardiovascular fitness have a reduced risk of developing cardiovascular disease risk factors (e.g., high blood glucose, blood pressure, and cholesterol) and they tend to have better mental health and academic performance ( Previous reviews have noted that the relationship between active transport and cardiovascular fitness depends on the actual mode of active transport ( In a different study, In an 8-week intervention by Similarly, in an analysis of nationally representative data from the Canadian Health Measures Survey, In contrast to the abovementioned findings relating to cycling, studies have generally found no associations between walking to/from school and cardiovascular fitness. In the longitudinal studies mentioned above, no differences in indicators of cardiovascular health were observed between children who walked to/from school and those who traveled by car or bus ( Much has been written about the physical activity-related benefits of active transport (e.g., The importance of access (i.e., availability of activities to participate) and accessibility (i.e., the ease of accessing locations and activities) are not explicitly discussed in current literature focused on children’s transport and physical activity. However, results from current literature implies their significance. For example, distance to school (an important measure of accessibility) has been consistently reported as the most significant barrier to active transport to school and related physical activity among children ( The license to explore neighborhood locations without adult supervision, also known as children’s independent mobility (CIM), also creates opportunities for physical activity by offering greater access to places and activities where physical activity can occur. Greater independent mobility allows children to engage in active transport and outdoor play more frequently and longer than when they are accompanied by adult caregivers ( Similarly, license to participate in outdoor free play creates opportunities for physical activity, with the intensity depending on the type of play engagement. Current research has confirmed a statistical association between longer periods of outdoor play and higher physical activity levels ( Lastly, recreational programs and facilities are often designed to facilitate children’s physical activity. Many of these programs are focused on organized sports requiring vigorous physical activity engagement and have financial costs associated to them such a registration and equipment that could limit their access to marginalized populations. Existing literature has consistently reported an association between accessibility to these recreational programs and facilities and physical activity among children ( Traveling by foot or bicycle has limited external impacts on others, but the use of motorized vehicles has numerous significant negative impacts. Transport, and more specifically motorized road transport, is a primary source of death for children and youth worldwide ( Along with use, speed is a crucial component of the extrinsic impact of transport on a child’s wellbeing. As will be discussed in The risk (or perceived risk) of traffic-related injuries and death imposes other impacts on children’s physical wellbeing by preventing them from using or crossing a street. One such impact is commonly known as the “barrier effect” whereby parents restrict CIM because of traffic. This restriction likely reduces the child’s overall physical activity (e.g., The design of streets may also affect children’s physical activity. If the roadway is designed for rapid vehicle movement with intersections/stops placed at long distances, large blocks may limit the permeability of the area, reducing accessibility for active modes of transport, especially for children. Such planning approaches also reduce the number of route options for traveling between point A and point B, which has been found to reduce outdoor play by children ( In addition to potential health risks relating to injuries and fatalities, fuel combustion motors emit harmful byproducts that are associated with a number of health issues in children ( While health impacts relating to traffic noise remain somewhat less discussed, in a review of epidemiological studies, A closer look into how, when and where modern-day children and youth are spending time every day reveals that they are largely staying (or are kept) closer to homes, have limited mobility unless accompanied by adult caregivers, and some are getting a large proportion of their physical activity from organized sports or other recreational activities ( The current role of transport in enabling children’s mobility and physical activity participation behavior can be understood better by contextualizing these physical activity outcomes within several social, cultural and institutional processes around children’s mobility and caregiving. Historically, streets were common places where children of all ages would play during their leisure time ( These institutional changes were accompanied by a cultural shift that perceived street or free outdoor play as leading to “inappropriate behavior” ( The past five-or-so decades can also be characterized as a period when increased fear around children’s traffic safety has significantly affected children’s independent mobility outside of their homes. The perception of danger due to traffic has been institutionalized since the 1970s. In their seminal work, These social and institutional processes have had a significant impact on children’s physical health, and they have also led to geographical and social inequality with regard to access to locations for physical activity. For example, disaggregated land use planning particularly in the newer suburban locations, school siting requirements, and a more recent focus on large “magnet schools” instead of smaller neighborhood schools have increased school travel distance for many children ( More broadly, a significant and systematic decline in children’s ‘home range’, including the variety of outdoor places that they visit and the range of activities that they participate when unaccompanied by adult caregivers, has been reported in current literature ( The socio-economic inequalities in accessibility to recreational facilities have also been documented. Neighborhoods with higher socio-economic status (SES) had better accessibility to physical activity facilities, in addition to parks and youth organizations, when compared to lower SES neighborhoods ( This chapter discussed how transport impacts children’s physical wellbeing through intrinsic means (i.e., active transport), access to destinations that facilitate physical activity, and through external influences such as collisions, air quality, noise, and barrier effects. With regard to children’s active transport, the current literature has largely focused on school journeys, and the evidence consistently indicates that those children who walk or cycle to/from school are more physically active than those who do not. While cycling is likely to provide more immediate benefits such as improved cardiovascular fitness, regular walking is important for the formation of long-term healthy habits. Research has suggested that for adults, moderate-intensity physical activity such as walking and cycling may provide more immediate physical health benefits. In addition, and as discussed in the following chapters, walking has other psychological and social wellbeing-related advantages. Unfortunately, in many modern western societies, private automobiles have become the most accepted means of transport for children. While automobiles are widely perceived as a faster, safer and more mobility efficient mode of transport, these perceptions are not necessarily always true. While cars do enable access to far-away schools and open up opportunities to participate in a wider diversity of recreational activities including physical activity-related facilities, a closer examination begins to identify multiple negative physical wellbeing-related impacts of this dominant culture of automobility. In-vehicle deaths are more common, and active modes are threatened by vehicles, making them the source of safety problems which increases with greater speeds. Further, over-dependence on automobiles for everyday mobility may reduce opportunities for active transport, independent mobility and free play. An increased number of cars is also associated to problems of air quality (linked to asthma among others), noise (stress, problems of concentration), and prevents the use of streets as public space for play and CIM. In addition, as children’s play has largely been replaced by more organized recreational activities, physical wellbeing of those children with limited access to automobiles and with lower financial capacity are disproportionately affected. The findings from this chapter, then, reemphasize the importance of urban planning approaches and public health/grass-roots level interventions aimed at enabling active transport among children. But more broadly, our observations call for a more balanced approach to community planning and policy-making where children’s health and wellbeing are not compromised to enable faster mobility.