In-pit crushing and conveying (IPCC) and ore sorting are two developing technologies that, in addition to providing likely economic benefits, also have the potential to reduce the greenhouse gas footprint of mining and mineral processing operations. A life cycle assessment study was carried out to provide estimates of the likely greenhouse gas reductions from the implementation of IPCC and ore sorting technologies in a hypothetical copper mining and mineral processing operation. Based on the assumed configurations and operating characteristics of the two systems, the results indicated that IPCC had 4% less (i.e. 3kgCO2e/t ore or 0.16kgCO2e/t ore.km) greenhouse gas emissions than truck haulage for the base case configuration. Using electricity generated from natural gas rather than black coal increased the greenhouse gas advantage of IPCC over truck haulage from 4% to about 22% (i.e. 14kgCO2e/t ore or 0.74kgCO2e/t ore.km). However, transport distance and annual plant feedrate affect the magnitude of these greenhouse gas reductions.
                  A potential reduction of about 13kgCO2e/t ore in greenhouse gas emissions was estimated from the use of ore sorting technology based on black coal generated electricity, while with natural gas-based electricity the reduction was only 8kgCO2e/t ore. The mass rejection rate of the ore sorting device was the main operational variable affecting the magnitude of this reduction, although it is also affected by the specific comminution and concentration energy requirements of the ore. While the results indicate that ore sorting offers nearly four times the potential reduction in greenhouse gas emissions than IPCC did at the same annual plant feedrate for the base case configuration with black coal-based electricity, the situation was reversed with natural gas-based electricity, with IPCC offering nearly double the potential reduction in greenhouse gas emissions than ore sorting. However, it should be appreciated that due to the limited amount of publicly available data on these technologies at the present time, the results of this study should be viewed as first estimates only.The metal production sector, like many other industrial sectors, is under increasing pressure to reduce the greenhouse gas footprint of its supply chain operations as a result of global concerns about climate change. Previous results ( The results in As the world’s high grade ore deposits become progressively depleted, and larger lower grade deposits are mined to meet demand, technological innovation will be required to achieve sustainable mining and mineral processing of these deposits. IPCC and ore sorting are two technologies that offer potential to assist mining companies in their endeavours to progress towards these sustainability goals by reducing downstream energy consumption (and thereby costs), improving mineral recovery and hence productivity, and reducing environmental impacts. These technologies are described in more detail below. Mining activity can be either open-cut or underground, depending on the orebody. In the case of open-cut mining, this typically involves removal of overburden to expose the orebody and separate unwanted earth material from the mineral ore. Heavy machinery such as face shovels (e.g. diesel operated hydraulic shovels and loaders), dozers for moving loose material to the shovel bucket, haul trucks, and graders for maintaining haul roads are required to move bulk material from the mine pit to the processing plant where it typically undergoes size reduction and further beneficiation. Shovels and haul trucks usually work in combination and are thus generally considered a conventional truck and shovel mining system. Crushers are used for primary and further size reduction before the grinding stage to liberate minerals from the ore. The concentration stage involves froth flotation to beneficiate the ore and produce a concentrate suitable for downstream metal extraction, e.g. smelting. Currently, most open-cut mines in Australia use diesel operated, track-mounted face shovels and a number of haul trucks in combination for bulk material movement. Typically, a face shovel has two engines, each with a 2.8 Although the above shovel/haul truck combination is common, there has recently been an increasing trend to adopt newer material extraction and movement technologies. In-pit crushing and conveying (IPCC) is one such technology, which is gathering momentum in open-pit mining as an alternative to the shovel/haul truck system. IPCC is the use of fully mobile, semi-mobile or fixed in-pit primary crushers in combination with conveyors and spreaders (for ore and waste material) or stackers (for ore) to move material from an open-pit mine ( The driving forces for adoption of IPCC include the increase in capital cost of mining assets and machinery, fuel, lubricants, tyres, high labour costs and labour shortages in some cases. Although the initial capital investment of a conventional shovel and haul truck system is less than an IPCC system, the operating cost of the former is higher ( As most ore deposits typically consist of high grade ore intermingled with low grade ore or even totally barren rock, ore sorting or pre-concentration provides great opportunity to reject a coarse, largely barren, fraction. Ore sorting involves the recognition of these differences at an early stage in the mining process, and the subsequent rejection of unwanted particles prior to further processing. It has the potential to upgrade a range of mineral ores for processing, leading to a substantial reduction in downstream costs, improving ore quality and mineral recovery and reducing environmental impacts. Ore sorting itself is not a new concept, with hand sorting being one of the first methods of minerals processing, and according to The ore sorting process can be divided into four inter-active sub-processes ( particle presentation, particle examination, data analysis, particle separation. Once the particles have been properly prepared for sorting, they must be presented to the sensor. To operate efficiently, the sensor must be able to analyse each single particle at the required level of accuracy. Feedrate and materials handling methods are therefore critical components of the system, with this most commonly being done by belt conveyor or chute. The critical stage of examining the particle and determining whether material is valuable or barren is done by a combination of sensor and processing unit. Once the decision has been made to accept or reject a given particle, a mechanical device is required to physically make the sort. High pressure jets of air are generally used to make this separation. A multitude of different sensors are available (  While the main driver for IPCC and ore sorting technologies is increased mineral recovery and reduced energy consumption and hence improved productivity and lower costs, another potential benefit of the technologies is a reduction in the greenhouse gas footprint of the mining and mineral processing operation. The likely reductions in greenhouse gas emissions for these two technologies were estimated by carrying out a life cycle assessment of a hypothetical copper mining operation incorporating these technologies. This life cycle assessment study is described in detail below. Reductions in greenhouse gas emissions with ore sorting come about largely as a result of the reduced amount of material that undergoes comminution and concentration, which reduces the comminution and concentration electrical energy and hence the greenhouse gases associated with its generation. This reduction in comminution and concentration energy is partially offset by the electrical energy consumed by the ore sorting device Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a standardised methodology for determining resource inputs, emissions and energy flows as well as their potential environmental impacts along the whole life cycle chain of a product or process. LCA covers the consecutive and interlinked stages of a product or process system, from raw material acquisition or generation from natural resources through to final disposal. It essentially involves the compilation of an inventory of relevant environmental exchanges during the life cycle of a product and evaluating the potential environmental impacts associated with those exchanges. The LCAs of mining and mineral processing operations described in this paper were all carried out in accordance with the international standard LCA guidelines ( The goal of this study was to determine the potential reduction in the life cycle-based greenhouse gas emissions from the implementation of both IPCC and ore sorting technologies in a hypothetical mining and mineral processing operation to assist the minerals industry in identifying potential opportunities for improving their greenhouse gas performance, particularly as ore grades fall in the future. The study covers the mining and mineral processing of ore from an open pit copper mine. The functional unit assumed for the study was 1 The system boundary for the study extended from mining of ore (with a strip ratio of 7) through to concentrate production as shown in The LCA inventory data used in the study were derived from a number of published sources, supported by independent estimates made by the authors for the assumed IPCC and ore sorting configurations. The inventory data used in the study are tabulated in  Electricity is black coal-based with a greenhouse gas emission factor of 0.99 Greenhouse gas emission factor for diesel transport fuel is 77.7 Flotation copper recovery is 94%.  Total ore and waste rock transport distance of 19  Comminution electricity consumption of 18.5 The results produced by the respective SimaPro models of the various technologies incorporating the inventory data in The embodied energy footprint of IPCC is compared with haul truck operation in The reductions in life cycle-based greenhouse gas emissions (per tonne of copper in concentrate) from the use of ore sorting technology are shown in The total ore and waste rock transport distance for the base case described above was 19 The base case plant feedrate was 3.6  There are very few reported studies in the literature on the greenhouse gas impacts of IPCC and ore sorting, particularly the latter. The few reported greenhouse gas results for IPCC are generally for simple comparisons with conventional truck haulage, although the study by A life cycle assessment study was carried out to provide estimates of the potential greenhouse gas reductions from the implementation of IPCC and ore sorting technologies in a hypothetical copper mining and mineral processing operation. Based on the assumed configurations and operating characteristics of the two systems, the results indicated that IPCC had 4% less (i.e. 3 In the case of ore sorting, a potential reduction of about 13