Wind energy has become one of the most significant sectors in global renewable energy market. This chapter analyses the global rare earth elements (REE) demands and associated environmental implications driven from the rapid growing global wind energy demands. The NdFeB permanent magnet demand from wind turbines is a valuable case study to underpin and evaluate the environmental benefits of REE consumption and wind energy growth, as both of them are key areas of expected global clean energy supply and critical metal demands. It is important to understand that, each REE has distinctive physical and chemical characteristics, and hence, different downstream uses. The term light rare earth elements (LREE; La to Gd) and heavy rare earth elements (HREE; Tb to Lu), defined by similar electron shell configurations, are commonly used to classify the lanthanide elements more accurately. Despite having a relatively small molecular weight, yttrium is typically classified as a HREE, and scandium is not formally classified as either a LREE or a HREE due to the lack of similarities to either group; yet, it is included with the REE as a whole. Since the latter part of the 20th century the increasing demands for high-performance REE materials (see However, the unique characteristics and the associated complexity of REE in the downstream applications often make them extremely difficult to recycle. Binnemans et al. In global terms the REE are not “rare” from a geological abundance perspective—as some REE have a similar abundance to copper. Typical REE abundance in the Earth’s crust varies significantly. For example, Ce has an average crustal concentration of 63 From a production perspective, the REE are primarily produced as rare earth oxides, or more specifically, rare earth oxides plus yttrium (TREO+Y). Weng et al. The NdFeB permanent magnet is the key functional component in modern wind turbine industry. It is used for making permanent magnet synchronous REE-dependent permanent magnets provide significantly better “maximum static energy product” capacity BH( Humphries Given the importance of REE in facilitating clean energy technologies to help with addressing climate change, it is clear that there is a need to examine the finer details underlying basis of the criticality of REE—especially potential supply rates to meet growing demands for a variety of specific technologies. As systematically summarized by numerous articles, governmental, and industrial reports: the design, generation capacity, and efficiency In this section we compare two life cycle assessments (LCA) between two onshore low–medium speed wind turbines; namely: Vestas V112 3~3.45  The overall life cycle impacts of a100-MW wind plant (farm) (20 years life cycle) composed of 33 units of V112 or V126 are summarized in The detailed Nd, Dy, and Tb mineral resources data and corresponding environmental impacts in the production stage have been adapted from Refs. Principal assumptions include: Typical life cycle period of a wind turbine is 25 years Medium-high speed PMSG is only utilized in onshore wind turbines. Low-speed PMSG is only utilized in offshore wind turbines. The average capacity factors (Ratio of wind turbine’s actual power output and peak power output under 100% nameplate capacity for the same period of time) for both onshore and offshore PMSG wind turbine are estimated as 28% Other metal demands of permanent magnet production (e.g., Fe, Cu, Ni, B, etc.) are assumed to be covered by existing LCA studies with environmental impacts and has been included as part of the wind turbine’s overall environmental footprint. Environmental impacts of REE production and NdFeB magnet manufacturing characterizations and allocations are based on mass fractions of metal.  Compared to medium-high speed PMSGs, which dominates the current wind turbine market, low-speed generators have a significant higher REE (i.e., Dy, Nd, Tb) amount per megawatt capacity, in exchange for lighter weight, better energy efficiency (or capacity factors), and lower GHG footprint. This is also seen in the lower average total GWP impact of low-speed PMSG as compared to the medium-high speed PMSG units. Broadly speaking, it is reasonable to believe that extrapolating GWP impacts from REE production and permanent magnet manufacturing processing, to future wind turbine production (especially for low-speed PMSG), the utilization of REE permanent magnets will not compromise but will enhance the systems overall GWP footprint. Hence REE permanent magnets will become even more important for future wind turbine designs and application, especially given that the market is shifting toward high capacity low-speed PMSG wind plants. It is also worth mentioning that, due to lack of good quality data, current indicative LCA focus only on GWP impacts. The available data is insufficient to determine the overall environmental burden of global REE production. There is a broad range of other critical issues such as REE recovery  The International Energy Agency (IEA) predicts the evolution of the global energy sector toward 2040    All scenarios have predicted a rapid growth of the renewable energy sector toward 2040. For example, in the NPS scenario, with increasing policy support from governments, reducing production and implementation costs, and greater scale use of new technologies, the fraction of renewable energy in total global energy market is expected to rise from 14% in 2014 to 19% in 2040, with a total renewable power generation of 78,000×10 The substantial increase in global wind energy sector will require a corresponding growth in upstream REE-dependent component or material industries (e.g., NdFeB magnets) thus steering the economic drivers to increasing TREO+Y production over the coming decades along with other REE-dependent technologies. The limited TREO+Y production capacity, China’s monopoly position in REE processing, and commercial, geopolitical, and environmental supply risks, all contribute to the implication that insufficient long-term REE supply will be the most severe constraint for wind energy to meet projected demands. In order to provide a more reliable and robust assessment of wind energy growth and expected demand, this sector presents a quantitative analysis of intercorrelations between available mineral resources  Again as stated by Weng et al.  The use of REE permanent magnets will not compromise but enhance the environmental footprint of wind turbines. Furthermore they lead to greater environmental benefits for the life cycle of wind turbines, which includes the associated environmental impacts from REE mineral production stages. Therefore REE permanent magnets as key functional components will become even more critical for future wind turbine design and applications, especially given the market shifting toward high capacity low-speed PMSG wind turbines. However, as a global industry, the overall environmental impact from increasing REE production are still significant especially considering the exponentially increasing global REE demands driven by other emerging technological applications like electric vehicles (EV), photovoltaic (PV) thin films, and new sustainable system in future. Hence novel REE extraction, recovery, and diverse supply chain based on various REE mineralogy are needed to cope with expected demands. Also instead of the long-term availability of REE mineral resources, the short to medium term TREO+Y Furthermore current global REE mineral resources are dominated by LREE instead of HREE (e.g. Dy, Tb, Er, etc.) with an average ratio of light rare earth element oxides (LREO) to heavy rare earth element oxides (HREO) of 13:1. The recent global REE supply has been dominated by the production of LREE-enriched bastnäsite-based carbonatite projects (e.g., Bayan Obo in China and the Mountain Pass in United States; the latter was shut down again in 2015). However, the predicted global REO consumption growth is mostly driven by increasing HREE (and particular LREE such as Eu, Nd) demands from the emerging and advanced technology sector. Therefore by simply increasing the production at the current carbonatite REE mines may result in an excess of LREE production while not being able to meet the demands for a particular HREE. As highlighted in