Osteoporosis is a systemic metabolic disorder associated with a decreased bone mass and resistance. Bisphosphonates suppress bone resorption and bone turnover by a mechanism that depends on their structure. They are characterized by low gastrointestinal absorption. In postmenopausal women, alendronate (ALN) reduces bone resorption markers and increases bone mineral density (BMD) in the lumbar spine, femoral neck, and total body. Individuals receiving ALN have been studied for up to 10 years with an apparent linear increase in BMD over that time period estimated at 13.7% at the lumbar spine. Treatment with ALN reduced the risk of both vertebral and non-vertebral fractures, including hip fractures, in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Direct comparisons of the results obtained with different antiresortive agents is difficult, because the designs of the respective studies, populations and other factors. However, the meta-analysis of available publications seems to indicate that ALN reduces the relative risk of vertebral fractures in a greater proportion than any other agent. Furthermore, ALN prevents the reduction in BMD after hormone replacement therapy discontinuation.Osteoporosis is a multifactorial systemic metabolic disorder mainly characterized by a decreased bone mass and resistance. However, osteoporosis has also been conceptualized as a risk factor, and described as “disease mongering” Bone fractures related to osteoporosis, particularly vertebral and hip fractures, cause significant suffering and are associated with high mortality and decreased quality of life The WHO defines osteoporosis as the presence of a bone mineral density (BMD), the most widely used surrogate parameter, more than 2.5 standard deviations (S.D.) below the maximum mean densitometric value in young women The US National Osteoporosis Foundation recommends starting treatment to prevent fractures in postmenopausal women with a densitometric Screening for osteoporosis should identify perimenopausal women at risk before the start of rapid bone mass loss. Screening and identification of women at risk of osteoporosis is not easy, and no simple methods are available. The US National Osteoporosis Foundation recommends the measurement of BMD in all women aged 65 or over, as well as in younger women with one or more risk factors Kovacs The US Preventive Service Task Force stated that screening 731 women aged 65–69 years would prevent one hip fracture if those with indications for treatment took it, and screening 248 women would prevent one vertebral fracture. The benefits of screening are relatively small in women under the age of 65 years, unless they have other risk factors for osteoporosis Success in the prevention and treatment of osteopenia and osteoporosis requires the achievement of a number of pathophysiological objectives leading to the prevention of fractures The second change refers to a gain in BMD, measurable by densitometry, as a result of tissue reconstruction by the bone metabolic unit, and which occurs after months of treatment. It has been claimed that the greater the increase in BMD, the greater bone resistance. However, increases in BMD are associated with variable changes in bone microarchitecture, so that different treatments induce different densitometric and microarchitectural responses which correlate to an increased or reduced risk of bone fracture. In other words, although BMD is a significant determinant of bone resistance and of the risk of fracture, the relationship is not linear, and small reductions in BMD are associated to disproportionately large increases in fracture risk The objective of treatment is to reduce the incidence of bone fractures and the desirable clinical benefit. There are two meta-analyses showing the existence of a significant association between increased BMD in the lumbar spine and hip and the risk of new radiographic vertebral fractures during treatment with antiresorptive drugs Bone turnover is approximately 30% per year in trabecular bone, i.e. about 10-fold higher than in cortical bone. Therefore, changes in bone turnover and in BMD in cortical bone would be better indicators of the risk of non-vertebral fractures during antiresorptive treatment In this context, the available scientific evidence varies for the different treatment modalities, though the results of greatest value based on design and methodology, randomization and follow-up refer to alendronate (meta-analysis of all treatments available for osteoporosis following the methodology of Cochrane) The bisphosphonates are the most potent antiresorptive drugs available for the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis. They all share the pyrophosphate structure, which characterizes the pharmacological group. The bisphosphonates are structural analogs of pyrophosphates with specific activity upon bone, thanks to their potent chemical affinity for hydroxyapatite, the main organic component of bone. Bisphosphonates were formerly classified according to the chemical group added to the base pyrophosphoric nucleus at its R2 side chain All bisphosphonates are characterized by low gastrointestinal absorption (approximately 1% of the administered dose), which can be totally neutralized if the drug is administered with any type of food. Uptake by bone is quite constant, with a half-life of the incorporated drug of over 10 years. At high doses they interfere with the mineralization process, causing osteomalacia. However, the resorption/mineralization ratio of the aminobisphosphonates is so great that they do not interfere with this process, as a result of which the therapeutic dose is about 1/100 the dose that causes osteomalacia. The bisphosphonates modify calcium metabolism. Bone calcium resorption decreases and intestinal absorption increases, as a result of which the calcium balance is positive. These drugs reduce the differentiation and recruitment of osteoclast precursors formed from the hemopoietic stem cells. At the same time, they increase osteoclast apoptosis, partly by caspase activation. The end result is, therefore, a marked reduction in the number of these cells. The third action of this group of drugs is on osteocytes (the cells responsible for skeletal resistance to mechanical loading), whose half-life is prolonged (i.e. premature apoptosis such as that seen in osteoporosis is avoided). Alendronate sodium (4-amino-1-hydroxybutylidine-1,1-bisphosphonate) is a bisphosphonate which is poorly absorbed following oral administration, and the assimilated fraction is rapidly bound to the bone remodeling units or is excreted in urine as the unchanged molecule Experimental studies in animals suggest that bisphosphonates can also have chondroprotective effects upon cartilage. This possibility has recently been confirmed in humans in a controlled, randomized study involving alendronate Alendronate sodium has been extensively evaluated in clinical trials for over a decade in aspects ranging from the metabolic, densitometric and histomorphologic changes and clinical tolerability to results regarding the incidence of all types of fractures. The patient age range is also very wide (55–81 years), and the bone status has varied from densitometric Treatment with alendronate, both daily and weekly, with calcium and Vitamin D supplements, reduces bone resorption markers after 1 month of administration to levels characteristic of the premenopausal phase, while bone formation marker levels decrease after 3 months of treatment Alendronate rapidly increases bone mass in the lumbar spine and hip both with daily treatment and with weekly administration. BMD increases are significant compared to baseline values after 6 months of therapy. After 24 months, a 6.8% increase is recorded for weekly alendronate treatment, versus 7.4% for daily administration Long-term treatment with alendronate has a sustained efficacy, with no evident plateau effect Emkey et al. The results from Boivin et al. Concern has been raised by some authors that bisphosphonates may initially increase the toughness of bone, and then with prolonged therapy, decrease it. Some animal studies indicate that microcrack density and length increase during treatment with high doses of bisphosphonates An essential question is the reliability of the treatments, i.e. the percentage of treated patients in whom a positive treatment effect is seen. In this sense, BMD significantly increased after 1 year of treatment with alendronate in over 90% of treated patients, and the percentage response was similar for both the 10 In the The The FIT was conducted with a data control system, independent of the study sponsor, which guarantees objective evaluation of fractures, product safety and other aspects. The inclusion criteria for the cases were very strict. As an example, 10% of the fractures were discarded due to a lack of evidence, and follow-up was also highly rigorous, so that 95% of the cases were controlled to the end of the study. The patients included were 6459 women postmenopausal for at least 2 years, with ages ranging from 55 to 81 years, and with a reduced hip BMD (under 0.69 The women were randomized to treatment with alendronate (5 This study has shown that alendronate significantly reduces the number of hip fractures, statistical significance being reached after 18 months of therapy with a 63% reduction which was sustained throughout the study. The risk of hip fracture and the effect of alendronate upon fracture prevention depend upon the baseline BMD Lewis et al. Administration of alendronate prevents bone mass loss as measured by BMD in recently menopausal women without osteoporosis Luckey et al. The tolerability of long-term treatment with bisphosphonates has been analyzed in terms of histological safety and gastrointestinal tolerability Although the tolerability of alendronate is good when the recommendations appropriate for bisphosphonates are followed, some patients consider its use inconvenient, particularly if they are taking multiple drugs. Weekly treatment with 70 A multicenter study analyzed the gastrointestinal tolerability of a weekly dose of alendronate (70 In an observational cohort of 11,916 patients under treatment with alendronate the events most frequently reported as suspected adverse reactions were gastrointestinal symptoms including dyspepsia, esophagitis, esophageal reflux, duodenitis, gastritis and heartburn. Serious suspected adverse reactions possibly related to alendronate were single reports of angioedema, erythema multiform, hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia Antiresorptive treatments for postmenopausal osteoporosis have been studied from multiple perspectives. Marcus et al. The effects of SERMs, bisphosphonates and salmon calcitonin to increase BMD and reduce the risk of fractures have been shown in prospective and randomized studies, but the evidence is weak for calcitonin The Osteoporosis Research Advisory Group has analyzed in depth the information on the effects of antiresorptive drugs upon vertebral and non-vertebral fractures Direct comparison of the results obtained with different drugs is difficult, because the designs of the respective studies must be taken into account, as well as patient age at the time of entry to the study, the time from menopause, the use of calcium supplements and Vitamin D, the primary fracture parameter, the definition of vertebral deformity or fracture, the treatment discontinuation rate, and statistical power. A last point of caution is the value of BMD as surrogate parameter, since the relationship is uncertain and variable. The so-called Study 159, a multination, double blind, placebo-controlled trial, compared the efficacy during 1 year of weekly alendronate (70 Adami et al. Downs et al. As regards the possibility of combined therapies, the administration of two antiresorptive agents causes a greater increase in BMD, but the effect of the combination upon risk fracture is not known. HRT is effective for the prevention of bone mass loss and fractures related to osteoporosis Lindsay et al. Bone et al. Palomba et al. The combination of alendronate and HRT has additive effects, with BMD increases superior to those achieved by each treatment alone. Both alendronate and raloxifene reduce bone turnover markers, increase BMD, and prevent vertebral fractures, though alendronate, but not raloxifene, has been consistently shown to prevent non-vertebral fractures. Johnell et al. A potentially interesting indication for alendronate in relation to HRT is in those patients with risk factors for osteoporosis or in osteoporotic individuals in whom HRT is discontinued due to intolerability, poor compliance, or based on the results of the WHI study (it should be remembered that this study showed the risk/benefit ratio for HRT beyond 5 years of continuous treatment to be questionable, requiring individualization in each case). The results of a prospective, randomized and placebo-controlled study involving 144 patients who abandoned HRT have been recently reported The primary objective of treating osteoporosis is to substantially reduce risk of fractures. ALN is an important drug for the treatment of osteoporosis because they inhibit bone resorption, increase bone density and, therefore, decrease risk of fractures. Given that treatment for osteoporosis should be long term, compliance and tolerability are important. The side effect profile of ALN is similar to that of placebo. In clinical practice, oesophagitis has rarely been reported and in most cases seems to be related to inappropriate administration. Although bisphosphonates reverse the low rate of remodeling and resorption and increase tissue mineral content and thereby bone mass, we do not know why the fracture risk is reduced but not abolished, the precise value of bone density as a surrogate measure for antifracture efficacy, and the most adequate duration of ALN treatment. More research is needed to identify new fracture reduction strategies that will allow better matching of risk factors and treatments. We also need well designed comparative studies, head to head, with other agents currently used for the treatment of osteoporosis and prevention of fractures. In women with documented osteopenia, or a strong family history of osteoporosis, a low dose of ALN has been shown to increase and maintain bone density and reduce fractures. It is necessary to develop clinical methods to study bone quality during antiresortive treatments to assess bone structure and function. Finally, the only property of bone that we would need to know would be its ability to resist fracture.