The mineralization of industrial wastewater from beverage industries during a solar photo-Fenton enhanced process mediated by ferrioxalate complexes was evaluated as an alternative to reduce the total treatment time required for conventional anaerobic digestion procedures in a compound parabolic collector (CPC) pilot plant. Under selected conditions (H2O2 flowrate=460mL/h, H2C2O4 flowrate=2100mL/h, [Fe]0
                     =150mg/L, pH=2.79, medium solar power=35.8Wh) and continuous operation, 70.6% and 96.6% of the total organic carbon (TOC) was removed from industrial effluent with an initial TOC concentration of 1386.8mg/L after 55 and 125min, respectively. In addition, this process completely removed the toxicity and COD and removed 99.8% of the BOD-5.
                  First, the physico-chemical pre-treatment of raw wastewater was performed based on sedimentation to remove suspended solids and reduce the turbidity by 91%.
                  The effects of the variables were studied during two different irradiation periods. Solar power is the main factor that influences mineralization during the first 60Wh of accumulated energy due to the generation of hydroxyl radicals. However, solar power is unimportant at the end of the process (150Wh of accumulated energy), when the molecular reaction mechanism between H2O2 and the intermediates is predominant.
                  The overall mineralization process (k
                     =0.0096min−1) occurs due to the contributions of the photo-Fenton process (k
                     =0.0044min−1) and the ferrioxalate photochemistry (k
                     =0.003min−1). The synergism between both processes was 22.9% based on the first order rate constants for TOC removal.The beverage industry generates large amounts of wastewater effluent. In the beverage industry, water is used as an ingredient, an initial and intermediate cleaning source, an efficient conveyor of raw materials, and a principal agent for sanitizing plant machinery and work areas. These effluents contain high concentrations of organics due to the use of raw materials, such as oranges, grapes or sugar Conventional biological processes are usually the most cost-effective alternatives for treating these effluents, but it is widely known that high concentrations of toxic or non-biodegradable compounds prevent mineralization Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are an efficient alternative that could be used to solve this problem. Among AOPs, the ferrioxalate-induced solar photo-Fenton process is a clean technology that is considered environmentally friendly and competitive at the industrial scale The use of ferrioxalates for organic pollutant degradation under sunlight radiation has been previously reported as effective In this study, the mineralization of actual beverage wastewater effluent was studied using a continuous ferrioxalate-induced solar photo-Fenton process as an alternative to conventional anaerobic digestion or as a rapid pre-treatment step (to reduce the total treatment time). Physico-chemical pre-treatment of the raw wastewater was performed using precipitation and sedimentation to improve the photocatalytic treatment efficiency. Six variables were studied in this work using a Central Composite Experimental Design and the hydrogen peroxide and oxalic acid flowrate, initial TOC concentration, pH, temperature and solar power. The response function was the degree of mineralization (after 60 and 150 The experimental results were fit with neural networks (NNs) The novelty of this research includes several items: it is the first time that reagents are added continuously to the system, the effect of the variables was studied under two different irradiation periods and finally since the overall mineralization process occurs by the contribution of the photo-Fenton process and the ferrioxalate photochemistry, the synergism between both processes was estimated from the first order rate constants for TOC removal. A factory that produces juice drinks from orange, apple and grape supplied the wastewater used in this study. The composition of the beverage wastewater is given in Hydrogen peroxide (H The wastewater was mineralized during the photo-Fenton process using ferrioxalate at a pilot plant consisting of a solar compound parabolic collector (CPC) manufactured by Ecosystem, S.A. ( The experimental set-up is also completed with an UV pilot plant composed of a 28-L reactor with two UV-C lamps and two UV-A lamps which can be operated in series with the solar CPC plant to improve efficiency or in not sunny days, but it was not used in this research. The degree of mineralization, calculated as (TOC Chemical oxygen demand (COD) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD-5) analyses were performed according to methods already described in literature The formate and acetate concentrations were determined by high performance ion chromatography using a Metrohm chromatograph fit with an ASUPP5 250 column and an ionic conductivity detector at a pressure of 10–12 The toxicity was evaluated by determining the inhibitory effects of water samples on the light emission of A central-composite experimental design (CCED) consisting of 11 experiments was applied to investigate the effects of two variables [flowrate of H The design consisted of a series of the three following experiments: (i) a 2 The incident solar power, temperature and pH were not controlled during the experiment. Instead, these parameters were measured during the reaction, and their average values were used during the fitting process. The initial TOC concentration was also used for fitting because it fluctuated between 1897 and 1386 The chosen response function for optimizing the photocatalytic process through experimental design was the degree of mineralization in the treated water at accumulated solar energies of 60 and 150 In all the experiments, the disappearance of TOC followed pseudo-first-order kinetics with respect to the pollutant concentration, as follows: In order to compare experiments over several days, it is necessary to use a simple equation to normalize the data so that the time used in Eqs. The neural network used in this work to determine the mineralization constants and obtain optimal operation conditions was solved for two neurons and by using an exponential function and solution strategy based on a back-propagation algorithm The sedimentation test revealed (data not shown) that the removal of turbidity in 10 Pre-treatment was essential for achieving an efficient photo-catalytic process. Previous tests indicated that the degree of mineralization reached in wastewater without pre-treatment was always less than 20% due to a screen effect linked to radiation scattering that decreased the depth of radiation penetration. All experiments presented in this section were based on the mineralization of wastewater from the beverage industry (initial TOC concentration varied between 1386 and 1897 The experimental tests and the values of the achieved %TOC removal under different accumulated energy values are shown in The saliency analysis results (  It is difficult to determine which products are present in the initial industrial wastewater and form intermediate compounds. Thus, we analyzed the acetate and formate concentrations during the optimal degradation test. It this case ( Carboxylic acids (such as formic acid and acetic acid) are stable and invariably develop a resistance to further oxidation Finally, a linear relationship between the consumed peroxide and the percentage of removed TOC was observed under optimal conditions. Overall, 2.5 When both flowrates (oxalic acid and hydrogen peroxide) are high, as shown in Ferric ions are formed from the oxidation of ferrous ions by dissolved oxygen (Reaction In this test, Fe(II) is very quickly converted into Fe(III) in the presence of excess hydrogen peroxide ( In contrast, because the reaction of hydrogen peroxide with hydroxyl radicals produces oxygen (Reactions During the first stage of this test, the DO content remains very low because it is efficiently used in mineralization reactions. However, after 110 The mineralization constants for each step (fast and slow) were 0.0096 and 0.0016 If the hydrogen peroxide flowrate decreases, important changes in the mineralization process occur. During the first 20 Mineralization during this stage (after 20 TOC reduction results from the decarboxylation of organic-acid intermediates as follows In this case, the mineralization reaction is mainly due to In summary, the overall mineralization process ( The synergism between the photo-Fenton process and the ferrioxalate photochemistry was 22.9% when using the first order rate constants for TOC removal according to Eq.  However, when 150 One example of the effects of temperature was simulated and is shown in Wastewater from a beverage industry can be photo-degraded using a ferrioxalate-mediated solar photo-Fenton process. Under optimal conditions, 70.6% and 96.6% of total organic carbon (TOC) was removed from industrial effluent with 1386.8 Finally, the synergism between the photo-Fenton process and the ferrioxalate photochemistry was 22.9% according to the first order rate constants for TOC removal. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from