As jointed rocks consist of joints embedded within intact rock blocks, their behavior depends on the behaviors of the joints and the intact rock blocks. In a jointed rock, there are two levels of heterogeneity within the jointed rocks due to the differences in properties between the rock blocks and the joints at a macro-scale, and within the intact rock blocks due to difference in the randomly-distributed flaws at a meso-scale. In this paper, numerical tests on plane stress numerical specimens with an embedded, partially-spanning joint are reported. The individual influence of three parameters relating to the geometry of partially-spanning joints: joint location, joint orientation and trace length was studied. In the simulations, the joints were modeled by elements with low moduli and strengths, whereas the heterogeneity of the rock properties of the intact rock block was taken into account by assuming that they obey the Weibull distribution. The numerical simulations not only agreed well with the experimental results, but also duplicated the complete rupture process of samples with the stress evolution and tempo-spatial distribution of damage events. The numerical results show that there is an approximately linear relationship between the location of the terminus of the partially-spanning joint with respect to the end of the sample (joint location) and the compressive strength of the partially-cut sample, whereby failure stress increases with increasing joint location value. With respect to joint orientation, the simulations show that the minimum compressive strength occurs for a joint angle of 45°, and that compressive strength increases with both increasing joint angle and decreasing joint angle from this critical value of 45°. In relation to the joint trace length, the numerical results reveal that the compressive strength of partially-cut specimens is correlated with the joint trace length using an approximately linear relationship.Geotechnical engineers are actively engaged in the search for solutions to complex problems involving the behavior of jointed rocks. Jointed rocks are heterogeneous and discontinuous containing joints and/or bedding planes with varying degrees of strength along these planes of weakness. The behavior of a jointed rock is governed not only by the properties of the intact rock block, but also mostly by the presence and properties of discontinuities such as joints and/or bedding planes within the jointed rock. For example, it is essential to know if and how existing joints and/or bedding planes connect with each other to form a continuous discontinuity surface for the stability of rock slopes or tunnels ( Extensive experimental and numerical research has been done on the mechanical behavior of rock-like materials from a single pre-existing flaw such as a joint, weakness plane or fracture in compression. For example, Although considerable attention has been paid to the initiation and propagation of pre-existing flaws in jointed rock mass, the influence of joints on the overall mechanical properties of jointed rock mass and the underlying fracturing mechanism remain less well understood. Moreover, detailed knowledge of the effect of joints on the overall mechanical properties of jointed rock mass is fundamental to an understanding of the deformation and failure process of engineering rock mass and the design of engineering rock mass structures. Thus, in the present study, an attempt has been made to consider the most significant aspects including joint location, joint orientation and joint trace length of rock joints which are mainly responsible for the reduction in strength and are measurable in the field. Numerical simulation is currently the most popular method used for modeling the deformation behavior of rock-like materials before failure. Even though progress has been made in the numerical simulation of failure in rocks, a satisfactory model which can simulate progressive failure in a more visual way, including simulation of the failure process and failure-induced stress redistribution, is lacking. The demand for new tools which may contribute to a better understanding of the failure mechanisms of heterogeneous brittle materials initiated the development of the Rock Failure Process Analysis code (abbreviated as RFPA There are two levels of heterogeneity in a jointed rock, one being the differences in properties between the rock block and the joint at a macro-scale, and the other being the heterogeneity within the intact rock blocks due to differences in the randomly distributed flaws at a meso-scale. In the model, because the system was analyzed at a meso-scale, the heterogeneity within the intact rock blocks due to the differences in the degree of weathering and the randomly distributed flaws at a meso-scale was taken into account. The stress–strain relationship can be described by an elastic damage constitutive law. Continuum damage mechanics can describe the effects of progressive micro-cracking, void nucleation, and micro-crack growth at high stress levels using a constitutive law, by making use of a set of state variables modifying the material behavior at the macroscopic level. Using an isotropic continuum damage formulation, the constitutive law for an isotropic and elastic material at instantaneous loading can be written as ( Hence, for uniaxial loading, the constitutive law is explicitly dependent on the damage index The model is based on progressive isotropic elastic damage. Specifically, when the mesoscopic element is under uniaxial tensile stress, at the beginning, the stress–strain curve is linear elastic and no permanent damage occurs. When the maximum tensile strain criterion is met for a given element, the element is damaged. According to the constitutive law of mesoscopic elements under uniaxial tension, the damage evolution of element Similarly, when the element is under uniaxial compression and damaged in shear mode according to the Mohr–Coulomb criterion, the damage variable From the above derivation of the damage variable In addition, in the model a single damage event represents a micro-crack-forming event to assess the damage evolution, and the damage energy release is related to the strain energy of the element before and after its damage. Therefore, the number of damage events is counted by the number of damaged elements and the damage energy release can be determined from the area of shadow shown in In relation to material heterogeneity, material properties such as failure strength  In this study, a numerical scheme identical to the experimental tests conducted by In order to eliminate the effect of elements' spatial distribution on the numerical results, the material distributions in numerically generated matrix specimens for different cases are the same. The given partially-spanning joint was then configured in the matrix specimen. That is to say, the matrix specimens were identical, except for the variation of the partially-spanning joint. This is impossible to achieve in laboratory tests but can be achieved in a numerical test, and this is one of the advantages of numerical simulations. The detailed geometrical configurations for the different locations, orientations and trace lengths of the partially-spanning joint in the matrix specimen are presented in As discussed above, the uniaxial compressive testing scheme was designed to investigate the independent influence of three variables relating to the geometry of partially-spanning joints, i.e., joint location, joint orientation and joint trace length, on the overall mechanical behavior of the numerical partially-cut samples. The numerical results relevant to these three variables and their influence on stress–strain curves, damage event evolution, failure patterns and compressive strength of the partially-cut samples are presented and discussed below. The experimental and numerical final failure stresses for the partially-cut samples with various joint locations are listed in In addition, the final failure patterns and the localized strain distributions of the partially-cut samples for experimental and numerical results are presented in  The complete stress–strain curve, the damage event counts–strain curve, and the corresponding stress and damage evolution at stress drops A, B, C, D and E for numerical sample JL2 are represented in Comparisons between the experimental and numerical results for the failure stress of specimens with various joint orientations (the angle of the joint from the plane perpendicular to the loading direction) are listed in The specimen failure patterns and corresponding strain results for the experimental and numerical results carried out on samples with varying partially-spanning joint orientations are shown in  The comparisons between experimental and numerical results for the failure stress of specimens with various joint trace lengths are listed in The specimen failure patterns and corresponding strain results for the experimental and numerical results tested in the study on the influence of joint trace length on failure patterns and localized deformation are shown in  In this paper, uniaxial compressive testing of plane stress numerical specimens with an embedded, partially-spanning joint was used to investigate the individual influence of three parameters relating to the geometry of partially-spanning joints: joint location, joint orientation and joint trace length (ratio). The numerical simulations not only agree well with the experimental results, but also duplicate the complete rupture process of samples with the stress evolution and tempo-spatial distribution of damage events. With respect to joint location, the numerical simulations demonstrate an approximately linear relationship between the location of the terminus of the partially-spanning joint with respect to the end of the sample (joint location) and the compressive strength of the partially-cut sample, whereby failure stress increases with increasing joint location value. This suggests that a greater length of material to be ruptured to cause failure will require more energy input for failure. In relation to joint orientation, the test results show that minimum compressive strength occurs for a joint angle of 45°, and that compressive strength increases with both increasing joint angle and decreasing joint angle from this critical value of 45°. The nature of the curve relating the compressive strength obtained from numerical simulations and experiments to the orientation of the partially-spanning joints tested is such that the slope defined by variation in compressive strength with increasing joint angle from 45° is different from the slope defined by variation in compressive strength with decreasing joint angle from 45°. These results differ from results obtained for similar testing using fully-spanning joints, suggesting that relationships obtained from work on fully-spanning joints cannot be directly applied to cases concerning partially-spanning joints. In relation to joint trace length (ratio), numerical simulations reveal that the compressive strength of partially-cut specimens can be correlated with joint trace length (ratio) using a linear relationship. In addition, the joint trace length (ratio) has an obvious influence on the stress–strain curves of samples with a partially-spanning joint. In general, the results of a numerical study conducted on specimens with partially-spanning joints in different geometries were compared with the experimental results. Numerical simulations duplicate the stress field in the vicinity of cracks, and capture the associated damage event sequence, the process of propagation, and the coalescence of cracks in samples with a partially-spanning joint. The results show that the failure stress and failure patterns of samples strongly depend on the mechanical and geometric properties of partially-spanning joints in samples, and the failure of jointed samples in axial compression is the final manifestation of earlier tensile crack growth induced under overall compression. Numerical simulations demonstrate some simple relationships between compressive strength of a rock-like material with partially-spanning joints and the geometry of those partially-spanning joints. These relationships differ in nature from those found for fully-spanning joints. This indicates that it is of great importance to have a clear understanding of the geometry of the joints in jointed rock prior to the design of engineering rock mass structures. The work reported in this paper is an initial effort on the influence of joint geometry on the strength of jointed rocks containing partially-spanning joints. The numerical simulations provide a fundamental understanding of damage and failure behavior in a jointed rock mass and the numerical tool employed in this paper can be used to efficiently study the complex damage and failure behavior of jointed rock mass with complicated multiple joints. The support provided by the