Libraries of kinetic hydrate inhibitors (KHIs) based on poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) were synthesized by post-synthetic modification of an existing PNIPAM copolymer. Unlike other synthetic routes this generates accurately controlled libraries of KHIs with similar molecular weight (
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       M
                                    
                                    
                                       ‾
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 w
                              
                           
                        
                     ), molecular weight distribution, end groups and composition. This allows for accurate interpretation of the effect of each of these components and highlights key functional groups that can improve performance. This was assessed using a high throughput KHI ranking method based on its inhibition performance of Structure II (sII) forming cyclopentane (c-C5) hydrate under atmospheric pressure. Hydrate inhibition tests showed that performance of PNIPAM-based KHIs can be improved by careful inclusion of select groups. In addition, cloud point data demonstrates that polymers with higher deposition points could be generated using this method. The presence of side products has a pronounced effect on cloud point but minimal effect on hydrate inhibition performance. These data provide valuable insights into polymers that can improve the performance of KHIs. The method can also be applied to a number of structural motifs to develop chemicals to overcome issues associated with natural gas transport.Gas hydrates or clathrates are crystalline non-stoichiometric structures consisting of gas and water. The gas molecules are confined in the cavities of the crystal structure formed by the water through intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Hydrates have been studied in a range of different areas including gas storage Hydrate formation during offshore operations is typically prevented by injecting large volumes of thermodynamic inhibitors (THIs), such as monoethylene glycol or methanol, which work by shifting the hydrate equilibrium curve to lower temperatures. However, high dosages (up to 50 There is clearly a need for new KHIs with improved performance and cloud point but there are no design rules for KHIs because a broad number of structures have been reported. For example, the KHIs reported to date have different molecular weight, composition or architecture. In addition, the mechanism of inhibition is not fully understood which again poses challenges to designing molecules with significantly improved performance. There are also issues in terms of testing new KHIs because the methods are slow and often qualitative. These include autoclaves, stirred batch reactors, rocking cells and high pressure-automated lag time apparatus The current study uses high throughput (HTP) materials synthesis, characterization and testing to generate a systematic library of KHIs that were optimized in terms of KHI performance. HTP approaches have been used in a number of areas relating to material synthesis In order to accurately control polymer structure post synthetic modification of poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylic acid) (PNIPAM-co-AA) was employed. The PNIPAM-co-AA was synthesized by free radical polymerization and post-synthetic modification of the acrylic acid group was used to generate materials with similar molecular weight, Mw distribution, end groups and composition along the chain. We have previously demonstrated the advantages of this post synthetic method for polyacrylamide based hydrogels All reagents were used without purification. The following materials were purchased from Sigma Aldrich: N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, commercial grade); N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS, 98%); cyclopropylamine (cycloprop, 98%); cyclobutylamine (cyclobut, 98%); cyclopentylamine (cyclopent, 99%); cycloheptylamine (cyclohept, 99%); cyclooctylamine (cyclooct, 97%); propylamine (C The structure of the base polymer, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylic acid) (PNIPAM-co-AA), was determined using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to confirm successful polymerization ( The number average molecular weight ( Synthesis and characterization details can be found in the For screening the cloud point the polymers were placed in a sample holder that was submerged in a temperature controlled water bath ( This method is based on the inhibition performance of inhibitors for Structure II (sII)-forming cyclopentane (c-C5) hydrate under atmospheric pressure. Ice provides excellent heterogeneous nucleation sites for clathrate hydrate nucleation but their lattice structures are different. The barrier to the heterogeneous nucleation in the presence of ice is much lower than that to the heterogeneous nucleation at the guest gas – water interface or in the presence of a solid surface. However, our test method is for the inhibition of both hydrate heterogeneous nucleation (on ice) and growth. Therefore, the method focuses on nucleation and the growth inhibition performance of a KHI. Using this method effective inhibitors that can prevent hydrate formation and growth even at low concentrations are identified and determination of this threshold concentration, through a series of dilutions, is used to rank inhibitors. This method has been described in detail elsewhere Briefly, sample solutions with concentrations of 0.01%; 0.05%; 0.1%; 0.5–1.0% (w/v) were prepared at room temperature 24 Polymer molecular weight has been shown to be an important parameter influencing KHI efficacy. Low-molecular-weight polymers show improved performance for many classes of polymer other than PVCap The molecular weight of the polymer is one parameter that affects the performance of a KHIs, however the structural composition has a more profound effect. This is because the KHI performance depends on the interaction of the functional groups with either the water molecules (through hydrogen bonding) or with the gas hydrate cavities (via hydrophobic interactions). The adsorption of a hydrophobic group into a cage at the hydrate surface increases the structure around the cage, which results in a strong adsorption in the surrounding cages which inhibits hydrate growth Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) and PNIPAM-based copolymers are extensively studied because of their thermos-responsive properties. They exhibit a reversible phase transition in aqueous solutions that is observed as turbidity above the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) which is a function of their hydrophilic-hydrophobic balance. The phase transition, or cloud point, is dependent on the structural characteristics of the PNIPAM polymers. Increasing the cloud point is important for KHI because polymers with very low phase transitions (and consequently deposition points) can precipitate in hot sections of the pipeline, leading to loss of performance In general, increasing the hydrophobic alkyl chain length lowers the cloud point temperature so it is closely related to the hydrophobicity of the molecule. The functional groups selected for this study allowed accurate control over the hydrophobicity across the linear, branched and cyclic groups. In order to understand these effects Hansen Solubility Parameters (HSP) have been used to predict molecular affinities, solubility, and solubility-related phenomena The increasing hydrophobic character observed for the final modified polymers in this study would be expected to reduce the cloud point temperature, due to increasing pendant group content (mol%) and hydrophobic character. However, the results show the opposite trend with an increase in the cloud point temperatures observed for all hydrophobic groups, compared to the base polymer (PNIPAM-co-AA), including groups with large δ Initially samples with 7.5 Polymers based on butylamine (C The post-modification route is able to rapidly generate large libraries of KHIs and testing these libraries in a reasonable timeframe is not possible with conventional hydrate testing protocols. Therefore, High Throughput (HTP) Hydrate tests were carried out to assess all of the KHI. The KHIs were compared under identical test conditions and each sample was measured in triplicate. Cyclopentane (c-C5) was used as a model hydrate to evaluate polymers as potential KHIs, because c-C5 form hydrates at atmospheric pressure, it is immiscible with water and forms structure II hydrates, the same as formed in oil and gas production systems. Controls with no polymer were also measured (only water and cyclopentane). In addition, the PNIPAM library was compared to commercial inhibitors the results of which have been previously published: Luvicap 21W, Luvicap 55W, Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and polyacrylamide (PAM) All experiments were initially carried out at a polymer concentration of 1 The leading KHIs were also tested at lower sample concentrations (0.5 and 0.1 In general, based on the screening method the performance of the synthesized KHIs are comparable or better than commercial KHIs such as Luvicap 55W or Luvicap 21W ( Based on these libraries of KHIs, the results showed that the cloud point of the copolymer/terpolymer did not correlate to inhibitor performance ( In the case of PNIPAM-cyclopent polymers, the 5-membered ring in the polymer chain may be able to disrupt the formation of hydrate crystals because of an optimized interaction with the pentagonal faces of the building block (5 We compared the hydrate inhibition of the leading three KHIs from this study with commercial inhibitors based on their threshold concentration using the HTP Hydrate Screen and they ranked as follows: PNIPAM-cyclopent-20 (0.05 The KHIs synthesized in this study show promising performance compared to commercial samples in terms of the hydrate screening method. It is important to note that the threshold concentration is a guide for performance based on the screen and the actual amounts do not correspond to that increase in performance. As such, this is a first approximation and more detailed testing is required. However, it is clear that accurately controlling polymer structure can fine tune performance and methods that can do this offer a route to overcome the limitations of commercial KHIs. The HTP screen is sensitive enough to compare samples within a KHI subset (eg., PNIPAM-C PNIPAM-C The effect of polymer concentration was also investigated and generally increasing KHI concentration decreases hydrate formation and the HTP hydrate screen confirmed this was the case with the KHIs synthesized in this work. For example, the results for cyclopent products ( Libraries of kinetic hydrate inhibitors (KHIs) were synthesized using a high-throughput post-synthetic modification methodology of a precursor poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylic acid) with various amines. All of the polymers possess similar molecular weight but with different functional groups incorporated at controlled concentrations. This is the first truly systematic structure-property study for KHIs. The modified polymers, specially PNIPAM-C We thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 