Chemical injection into oil reservoirs is considered as an effective enhanced oil recovery (EOR) method. Although some of the chemicals improve oil recovery, they may have side effects on reservoirs such as formation damage due to fluids incompatibility or chemical interactions with reservoir rocks and fluids. Since our previous work indicated promising results from Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs; DES1 – choline chloride:glycerol=1:2 and DES2 – choline chloride:urea=1:2) on enhanced heavy oil recovery, we now examine the possible effects of these DESs on sandstone formation damage.
                  Core flooding tests were performed at reservoir pressure and different temperatures to measure possible permeability changes by DESs injection. To understand the mechanisms of formation damage, different measurements were performed: Critical injection rate beyond which fines migration will take place, water shock effects on formation damage, dry core weight measurements before and after each core flooding tests, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and computed tomography (CT) scanning studies of fresh and treated core samples.
                  Permeability measurements by core flooding tests showed that the water shock phenomenon caused severe damage (65% reduction in absolute permeability) when distilled water was injected after brine flooding. Both DESs showed positive effect on reducing the water shock damages at different temperatures, where DES2 was much more effective when compared with DES1. Core weight measurements confirmed that whenever permeability damages were higher, the amount of core weight increase was also high. Moreover, results of SEM and quantitative XRD showed that precipitation and deposition inside pores are the main sources of formation damage. In addition, CT-scanning images provided good comparisons between fresh and damaged cores. We observed that using DESs showed that despite the DES׳s solutions role in preventing severe water shock damage and stabilizing the clays, there was still some formation damage caused by re-crystallization and precipitation processes reducing the permeability of the core samples.Formation damage is one of the most important reasons for declining well injectivity as well as productivity in oil and gas reservoirs. Several mechanisms responsible for formation damage are reported in the petroleum literature: fines and clay migration, clay swelling, fluid–fluid incompatibility, rock–fluid interaction, phase blocking, adsorption, scale formation, thermal stress, dissolution and precipitation reactions, effect of the net overburden stress pore deformation, and wettability alteration (  Near-wellbore formation damage could also be prompted by fluid–fluid interaction. Injection of incompatible water with formation brine could lead to scale formation like calcium carbonates. The formation of scale will plug formation rock by filtration of suspended scale particles from the water, or by the formation of a solid scale on the formation face ( Water blocking is considered as another mechanism of damage for formations with low-porosity and low permeability. It occurs due to the capillary effect associated with the development of micro-pores when the water based drilling fluid or EOR chemicals are injected into the formation. Originally, water adsorbs on the surface of water-wet rocks or occupies at the corner of micro-pores, while the oil and gas are in the middle areas and afford the flow passage. In the reservoirs with ultra-low permeability, when the filtrate of drilling fluids invades formation (developing micro-pores) or where the original water saturation is lower than the irreducible water saturation formed by the invasion fluids, the water blocking occurs due to the capillary effect of micro-pores for this type of formations. The water-blocking phenomenon may decreases effective permeability to oil. To ease the water blocking effect, the filtration loss of drilling fluids should be monitored and reduced to be as little as possible. In addition, rock–fluid interactions including dissolution, precipitation, and pore and throat surface erosion during chemical injection may also cause formation damage. Small particles and precipitates can travel through the formation and initially plug the pore throats by bridging, thus creating internal pore restrictions and reducing the formation permeability ( Water shock is another phenomenon which causes formation damage. Reservoir rocks, especially sandstone formations containing clays (often kaolinite) are most susceptible to brine salinity. Change in salinity disturbs the equilibrium conditions in the rock–fluid system of porous media. Consequently, fine particles can be detached from the surface easily, move and trap the pore throat which eventually leads to a permeability reduction of the formation. Different clay stabilizers have been proposed such as the amine-based choline chloride, tetramethyl ammonium chloride (TMAC), Al/Zr-based stabilizers, and nano particles ( An alternative class of ionic liquids (ILs) called Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) have recently been discovered and investigated. A DES is generally composed of two or more components that are capable of self-association, to form eutectic mixture with a melting point lower than that of each individual component ( In our previous study ( Formation brine was collected from an Omani oil field; its properties are listed in The formation damage tests were carried out in a high pressure/temperature core flooding apparatus (can handle up to 220 In order to study the effect of fine migration on formation damage, critical velocity tests were carried out using six different flow rates ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 Absolute permeability change after DESs injection is considered as formation damage indicator in core flooding tests. The tests were carried out at the reservoir confining pressure of 1200 In another set of tests, the effect of DESs treatment on the water shock phenomenon was examined. This was done by injecting 3 pore volumes (PV) of DES solution and soaking for 12 XRD is normally utilized to study the rock mineralogy and composition and, particularly in our case, the clay components (<2 The SEM was used to examine the core samples at various magnifications, generally in the 100–10,000× range. These magnification levels are ideal to investigate alteration features observed in the original minerals resulting from fluid invasions, incompatibility, dissolution, and scaling (precipitations on rock surfaces). Generally, in this technique sub-samples of 0.5–1 CT scanning has become an important tool in modern core analysis in a non-destructive manner. It has been used in the past for studying reservoir rocks and rock–fluid systems including mineralogy, porosity and density profiles, permeability mapping, viscous fingering, miscible displacement, gravity drainage, three-phase flow, relative permeability, and formation damage ( Formation damage studies were done through core flooding tests to measure any permeability damage at reservoir pressure and different temperatures for two DESs solutions. To understand the mechanisms affecting formation damage, different studies were carried out for fresh and treated core samples. Core flooding tests were performed to measure the effect of DESs injection on absolute permeability at reservoir pressure and different temperatures. Results of permeability and core samples weight changes are shown in Permeability damage in water shock tests were 60%, 65% and 67.1% at 40°, 60° and 80 Results of permeability changes for brine treated samples showed an increase in permeability damage by increasing temperature. A previous study by For a more detailed examination of the temperature effect on formation damage, another core flooding test was performed with a different procedure: The same initial procedure for DES1 treatment at 60 Results of quantitative XRD analyses for fresh core samples and treated core samples with and without DESs solutions injections at 60 and 80 SEM images of fresh material and treated samples (both DES1 and DES2) are shown in CT scanning was carried out at 60 The change in core sample weight was found to be directly proportional to the amount of permeability reduction. SEM images ( Results of changing temperature during the core flooding test indicate that parts of the precipitates formed at 60 Comparison between fresh rock and treated rock samples shows that clay (kaolinite) concentration increased from 0.8% in the fresh sample to 2.1% in the brine-damaged samples, most probably because of clay formation that occurred in parallel to quartz destruction (higher SiO Similar results were reported by Summarizing the results of our experiments and analyses, we are able to show that despite the DES׳s solutions role in preventing severe water shock damage and stabilizing the clays, there was still some formation damage caused by re-crystallization and precipitation processes reducing the permeability of the core samples. The two tested DESs reduced these damages, DES2 yielded the best results.