A solid-stabilized emulsification process was developed to produce a concentrate of the rare earth element (REE)-bearing minerals bastnäsite and monazite from an ore that included gangue minerals such as dolomite, calcite, ankerite, silicate, quartz, pyrite, mica, hematite, and barite. The liberated REE-bearing minerals displayed better affinity for oil droplets than the gangue due to differences in surface wettability and eventually adsorbed to the oil-water interface whereas the gangue remained in the water phase. We studied the behavior of the REE-bearing ore in a Pickering emulsification system. We, consequently, determined the ability of Pickering emulsification to separate and concentrate REE-bearing minerals. The enrichment ratio after a single-stage emulsification was 2.9, with a recovery exceeding 50%, and with no need to adjust the pH and/or apply a surface modifier.particle diameter diameter below which 10% of the overall droplet size is located diameter below which 90% of the overall droplet size is located Sauter mean diameter total interfacial free energy when the particle is totally immersed in the water phase total interfacial free energy when the particle is attached to the droplet interface total interfacial free energy when the particle is totally engulfed by the droplet efficiency of collision efficiency of three-phase contact line formation efficiency of attachment efficiency of droplet interface coverage total efficiency attachment force detachment force collision force particle/droplet collision frequencies droplet/droplet collision frequencies attachment efficiency index mass of particles in the feed stream mass of particles attached to droplets in the overflow mass of non-emulsified particles in the underflow number of particles in size interval numerical size distribution density in size interval contact time drainage time TPC line expansion time water surface tension oil surface tension oil/water interfacial tension water-air-solid contact angle oil-air-solid contact angle water-oil-solid contact angle or particle contact angle interfacial energy preventing a particle from detaching from an interface interfacial energy needed for a particle to be engulfed by an oil droplet particle density dispersed phase volume fraction brightness level of the concentrated ore brightness level of the fresh ore brightness level ratio brightness level of a sample crushed sieved feed dry sieved feed elemental assay of concentrated ore energy dispersive spectroscopy elemental assay of fresh ore electron microprobe analysis elemental assay of a sample glass beads isoelectric point image analysis Norton activation analysis numerical size distribution non-emulsified sediment particles oil-in-water emulsion pitched blade turbine particle size distribution quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy rare earth elements rare earth oxides red green blue brightness level stabilized cream droplets scanning electron microscopy solid-stabilized emulsion three-phase contact line total rare earth oxides total rare earth elements wet sieved feed Flotation is one of the most common techniques used in mineral processing to concentrate rare earth elements- bearing minerals. It relies on the use of surfactants and chemical reagents to control hydrodynamics inside the flotation tanks (i.e., bubble-particle interactions, bubble stability and lifespan, properties of modified surface of particles), and the pH of the aqueous phase. Various types of surfactants such as frothers, collectors, and depressants can be added to the flotation tank to obtain a desired mineral recovery and grade ( We introduce, for the first time, a water/oil/particle-based Pickering or solid-stabilized emulsification (SSE) process ( In an SSE system, most mineral particles with a relatively lower hydrophilicity as opposed to hydrophobicity should adsorb to the interface of the oil droplets, whereas most relatively hydrophilic minerals remain in the continuous water phase.  Pickering emulsification is very versatile and has a wide range of applications in the cosmetics ( We used the SSE technique to develop a process to separate and concentrate valuable REE bearing minerals such as bastnäsite and monazite, respectively with general formulas of REE.F.CO We present the feasibility of the process in terms of REE-bearing ore concentrations for several fixed operating conditions, including mixing criteria, O/W ratio, and oil type. In addition, we discuss in detail the impact of the particle size and concentration of the upstream feed on the performance of the process. REE-bearing minerals such as bastnäsite and monazite have higher oil-water (O/W) contact angles than gangue ( Particles adsorbed to the interface of oil droplets can be collected downstream from the emulsification tank and subsequently separated from the oil droplets by centrifugation, for instance. A single particle of ore may contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic minerals. Consequently, an optimized particle size that is as close as possible to the liberation size of the REE-bearing minerals should be selected to optimize the adsorption of REE-bearing minerals to the interface of oil droplets. Differences in wettability between the target mineral particles and the gangue and the tailored O/W interface govern their competitive adsorption and thus the selective separation of REE-bearing minerals.  At equilibrium, the balance of interfacial energy preventing a particle at the interface from detaching and moving into the water phase ( Parameters Δ We used this principle to explain the separation of REE-bearing minerals from the associated gangue in the ore. Even though the REE ore particles were not spherical, the fundamentals behind Eqs. REE ore particles with a greater affinity for oil or a higher contact angle attach to the oil droplets (dispersed phase) and can thus be easily separated with the creamed droplets. In reality, after the emulsification step, stabilized droplets are not fully covered by particles and thus cream at the top of the emulsification tank due to their overall buoyancy following a long enough resting time. Creaming occurs because the density of the partially covered droplets is slightly lower than that of water. The remaining non-emulsified gangue particles, which have a higher density than water, sediment at the bottom of the emulsification tank. It is thus anticipated that the creamed droplets carry most of the bastnaesite and monazite while the sedimented particles mostly consist of gangue particles. It is also clear that creamed and non-creamed droplets can be separated based on their size compared to the size of the particles, with a magnitude ratio of 50–100 on average. Pickering emulsification uses essentially two immiscible liquids, normally oil and water, to generate a continuous phase and a dispersed phase. We used a typical polydimethylsiloxane silicone oil (PDMS) (CLEARCO Inc.) for the dispersed phase. Some physical properties of the oil are listed in The fresh ground ore came from the Niobec REE deposit in Saint-Honoré, Quebec, Canada. A QEM-Scan analysis of the ore is provided in The mineral content of the deposit varies from one area to another, but the average mineral content of the ore is similar throughout the deposit.  A single particle in ore can be composed of more than one mineral. As wettability is the most important parameter for controlling the selectivity of Pickering emulsions during particle adsorption to the interface of oil droplets, the process is more selective for fine and small particles on which monazite and bastnäsite minerals are well liberated. A good understanding of the contact angles of REE-bearing and gangue minerals would provide insights into the separation mechanism. The main minerals in the Niobec ore were thus purchased in almost pure form: calcite from Morocco, dolomite from Teruel in Spain, bastnäsite and monazite from Mountain Pass in the United States, pyrite from La Rioja in Spain, and others from Vizcaya in Spain. The average water-solid contact angles of the minerals were measured directly on clean, polished flat surfaces with a goniometer (Data Physic OCA, SCA20 software) using the sessile drop technique. An intermediate equilibrium contact angle was obtained by depositing a water droplet on the surface using a syringe. The water-air-solid contact angle was linked to the oil-water-solid contact angle in Young’s equations (Eqs. The contact angle measurements were repeated in triplicate for each mineral. The average values are presented in Our results indicated that the REE-bearing minerals are relatively more hydrophobic than the associated gangue ( Since contact angles are not absolute values, the surface of a mineral can be classified as being more hydrophilic or less hydrophobic than that of another mineral. The contact angles of minerals are affected by wetting characteristics, electrokinetic features, and surface charges in conjunction with the oil and are significantly related to their semi-solubility and chemisorption behavior in the aqueous phase. ( The experimental setup included a 0.5-L agitation tank (H = T, C = 0.5 cm) equipped with a controllable pitched blade turbine (PBT) impeller (D = 3 cm) installed off-center to avoid vortex formation and generate turbulence in the flow field ( The volume fraction of PDMS oil in the O/W formulation was adjusted to Φ = 9 wt% to make a dilute emulsion and to generate an appropriate interface. In addition, the mass fraction of the feed, i.e., the ore particles in the solid-oil-liquid formulation, was set at 5 wt%. The stirring speed of the PBT impeller was 1000 rpm in all experiments ( A typical experiment started by adding 300 g mass of water to 16 g mass of feed followed by mixing at 1000 rpm for 3 min to homogenize the particle dispersion and break up particle aggregates. Once a reasonable dispersion of the solids was obtained, mixing was stopped, and a 30 g mass of PDMS oil was added. The amount of oil required for capturing the total amount of monazite and bastnäsite in 16 g mass of ore was calculated based on the total coverage potential of a 3% TREO grade and a D32 mineral size. For an emulsification system with a 5 wt% solid dry ore as feed, we estimated that an O/W ratio or a dispersed phase volume fraction Once the agitation was stopped, creamed droplets (at the top) typically are expected to contain higher concentrations of REE-bearing minerals. The remaining mineral particles that settled to the bottom contained lower concentrations of REE-bearing minerals. The mixture was left for 15 min to stabilize, resulting in an overflow (creamed droplets) and an underflow (sediment) phase. The overflow contained particles attached to the interface that were extracted with the oil droplets, while the underflow contained the remaining particles in the non-emulsified sediment ( A separation funnel or decanter was used to remove the creamed droplets from the top of the emulsion. There are many methods to separate droplets, including hydro cyclones and density traps. The remaining particles attached to the oil droplets are separated using a demulsification method that normally requires additional energy. One of the most common methods is centrifugation, which can be used to process industrial scale tonnages ( Ideally, an SSE system has three particle streams as shown in A Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Inc.) instrument was used to obtain the appropriate size distribution of the particles and droplets. Where applicable, the Sauter mean diameters (D The Slowpoke nuclear reactor of Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal was used to determine the elemental composition of the collected solid samples associated with the overflow and underflow of each test. This was done by neutron activation analysis (NAA) ( Since lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), and neodymium (Nd) make up more than 95 wt% of the REE-bearing carriers in fresh Niobec ore, the mass of total rare earth oxides (TREO) in a feed or product sample was assumed to be the total mass of these three elements. As discussed later, we observed that REE-bearing minerals tend to attach to the oil droplets. As such, the recovery, grade, and enrichment ratio of the total La, Ce, and Nd were evaluated by Eqs. Although we generated several SSE samples, an elemental analysis by NAA takes at least ten days to complete whereas it is costly. We thus had to develop a quick screening technique to select the most suitable samples for the elemental analysis. We first developed an experimental image analysis (IMGA) method to obtain a preliminary and quick estimation of the grade of rare earth elements in the overflow and underflow streams. Details of the IMGA method are provided in Appendix A. In addition, we developed Eq.  Pickering emulsification was also performed on a dry sieved feed (DSF) and a crushed sieved feed (CSF- see appendix) with particles under The three feeds (DSF, CSF, and WSF), each with five particle size distributions −20 µm, 20 to 37 µm, 37 to 45 µm, 45 to 53 µm, and 53 to 63 µm were subjected to a Pickering emulsification to determine the optimum particle size required for the best separation performance in terms of recovery and enrichment ratio. The recoveries and enrichment ratios of the REE-bearing minerals ranged from 25% to 50% and 140% to 295%, respectively. Regardless of the upstream sieving method, the maximum recovery and enrichment ratios were associated with the smallest cut sizes. For instance, the highest selectivity, i.e., enrichment ratio, associated with the WSF (295%) was obtained with the −20 μm cut size. This was expected because of the size uniformity and higher grade of the liberated REE-bearing minerals in the smaller feed cut sizes where the maximum liberated surfaces of the target minerals faced the selective interface. Also, as discussed in the preceding section, a smaller particle size leads to better stabilization. In other words, a smaller PSD increases the probability of emulsion stabilization by maximizing the stabilized interface in the system that can, in turn, lead to smaller droplet sizes and, consequently, higher potential recoveries ( Our results with respect to the particle size classes showed that a larger particle size would lead to lower selectivity due to the need for a higher attachment energy and, consequently, lower attachment efficiency. In fact, particle stabilization at a droplet interface involves the following successive steps: collision, attachment, three-phase contact line (TPCL) development, and network formation. Each of these steps has a specific efficiency with respect to effective coverage during the stabilization of the droplets. According to the literature and the fundamentals underlying the stabilization phenomenon, these efficiencies can be assessed by free energy or force analyses ( The collision efficiency, attachment, and TPCL are always low for relatively large particles. Consequently, the overall efficiency required to cover the interface would decrease with increasing particle size ( A comparison of the recovery/enrichment ratios versus the particle cut sizes of the DSF and the WSF revealed that the WSF led to a higher REE recovery and enrichment ratio than the DSF as long as the particles were under 37 µm in size. This trend was reciprocal for larger particle sizes. This was due to the presence of very fine liberated REE-bearing minerals sticking to the surfaces of coarse particles in the DSF. From another point of view, a comparison of the CSF results with the DSF and WSF results indicated that excessive grinding of larger particles, i.e., over +63 µm in size, results in an undesirable situation, in that the liberated gangue minerals with a contact angle close to that of bastnäsite and monazite compete with them and may eventually also attach to the oil droplets. The recoveries and enrichment ratios of the REE thus declined from 47% to 35% and from 280% to 190% for bastnäsite and monazite, respectively, when the feed particles were under 37 µm in size. The mean sizes of the droplets corresponding to the emulsification of five cut sizes of the DSF are presented in  A similar explanation could apply to the particles over + 37 µm in size in the WSF, which generated larger droplets than the DSF and CSF because for those size classes of the WSF no very fine particles remained on the surfaces of the larger particles that could influence droplet size. We defined an attachment efficiency index to establish a link between REE recovery and emulsion properties. The index is based on the multiplication of the efficiencies related to particle stabilization at the oil droplet interface: collision, attachment, TPCL development, and effective interface coverage ( We assumed that the fundamental correlations (  Our results showed that it is possible to recover REE-bearing minerals in their natural condition by Pickering emulsification without modifying the pH or the mineral surface. The enrichment ratio and recovery of a one-stage Pickering emulsification process were, respectively, 2.9% and 50%. Taking economic viability and current environmental standards into consideration, the SSE approach provides new prospects for recovering REE-bearing minerals but, like many other approaches, it must be optimized in terms of feasibility and performance. As such, two approaches should be considered. The first involves upgrading the emulsification, demulsification, and phase separation steps by improving mixing and centrifugation as well as process configurations such as continuous or batch processes. The second involves optimizing formulations, improving feed preparation in upstream processes, and modifying the surface properties of minerals using appropriate surfactants. The phase separation process should also be investigated further, including demulsification by centrifugation as well as oil separation and recycling, which are important components of the process with respect to environmental constraints. REE mineral beneficiation by SSE without the use of surfactants is feasible at the laboratory scale. SSE is able to selectively capture REE-bearing minerals based on differences in wettability. The Niobec ore feeds were used with their natural surfaces and without modifying the surfaces or the pH. The results from a one-stage non-optimized emulsification process show that separation performance is acceptable at approximately a 50% recovery rate and 2.9 enrichment ratio. The application of SSE presented here is a novel alternative or supplementary procedure that can be performed prior to conventional froth flotation in a physical beneficiation process of REE-bearing minerals. The grade and size distribution (i.e. liberation size) of the feed has a significant effect on the selectivity or grade of the products. Separation or selectivity performance can be enhanced by grinding the feed to a cut size under −37 μm followed by wet sieving prior to emulsification. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the We used a QEMSCAN analysis to determine the grain size of the minerals associated with the Niobec ore. As can be seen in The size distributions of some samples from bags of ore are shown in Although, in practice, dry sieving is not efficient for particles under −75 μm in size, we applied dry sieving and wet sieving methods to the ore inventory to determine the required feed size classes and the effect of feed preparation on the final recovery ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM EDS TM3030 Plus; Hitachi) was used to examine the 45–63 μm cut sizes of the dry and wet sieving processes at ×500 and ×1500 magnification (  The mass balance was calculated for each stream feed (F), overflow (O), and underflow (U) using numerical particle size distribution data (PSD) from each of the streams: By applying a proportional relation in the mass continuity equations between each stream, we can calculate the mass fractions. However, it should be noted that the assumptions, i.e., density and shape factor, remain similar for all particles: Samples of interest were placed in vials and, once the mineral sediments had adhered to the bottom of the vial, the vials were turned upside down. Images were then acquired in a symmetric arrangement ( ImageJ software provides the brightness level in standard RGB format, which ranges from 0 to 256 for red, green, and blue pixels. Since REE-bearing minerals display specific light absorption behavior, i.e. wave length absorbance, the brightness levels of the samples differ depending on the grade of the REE ( We calibrated the IMGA method for unknown samples using the NAA results. As can be seen in Feeds containing particles under 63 μm in size were prepared to investigate the mass fractions of each particle size class attached to the interface. The mass fractions of the size intervals were calculated based on the mass distribution balance (Eq.