The phenomena of high voltage pulse (HVP) selective breakage and HVP weakening have been reported separately in the literature, but the relation between the two HVP applications has previously not been investigated. Synthetic particles made of Epirez high strength grout were cast with and without embedded metalliferous minerals of chalcopyrite and pyrite and used in a study of HVP selective breakage and weakening. When metalliferous grains were embedded in the grout, there were added either as a single grain occurrence or as a fine disseminated texture. The HVP products were assessed using the JKRBT breakage characterisation method for the mineralised particles and the barren particles (with no metalliferous minerals contained), respectively. It has been found that the HVP weakening effect mainly occurs in the mineralised particles, with a reduction in particle competence (indicated by the relative change in A × b value) between 172% and 200% for the pyrite fines dispersed synthetic particles, and 70% relative reduction for the single chalcopyrite grain embedded synthetic particles. The barren synthetic particles do not exhibit a statistically significant weakening effect and appear much more competent than the mineralised particles after HVP treatment. This finding suggests that in mineral processing circuit design utilising the HVP technology, benefits associated with HVP weakening on the downstream comminution process would be maximised by combining the HVP pre-concentration and weakening applications, in doing so removing the barren unweakened rocks from the process.High voltage pulse (HVP) technology has the potential to be applied in the mineral and other industries ( More comprehensive work with respect to HVP weakening effects can be found in Recently there has been a series of published works which have quantitatively assessed the magnitude of the HVP weakening effect. In all the HVP weakening work reported in the literature, it was considered that the HVP treated product from a given feed was homogeneous, assuming that every particle in the feed received the same amount of HVP energy and was broken in a similar pattern. However, it has recently been discovered that the HVP energy may be attracted preferentially by the particles containing metalliferous minerals, resulting in HVP selective breakage of these mineralised particles, while keeping the barren particle intact ( During the HVP selective breakage tests using synthetic particles, it was observed that the selectively broken fragments contained surface cracks, a visual sign of weakening whereas the intact barren particles did not. It is reasonable to hypothesise that in addition to the selective fragmentation of the mineralised particles, there might also be a selective weakening of the broken mineralized particles. In the prior-art HVP weakening research, the bulk HVP product was analysed to determine its overall competence in comparison with that of the ore sample before HVP treatment. Based on the hypothesis that the HVP weakening effect is associated with the metalliferous mineral grain-induce selective breakage, it was contended that the competence of HVP treated product should be analysed based on two separate components: the broken mineralised particles and the barren intact particles. It is therefore argued that the HVP weakening effect may be enhanced if the barren intact particles were removed by screening prior to downstream comminution processing. The HVP testing facility installed at the JKMRC, the selFrag Lab, has been described elsewhere. A schematic illustration of the set-up can be found in The HVP weakening effect was assessed using the JKRBT test. The JKRBT is a high throughput device that can characterise the competence of a large number of particles that have (or have not) been subjected to HVP treatment. The industrialised JKRBT consists of a rotary feeder, a rotor-stator impacting device with a drive system and an operational control unit ( The material used in this study were synthetic particles made of grout embedded with a single grain of chalcopyrite (1.7–2.0 mm, 0.2% mineral grade by mass) or disseminated pyrite fines (0.05–0.2 mm, 2.4% pyrite mineral grade by mass). These particles were the same kind as those used in an HVP selective breakage study previously published by The experimental procedures are presented in Particles were treated in pairs in the selFrag HVP device, in After HVP treatment, each pair of particles and the resultant fragments were bagged so the individual analysis could be performed. Particles were firstly imaged in an XCT scanner (the results are given in JKRBT tests were performed on barren synthetic particles not subjected to HVP treatment, and on HVP-treated synthetic particles, both barren and mineralised. For the untreated barren particles, only one particle size (20 mm diameter × 20 mm height) was available for testing, at three impact-energy levels (specific-energy For the HVP-treated For the HVP-treated  It was found that, of the 60 pairs of synthetic particles for each testing configuration ( Size distributions (in terms of percentage retained) of the genuine HVP selective breakage induced by the metalliferous mineral grains are presented in   As shown in JKRBT tests were performed on various groups of the synthetic particles, including barren particles not subjected to HVP treatment, barren particles remaining unbroken after HVP treatment in the The results show that the Statistical t-Tests were performed to evaluate if the differences in The JKRBT data were fitted to the JK size-dependent breakage model ( For a long time, the JKMRC has been using the breakage model in Eq. The product of the model parameters The Since the  The  However, significant changes in In order to demonstrate clearly the HVP weakening effects attributed to the metalliferous mineral grain-induced selective breakage in this study, 8–9 pairs of the misclassified particles out of the 60 repeat tests were excluded in the JKRBT tests to determine the product residual competence. Considering that readers may be interested in ore competence of the full HVP products without excluding the misclassified particles, the product competence If the misclassified particles were included in a product, this product would consist of multiple components with various  This paper provides strong evidence to support the hypothesis that HVP selectively weakens mineralised synthetic particles. The findings presented in the present study using synthetic mineralised particles also points to potential ways that the HVP technology could be better utilised for the mining industry. The literature has reported that HVP weakening has the potential to reduce energy consumption in downstream comminution process ( By way of example,  For the test involving finely disseminated particles such as the  The present study has also found that the degree of weakening is different for different mineralisation textures. The grade (i.e. the mass of grains) within the chalcopyrite and pyrite embedded synthetic particles differed in this study, being 0.2% and 2.4%, respectively. Grade may also be playing a role in the efficiency of HVP weakening and pre-concentration and this should be investigated in future work. The JKRBT breakage characterisation method was used to assess the HVP weakening effect for mineralised synthetic particles and barren particles, respectively. It has been discovered that the HVP weakening effect mainly occurs in the mineralised particles, while barren particles only exhibit a minor degree of weakening, and appear much more competent than the mineralised particles fragmented in the metalliferous mineral grain-induced selective breakage. This finding suggests that exclusion of the barren rocks after HVP treatment would maximise the HVP weakening benefits in the downstream comminution processes. This can essentially be achieved by combining the HVP pre-concentration and weakening functions in the mineral processing circuit design. Results from the study also suggest that ore parameters such as texture (and potentially grade) affect the degree of weakening that will be achieved during HVP treatment. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial support from the