Monazite is a major rare earth elements (REE)-bearing phosphate mineral predominantly found in association with hematite and quartz in some Australian rare earth deposits. The flotation of rare earth oxides (REO) in monazite from mixtures containing monazite, hematite, and quartz with hydroxamic acid as a collector has been investigated using an IMN microflotation cell and a 1.2 L Denver flotation cell. Maximum flotation recovery of both monazite and hematite was attained at pH 7, whereas that of quartz, at pH 3. The flotation kinetics data indicated the need for depressants to achieve selective REO recovery from hematite and quartz mixtures. Sodium silicate and starch were thus tested as depressants of both hematite and quartz. The separation efficiency of REO in the absence of depressants was low and averaged 6.42% at 99% REO recovery, but could be increased to 44.78% with corresponding 93% REO recovery when 4000 g/t starch was used. However, the efficiencies of REO separation obtained with sodium silicate were generally lower (<18%), due to higher gangue minerals content in the flotation concentrates. A blend of sodium silicate and starch showed a good performance for REO recovery, with enhanced selectivity against hematite and quartz through a rougher-cleaner flotation test. This study presents the feasibility of upgrading REO from iron-oxide rich tailings using hydroxamic acid, in the presence of sodium silicate and starch as depressants.Recent literature have estimated the total rare earth oxides (REO) production worldwide averages 110 Mt, with not less than 80% of production from China The versatility of froth flotation has paved way for many researchers to study the dynamics of flotation in terms of mineral particle size distribution, froth stability, pulp chemistry, and collector-mineral surface interactions. Flotation rate test measures flotation performance in terms of mass pull, recovery, and concentrate grade. The variation in recovery of mineral particles over time is characterised as the flotation kinetics of the mineral The undistributed rate constant was proposed to overcome the difficulties in comparing Selectivity index which shows whether the selectivity of the valuable mineral over the gangue minerals remains unchanged, increased or decreased when flotation conditions are varied may be calculated based on the undistributed rate constant and is expressed as Hydroxamates are N-alkyl derivatives of hydroxyl amine, which have a wide range of applications in the flotation of REE minerals A review of the literature The flotation characteristics of monazite, zircon, and rutile were investigated by Pavez and Peres Espiritu and Waters Numerous investigations have been conducted on the Nechalacho Project Thor Lake deposit (Canada) for which different forms of hydroxamates have been tested Xia et al. Yang et al. Previous investigations and the literature This investigation is one of numerous model minerals studies aimed at identifying suitable processing methods to recover and upgrade REO from iron oxide-rich tailings from selected Australian mining operations, in which hematite and quartz are the main gangue minerals. This paper, through a comparative study, seeks to investigate the flotation kinetics and selectivity of monazite, hematite, and quartz in the presence of hydroxamic acid. Furthermore, the influence of collector dosage, and depressant type and dosage on REO recovery from mixtures comprising monazite, hematite, and quartz was ascertained. Monazite (RZ Mines, Australia) was selected as a model REE mineral, whilst hematite (Australian Bulk Minerals, Australia) and quartz (Unimin, Australia) were used as gangue minerals; and their mixtures were used as feed for microflotation and batch flotation tests. Samples were pulverised and screened to 80% passing 75 µm by hand sieving. Two feed mixtures were prepared using the model minerals; mixture 1 comprised equal proportion by weight of monazite, hematite, and quartz; and mixture 2, had 0.8 wt.% monazite mixed with 49.6 wt.% each of hematite and quartz. Mixture 1 was initially selected to aid in establishing the response of REO when depressants are introduced into the flotation system during the microflotation studies, whereas mixture 2 was made to mimic typical low grade REE-bearing ores or tailings in Australia. The head grade analysis of the feed mixtures obtained via ICP-MS have been presented in The collector used was AEROFLOAT 6494 (Cytec, U.S.A), a 34.6% alcoholic solution of hydroxamic acid. Calcium oxide (lime)/sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid were used for pH-modification. The solutions were prepared in distilled water right before commencement of the experiments to avoid the possibility of alteration of reagents over time. AEROFLOAT 6494 was solubilised with 10 wt.% sodium hydroxide solution under magnetic stirring for about 20 min followed by distilled water addition to yield a 1 wt.% hydroxamic acid (AEROFLOAT 6494) solution. A series of experiments were conducted to study the flotation kinetics of monazite, hematite, and quartz. During the single minerals microflotation tests, five different pulp pH (3, 5, 7, 9, and 11) and four hydroxamic acid dosages (500, 1000, 2000 and 3000 g/t) at flotation time of 10 min were tested. This was carried out to provide an idea of the behaviour of each mineral under the influence of hydroxamic acid at different pulp pH, as well as to establish the selectivity of monazite over both hematite and quartz. Microflotation experiments were performed in a standard 250 cm For the mixed minerals flotation tests, two different tests were conducted; (i) microflotation (250 cm For all the flotation tests, pH adjustment was carried out after 5 min of pulp agitation, before the addition of the respective reagents. The depressants (when required) and hydroxamic acid were added in succession and the system was allowed 5 min to equilibrate for each reagent addition. Mineralised froths were recovered by scraping the froth layer every other 15 s at cumulative times of 1, 3, 6, and 10 min (unless otherwise stated). Both the concentrate and tailing products were filtered, dried overnight at 70 °C in an electric oven, weighed to determine the mass recovery; and assayed using ICP-MS analysis to determine the chemical composition of the products. The errors for the recovery were controlled in 95% confidence interval. For the mixed minerals flotation tests, REO grade, as presented is the sum of Ce The flotation kinetics results for monazite, hematite, and quartz whilst varying the pulp pH from 3 to 11 are presented in From The flotation recovery of hematite as a function of flotation time at selected pulp pH is presented in The flotation recovery of quartz ( Based on the experimental results, the highest monazite recovery ( A series of experiments were performed to investigate the effect of hydroxamic acid dosage on the floatability of monazite when the pulp was maintained at pH 7, compared to hematite and quartz. The results obtained are shown in  The results imply that in a mixture (or an ore) comprising monazite, hematite, and quartz, it is anticipated that hematite will be more problematic, in attempt to achieve selective monazite (or REO) recovery. Monazite recovery is enhanced at increased hydroxamic acid dosage, a condition where the negative impact of both hematite and quartz on the selective flotation of monazite is also obvious. The results justify that, to achieve selective REO upgrade and recovery, a right balance between hydroxamic acid and depressant(s) dosage, respectively ought to be established. Based on the selectivity analyses, 1000–2000 g/t hydroxamic acid dosage may be considered as optimum range for monazite (REO) flotation from hematite (Fe To suppress the recovery of Fe Sodium silicate has proven to be a good depressant of silicate minerals and iron-oxides which interfere with the recovery of valuable minerals Satur et al. A comparison of Satur et al. This test was conducted on the feed mixture 2, where a blend of the two depressants was used since each yielded good output in terms of reducing the recovery of the gangue minerals. We observe from the metallurgical balance that 43% of the REO content in the feed was recovered into the final flotation concentrate. However, a significant upgrade was achieved with the final concentrate assaying a REO grade of 1.95% (2.35 times the feed grade). Furthermore, 76% Fe Although the grade and recovery of a mineral of interest into flotation concentrates are widely used in assessing the performance of various mineral processing methods, some limitation may be encountered in events where data obtained from similar experiments are being compared as explained by Wills and Napier-Munn Enrichment ratio, which is a measure of the ratio of the grade of mineral of interest in the concentrate to that in the feed, as a function of sodium silicate and starch dosage for tests carried out on mixture 1 has been compared in A combination of both grade and recovery into a single index referred to as separation efficiency is key in making decisions in the evaluation of metallurgical performance  The batch flotation test involving the rougher and cleaner stages presented promising results, with significant REO upgrade, although recovery was lower compared with those obtained from the microflotation tests. Comparing the two sets of mixed minerals separation tests, we observe that the recovery of REO in the batch flotation test was significantly lower. The differences in the flotation configuration and the synergetic action of the depressants are responsible for the improved selective recovery of REO. The positive impact of cleaning the rougher concentrate is highly evident, indicated by the significant REO upgrade and improvement in separation efficiency (from 15–25%). On the other hand, the separation efficiency of Fe Details of the mechanisms of sodium silicate and starch adsorption onto minerals have been extensively reported in the literature Flotation studies of REO (in monazite) from hematite (Fe In the mixed minerals separation tests, it was confirmed that the flotation of REO from Fe The results obtained are promising although the REO upgrade was generally low, because of high gangue minerals content in the concentrates. However, alternative beneficiation techniques such as magnetic separation may be exploited as a pre-concentration method to remove significant amount of Fe This work was supported by the