All-solid-state lithium batteries (ASSLBs) assembled with solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) have been regarded as promising next-generation rechargeable batteries with improved safety and high energy densities. However, the Li dendrites and poor Li+ transport greatly inhibit their practical applications when coupled with relatively high loading cathodes. Herein, we combine a glass fiber (GF)-reinforced composite polymer electrolyte based on poly(ethylene oxide) (labeled as PEO@GF) to suppress Li dendrite growth with a freeze-casted vertically-aligned (VL) electrode to facilitate Li+ transport in the high loading cathode. Benefiting from the enhanced mechanical strength and uniformed Li deposition enabled by the implanted GF, the Li–Li symmetric cells exhibit significantly improved cycling stability up to 2000 h (0.2 mA cm−2, 0.2 mAh cm-2) and 1000 h (0.42 mA cm−2, 0.4 mAh cm−2), which are over one order of magnitude longer than those of the pure PEO electrolyte. Furthermore, VL-LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode divides the thick electrode into numerous vertically-aligned “thin electrodes”, which significantly decreases the Li+ transport distance and enables the Li | PEO@GF | VL-LFP cell with a high LFP loading of 10.5 mg cm-2 to deliver a high areal capacity of 1.52 mAh cm−2. The rational structure design of both electrolyte and electrode offers an opportunity for developing high-performance ASSLBs with high active material loadings.To meet the increasing demands for higher-energy-density portable electronic devices and electric vehicles, lithium metal batteries have received great attention due to their higher energy density and ability to outperform state-of-the-art liquid lithium-ion batteries [ Nevertheless, SPEs still suffer from low mechanical strength at operating temperatures, which limits their ability to prevent Li dendrite penetration, especially when operated at high current densities and high areal capacities [ Moreover, the performance of SPEs in most studies are evaluated by coupling the SPEs with thin and low active material-loaded cathodes (LFP loading typically < 3 mg cm Herein, the optimization of both electrolyte and cathode structure, aimed at solving the aforementioned lithium dendrite and high areal-loading cathode issues, is investigated to improve the electrochemical performance of ASSLBs assembled with thick and high active material-loaded cathodes. As shown in The pure PEO electrolyte was prepared by a solution casting method. Firstly, the mixed solution of PEO polymer (M The LFP and VL-LFP electrodes were fabricated by blade casting technique. Typically, the LFP powder, acetylene black and PEO/LITFSI (EO/Li = 16/1) was dissolved in the mixture of acetonitrile and water (v/v = 1/9) with a weight ratio of 8:1:1 to form a slurry and then coated onto aluminum (Al) foil. After that, the Al foil coated with slurry was divided into two parts, one was directly dried at 60 °C overnight and another was freeze-dried at −50 °C overnight. The obtained cathodes were labeled as LFP and VL-LFP electrodes after the surface was modified with another 5 wt% of PEO/LITFSI electrolyte, respectively. The morphology, structure, and composition of the hybrid electrolyte and electrode were characterized by Hitachi S-4800 and Hitachi S-3400 scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The electrochemical performance of Li-LFP batteries and Li–Li symmetrical cells were tested with CR2032 coin cells, constructed in an Ar-filled glove box. The cathode (LFP and VL-LFP) and Li anode were separated by PEO or PEO@GF electrolytes. The charge-discharge tests were carried out using a LAND CT-2001A system with voltages arrange from 2.7 V to 4.0 V at temperatures of 60 °C and 80 °C. Constant current densities were applied to the electrodes during repeated Li stripping/plating process. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was tested at the open-circuit condition with a frequency range from 5.0 × 10 The morphology and structure of the as-prepared PEO@GF and pure PEO electrolytes are firstly investigated bySEM. As shown in To evaluate the electrochemical stability of the PEO@GF electrolyte, Li–Li symmetrical cells are assembled using two Li foils with a diameter of 1.0 cm. To understand the behavior of Li stripping and plating within different electrolytes, the Li–Li symmetrical cells operated at a current density of 0.2 mA cm Apart from the Li dendrite suppression, the Li The difference in Li dendrite suppression for PEO and PEO@GF electrolytes and Li The C-rate performance of PEO/LFP, PEO@GF/LFP, and PEO@GF/VL-LFP cells are investigated from 0.1C to 2C. As shown in The large difference in electrochemical kinetics between LFP and VL-LPF cathodes is further investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). The CV curves of PEO@GF/LFP and PEO@GF/VL-LFP cells obtained at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s Considering the strong capability of PEO@GF electrolyte in suppressing Li dendrite growth and fast Li In summary, we have successfully developed a high-areal capacity ASSLB by combining glass fiber-reinforced composite polymer electrolyte with a vertically-aligned electrode, which are beneficial for Li dendrite suppression and fast Li X. Yang conceived and designed the experimental work and prepared the manuscript; C. Zhao helped with SEM characterization; X. Gao helped with VL-LFP electrode preparation; Q. Sun, K. Adair, J. Luo, Y. Liu, X. Lin, J. Liang, H. Huang, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. Lu, and R. Li participated in the discussion of the data; X. Sun supervised the overall project. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. This work was partly supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at