Air purging is a new way of reducing the moisture content of coarse coal (i.e. within the 50–0.5 mm size range) products from vibrating basket centrifuges. The process, which involves injecting a turbulent stream of high velocity air through the coal bed as it traverses the centrifuge basket, has recently been shown to work at commercial scale. This paper describes some background modelling and experimental work that was undertaken to enhance understanding of the technique.
                  The most critical variables affecting air purging are the speed of the air exiting the bed and the height of the bed itself. Both parameters were characterised at commercial scale through a combination of experimental tests and modelling. These data were then used to predict the flow rate of the air into the bed and also the pressure drop across it. The predicted values agreed well with the experimental data. Based on this information it was then possible to establish that the operating costs of air purging would be of the order of A$0.02–0.03/ton of coal, considerably less than the financial gains associated with drier products. The next stage of assessing air purging would involve prolonged trials in different plant situations to resolve the remaining engineering issues. The technology is now sufficiently well understood for these trials to be approached with some confidence.CSIRO and Novatech Consulting Pty Ltd have been developing air purging as a new way of reducing the moisture content of coarse coal products from vibrating basket centrifuges. The process, which involves injecting a turbulent stream of high velocity air through the coal bed as it traverses the centrifuge basket, has recently been shown to work at commercial scale ( The program to demonstrate air purging in a plant was, of necessity, primarily empirically based and focussed on moisture reduction. However, during the course of the work it was possible to build up a reasonable understanding of how the main parameters affected the process. The background to this understanding is summarised in this paper together with how it was used to help: direct the practical program and the design of the equipment, focus on the parameters which were important to process performance and therefore needed to be carefully controlled, establish the costs of the process. In previous papers ( Several authors have modelled the passage of a gas through a particulate bed, one of the best known being developed by In order to establish that Ergun was applicable to coarse coal, a series of batch experiments was undertaken in which an air stream was passed through a static bed of coal formed in a perspex cylinder. The size range of the coal (−5.6 A comparison of pressure drops either measured or calculated from Ergun is shown in The model and experimental results predict, perhaps not surprisingly, that the best chance of success for moisture removal would involve using as high an air speed as possible to purge a bed as thin as possible. There were however three constraints on this idealised situation: At the start of the testwork the bed height was unknown and there was no technique in the literature for measuring it. Assuming it could be measured, there was no obvious way of controlling it. The air speed (and hence pressure drop) should not be so high as to render the process uneconomic, since pressure drop is related directly to the energy required to generate the air flow. The air speed should not be so high as to blow the coal particles off the basket. The next three sections of this paper focus on the issues related to bed height, air speed and pressure drop in relation to the full-scale application of air purging. In order to more fully understand the performance of air purging and successfully implement it, there was an acute need for a technique to measure the height of the bed of coal particles travelling down the centrifuge basket. The measurement had to be performed whilst the centrifuge was operating. As no technique had been published previously a new one had to be devised. Details are given elsewhere ( The main limitation of the technique was that bed heights could only be measured approximately half way up the basket since the feed chute prevented getting the tape head any further back. In addition, when viewing the basket from the front, it was possible to measure the bed only at the six o'clock position so it had to be assumed that the bed height was uniform at all points around the basket. Neither limitation affected the usefulness of the data. The results from the bed height measurements were surprising, the main conclusions being: The bed height was not constant along the basket, being thinner at the discharge end and becoming thicker as the distance up the basket increased. The bed height varied with time both in the short term (i.e. hour by hour) and long term (i.e. day by day) by far more than the experimental error of ±5 mm. The variations were greatest where the bed was thinnest. There was no apparent relationship between bed height and sampling time, nor with centrifuge throughput, within the range of throughputs which the centrifuge was receiving during the testwork period. There was no relationship between bed height and product moisture during the testwork period. This apparent defiance of Darcy's Law was probably caused by the permeability of the bed being so high that any changes in bed height which did occur led to changes in moisture which were smaller than the statistical variations in moisture associated with this coarse size range. The mean daily bed height close to the discharge was 20 mm, rising to 63 mm further up the basket. Variations in the daily means were up to ±25 mm. It was postulated that the bed height variations were primarily due to changes in feed size and moisture which are known to affect the handleability of the coal ( An example of the results, which shows the mean bed height determined during the testwork period as a function of distance along the basket, is given in The manifold had to be sited above the highest point that the bed was likely to reach, in order to avoid ploughing of the bed by the manifold. Bed ploughing had two detrimental effects – significantly wetter products due to the coal being prematurely lifted from the basket and excessive wear of the manifold. It was not possible to site the manifold close to the top of the bed, which was the preferred location for minimising loss of air and pressure drop prior to the air entering the bed. In order to control and adjust manifold position, a hole had to be drilled into the top of the centrifuge so that the air line could be fed in vertically. With the aid of a purpose designed “jacking mechanism” it was possible to adjust the height of the manifold very precisely, if necessary, whilst the centrifuge was running. In the commercial trials it was possible to avoid problems associated with the manifold coming into contact with the bed. However the issue remains to be resolved for day to day running in unattended operation. There is currently insufficient experience to know whether it is possible to locate the manifold in a position that can be guaranteed to remain clear of the bed at all times, or whether occasional tidal waves of coal sweep down the basket which could engulf the manifold. Only with prolonged trials can this issue be resolved. CSIRO/Novatech are developing new engineering solutions to avoid this problem. The variation in bed height with location on the basket had a significant influence on the manifold design and experimental program. The incentive was to direct the air through the thinnest part of the bed, which was located close to where the coal discharged from the basket. Thus, during the testwork program ( The full, pilot and bench scale studies ( The air speed exiting the bed was an important parameter for guiding the scale-up program and for helping to interpret the results. Since it could not be measured, it was calculated by relating it to the speed of the air entering exiting the manifold (which could be measured) using the FLUENT computational fluid dynamics (CFD) package. This section describes the modelling and experimental work undertaken to achieve this. In FLUENT, the governing conservation equations (e.g. continuity, momentum etc.) describing fluid flow are solved for each cell of a discretised solution domain. In the air purging application, each cell in the domain was modelled by the addition of viscous (Darcy) and inertial momentum source terms to the governing flow equations. This momentum sink contributed to the pressure gradient in each cell, creating a pressure drop that was related to the fluid velocity in the cell. Appropriate constants were derived from the Ergun equation. Additional input data required for the model were: manifold width in the axial direction along the basket of 90 mm, as in Manifolds C, D and E ( air source – one or two 1600 cfm compressors as used with Manifolds C, D and E ( distance between the base of the manifold and the top of the bed assumed to be 10 mm. The model provided profiles or contour maps of the decay of air velocity both within and beneath the bed from which could be interpolated the maximum and mean (summed over the width of the manifold) velocity of the air exiting the bed. All modelling was performed in two dimensions only. Preliminary cases were run which showed that neither the rotation of the basket relative to the stationary manifold nor the spacing between the bottom of the manifold and the top of the bed exerted any significant effect on the air flow patterns within the bed. These variables were therefore ignored in all further work. Further cases were then run to assess the effect of bed inlet velocity on bed exit velocity based on the conditions used for Manifolds C, D and E ( The other two cases investigated the effect of increasing air speed from 100 to 300 m/s, similar to the conditions used for Manifolds D and E. Under these circumstances, the predicted mean bed outlet velocity increased to 5 and then to 7 m/s, leading to experimentally determined moisture reductions of 0.7 wt% (Manifold D) and 0.9 wt% (Manifold E). The Manifold E results were particularly interesting since the mean predicted bed outlet velocity was close to that identified by the bench scale experiments as being required for good moisture reduction. In addition, the distribution of air exit speeds includes values up to 24 m/s thus covering the range of 8–20 m/s thought to be required from the Weber number approach to moisture removal (Briscoe and Galvin, 1991; Durbin, 1998). A series of experiments was undertaken in which Manifolds C, D and E were removed from the centrifuge, connected to the air supply and the speed of the air determined using a Pitot tube. Given the scale and difficulty in performing the experiments, air speed was measured only at the centre of the manifold; it was not possible to produce a map of air speed across the manifold cross-section. The Pitot tube measures velocity by measuring the difference between impact pressure (caused by the gas moving) and the static pressure. Although there are limitations to the accuracy of the technique at very low and very high air speeds, application of the Pitot tube in this situation provided a simple and reasonably direct technique for performing a difficult measurement. The air velocity was calculated from Assuming a value of 1 bar for the static pressure, which was reasonable given that the manifold is an open system, the following values of velocity were calculated from the Pitot tube measurements ( The values of air velocity were high, in particular when the air from two compressors was fed through the smallest manifold (Manifold E). Also included are the values of air speed used in the CFD model, which were in reasonable agreement with the experimentally determined values. The measurements obtained on Manifold C were repeated using an electronic vane anemometer. In this experiment, the manifold was used in its installed state inside the centrifuge (which was obviously not working at the time) and the anemometer was rested on the basket, ca 100 mm away from the manifold. It was possible to obtain readings at the centre and the edge of the manifold. The determined values of air speed were 120 (centre) and 80 m/s (edge). Interestingly there was reasonable agreement between the anemometer (120 m/s) and the Pitot tube reading (138 m/s) obtained under similar conditions). The previous two sections have described how air purging in centrifuges could be characterised in terms of the speed of the air being delivered to the manifold and the height of the coal bed, both of which could be measured experimentally. With these two parameters it was then possible to simulate using FLUENT the conditions needed to achieve moisture reduction. The final piece in the jigsaw involved understanding how the air would be produced and how much it would cost to produce it. For this, it was necessary to understand the pressure drop required to generate the appropriate air flow. This was approached in two ways as described below. Ergun's equation ( Air velocity up to 20 m/s (based on the critical Weber number model), equivalent to 3–7 m/s superficial air velocity, assuming a bed porosity of 0.35 determined in batch experiments. Mean bed height 60 mm (determined during centrifuge operation). Air viscosity 1.85E-05 Pa s at 25 °C and 1 bar. Particle sphericity 0.8 which is reasonable for most granular materials. Sauter mean particle diameter 1.6 mm (determined, assuming a minimum size of 0.5 mm). Air density The results are shown in The air-supply rig used in the full-scale trials is shown in A flow meter located between P1 and P2 was used to ensure that the compressors were delivering their rated capacity.  The costs of air purging consist almost entirely of the capital and operating costs of the equipment for delivering the air. These costs are in turn dependent on the volume flow rate of the air and the pressure drop. The air flow rate is specified from testwork such as that described in the previous paper ( There are many scenarios for how air purging can be installed into a coal preparation plant. Some of the factors involved include: The distance between the air delivery equipment and the centrifuge. The number of valves, bends, etc. in the lines. The number of centrifuges to be retrofitted – for example the cost per machine of retrofitting six centrifuges would be less than retrofitting each individually. The air source, e.g. blowers (preferred), compressors, exhaust air from a vacuum pump if the residual water is removed. considers only the option of applying one blower to a single centrifuge which is probably a worst case in terms of economies of scale, considers only the capital and operating costs of the blower, ignoring all site specific costs associated with delivery and installation, is based on the conditions for Manifold D air flow rate 3200 cfm, manifold cross-section area assumed compressible fluid flow using the method taken from The required air flow could be supplied by a 20 kPa blower of capacity 4000 cfm, through a line consisting of 30 m of 200 mm diameter pipe followed by 0.5 m of 100 mm diameter pipe inside the centrifuge. A blower of this type (which offers substantial contingency) would cost ca A$75 k, and have a motor size of 50 kW. Assuming a centrifuge throughput of 100 tph and a power cost of A$0.05 kWh, then this would equate to a processing cost of A$0.025/ton of coal. The above estimate is useful in providing an order-of magnitude cost. Although installation costs have been ignored, optimisation of air delivery systems and the economies of scale (since the above scenario applies one blower to one centrifuge) would result in significant savings. These costs are thought to be much lower than the benefits that would accrue from lower moisture products. Air purging therefore has strong potential as a cost-effective moisture reduction technology. The CFD modelling indicated, and this was confirmed by observation, that a significant proportion of the air was not penetrating the bed, but discharging with the centrifuge product. It is possible that improvements in the engineering of the process could lead to improvements in the efficiency of air utilisation and hence a reduction of costs. Techniques for doing this are currently being studied.  Air purging has been shown to reduce the moisture content of products from coarse coal centrifuges by up to 1 wt%. This paper provides some improved understanding of the technique which is essential if it is to be applied reliably in different plant situations. The two most important parameters affecting moisture reduction by air purging are bed height and the speed of the air exiting the bed. Using a new technique, the height of the bed of coal particles on the basket of the coarse coal centrifuge being tested was between 20 and 63 mm, depending on location on the basket. Surprisingly bed height showed substantial variation with time, which had a major influence on where and how the manifold was inserted into the centrifuge. The critical air speed for achieving moisture removal was known to be between 8 and 20 m/s. CFD modelling using FLUENT was used to relate the exit air speed to the air speed exiting the manifold, which was very high at ⩾200 m/s. Ergun's equation was used to calculate predictions of the pressure drop across the bed in order to achieve the required air flow. These predictions were in good agreement with experimental values. Based on these data, the costs of generating the required costs of air were calculated, in one scenario examined, to be only A$0.025/ton of coal treated. This is thought to be much less than the benefits that would accrue from lower moisture products. The authors would like to acknowledge financial support for this project from the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP).