Introduction
                  Shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) is a well – established treatment option for urolithiasis. The technology of SWL has undergone significant changes in an attempt to better optimize the results while reducing failure rates. There are some important limitations that restrict the use of SWL. In this review, we aim to place these advantages and limitations in perspective, assess the current role of SWL, and discuss recent advances in lithotripsy technology and treatment strategies.
               
                  Methods
                  A comprehensive review was conducted to identify studies reporting outcomes on ESWL. We searched for literature (PubMed, Embase, Medline) that focused on the physics of shock waves, theories of stone disintegration, and studies on optimising shock wave application. Relevant articles in English published since 1980 were selected for inclusion.
               
                  Results
                  Efficacy has been shown to vary between lithotripters. To maximize stone fragmentation and reduce failure rates, many factors can be optimized. Factors to consider in proper patient selection include skin – to – stone distance and stone size. Careful attention to the rate of shock wave administration, proper coupling of the treatment head to the patient have important influences on the success of lithotripsy.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Proper selection of patients who are expected to respond well to SWL, as well as attention to the technical aspects of the procedure are the keys to SWL success. Studies aiming to determine the mechanisms of shock wave action in stone breakage have begun to suggest new treatment strategies to improve success rates and safety.The introduction of shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) in 1980 revolutionized the management of kidney stones. Within ten years, it became the most common intervention for patients The Dornier HM3 was the first lithotripter to be widely utilized in clinical practice. It is a device that features a large water bath for optimum shock wave coupling, fluoroscopic imaging, an ellipsoid reflector with a small aperture and an electrohydraulic shockwave generator Electrohydraulic generators are based on spark – gap technology that produces a vaporization bubble. The bubble expands and immediately collapses, producing a high – energy pressure wave. The shock wave then encounters an ellipsoid reflector that focuses the wave Electromagnetic generators produce a magnetic field. The coil, which is basis of this technology, is located in one of two places: around a cylinder, on the inside plane of a spherical cap, or on a flat exterior with an overlying conductive membrane. A shock wave is produced when the magnetic field causes repulsion of the membrane. It is focused with a parabolic reflector or acoustic lens Piezoelectric generators result in the generation of a shockwave by non – linear propagation A capacitor is fired through a collection of hundreds of piezoceramic elements positioned on a reflector. Each element is focused on the same location (F2) much like a satellite dish. The outcomes of SWL can be enhanced in many ways. Patient selection plays an important role, and factors to consider include body habitus, stone burden, anatomical location, stone density measured by non – contrast CT, and for renal stone cases, stone to skin distance. Poor outcomes for SWL have been attributed to obesity. Appropriately positioning patients with high body mass index (BMI) to target the stone can be challenging as the focal length of most lithotripters is in the 15 cm range. Furthermore, excess adipose tissue dampens the energy from the shock wave as it travels to F2 Morbid obesity may render SWL impractical or technically impossible for various reasons. Firstly, there are weight limitations on the lithotripter table or gantry. Furthermore, it may be impossible to radio – graphically target the stone. Most often, the skin – to – stone distance (SSD) often exceeds the maximum allowable focal distance of the lithotripter. In such circumstances, a blast path technique that relies on high pressures generated at a point located co – axially beyond second focus (F2) may be considered A recent study combined two parameters: SSD with a measure of stone density (Hounsfield units). The results revealed that patients with both favourable parameters had a 91% stone – free rate, while those with both unfavourable parameters had a 41% stone – free rate ( Stone burden plays a significant role in predicting the outcome of SWL (even for patients with non – staghorn calculi). As stone size increases, the likelihood of a successful outcome decreases. EAU and AUA guidelines do not recommend SWL as primary treatment for stones larger than 2 cm in size Stones of differing composition vary widely with regard to their fragility. Similarly, stones of the same composition may respond differently to shockwaves Hockley and collaborators reported on 43 cystinuric patients treated with SWL and PCNL. The stone – free rates with SWL were 70.5% for calculi 20 mm or less; meanwhile, stones greater than 20 mm had stone free rates of 41% Brushite calculi also respond poorly to SWL. Klee et al. reported on 30 patients with a total of 46 brushite stones Poor response to SWL is not only limited to stones commonly thought of as exceptionally hard or dense. In fact, very soft matrix calculi, composed of as much as 65% organic matter (in comparison to 2% or 3% organic matter in most non – infected urinary calculi), also respond poorly to SWL Joseph and colleagues reported a significantly reduced stone free rate of 54.5% with SWL for calculi greater than 1000 HU Stone location is an influential factor for the outcome of SWL. Attaining a stone – free status with lower pole calculi (even if fragmentation occurs) can be challenging. Albala and collaborators' prospective, multicenter, randomized – controlled trial, Lower Pole I, compared success rates for lower pole calculi treated with SWL in comparison to PCNL The follow – up study, Lower Pole II was also a prospective, multicenter, randomized – controlled trial comparing ureteroscopy to SWL for lower pole stones less than 1 cm In addition to being contraindicated in young females of childbearing age, SWL of distal ureteral calculi, is associated with lower success rates. The 2007 meta – analysis of EAU/AUA offered guidelines for the management of ureteral calculi and pooled data on SWL outcomes. They noted an 82% stone free rate in the proximal ureter on 41 studies with 6428 patients, 73% stone free rate in the mid – ureter reporting on 31 studies in 1607 patients, and 74% stone free rate in the distal ureter reporting on 50 studies in 6981 patients. ( Infundibulopelvic angle plus infundibular width and length are anatomical factors that can alter the success rate for treatment of lower pole calculi with SWL. Elbahnasy and associates evaluated intrinsic renal anatomy using intravenous pyelogram features The unique clinical scenario of calyceal diverticula is a controversial topic when discussing appropriateness of SWL. The neck of the diverticulum is classically quite narrow; consequently, it can be quite challenging to fragment the stone enough to get clearance of all or any of the pieces. One study revealed a stone free rate of only 21% Patient selection may play a significant role in this subgroup. If there was adequate visualization of the ostium on pre – operative imaging, with the diverticula filling with contrast, and if stone size was small. Streem and Yost demonstrated stone clearance rates of 58% for calyceal diverticular stones Case selection, surgeon technique, and modifiable parameters play a role in enhancing safety and maximizing successful outcomes of SWL. Improved stone fragmentation and reduced tissue damage can be achieved with an optimal rate of shock wave application. Numerous randomized trials have indicated that decreasing shock wave rate can improve stone fragmentation, especially for stones larger than 1 cm The optimal treatment rate is not clear. Studies suggest that SWL at 60 to 90 shocks/min results in better fragmentation when compared to 120 shocks/min (particularly for larger stones) Ramping up the energy voltage of the device (rather than beginning at maximum energy) is one way to minimize the risk of tissue injury and potentially improve stone breakage. Ramping also allows for better patient accommodation to the sensation of treatment Recently, Lingeman and colleagues discovered that the administration of 300 pretreatment SWs can initiate a protective response in the majority of treated kidneys. Their findings can serve as a guide for minimizing tissue injury while simultaneously decreasing treatment time. This can be attained by selecting 300 or more pretreatment SWs as part of a pause – less treatment protocol; thus, avoiding an extended time pause between initial pretreatment SWs and the main body of treatment shocks Maximizing energy delivery to the stone can be achieved by proper coupling of the SWL generator head to the patient in an air – tight manner, with minimization of gas bubbles in the coupling media. Failure to recognize breaks in coupling can result in unsuccessful stone fragmentation Advances in lithotripter design have led to a shift from water bath coupling (as was seen with the original HM3 design) to the use of a smaller coupling interface. Coupling is influenced by numerous factors: the type of SWL machine, gel used at the patient – generator interface (preferably, a greater volume of lower – viscosity), method of gel application (best to apply to shock head first), and patient factors (i.e. patient movement during treatment, decoupling caused by lifting of the back off the generator and introducing air bubbles into the coupling interface) Proper stone targeting is fundamental to SWL success. An ongoing debate exists regarding the superiority of fluoroscopic or ultrasound targeting. Success rates vary based on urologist expertise, SWL machine type, and stone composition Lithotripters differ based on their acoustic output (i.e. the dimensions and pressures of the focal zone (F2). In cases with multiple renal stones, the efficacy was reduced when compared to the former gold standard, Dornier HM3 Distributing the shockwave energy on two applicators is the basis for the dual – EHL system (Direx Duet, Direx Corp, Israel). As shock waves can be delivered along separate paths, the use of dual shock sources has the potential advantage of reducing treatment time. Twin sources can be operated so that shockwaves are fired simultaneously (synchronous or simultaneous mode) or in sequence (alternating mode). Since this method can manipulate the acoustic field, it also has the potential to improve stone breakage Recognition of the role of cavitation in stone fragmentation has resulted in increased efforts to enhance the action of cavitation bubbles. One such example is tandem shockwaves generated utilizing a piezoelectric source fitted to an electrohydraulic system with an additional discharge circuit to produce the piezoelectric second pulse On the other hand, cavitation can be detrimental to stone fragmentation. The process results in the production of gas bubbles that last for hundreds of micro seconds, thereby blocking subsequent impulses Future studies should aim to improve clinical outcomes while simultaneously minimizing complications. The key to achieving better results involves focusing on modifiable factors including shockwave source, focal zone, acoustic output, voltage used, imaging modalities, focusing techniques, and coupling. Lastly, operator or technician experience is critical to success. For the properly selected patients, SWL is a well – tolerated, noninvasive procedure that produces reasonable stone clearance of upper urinary tract calculi while offering low morbidity rates. Recent advances in SWL have produced significant improvements in its safety and efficacy. A drawback to SWL is that retreatments may be necessary. Ureteroscopy has undergone remarkable advancements in the last 30 years. With the introduction of modern semi – rigid and flexible devices, stones that would have traditionally been considered for SWL, can now be managed via ureteroscopy. In fact, the application of ureteroscopic procedures for upper urinary tract calculi now surpasses that of SWL around the world. It would be erroneous to conclude that SWL is ineffective or is being replaced. SWL continues to have an important role. Proper selection of patients that are expected to respond well the procedure, as well as consideration of the technical aspects of SWL are key to it success. Although the features discussed serve as general guidelines for the use of SWL and help predict outcomes, the non – invasive nature of SWL has made it a desirable choice for patients. Many patients that are not ideal candidates for SWL, willingly accept the risk of a failed treatment (and the subsequent need for a secondary procedure) knowing no instrumentation will be necessary with the first attempt. Not applicable. None. James Lingeman and H E Elmansy. None. James Lingeman.