This work presents the design and the basic development of an innovative in-line mixing helical (coiled) reactor for the flocculation and solid–liquid separation of suspended particles. The device system was named flocs generator reactor (FGR), a compact flocculation system whereby the flocculation of particles is assisted by the kinetic energy transfer from the hydraulic flow through the reactor. The flow mixing, characterized as a plug flow regime with a slow dispersion, promoted the required hydrodynamics conditions to disperse the polymer flocculant (cationic polyacrylamide) and also to generate “strong” flocs of Fe(OH)3 (colloidal suspension model system) at pH 7.5. The solid–liquid separation of the flocs was then achieved either by settling or by flotation with microbubbles (30–70 μm). Studies were carried out with different models of FGRs (varying the length/volume ratio), and process efficiency (mainly kinetics) was evaluated as a function of polymer concentration and operating parameters, namely, feed flow rate, air-to-solids ratio and residence time. Results showed that the aerated flocs are readily floated with rising rates of the order of 120 m h−1, values higher than those obtained for the settling of the nonaerated flocs (18–24 m h−1). The FGR requires short residence times and generates dense, well-structured flocs (with a mass fractal dimension, d
                     F of about 3) which withstand high shear forces. Due to the high process efficiency and high loading capacity shown, it is believed that the FGR has a good potential as an in-line flocculation (or flotation) separator device in applications requiring high rate solid–liquid separations.Flocculation is a known process employed worldwide in several industrial operations, among others, thickening, wastewater treatment, mineral processing and papermaking ( Flocculation of suspended particles takes place after polymer diffusion and adsorption under stirring (agitation), followed by flocs build-up and growth at slow mixing stage. The bigger the floc, the faster is the solid–liquid separation settling rate ( Usually, flocculation is performed in agitated tanks or basins, and although appears to be quite simple, the process (and the devices) still presents problems such as short circuits, dead zones, high mechanical and electrical energy requirement, fairly high maintenance costs, etc. According to Yet, coagulation and flocculation may be conducted in in-line mixing facilities, such as conduits and pipes connecting treatment units ( According to Curved configurations of circular tubes, such as bends, and helical coils are commonly found in the industry mainly in heat exchangers, chemical reactors, reverse osmosis units ( Despite the advantages presented by coiled pipe facilities in numerous industrial processes, there is no much information about the employment of these units for the flocculation of suspended solids in water and wastewater applications. Only a few authors have evaluated in-line coiled mixing units for the generation of flocs at laboratory scale, namely, flocculation of polystyrene latex particles ( Therefore, the aim of the present paper was to describe the design and basic development of a new compact in-line coiled reactor to flocculate and separate suspended particles. The flocculation reactor behaves actually as a contactor and was named flocs generator reactor-FGR, and its efficiency was evaluated using colloidal Fe(OH) The reagents employed were FeCl The flocs generator reactor-FGR was designed and constructed for flocs generation ahead to the solid (flocs)–liquid separation stage, with feed rates ranging from 0.12 to 0.6 m Four (4) different reactor models with varying length/volume ratios were evaluated for the generation of the flocs. The constructive characteristics are summarized in The system rig used, shown in The feed rate was controlled by a Weg™ frequency controlling equipment model CFW 07. A Masterflex™ (model 7518-10) dosing peristaltic pump with a Tygon™ tubing model 6409-13 was used to inject the polymer. For the generation of the microbubbles (as in dissolved air flotation [DAF]), air was dissolved into water using a saturator vessel (90 cm in height and 10 cm in diameter). The saturator, operating at varying pressures (2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 atm), was constructed with a bed height of 50 cm, filled with pall rings of 25 mm in height and 25 mm in diameter. Flocculation experiments were carried out at room temperature, using colloidal Fe(OH) The flow exiting from the FGR fed the solid–liquid separation vessels (columns) whereby the settling (non aerated flocs) and up rising (aerated flocs) rates were evaluated. These rates were calculated, monitoring the times needed for the flocs to travel a fixed distance. Time measurements were made by direct observations (randomly) of many individual flocs. Also, flocculation efficiency was monitored by means of the iron removal from water analysing, with a Varian™ atomic absorption spectrometer, the residual iron concentration in the supernatants after flocculation. In all cases, the flocculation degrees were higher than 95%. The evaluation of the performance of the flocs generator reactor (FGR) and its optimization were made by monitoring the separation rate of the flocs formed. The criterion used (for optimal conditions) was the faster separation rates, settling time of non aerated flocs and up rising rate of the aerated ones. All experimental conditions were tested in triplicate, with at least 25 times measurements of separation in each experimental set. An arithmetic medium of all the values obtained were calculated and statistically analysed according to the analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA), as described in In the measurements of the nonaerated flocs settling rates, 1 l of sample exiting the FGR was introduced in a graduated cylinder. The density of these flocs was calculated using the Stokes law for laminar flux, using the settling rates data and the size of the flocs. The latter were obtained from photographic analysis (using a Sony™ digital camera, model DSC) and sized with a graduated scale (fixed at the same cylinder). The mass fractal dimension of the flocs was obtained using settling rate and size data obtained from settling experiments and through logarithmic correlation between the mass and the size of the flocs, considering spherical geometry ( In the experiments carried out with aerated flocs, microbubbles with sizes ranging from 30 to 70 μm ( The solid–liquid separation of these floating flocs was measured monitoring the up rising times in a graduated cylindrical column. Studies of the effect of the air/solids ratio on the separation efficiency were conducted fixing the ratio of injection of microbubbles in 10% and varying the saturation pressure (2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 atmospheres). The calculation of the air-to-solids ratio was made using the following Eq. The axial dispersion model in the FGR was evaluated using a tracer with an instantaneous (short term) injection of 1 ml of 10,000 mgl The velocity gradient was calculated from the head loss in the FGR with varying feed rates applying Eq. The Reynolds number determination was calculated from Eq. The effect of the reactor type and the feed rate on the settling rate of the flocs generated is shown in For all the reactors types, the highest settling rates ranged from 12 to 19 m h The residence time of the different reactors as a function of the feed flow rates is shown in Following the results obtained, the FGR 2, which showed the highest settling rates (19 m h   The settling rates of the Fe(OH)  Results of physical characterization of the flocs generated in the FGR are shown in  The mass fractal dimension ( Yet, the FGR, because of its coiled design, presents some peculiarities, among others, a fairly good shear rate for aggregation, a secondary flow and centrifugal collision operating forces. These properties enable a good contact between the high molecular weight polymer macromolecules and the colloids and thus form strong, big and compact structures. The hydraulic performance of the reactor is shown in the The velocity gradient ( In this system, not only the flocculation is favored (higher turbulence) but also the entrainment and/or entrapment of the air bubbles inside the flocs leading to formation of big aerated units. This phenomenon was observed visually and is represented schematically in The effect of the reactor type was again evaluated through the determination of the flocs up rising rates using the technique already described (results are shown in In all reactors, the highest up rising rates were obtained for the feed rate of 2 lmin FGR 2 presented (again) the best results in terms of floc up rising rate (112 m h The variation of the flocs up rising velocity according to the air to solids ratio is shown in the  Comparative results obtained in this work revealed that the separation rates of the aerated flocs are of the order of six times higher than the flocs settling. The floating rates of the aerated flocs (5–8 mm), reaching values higher than 100 m h Thus, the diameter of the equivalent bubbles calculated by the Stokes equation for the up rising rates of 67 to 112 m h An innovative in-line flocculation “helical” unit, named flocs generator reactor (FGR), was developed for the generation of polymeric (aerated and nonaerated) flocs. The studies showed high efficiency for the generation of Fe(OH) Authors thank to the students Silvio Gobbi and Láuren Brondani for their assistance in the experimental work and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil, especially CNPq (Millennium Project).