The reaction between acrylamide and glycine was studied in the aqueous model system heated at 150°C. The main reaction products were identified as C5H10N2O3, C8H15N3O4, C7H12N2O5 and C10H17N3O6 using HPLC-MS/MS, IT-TOF and NMR. Both of the critical intermediates were identified as glyoxylic acid and iminodiacetic acid. The pathways for the removal of acrylamide by glycine were proposed as the Michael addition between acrylamide and glycine with or without the initial oxidation of glycine. The changes in the contents of reactants and products provided quantitative evidence for the above pathways. The addition products between acrylamide and other 14 amino acids were identified by HPLC-MS/MS also.Acrylamide (2-propenamide, CAS No. 79-06-1) is widely used as a reactive monomer or intermediate in organic synthesis, and polyacrylamide has applications in the paper, textile and cosmetics industries, as well as the treatment of wastewater, mineral processing and other miscellaneous uses ( Our previous studies have suggested that glycine may compete effectively with asparagine in the Maillard reaction, or else covalently bind acrylamide ( LC solvents were of HPLC grade (Honeywell, Seoul, South Korea). Formic acid (≥98%) was obtained from Sigma–Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany). Acrylamide (>99.9%) was from Bio Basic Inc. (Markham, Canada) and glycine (≥99%) was from Amresco (Solon, USA). Glyoxylic acid was anhydrous (≥98%) (Aladdin, Shanghai, China) and The acrylamide/glycine model systems were designed on the basis of our previous work ( Instead of glycine, the other 19 amino acids (alanine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, serine, threonine, cysteine, methionine, asparagine, aspartic acid, glutamine, glutamic acid, lysine, arginine, histidine, proline, phenylalanine, tyrosine, tryptophan) was added to perform the reaction according to the above conditions, respectively. The main RPs formed in acrylamide/amino acid model systems were preliminarily identified by an Alliance 2695 Separations Module (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Micromass Quattro Micro triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Micromass, Manchester, UK). HPLC separation was carried out on a Venusil MP-C Based on the identification of the reaction products (quasimolecular ions at Structures of RPs were further identified using ion-trap time-of-flight mass spectrometry (IT-TOF) (Shimadzu, Tokyo, Japan). Mass spectra of the precursor and product ions ( The purified samples of RP 1–4 were prepared in Wilmad 528-PP 5 According to the identified structures of RPs, glyoxylic acid and iminodiacetic acid (IDA) were predicted to be the critical intermediates in the addition reaction between acrylamide and glycine following the oxidation of glycine. In order to verify the presence of glyoxylic acid, The formation of another intermediate IDA in glycine/acrylamide (0.1 The quantification of reactants (acrylamide and glycine) and products (RP-1, RP-2, RP-3, RP-4) in the acrylamide/glycine model system was performed by an Alliance 2695 Separations Module (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Micromass Quattro Micro triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Micromass, Manchester, UK). The final test solution (10 The quantification of the reactants and products was performed by an external standard method. For each standard curve, seven different concentration levels (1–25 Based on the preliminary identification, separation and preparation of four RPs, the further information of chemical structures of four RPs was given by IT-TOF high-resolution MS and NMR spectroscopy as the unequivocal evidence for the identification of RPs. The accurate mass and predicted chemical formulas of RP-1, -2, -3, and -4 are listed in Two reaction pathways between acrylamide and glycine during heating are proposed based on the identification of the RPs and intermediates found in present paper. The nucleophilic addition was assumed to be the one of the reaction pathways ( Furthermore, in order to confirm the addition mechanism between acrylamide and glycine, the RPs formed in other reaction model systems between acrylamide and 19 essential amino acids, except glycine, were identified by HPLC-MS. Only 14 nucleophilic addition products resulted from the reaction between acrylamide and the corresponding 14 amino acids. However, no nucleophilic addition products between acrylamide and aspartic acid, asparagine, glutamic acid, glutamine were detected, respectively. This was consistent with what is expected when these amino acids were the major precursors for acrylamide in foods. Furthermore, no products were detected for phenylalanine without a substituent group on the phenyl. In addition, the reaction pathway between acrylamide and glycine was described in The key intermediates in the acrylamide/glycine model system were identified to clearly explain the reaction pathway. There were the protonated quinoxaline derivatives of glyoxylic acid with a molecular ion at The sample from the acrylamide/glycine model system gave the molecular ion at The changes of reactants and products, identified in the acrylamide/glycine reaction model systems during heating at 150 The changes of the amounts of RP-1, RP-2, RP-3 and RP-4 were shown in The ratio of acrylamide molars present in the products compared to the consumed acrylamide detected could be the base to compare the contributions of two pathways for the removal of acrylamide using glycine. It is obvious that pathway 1 is the main reaction due to its dominance over pathway 2 from the consumed percentage of acrylamide ( The structures of material objects obtained in this study constitute a fundamental proof of the complexity of the reactions involved in the formation and removal of free acrylamide in foods. Two alternative pathways were proposed: Michael addition and oxidation followed by Michael addition. Although the reaction time in this study is too long to apply to food processing, the model system is the foundation to solve the problems related to this system. Oxidation of glycine was the evidence that the use of an atmosphere enriched in oxygen was a potential way to minimise the acrylamide content in foods, although such an atmosphere could give rise to oxidation of other food components such as unsaturated fats. Therefore, a better understanding of the chemistry and biology of RPs in general can facilitate the development of methods for decreasing acrylamide content during food processing. We thank Prof. N. Li and X. M. Liang (College of Science, China Agricultural University) for their valuable help in the NMR experiments. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the