The collection of hydrophobic particles in the froth phase in flotation has been studied. A continuous flotation cell was developed, in which the froth phase could be isolated from the pulp zone. Hematite particles, d
                     80=87 μm, were floated in the pulp, using a conventional oleate collector, while glass particles of similar diameter, d
                     80=82 μm, were introduced in wash water added to the froth. Four samples of glass particles, with contact angles between 0° and 82°, were used. The results indicate that the efficiency of collection of the hydrophobic particles in the froth can be very high. The process is strongly influenced by the hydrophobicity of the particles and the surface area available for attachment in the froth.
                  Recommendations for the flotation of particles in the froth phase are made, especially regarding the desirable hydrophobicity as reflected in the contact angle, the froth depth, the solids concentration in the feed to the froth, the air rate and wash water rate.The behaviour of mineral particles in the froth phase, and especially the measurement of the collection efficiency in the froth, has not been fully explored. There are indications, however, that the collection of particles in the froth may even be more efficient than the liquid phase. Froth-phase separation was well-known in the late Soviet Union since first being introduced in the early 1970s The maximum size of particle that can be effectively separated by froth separation has found to be 5 to 10 times the upper limiting size for mechanical machines. Particles of up to 3000 μm was reported to be effectively recovered A careful examination of froth phase studies reported in the literature provide some insight into the collection of particles in the froth zone. For instance, The general conclusion from previous work is that the collection of particles in the froth is not only possible, but that high collection rates may be achieved. However, there has been little systematic study on this point. In this work, we have conducted experiments in a continuous flotation cell of special design, in which the froth zone is separated from the pulp zone. Hematite is floated in the pulp in the normal way, so that the flotable particles transfer to the froth and travel upwards to discharge at the overflow lip into a launder. The cell also has facilities for introducing wash water and a froth-feed which may contain hydrophilic and hydrophobic glass particles of a similar size to the hematite. The feed to the froth contains particles of different hydrophobicities as measured by the contact angle. Particles of well-defined hydrophobicity were used to evaluate the effect of hydrophobicity on the recovery of particles as well as froth phase behavior. The interaction of hydrophobic froth-fed particles with particles which are carried out of the flotation pulp and are already attached to the surface of bubbles in the froth, was also studied. Froth-fed particles that attach to the froth will pass out in the product launder. The design of the cell is such that particles that have been fed into the froth and have passed through it, or hematite particles that have dropped out of the froth, can be collected and measured. A special cell in which the froth phase is isolated from the pulp zone was employed. The main objective was to study the collection of particles in the froth phase alone, so it was necessary to be able to capture all particles that were dropping out of the froth zone. This approach was first used by A schematic diagram of the apparatus employed in the study is given in To generate bubbles, a sintered glass disc located at the bottom of cell was used. High purity nitrogen gas was introduced at the bottom of column through the disc. The gas flowrate was controlled by a needle valve attached to a pressure regulator. A laboratory stirrer was used to keep particles in suspension. A stirring speed of 445 rpm was found to be sufficient to suspend all of the particles. It is necessary to distribute the froth-fed solids as evenly as possible within the froth, while ensuring that the froth structure is not unduly disturbed. After some initial trials, a convenient design for the distribution of the glass particles was arrived at. It is essentially a ring made of stainless steel tubing 3.2 mm outside diameter, 1.8 mm inside diameter, and perforated with six holes of 1.5 mm diameter. The position of the feed distributor in the froth was decided by trial and error, initially without wash water. However, after a number of tests conducted with hydrophilic glass particles, it was found that the elimination of entrainment of glass particles to the concentrate was not achievable. Even when the feed distributor was located very deep in the froth, a considerable number of hydrophilic particles were transported to the froth product. Consequently, it was decided to add wash water from the top of the froth to flush away any particles that may be trapped between bubble films, or may be present in the feed water reporting to the froth from the pulp. The feed distributor for the glass particles was located 300 mm below the surface of the froth. Wash water was added 50 mm below the top of the froth through a distributor similar to the glass sphere feed distributor. The ore was from the Port Hedland area in Western Australia and is predominantly hematite (>96%) with a small amount of quartz (1.6%) and alumina (0.6%). It was selected as the simplest ore, which was readily available for such a study with the added advantage that the separation between hematite ore and glass particles could be easily achieved. The ore was dry ground in a laboratory rod-mill. Special effort was put into obtaining a particle size distribution close to that of the glass particles so that any effects arising from differences in size between the two minerals could be kept to a minimum. The measured Spherical glass particles were used as the hydrophobic model system. Their response to flotation is similar to quartz, except that the quartz particles are naturally angular, while the glass particles are spherical in shape. The glass particles used in this study were Mill Spec-13 grade supplied by Godfrey Blast Cleaning, Australia. The average particle size ( The glass particles were first cleaned by soaking in 1 M sodium hydroxide for several hours and then washed with water until the supernatant liquor returned to pH 7 to 8. The sample was dried at 110 °C in a clean oven for 24 h before storing in sealed containers in a vacuum desiccator over silica gel. To hydrophobise the surface of the glass particles, approximately 1000 g of cleaned glass particles was heated at 160 °C overnight to remove any physically adsorbed water. The sample was then placed inside a closed container and taken immediately to a dry-nitrogen-filled polyethylene glove-bag, where it was allowed to cool for at least 4 to 5 h. Particles were spread out in a thin layer, less than 0.5 cm. Large evaporating dishes filled with P The contact angle was measured using the Washburn technique, using cyclohexane to obtain the packing constant; the values recorded were the average of five separate determinations. The surface tension was measured by the ‘maximum force on a ring’ method. Considerable care was needed in choosing a suitable collector for the hematite, which would not interfere with the hydrophobicity of the glass particles. The latter is extremely sensitive to the slurry pH and there is a pH range where the flotation recovery is a maximum Dowfroth 250 (polypropylene glycol methyl ether), at 30 ppm concentration, was used as the frother. The concentration was chosen as a value above which no effect of concentration on bubble size was detected. Bubble size measurements, not reported here, were conducted using a photographic method. A measured quantity of hematite was placed in a stirred vessel and conditioned with a known concentration of the reagents (oleic acid and kerosene) at a pulp density of 45% solids for 20 min. The pH of the suspension was adjusted to 8 during the conditioning period by using either HCl or NaOH. The suspension was then transferred to the feed tank and diluted with tap water to the desired pulp density (generally 12%). Frother, at a concentration of 30 ppm, was added to the feed tank and mixed for a further 1 to 2 min before the suspension was fed to the flotation cell. Meanwhile a batch of glass particles was prepared and stirred for 5 min. As soon as froth appeared in the launder, the glass sphere feed and wash water pumps were started. Timed samples of the concentrate, the drop back, and the tailings were taken after the concentrate flowrate reached a steady state. The samples of hematite feed, glass-sphere feed, concentrate, drop back and tailings were weighed, filtered, dried and weighed again (to calculate % solids). The concentrate samples were then analyzed for hematite and glass particles content as described below. Variable-speed peristaltic pumps were used on the two feed streams, and on the drop back, tailings and wash-water lines to control flowrates. The concentrate, tailings and drop back streams were not recycled back to the feed tank. The pulp–froth interface was set at the same level manually in all the runs, to a point at the level of the partition between the pulp zone and the drop back collection column. The effective volume of liquid in the pulp zone was 1.95 l and the mean residence time in this zone, where the hematite was floated, was 3.25 min. By following the experimental procedure given above, a series of flotation tests were conducted to evaluate quantitatively the effects of various operating parameters on the collection of hydrophobic particles in the froth phase. The experimental conditions are summarized in This investigation is focussed on the behaviour of particles in the froth zone. Accordingly, the experiments were carried out in such a way that the recovery of hematite in the pulp zone was in the range of 98% to 100%. For interest, the carrying capacities of the particles were calculated using the correlation of Hematite is soluble in hot concentrated hydrochloric acid, while the glass particles are unaffected. Acid treatment was therefore used to determine the fraction of hematite in samples of product, tailings, etc. The recovery of the glass particles is shown in As can be seen from  An interesting effect that can be seen in Other investigators have also highlighted the fact that highly hydrophobic particles with contact angles greater than 80° to 90° Further consequences of the drainage phenomenon may be seen in Another interesting outcome is observed in The interest here is not only to examine the possibility of recovery of hydrophobic particles in the froth phase, but also to investigate the interaction between particles to be collected by the bubbles and particles already located on the surface of bubbles. The particle sizes of the two solid species were matched as closely as possible to eliminate this factor as a possible variable. From From practical observation and the limited information in the literature, the froth depth would be expected to be one of the main parameters affecting the collection of particles in the froth. Tests were carried out to investigate this effect, and the results are given in As expected, the recovery for the strongly and intermediate hydrophobic particles increases with froth height. The interesting aspect of the graph lies in the fact that the differences in recovery between the two particles is not large, especially at froth depths deeper than 200 mm. The increases in recovery for the strongly and intermediate hydrophobic particles are only 10% and 11%, respectively, when the froth height is increased from 200 to 500 mm. A large difference in recovery for the two types of particles is observed, however, at the lowest froth height employed. For the lowest froth height used in the experiments (100 mm), 86% of the strongly hydrophobic particles are able to attach to bubbles in the froth, while recovery for the intermediate hydrophobic particles is lower, at 72%. The most probable reason is that, at lower froth heights, the bubble size is smaller, so that there is more surface area available for attachment. For the weakly hydrophobic particles, the behavior is the same as for the strongly and intermediate hydrophobic particles in that there is a regular increase in recovery with froth height up to 300 mm. But the rate of increase is more drastic; recovery increases approximately from 40% to 80% as the froth height is raised from the limiting height (100 mm) up to 300 mm. This observation indicates the importance of residence time in the froth for the particles of low degree of hydrophobicity. Beyond 300 mm froth depth however, unexpected behavior is observed. The recovery for the weakly hydrophobic particles starts to drop with further increase in the froth depth, suggesting that there is an optimum residence time for these particles in the current apparatus. The recovery of hematite in the presence of glass particles is shown in In the presence of intermediate hydrophobic particles, the recovery and collection efficiency of both hematite and glass particles appears to increase with froth depth With particles of weak hydrophobicity From this observation it is evident that depending on the degree of hydrophobicity of the particles present, some selectivity occurs in the froth which corroborates results reported in the literature A series of tests was carried out in which the superficial gas velocity Apparently, higher surface areas are needed to ensure that the particles of weakest hydrophobicity remain attached to the bubbles in the froth phase. Note also that the highest recovery of the glass particles was achieved with particles of intermediate hydrophobicity, with contact angles of 66°. There is a regular increase in the hematite recovery with superficial gas velocity, reaching a maximum value at about 1 cm/s in the presence of all three types of glass particles. Beyond that value, the recovery remains unaffected by the gas rate. Note that the hematite recovery is affected by the hydrophobicity of the glass particles only at lower gas rates. Since the froth and pulp phases are isolated in the current flotation cell, the initial contact with bubbles is also occurring separately, hematite in the pulp and glass beads in the froth column. Some interaction will undoubtedly occur in the froth column, with the possibility of replacement of the hematite by glass particles. However, the results in For hematite, collection occurs in the pulp, but the overall recovery is influenced also by events in the froth zone. The overall recoveries of hematite were very high, and the drop back out of the froth was very small compared with the flow of hematite in the tails from the pulp cell. Thus, it may be assumed that the flotation efficiency of the hematite is largely determined by phenomena in the pulp. The relation between flotation kinetics and gas rate is complex. It would be expected that any rise in In the froth, unlike in the pulp zone, the gas holdup decreases with increasing The recovery of hydrophobic glass particles is shown in It can be seen from the figure that with the strongly hydrophobic particles, the recovery is more or less constant over the bias range investigated. For the intermediate hydrophobicity, on the other hand, there is a steady rise in recovery with increasing bias rate. In the case of particles with weak hydrophobicity, recovery decreases continuously with wash water velocity. They are clearly being washed out of the froth. Hematite recovery as a function of the bias velocity is given in In contrast, there is a steady fall in the recovery of hematite with bias velocity for the intermediate hydrophobic particles, accompanied by an increase in the recovery of the glass beads. It appears that under the action of the wash water, the particles jostle for position at the interface and some hematite is replaced by glass particles. In the case of the weakly hydrophobic glass, the recovery of hematite consistently decreases with an increase in the wash water velocity. When wash water is added it partitions, with some going to the overflow and some flowing down through the froth. In the current work, the column was operated with a positive bias, i.e. bias water is greater than zero in the downward direction, which may explain the behaviour observed in The practical inference is that, in a relatively lightly loaded froth, the wash water rate should be no more than is necessary to maintain a positive bias. Regarding the influence of wash water rate on the collection of glass particles, the following effects may be expected. The liquid holdup in the froth increases with wash water rate. Wash water replaces the drained liquid between bubbles. Thus, the coalescence of bubbles reduces, resulting in more surface area available for attachment. On the other hand, higher liquid holdup would also increase the bubble film thickness. As a result, the chance of particle and bubble contact would reduce due to the increasing distance between bubble and particle. Another effect of wash water on the collection rate of hydrophobic particles would be the higher downward velocities of both liquid and particles in the froth, with consequent reduction in the residence time. The extent to which these parameters affect the collection rate would largely depend on the hydrophobicity of the particles. As the attractive force between bubble and particle increases with particle surface hydrophobicity, the induction time, which is the time required for the film thinning between particle and bubble, is much lower with the particles having higher degrees of hydrophobicity. Probably that is one reason why intermediate and strongly hydrophobic particles are not affected when wash water is added to the top of froth at high wash water rates. As this investigation is the first of its kind, there are no previous results with which the outcomes from these experiments could be directly compared. Regarding the relation between the recovery of hematite and the wash water velocity, the general effect of the wash water rate on the recovery of hematite in the presence of glass particles in the present study is inconsistent with data reported in the literature The aim of this work was to investigate the recoveries of particles distributed in the froth phase in a flotation cell, and compare them with those of particles of a similar size that were contacted with bubbles in the pulp zone of the flotation cell. The work shows that collection in the froth phase can be very rapid, and give high recoveries. For froth depths as low as 100 mm below the entry point of the feed to the froth, recoveries as high as 87% were achieved. However, the work also shows that the particles that are already in the froth are not easily dislodged. The flotation conditions were such that the froth leaving the pulp collection zone were not heavily loaded, and recovery of hematite in that zone alone was always better than 98%. The results suggest that when the flotation conditions in the froth were put under stress, for example by the addition of high wash water flowrates, or by increasing the froth height to induce drainage and bubble coalescence, the hydrophobic particles added to the froth had little effect on the recovery of the hematite. Regarding the superficial air velocity In overall performance, the particles of intermediate hydrophobicity, contact angle 66°, gave the best results in terms of froth-phase recovery. At a constant Strongly hydrophobic froth-fed particles float very well, and stabilise the froth. This can lead to difficulties, for the froths from these particles are sticky and immobile, whereas those from the intermediate hydrophobicity were stable, moved well and collapsed faster in the launder. Weakly hydrophobic froth-fed particles can give good recoveries, but the recoveries are more sensitive to changes in the parameters, especially the froth height, wash water rate and solids loading. The gas rate must be sufficient to provide bubble surface area for the flotation of all the particles in the feeds, whether the feed goes to the pulp or the froth zone. The optimum The froth depth is a very significant factor in the froth-fed flotation of particles. If the depth of froth is increased, the surface area and the residence time are increased as well, so the probability of capture of particles increases. For medium hydrophobic particles, froth depths of 400 to 500 mm (total) minimum are recommended but generally, the deeper the better as far as froth-phase recovery is concerned. The concentration of solids in the feed to the froth does not seem to be an issue for the size ranges investigated here. On one hand, the mass flowrate of floatable froth-fed solids in the froth product increases linearly with mass concentration in the feed to the froth, but this can only be true up to a certain point. The bubble surface area available in the froth must be sufficient to transport the floatable solids to the product launder, so the mass that can be fed to the froth must be related to the flowrate of floatable solids in the feed to the pulp zone. Certainly it can be said that there were no practical difficulties in handling froth feed solids rates of up to 25% w/w. The results suggests that the wash water rate should be such as to give a positive bias, i.e. the total water addition as wash water and as water in the feed to the froth should be greater that the water reporting to the froth concentrate. If the wash water rate is too high, loss in recovery was observed, so the bias, although positive, should be kept as small as practical. This appears to be the first study in which the recovery of particles in the froth phase has been investigated. We believe it opens up a neglected area of flotation, and that there may be practical cases where it could be beneficial to feed particles into the froth, rather than into the pulp as is traditionally the case. An instance where froth-fed flotation could be useful is where the particles have difficulty in transferring from the pulp into the froth phase, especially with large or weakly hydrophobic particles. An area of work that should be addressed in the future is the kinetics of flotation in the froth phase, especially the effects of the residence time of froth-fed particles, the froth void fraction, and the solids concentration. One of us (SA) is grateful to the University of Newcastle, and the Australian Research Council Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes, for financial support.