Molybdenum ore flotation techniques are constantly challenged by the emergence of complex sulfide minerals, such as bismuthinite, in the mineral processing industry. Conventional flotation depressants, such as sodium sulfide, used in Mo–Bi-containing ore flotation require high dosages, which leads to high cost and low selectivity. Therefore, in this study, pyrogallic acid (PA), a widely distributed organic source, is tested as an alternative depressant to selectively depress bismuthinite in Mo–Bi sulfide ores from Shizhuyuan. Results show that PA has a minimal effect on molybdenite recovery; by contrast, PA has a high depressing effect on bismuthinite amelioration. At 500 g/t PA, molybdenum recovery slightly decreases by 2 percentage points, and bismuth content in molybdenum concentrate sharply declines by 34 percentage points, with respect to samples floated without PA. Batch flotation tests demonstrate that PA addition affects froth stability, as indicated by the variations of solid and water recoveries. The superior selectivity of molybdenite over bismuthinite is promoted by increasing the PA dosage. On the basis of these findings, PA is a feasible option and thus can be used as a depressant for bismuthinite in the flotation of sulfide minerals.The Shizhuyuan mine in Chenzhou is known for its W–Sn–Mo–Bi polymetallic deposits. Bismuth in the form of bismuthinite (Bi To overcome the above mentioned limitations, pyrogallic acid (PA) was introduced as a new depressant to selectively reduce bismuthinite in Mo–Bi sulfide flotation. PA is a powerful reducing agent ( Typical samples of Shizhuyuan ore were pressed through a jaw crusher to obtain a particle size of 100% (3 mm). The bulk sample was blended and riffled thoroughly to prepare subsamples for mineralogy analysis. The representative samples (1 kg) were rotary split and then ground in a stainless-steel ball mill at 66% solids to achieve a P Collector kerosene and frother terpilenol were supplied by Kermel (Guangdong, China). Depressant pyrogallic acid (PA) was supplied by Xilong Science (Guangdong, China). Kerosene and terpilenol were of industry grade and used as received. PA was of analytical reagent. The 10% PA solution was prepared using distilled water. Kerosene and terpilenol were used at the dosages of 30 g/t and 20 g/t, respectively. PA was used with the required dosage. 0.1 M NaOH and HCl were prepared to adjust the pulp pH. Tap water was used in all flotation experiments. All chemical solutions were freshly prepared using distilled water at the beginning of the experimental work. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurement was used to identify the minerals in the Shizhuyuan ore. The finely ground samples were measured by LabX XRD-6100 with Cu-Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA in the range of 0–90° (2θ). All data were obtained using a step size of 0.1° (2θ) and a counting time of 1 min per step. The results indicate that the major sulfide minerals were molybdenite, bismuthinite, and pyrite. The main gangue minerals were fluorite, quartz, garnet, and calcite. According to literature, adding modifiers will affect froth stability ( The recovered solids cannot accurately explain the effect of PA on the recovery of sulfide ore because the total solids include the sulfide ore and entrained gangue. The changes in the recovery and grade of concentrate are derived ( As shown in In contrast to those of the molybdenite, the grade recovery curves of the bismuthinite gradually shifted to the lower left corner when PA dosage increased. The overall recovery and grade of the bismuth were decreased in all cases (i.e., increased PA dosage in the flotation), which resulted in the bismuthinite flotation rate to reach an asymptote ( Considering that all batch flotation tests in the present study were conducted with the same particle sizes in the same operating conditions, the flotation process can be considered a first-order kinetic procedure, in which mineral recovery is a function of time in the flotation process. Thus, the classical first-order kinetic model was applied to calculate the first-order rate constant and the maximum recovery. The modified flotation rate constant was obtained by multiplying the maximum recovery by the first-order rate constant to determine the PA effect on ore flotation performances ( The molybdenum and bismuth sulfide maximum recoveries ( The tabulation ( According to the results illustrated in The PA influence on flotation selectivity of Mo–Bi-containing ore was analyzed with mathematical statistical methods (least square method). The plot of selectivity indices versus PA dosage showed a linear relationship ( Here, PA is tested as a potential selective depressant to separate molybdenite and bismuthinite. The PA can depress bismuthinite in Shizhuyuan ores at pH 8. In the batch flotation tests, increasing the PA dosage causes the water and solid contents recovered into the concentrate to first decrease to the lowest point and then increase. The recovery and grade of molybdenum in the concentrate were hardly affected by PA, whereas those for bismuth substantially decreased with the increase in PA dosage. According to first-order kinetics, the flotation rate of molybdenite decreases initially and increases afterwards as the PA dosage is increased. This phenomenon may be attributed to the destabilization of the froth phase caused by PA. By contrast, the flotation rate of bismuthinite was reduced in the entire PA dosage range of this study, which indicate that PA inhibits bismuthinite and minimally affects molybdenite. A higher separation selectivity of molybdenite over bismuthinite is obtained in the presence (instead of absence) of PA. Thus, careful control of PA dosage at the appropriate levels should be considered when selectively separating molybdenite and bismuthinite. This control requirement has practical implications in continuous operation at the plant scale. This study was financially supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of