The biooxidation of ferrous iron is a potential industrial process in the regeneration of ferric iron, in hydrometallurgical leaching operations and in the removal of H2S in combustible gases. Another field of application is the treatment of acid mine drainage water. The aim of this work was the design of a continuous reactor for a high efficiency ferrous iron biooxidation capable of attaining the oxidation rates demanded by industrial processes for a minimum-sized reactor. Some criteria of design come from the data of former studies.
                  The bioreactor consists of a 1249 mm high and 84 mm diameter column randomly packed with siliceous stone particles with inlets for fresh medium and air at the bottom. The present work studies the influence of air and liquid flow rates on the ferrous iron biooxidation in a flooded packed bed bioreactor. Starting from the data of this study, kinetics, and oxygen concentration in the outlet gas, it was deduced that the biooxidation process was limited by the availability of oxygen in the liquid medium. The free-swimming cells concentration was measured in the outlet solution for different operating conditions. It was observed that once the biofilm has been formed, a variation in the liquid flow rate does not alter the biomass attached to the packing. The highest ferric productivity attained was 11.25 g/L·h.Biooxidation of ferrous iron (2Fe hydrometallurgical leaching operations the removal of hydrogen–sulphide in combustible gases In this way, the oxidant agent consumption is theoretically zero, the two processes are closed treatments, not polluting and without effluents. Another field of application is the treatment of acid mine drainage water Taking into account the treatment volumes of industrial processes, the bioreactor design has very strong economic limitations that affect its size, complexity, and type of bacterial support. The natural tendency of Packed beds with different packings, such as low grade sulphide minerals The present work studies the influence of liquid and air flow rates on the ferrous iron biooxidation in a flooded packed-bed bioreactor. Other variables such as pH, temperature, inert support material, support particle size and type of air distributor have been previously studied The culture used as inoculum was originally isolated from Riotinto mine drainage waters. It consisted mainly of Siliceous stone particles were used as bacterial support. In order to prepare the particles, the following operations were performed: screening to provide particles between 6 and 7 mm in size; washing with water under pressure to remove slimes; and washing with 1 M sulphuric acid to remove the soluble compounds. The bioreactor consisted of a 1249 mm high and 84 mm diameter polymethyl methacrylate column The process of biofilm formation on the solid support took place in the following stages. ⋅ Immobilization: the support particles were randomly placed in the column, constituting the three beds (first, second, and third floors). The void fraction in each floor was 0.42. The inoculum (1050 mL) and fresh medium (2000 mL) were added at the top of the column. The air flow rate was 500 mL/min. The bioreactor operated in batch mode. After 50 h, 95% conversion of ferrous iron was achieved and bacteria had colonized the surface of support particles. ⋅ Continuous recycling: once the last step was finished, continuous recycling flow mode of operation was initiated. Ten liters of fresh ferrous iron solution was fed in at the column. The liquid flow rate was 450 mL/h, and the air flow rate was 500 mL/min. After 54 h, 95% conversion of ferrous iron was achieved. Then, another volume of fresh medium (10 L) was fed into the column, and 100% conversion of ferrous iron was achieved after 38 h. The biofilm formation was then considered to be complete, and the reactor could operate in continuous flow mode. The column was continuously fed with fresh medium, and the steady state was established when the ferrous iron concentration varied less than 5% in a period of time equal to 50 times the mean residence time for each flow rate. The liquid and air flow rates were simultaneously increased stepwise. If ferrous iron concentration in the outlet solution was less than 0.5 g/L, the liquid flow rate was increased, and if ferrous iron concentration in the outlet solution was higher than 0.5 g/L, the air flow rate was increased. The RTD was experimentally studied using copper ions as a tracer. At a specified time The mean air bubble diameter was determined at zero and third floors. Zero and third floors were filmed by a video camera. Two hundred air bubble diameters were measured using a TV monitor. The mean air bubble diameter was calculated as the arithmetic average of these measurements. Ferrous iron concentration was determined by end-point automatic titration with 0.0083 M K  The RTD was experimentally studied for different air and liquid flow rates. in the zero floor, there are no inert support particles (small biomass density) and the rate of oxygen consumption has to be small; in the zero floor, the oxygen transfer conditions are the best:  the average size of the bubbles is the smallest in the column; and the level of turbulence is the highest in the column due to the proximity of the air diffuser. The same argument may explain the fact that as the air flow rate increases, the upward slope of the total system productivity curve decreases The free swimming cells concentration, The highest ferric productivity was 19.9 g/h (2327 g/h m Air flow rate has a noticeable effect on ferric iron productivity, which increased as air flow rate increased. The biooxidation process was limited by the availability of oxygen in the liquid medium. As either the air or the liquid flow rates increases, deviations from plug–flow behaviour decrease. Once the biofilm has been formed, variation in the liquid flow rate does not alter the biomass attached to the packing. It can be postulated that if ferrous iron concentration is low in a zone of reactor, a fraction of attached cells is detached by chemotaxis. The highest ferric productivity was 11.25 g/L h. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of CICYT (Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a, Spain), Project BIO95 0482.