The formation and consumption of elemental S were investigated in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite within and without a CE dialysis membrane in Acidithiobacillus caldus cultures. The bacteria were supplemented with tetrathionate outside the membrane. XPS analysis showed that monosulfide species and elemental S were formed on CuFeS2 surface regardless of the enclosure in the dialysis membrane. They diminished over time in the inoculated systems. In the membrane enclosure, colloidal S partially dissolves and can pass the dialysis membrane for bacterial oxidation to sulfuric acid. Anaerobic pre-oxidation of CuFeS2 by Fe3+ produced S-rich deposition on mineral surface. The solubilization of Cu from membrane-enclosed pre-oxidized chalcopyrite in the A. caldus culture was much slower as compared to direct contact with bacteria. The difference is attributed to slow diffusion through the dialysis membrane as well as clogging caused by polymerized S on the inside of the membrane.Chalcopyrite is a worldwide Cu mineral resource but its recovery by conventional mining technology poses a major technical and economic predicament if the grade is low. It is possible to exploit bioleaching techniques for processing of low-grade chalcopyrite ores but in practice this route is hampered by recalcitrance of CuFeS For assessing the passivation and mechanism of bioleaching of chalcopyrite, bacteria that are only capable of sulfur compound oxidation offer a research tool to investigate sulfur transformations without the Fe The museum-grade specimen of chalcopyrite was obtained from Sayama Mines, Japan. The sample was ground to −  In the first bioleaching experiment, finely ground chalcopyrite (0.5 In the second bioleaching experiment, chalcopyrite was first pre-oxidized with 50 At intervals, samples of leach solution were removed for pH and Eh measurements and microscopic (× At the end of each batch experiment the solid residues were recovered by filtration and freeze-dried before analysis by Raman spectroscopy (NRS 2000, JASCO International, Tokyo, Japan) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a Physical Electronics PHI 5800 ESCA system (ULVAC-PHI, Chigasaki, Kanagawa, Japan). For Raman spectroscopy, excitation was accomplished with an Ar ion laser (514.5   Raman spectra for the solids were consistent with the XPS results. Elemental S was oxidized in the inoculated systems but remained in the bulk phase of the sterile controls regardless of the membrane ( In the second experiment, a S-rich layer was chemically produced on chalcopyrite surface by anaerobic pre-oxidation with Fe  Thus the data indicated that elemental S layers on CuFeS Precursors of colloidal S and the rhombic elemental S ring structure (S The oxidation of sulfur to sulfuric acid was the primary role of Financial support was provided to KS by the