Purpose
                  To study the effects of surgical and nonoperative treatment on wrist function in patients with distal radius fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  In total, 97 patients treated for distal radius fracture in the Department of Orthopedic Trauma at the People's Hospital of Peking University from Jan. 2010 to Jun. 2016 were selected for outpatient follow-up, including manipulative reduction and dorsal splint fixation in 24 cases, bivalve cast fixation in 19 cases and open reduction and internal fixation in 54 cases. Evaluation was based on Sartiento's modification of the Gartland and Werley score. Efficacy was assessed with wrist pain as the focus.
               
                  Results
                  The wrist function scores of the surgical group were better than nonoperative groups. There was no significant difference in wrist function scores between the dorsal splint group and the bivalve cast group. The ulnar wrist pain incidence had no significant difference in surgical and nonoperative groups. The displace rate in dorsal splint group was higher than other groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The overall effect of surgical treatment of distal radius fracture is better than nonoperative treatment. The ulnar wrist pain incidence has no significant difference in these groups. Dorsal splint fixation is more prone to displace than bivalve cast fixation.Distal radius fracture is a clinically common fracture accounting for about one-sixth of all fractures, This study was authorized by the ethical committee of Peking University People's Hospital and all patients gave written informed consent for their participation in the study. The inclusion criteria were unilateral distal radius fracture, closed and fresh fracture, nonoperative treatment (including manipulative reduction and dorsal splint fixation or bivalve cast fixation) or surgical treatment of internal fixation using a palmar plate, age of ≥18 years, integral clinical data, a postoperative follow-up period of ≥12 months, distal radius fracture with normal union, and provision of informed consent after receiving an explanation of the purpose of this study. The exclusion criteria were old fracture, pathological fracture, open fracture, bilateral distal radius fracture, and fracture of other parts of the wrist (excluding the ulnar styloid). A total of 97 patients with distal radius fractures who met the inclusion criteria were followed up by outpatient visits. Local anesthesia was used in the hematoma, and manipulative reduction. After the reduction, the dorsal splint or bivalve cast was used. The X-ray showed satisfactory reduction. Preoperative examinations were performed to exclude surgical contraindications. The operation time was completed within 2 weeks after injury. All surgeries were completed by doctors with extensive clinical experience. The volar approach was used for open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures. All patients included in this study underwent outpatient follow-up. The union and displacement of the fracture were evaluated by X-ray. Sartiento's modification of the Gartland and Werley score was calculated. SPSS 20.0 statistical software (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) was used for data analysis. The Mann-Whitney A total of 97 patients were observed, including 73 females and 24 males. The patients ranged from 18 to 84 years old, with an average age of 54.4 years. All the patients were fresh fractures when they came for treatment, and they had integral clinical data, and a postoperative follow-up period was over 12 months, including manipulative reduction and dorsal splint fixation in 24 cases, bivalve cast fixation in 19 cases and open reduction and internal fixation in 54 cases. One week after the treatment of patients with X-ray examination, the results showed that displacement occurred in 7 cases with dorsal splint fixation, 3 cases with bivalve cast fixation and 0 case with surgery. The displacement ratio of dorsal splint fixation group was significantly higher than that of other groups ( The patients were evaluated for long-term effects. The Gartland and Werley score showed that the excellent and good efficacy rate was 90.7% (excellent: Long term follow-up results showed that 25 cases had ulnar wrist pain, and the overall incidence of ulnar wrist pain was 26.6%. The analysis results showed that different treatment groups did not significantly impact ulnar wrist pain ( Distal radius fractures are common in outpatient and emergency departments. Treatment methods include surgery and nonoperative treatment. There are different treatments for different types of fractures, however, with the further study of wrist joint treatment, the choice of approach is constantly evolving. At present, most scholars suggest surgical treatment in the following situations: the volar or dorsal cortex of the distal radius is a comminuted fracture, and the displacement of articular surface is > 2 mm; volar tilt angle leans toward dorsum more than 20–25; shortening of radius is > 5 mm; instable fracture after reduction is prone to re-displacement. This study showed that the overall effect of surgical treatment of distal radius fracture was better than nonoperative treatment. This may be related to the stability of the fracture, the long time external fixation and the stiffness of the joint. It is difficult to reduce the unstable distal radius fracture. The supporting effect of cortical bone is poor, and tendon and periosteum may be embedded in the fractured end. Although plaster is fixed, the fracture is still prone to re-displace because of some unstable factors such as cortical defect. This may lead to traumatic arthritis and eventually lead to wrist dysfunction. Surgical treatment is still recommended for distal radius fractures with indications of surgery. This study has some limitations. Firstly, it is a retrospective study, and selection bias may therefore be present. Secondly, there are many methods for treatment of distal radius fracture, and only some of the treatments are performed in this study, which may not be comprehensive enough. Finally, although all surgeries were completed by doctors with extensive clinical experience, some technical differences might have existed among the doctors. In conclusion, surgery and nonoperative treatment are both important approaches for distal radius fracture. Conservative treatment with manipulative reduction is still available for the stable fracture patients because of lower cost and burden. In contrast, for the unstable fractures patients, early and proper surgical treatment often results in better wrist function than non-operative treatment. In addition, in accordance with the current concept of ERAS (Enhanced Recovery After Surgery), surgical treatment often results in better wrist function than nonoperative treatment does. This study was supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at