An approach to quantify the grinding behaviour of different materials is presented. Based on a dimensional analysis and on fracture mechanical considerations, two material parameters, f
                     Mat. and W
                     
                        m,min, are derived theoretically. f
                     Mat. characterises the resistance of particulate material against fracture in impact comminution. f
                     Mat. comprises the effect of particle size on fracture and the resistance against the external load which is quantified by the specific impact energy. W
                     
                        m,min characterises the specific energy which a particle can take up without fracture. Values for f
                     Mat. and W
                     
                        m,min which determine the grindability of different materials are given. Both the dimensional analysis and the fracture mechanical considerations lead to the same influence of initial particle size, mass-specific impact energy and newly derived material parameters on the comminution result. Experimentally, the material parameters are determined by single-particle impact tests. Together with the initial particle size and the impact energy, they allow for a quantitative description of the breakage probability of different materials in the form of a mastercurve and can also be applied for the qualitative description of the breakage function. The results for five polymers, limestone and glass spheres of different sizes are shown.In grinding processes, machines and products interact in a complex way coupled by the operational parameters. The quality of the process result, usually the particle size distribution of the ground material, depends on every single apparatus involved, mainly mill and classifier, and the material's performance in each of those. A profound understanding of the whole process therefore requires a good understanding of every single component contributing to the comminution result. For the size reduction process, the stressing conditions, which are determined by the operational conditions, and the materials reaction to the applied stress have to be known. Furthermore, this understanding has to be quantified, if the process shall not only be understood better but also modelled predictively.  Every material performs differently in the milling process and exhibits different grinding characteristics. So far, a systematic description of the grinding performance of different materials is impossible. Only one publication In this paper, an approach which describes the impact grinding performance of different products independently from mill properties is introduced. It can be derived on the basis of a dimensional analysis by Rumpf The grinding of particles is a complex problem, which can be approached by fracture mechanical considerations. Two different procedures will be applied here in order to improve the understanding of the size reduction process: a generalising dimensional analysis approach proposed by Rumpf For the breakage of geometrically similar and physically identical particles, Rumpf A similar breakage pattern exists if all cracks form similarly. Therefore, the crack pattern can be described by a single characteristic length. The ratio of characteristic crack length and initial particle size has to remain constant to fulfil similarity. Then, the distribution function of the dimensionless crack length is identical for particles of different size. From the similarity in the breakage pattern, Rumpf concludes that the surface area per unit of volume of the product is inversely proportional to the initial particle size The breakage probability describes the fraction of particles which is destroyed in an experiment. For regular shapes such as spheres or cubes, the breakage can be determined by fragments missing from the original shape. This cannot be realised reasonably anymore for a large number of irregular-shaped particles. As an approximation for the breakage probability, the fraction of broken particles, e.g. the mass fraction of particles smaller than the feed size of a narrow size distribution, will be used equivalently in the following. In the most simple case, a single crack running through a particle leads to breakage, i.e. if the maximum crack length reaches the dimension of the initial particle size, the particle is destroyed. This is valid for more complicated crack patterns as well. Therefore, a similar breakage pattern leads to the same breakage probability and should therefore be achieved (for geometrically similar and physically identical) particles when The breakage function describes the size distribution of the fragments, not taking into account the amount of undestroyed particles. A similar fracture pattern according to Rumpf is characterised by a similar distribution of cracks within the particle. However, a similar distribution of cracks leads to a similar distribution of fragments. Thus, the breakage function should be similar if the grinding took place at a constant value of In addition, by dimensional reasoning, Rumpf derives For the case of impacting particles which is the focus of this paper, the deformation velocity As above, again, the similarity derived by Rumpf for the specific surface area can be applied to the breakage probability The difference in the material is thus characterised by the Young's modulus Weichert The Weibull statistics is based on the principle of the weakest link in a chain. It gives the probability For impacting elastic spheres, the Hertz In It can be assumed from Inserting the above two equations into  Rearranging the dimensionless variables in The initial size of the particles under investigation in this work lies for the polymers in the range of 2–3 mm, for the glass spheres between 0.095 and 8 mm. It is assumed that for these particle sizes, the initial flaw size is far smaller than the dimension of the particles, and flaw size is not yet influenced nor limited by the initial particle size. Therefore, the initial flaw size is independent of the initial particle size and the parameter  When experimental results (e.g. So far, the main result of this fracture model is the dependency of the fraction of broken particles When As with Going back to the general Weibull distribution function From the experiments presented below Based on both approaches, i.e. the modified similarity considerations first published by Rumpf Single-particle comminution experiments show some advantages, which allow the determination of the unknown material parameters. The particle concentration in single-particle tests is small enough to ensure that particle–particle interaction can be neglected. The stress intensity (here impact velocity) is well defined, and because of the shape of the target ring  For the single-particle experiments shown here, impact velocities from 60 to 140 m/s were realised at ambient temperature. At the end of a single test, the size distribution of the product particles was determined by sieve size analysis. After the analysis, the product particles were stressed again under the same conditions in order to simulate multiple impacts. This procedure was repeated up to five times. Different polymers [three different polymethyl methacrylates (PMMA G55, G7 and G88 from BASF and Agomer GmbH) and two polystyrenes (PS 168N and 144C from BASF)] with different mechanical properties were used. To produce different feed sizes from the nearly monodisperse extrudate, the material was ground once in the single-particle impact device. From the ground product, sieve size fractions between 2.0 and 2.5, 1.0 and 1.25 and 0.4 and 0.6 mm were produced. As these fractions have been stressed once in the impact device, they will clearly show a different grinding performance when compared to the fresh feed material. However, as all three fractions have experienced the same stressing history, they will be comparable among each other.   The energy threshold  Fitting One can see that for all materials under investigation, i.e. three PMMA, two PS, limestone and glass spheres, a single curve describing the breakage probability is obtained. The main conclusion which can be drawn from these results is that the influence of the main parameters stress intensity (impact energy) and stress frequency (impact number), initial particle size and material property is quantified correctly by Furthermore, for the first time, measurable material properties, the material parameter As shown above, the similarity in the breakage behaviour should not only be seen in the breakage probability but also in the breakage function. In order to compare the breakage function for different initial particle sizes, the fragment size From the breakage function, characteristic values like the ratio The change in slope in Two approaches describing the influence of material properties, initial particle size and external load on the result of impact comminution have been presented. It is shown that both of them lead to the same influencing dimensionless parameter It has been shown that Rumpf's approach based on a similar breakage pattern cannot only be applied to the increase in specific surface area but also to the more closely related functions of breakage probability and size distribution of the fragments (breakage function). Both are determined by the dimensionless stressing parameter. The breakage probability is described by a single mastercurve comprising the breakage behaviour of different materials (polymers, limestone, glass) of various sizes (95 μm to 8 mm). From the breakage function, the ratio of For the first time, measurable material properties describing the comminution performance in impact grinding of different materials have been derived and determined experimentally. These material parameters allow for a quantitative differentiation between various products and enable a comparison between different materials of different sizes. In future work, it will be investigated if the parameters diameter of the contact circle breakage function, size distribution of fragments rotor diameter Young's modulus of the particle material Young's modulus of the target material parameter impact number initial flaw size Weibull exponent revolution speed maximum pressure in contact area breakage probability, fraction of broken particles volume-specific surface area impact velocity deformation velocity velocity of elastic waves velocity of crack propagation strength mass-specific kinetic impact energy mass-specific threshold energy for particle breakage volume-specific elastic strain energy volume-specific threshold energy for the activation of a crack initial particle size mass-based median fragment size number of chain links crack extension energy per unit of created surface Poisson ratio of the particle material Poisson ratio of the target particle density load tensile stress material strength deformation elastic fracture initial kinetic mass specific maximum minimal, threshold material specific strength target volume specific mass-based median This project is sponsored by the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, grant number AiF-No. 12680 N. The authors appreciate the given support.