Using optical microscopy, XRD, SEM, and EDS, the effects of diverse coals on the reduction behavior of tin-bearing iron concentrate pellets were studied in this research. The results indicated that anthracite and coke breeze could be used as suitable reducers to separate tin from the tin-bearing iron concentrate pellets. Lignite and semi-coke with good reactivity accelerated the generation of metallic iron and metallic tin and caused Fe–Sn alloy to easily form in the reduced pellets; this had an adverse effect on tin volatilization from the roasted pellets. When using anthracite and coke breeze as reducers, the majority of the tin was effectively volatilized as SnO(g) at higher temperature. The finished pellets contained a large amount of recrystallized wustite, some unreduced magnetite, and a small amount of metallic iron. Some fayalite also formed in all of the reduced pellets but was incompletely crystallized.In recent years, the Chinese iron and steel industry has been rapidly developing and requires a large quantity of iron ores. As currently reported, low-grade, polymetallic and complex iron ores have taken an overwhelmingly dominant position in China ( There are abundant complex iron ores containing tin, zinc and other metals that are found in China ( A novel process of tin and zinc separation and pellet preparation for blast furnaces from tin-bearing iron concentrates by selective reduction has previously been presented ( In this study, the reactivity and proximate analysis of diverse coals were first studied. Then, the reduction behavior of tin and iron oxides in the pellets using different coals were characterized using physico-chemical analysis, optical microscopy, XRD, SEM and EDS. The tin-bearing iron concentrate samples with a granularity less than 0.075 From the compositions in The chemical phases of Fe and Sn and their distributions in the sample concentrates are analyzed and presented in It was observed that 96.45% of the Fe existed as magnetite. The mass fractions of Sn as monomer cassiterite and magnetite were measured to be 54.78% and 41.31%, respectively. SEM (KYKY-2800) photos of magnetite and cassiterite in the sample concentrates used in the present study were shown in Lignite, semi-coke, anthracite, and coke breeze were used as reducing coals in this paper; the proximate analyses of them are listed in The fuel ratio of fixed carbon to volatile matter was an important criterion for coal combustibility, which is closely correlated to coal reactivity ( The reactivity (α) was defined as the reaction capacity of coals reducing gaseous CO The experimental procedure, reported in the previous research ( A detailed set of bench-scale tests was conducted as follows. First, iron concentrates were blended with 1% modified humic acid, a new organic binder, balled into 12- to 15-mm-diameter green pellets in a Φ1000 The compressive strengths of the pellets were measured with a universal material testing machine (KL-WS). The loading speed was controlled at 15 The tin volatilization rate was defined as the volatilization rate of tin from the reduced pellets and was calculated in accordance with the following expression: Where The iron metallization degree was calculated by the following expression ( Where The phase transformation rules of iron oxides and the consolidation mechanisms of the pellets reduced by diverse coals were also studied using optical microscopy, XRD, SEM, and EDS. The area percentage of mineral compositions of the reduced pellets was calculated using a Leica DMLP microscope equipped with the Leica Qwin image processing and analysis application. The microstructure features of the roasted pellets were characterized by a KYKY-2800 SEM. The chemical composition quantitative analysis of the micro-zones in the reduced pellets was conducted using a FINDER-1000 Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS).  As shown in During the strength testing, the pellets reduced by lignite and semi-coke presented plastic deformation (in Many researches have examined the reduction of iron oxides by solid reducers ( The final reduced products depended largely on the CO partial pressure in the reducing atmosphere ( In the present study, lignite, semi-coke, anthracite and coke breeze, which were used as solid reducers, have diverse reactivities. For the reasons mentioned above, the reduction degree of iron oxides by these four types of coals varied significantly. XRD was used to investigate the differences of the main phase compositions in the reduced pellets, and the results are plotted in As observed from As shown in  SnO As listed in Comparatively, the gasification speeds of solid carbon in coke breeze and anthracite were very slow and caused a low CO partial pressure in the gaseous phase. Therefore, most of SnO Microscopic photos of reduced pellets were obtained using a Leica optical microscope and displayed in Overall, the porosity of pellets reduced by lignite was the highest primarily because lignite had the best reactivity and a large amount of wustite was reduced into metallic iron. After reduction, there were many micropores left in the finished pellets. As shown in From   Similar to a previous report ( The mineralogical characteristics of tin-bearing iron concentrates were determined using SEM. Then, the reduction behaviors of iron and tin oxides of the tin-bearing iron concentrate pellets using coals with diverse reactivities were researched. Lignite and semi-coke accelerated the generation of metallic iron and Fe–Sn alloy due to their good reactivities; however, this is unfavorable for removing tin from the pellets. Furthermore, the residual tin content in the pellets reduced by lignite and semi-coke was more than 0.12%. As for the pellets reduced by anthracite and coke breeze, the tin volatilization was respectively 70.98% and 72.54%, and only small amounts of metallic iron formed. Comparatively, the contents of wustite, fayalite and residual magnetite were higher. Incidentally, the porosity of pellets reduced by anthracite and coke breeze was less than that of the pellets reduced by lignite and semi-coke. SEM analysis also indicated that large amounts of fayalite were connected with wustite but crystallized incompletely. Overall, tin impurity could be effectively volatilized from the tin-bearing iron ore pellets if anthracite and coke breeze are used as reducers. Under the optimal conditions of roasting temperature 1075 The authors wish to express thanks to the