The effects of Ag nanoisland structure on the surface of Na3YSi3O9:Tb3+ glass ceramic was studied by cathodoluminescence and atomic force microscopy. Under electron beam excitation, the emission spectrum shape and main peaks were not affected by the Ag nanoisland structure, but about a fourfold enhancement in emission intensity was observed. The enhancement factor increased remarkably with increasing accelerating voltage and then stabilized to a constant. However, the increasing filament current did not affect the enhancement factor. These results suggest that surface plasmon resonance is beneficial to improve cathodoluminescent intensity.Nanometal materials exhibit unique optical and electrical properties that remain unmatched by many traditional materials. They present wide application prospects in the fields of material science, life science, and nanophotonics. Generally, when an external electric field (e.g., light field) acts on Au, Ag, Cu, or other metals, an induced charge will form on the metal surface or interface. In this case, when the metal particle size is smaller than the incident wavelength and the natural vibration frequency is close to the incident wavelength, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is produced. Charge resonance localized on the surface of the metal nanoparticles or rough metal surface is called the localized surface plasmon (LSP). Its properties depend on particle size, shape, dielectric surroundings, particle composition, and particle spacing. Thus, control can be achieved by changing their carrier, particularly the metal micro/nano structure. Metal nanostructure remarkably enhances the SPR of luminescent materials. With the rapid development of methods for preparing and manipulating nanoscale metal particles, the fluorescence enhancement effect of SPR has gained considerable attention in optics research. This property has been explored in the fabrication of biochemical sensor devices, optical waveguides, high-brightness GaN-based LEDs, solar cells, and so on The glass ceramic Na The atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of sample surfaces were obtained using a Dimension 3100 AFM (Bruker, Santa Barbara, CA, USA). For GC-NYSTb-Ag-islands, the CL was collected from the GC-NYSTb side in an ultrahigh-vacuum chamber (<8.0×10     Samples of GC-NYSTb-Ag-islands were prepared by annealing at 300 This work was supported by the