Under concentrated loading and uniform loading conditions, a number of tests were conducted using a self-developed loading device on the brittle fracture, hinged arching, until the rock-arch instability of the sandstone plates and the sensitivity of influent factors on the rock-arch failure were analyzed by numerical test based on the particle flow code (PFC). The results showed that sandstone plate instability presented four phases and three failure modes in the upper plate of the double-layer rock plates. The comparative analysis of dynamic thermomechanical properties for granite, sandstone, and mudstone were performed, and the rock-cutting fragmentation shows significant fractal features under the mechanical shock loads. To establish a meaningful correlation between the rock strength and the discontinuities, the standard uniaxial compression tests have been conducted using rock samples.In China, numerous shallow mined-out areas have been left due to the disordered mining by the private coal mines. It is of important theoretical and practical value for the roof stability evaluation and disaster forecasting to research the deformation rupture, instability mechanism, and failure mode of the rock roof in the mined-out areas. The studies on the instability of the rock roof in the mining field have been a main topic both for scholars in China and abroad. For example, according to elastic thin plate theory, In summary, though many research achievements have been made, the most results still lack laboratory testing and need to be verified. In addition, some numerical calculations were conducted based on the continuum mechanics, which could not reflect the spatial heterogeneity and the anisotropic effect of the roof in the mining field. Only a few researchers utilized the discrete element methods to study the macromechanical The rock samples used in the test were Hawkesbury sandstone, which obtained from Gosford Quarry in Sydney, Australia. The quartz sandstones which contained a small quantity of feldspars, siderite, and clay minerals were formed in marine sedimentary basin of the mid-Triassic, and located on the top of coal-bearing strata. The surface of specimen exhibited local red rather than white because of the content and distribution of iron oxide. For the single-layer roof of the mined-out areas, it could be classified into two categories according to the thickness: the thin plate and the thick plate. And the roof was always made up of various combinations of the thin plates and the thick plates. Thus, according to the definition of the thin plate and the thick plate in elastic mechanics, the specimen size of the thick plate was deigned to 190 The MTS-851 rock mechanics testing machine was selected as loading equipment, and the load was controlled by vertical displacement and loading rate was set 1 As shown in To monitor the cracks initiated and identify the failure location of the rock plate, the USB Acoustic Emission (AE) Nodes were used in the test. The USB AE Node is a single channel AE digital signal processor with full AE hit and time based features. In the test there were four USB AE nodes being connected to a USB hub for multichannel operation ( As shown in Stage 1: The rock plate was in the small deformation elastic stage. With the vertical force slowly increasing, the vertical displacement grew gradually. On the contrary, the horizontal force showed a slight decrease, which was mainly caused by the slight horizontal shrink of the rock plate during the loading process. Stage 2: The rock plate produced a brittle rupture and formed the rock-arch structure. As the vertical displacement went to about 2.5 Stage 3: The rock-arch structure began to bear loads and produced deformation. With the vertical force increasing, the middle hinge point of the rock-arch structure moved down, and the two flanks of the rock-arch rotated around the hinge point, respectively. Such kinds of motion would stretch the rock-arch structure in the horizontal direction and squeezed the plate in two sides, and the horizontal force showed a significant growth. Stage 4: The hinged rock-arch structure became unstable. With the vertical force continuously increasing, the middle hinged point of the rock-arch structure moved down constantly, and when the hinged point exceeded the horizontal line formed by the hinged point and two ends of the plate, the rock-arch structure became thoroughly unstable. Under the uniform loading, the damage and fracture extent of the rock plate was more serious than that under the concentrated loading, especially at the two ends of the rock plate ( As shown in As shown in the AE location map ( The rock plate was treated as the porous and solid material that consisted of particles and cement bodies. The force–displacement curve was simulated under the concentrated loading using the three-dimensional particle flow code (PFC3D). Before the numerical simulation model could be built, the microparameters needed to be adjusted repeatedly and finalized until the macromechanical parameters calculated were consistent with the physical macromechanical parameters. The microparameters required to be adjusted were as follows: Take the thick plate 190 First, a parallelepiped specimen consisting of arbitrary particles confined by six frictionless walls was generated by the radius expansion method. Second, the radii of all particles were changed uniformly to achieve a specified isotropic stress so as to reduce the magnitude of locked-in stresses that would develop after the subsequent bond installation. In this paper the isotropic stress was set to 0.1 A square wall with sides 10 As shown in In the elastic deformation stage ( As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in Under the both concentrated and uniform loading, there were elastic deformations, brittle ruptures, rock-arch bearing loads, and rock-arch instability four stages in the force-displacement curves. The peak value of the vertical force under uniform loading was greater than that under the concentrated loading. The number of AE hits and AE location showed the damage extent and scope of the rock plate under the uniform loading were greater than that under the concentrated loading. The simulation results showed that the tensile cracks of the rock plate were dominating during the concentrated loading. The numerical test results showed the instability of the rock-arch structure was more sensitive to the width and thickness compared with the length. The loading rate could be regarded as the quasistatic loading when that was less than a critical value. The vertical and the horizontal force would show the growth trend with the initial horizontal force increasing. To obtain the more precise simulation results in calculating by using PFC3D compared with the physical experimental results, the more precise description for the numerical model and the interaction forces among the particles should be improved. In the past three decades, numerous shallow mined-out areas had been left due to disordered mining by private coal mines in China. With the decrease of available land resources, a number of industrial and civil buildings, and many structures, such as expressways, bridges, and tunnels had to cross the mined-out areas. The stress of overlying strata in shallow mined-out areas was redistributed after the coal being mined, and then ground subsidence and destruction of these buildings appeared, which seriously affected the building plan, construction, and operation of the structures built above the mined-out areas ( The layered sedimentary strata structure was the common structure type of the rock roof in the coal mined-out areas. Considering the effect of the bedding structure, the characteristics of transverse isotropy and the interaction between layers, the deformation feature, failure mode, and fracture mechanism of the layered roof were more complicated. Thus, this is a difficult problem that needs to be urgently solved, specifically to study the roof deformation, failure process, and catastrophe mechanism in engineering practice. At present, most scholars usually regard the roof of a mined-out area as the rock beam to do mechanical analysis and the relevant tests ( To overcome the disadvantages of these hypothesis and relevant tests about elastic rock beam, a new loading device was developed to conduct the loading and AE test of four classes of double-layer rock plates, which is of great theoretical meaning and practical value for revealing the deformation process and the catastrophe mechanism of the combined rock plates ( The rock plate samples in the test were Hawkesbury sandstone, which were obtained from Gosford Quarry in Sydney, Australia. According to the definition of the thin plate and thick plate in elastic mechanics, the specimen size of the thick plate was deigned to 190 Under the concentrated load, the double-layer rock plates contacted closely and performed the bending deformation together; the frictional resistance caused by slide between these two plates could reflect the mechanical effects of the interaction to some extent. In the test, these double-layer rock plates were classified into four categories: upper thin plate and lower thick plate; upper thick plate and lower thin plate; double-layer thin plates and double-layer thick plates. Each rock plate was produced for three sets, and the comparative tests were done under the same conditions. As shown in The device consisted of three parts: the top was the circular board used for the concentrated load; the middle was a loading framework which included four bolts with nuts connecting the steel plates on both sides; and the bottom was a rectangle steel foundation, and the The overlying rock above the layered roof was usually treated as the uniform load, which created a key problem for how to apply the uniform load continuously on the layered roof in the process of the test. To simplify the stress condition reasonably, the uniform load was identified with the concentrated load through analyzing. The loading circular plate where the steel ball was embedded ( Whether the design of double-layer rock plate's ends was reasonable or not was a key point of the test. In the test, the boundary restraint state of these two ends was reasonably simulated to avoid issues of whether stiffness was too high or too small, which revealed the deformation process and fracture mechanism. Generally, the constraint forms of rock plate's ends was classified into three categories: hinged-support boundary, fixed supported boundary, and unconstrained boundary. To simulate the real boundary restraint of the roof of the mined-out areas, this test selected the first boundary constraint form that the displacement along the width of the rock plate was restricted, and the ends along the length of the rock plate were simply supported. Some special designs were used; for example, the curved groove along the length of the hinge bearing was designed to place a cylindrical ball. When the special designs were used, the movable bearing should be put on the fixed base in which the cylindrical steel was built to cause the free bending of the rock plate’s end along one direction to achieve the restraint of the hinge bearing ( The loading device selected was MTS-851 rock mechanics testing machine, and the load was controlled by axial displacement and the loading rate was 1 The bridge modules of AE data acquisition were from American National Instruments and these models were Ni 9237, Ni 9205, and Ni 9201, which were based on Labview software platform and AE signals could be analyzed ( Under the concentrated load, the loading process of fracture instability of the double-layer rock plates were as follows: First, assemble the spontaneously developed loading device in order. Second, according to combining form, place the sandstone plates on the rotatable bearing of both ends of the loading framework. Third, regulate four nuts to keep the steel plates of both sides of the loading framework vertical and make the steel plates clamp the double-layer rock plates. Fourth, place the loading device equipped with specimens on the loading cushion of the MTS-851 rock mechanics testing machine horizontally. Fifth, place the loading circular plate on the rock plates and adjust the position of the steel ball of the loading plate to the centroid of sandstone plates. Finally, place the AE probe on one side of rigid contact with tape and apply the load on the rock plates with MTS-851 rock mechanics testing machine to conduct the test. Through 12 sets of experiments, it was found that the load–displacement curves had common features. As shown in The first stage: The horizontal initial stage of load–displacement curve. This stage mainly included contact adjustment between the loading contactor and sandstone plates, which was initial-load (or initial-displacement) adjustment. The second stage: When the applied load reached to the first peak (approximately 2.0 The third stage: with the vertical displacement increasing, the applied load showed a significant growth trend. After reaching the second peak, there was a through-and-through fracture in the upper thin plate and lag fracture in the lower thick plate. Then the load dropped again. This stage showed the brittle failure feature too. The fourth stage: as the load continued to increase after the second peak (approximately 5.2 Although three sets of double-layer rock plates had the same mechanical behavior before the second load peak, after that the combined specimens showed three different types of mechanical behavior of the sandstone plates: the first set showed postpeak yielding behavior, the second set showed postpeak hardening behavior, and the third set showed postpeak softening behavior. Overall, bearing capacity of the double-layer rock plates was greater than that of single-layer rock plates. The other sandstone plates, such as the upper thick plate and the lower thin plate, double thick plates and double thin plates, had the same features of load–displacement curve as the above. AE is a phenomenon of transient elastic wave generation due to a rapid release of strain energy caused by a structural alteration in a solid material. The AE event is closely related to the deformation and fracture mechanism. As shown in When the applied load reached to the second peak and before the integral fracture and instability occurrence, there were more AE events and the higher AE event rate occurred due to the macro crack propagation and coalescence of rock plates ( As shown in As shown in As shown in The experimental study showed that the double-layer rock plates, nearly all the upper plates had the radial plate-fracture feature and nearly all the lower plate had the beam-fracture feature in different plate combinations. Particularly noteworthy was that shown in The fracture instability process of double-layer rock plates test was conducted by the new loading device, and the device is simple, economic, and operable. There were four distinct mechanical response stages in the force–displacement curves of double-layer rock plates. The double-layer rock plates had the same mechanical behaviors before the second load peak, and three types of mechanical behavior of the double-layer rock plates arose after the second load peak, which were postpeak yielding, postpeak hardening, and postpeak softening. There were many different AEs among the adjustment phase, the prepeak phase, and the postpeak phase of force–time AE event rate curves; it could reveal the mechanical mechanism for the crack generating, propagation, and coalescence of double-layer rock plates in the process of fracture and instability. The experimental results showed that there were three failure modes of beam fracture, arch destruction, and plate-fracture damage. And the results mentioned earlier were instructive to study on the stability and risk prediction of the roof of the mined-out areas. The combined plates of more than three layers and that with weak intercalated layer will be further studied in the follow-up tests. There are the obvious characteristics of the layered rock structure in the coal-bearing strata, so it is of important theoretical significance and practical value to study the deformation and fracture characteristics of the layered roof in mining field considering the layers interaction. It is the main topic for scholars in China and abroad to research the instability of the rock roof in the mining field. For example, In thermodynamics, entropy is a physical quantity to be used to describe the degree of disorder or the uniformity of energy distribution of the system. Now the concept of entropy is widely used in the fields of classical statistical mechanics, ecology, and economy, and some mature theories have been formed ( In summary, though many research achievements have been made, only a few researchers researched on the macro-mechanical response of the rock plates considering the layer effect, and did not further explore the microscopic damage of the rock plates. Therefore, a new loading device was developed to study the rock-arch instability characteristics of the rock plates, and PFC was used to further probe into the microscopic damage of the double-layer rock plates under the concentrated load. The rock plate samples in the test were Hawkesbury sandstone obtained from Gosford Quarry in Sydney, Australia The MTS-851 rock mechanics testing machine was selected as loading equipment, and the load was controlled by vertical displacement and loading rate was set 1 The double-layer sandstone plates and the test device were shown in As shown in As shown in Stage 1: The double-layer rock plates were in the small deformation elastic stage. With the vertical force slowly increasing, the vertical displacement grew gradually. On the contrary, the horizontal force showed the slight decrease, which was mainly caused by the slight horizontal shrink of the double-layer rock plates during the loading process. Stage 2: The double-layer rock plates produced brittle rupture and formed the rock-arch structure. As the vertical Stage 3: The rock-arch structure began to bear loads and produced deformation. With the vertical force increasing, the hinge points of the double rock-arch structures moved down, the two wings of each rock-arch structure rotated around the hinge point, respectively. Such kinds of motion would stretch the rock-arch structure in the horizontal direction and squeezed each plate in two sides, thus the horizontal force showed a significant growth. Stage 4: The instability of the hinged rock-arch structures happened. With the vertical force continuously increasing, the hinged points of the rock-arch structure moved down constantly. When the hinged points exceeded the horizontal lines formed by each hinged point and two wings of each plate, the rock-arch structures went into instability thoroughly. The rock plate was treated as the porous and solid material that consisted of particles and cement bodies. The force–displacement curve was to be simulated under the concentrated load using the PFC3D. Before the numerical simulation, the computational model and the microparameters needed to be adjusted repeatedly, and until the calculated micromechanic parameters of the model were consistent with the physical macromechanic parameters. The microparameters that required adjustment were shown in Taking the upper thick plate and the lower thin plate as an example, the following steps were showed how to build the computational model in PFC3D. First, a parallelepiped specimen consisting of arbitrarily particles confined by six frictionless walls was generated by the radius expansion method. Second, the radii of all particles were changed uniformly to achieve a specified isotropic stress so as to reduce the magnitude of locked-in stresses that would develop after the subsequent bond installation. In this paper the isotropic stress was set to 0.1 Third, the floating particles that had less than three contacts were eliminated. The parallel bonds were installed throughout the assembly between all particles that were in near proximity to finalize the specimen. Fourth, a single-layer rock plate specimen was generated as shown in Finally, a square wall with sides was made on the top of the rock plates as the concentrated loading. The two cylinder walls were paced on the right and left at the bottom of the model, respectively, as a supporting base, shown in The value of initial horizontal force was set 0 As shown in As shown in  As shown in The vertical force curve went up first and then down, and the horizontal force curve increased to the nearby maximum peak platform and fluctuated, thus the rock-arch structure showed to As shown in As shown in As shown in If the particle strains energy of the rock plates can be expressed: The unit strain energy of the double-layer rock plates were added together, then the total strain energy of the double-layer rock plates system was Supposed that  As shown in As shown in As shown in The double-layer rock plates produced brittle fracture and formed the double hinged rock-arch structures under the concentrated load. With the increase of cohesive strength and friction coefficient of the layer between two rock plates, the The roof of mined-out areas is composed of layered rock plates in general. The instability of the layered rock plates is influenced by many factors, such as the rock particle size, the rock-plate boundary conditions, the rock-plate temperature, and so forth. Some scholars have conducted a lot of research on the stability of the layered rock plates. In summary, the research as mentioned in this section usually simplified rock plate as elastic rock beam or elastic thin plate based on the continuum mechanics, therefore the theory, method, and content of the research needed to be further developed and deepened. In the paper, using self-prepared PFC3D, the numerical loading tests of double-layer rock plates were performed under the concentrated load, meanwhile, the sensitive factors of fracture instability of double-layer rock plates were analyzed. Thus the research results would provide reference and guiding significance for the stability evaluation on the roof of the mined-out areas. Before building the computational model, the microparameters of the rock plate should be determined. By repeatedly adjusting the microparameters of the model until the numerical experiment results were consistent with the physical test results ( Taking the upper thick plate and the lower thin plate as an example, to illustrate how to build the numerical calculation model, the special idea of the model was as follows: First of all, the model size of the rock plate was 190-mm long, 75-mm wide, and 38-mm high, and the model was generated by the radius expansion method ( The loading rate was set to 0.01 As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in The fracture nonlinear mechanical behavior of double-layer hinged rock-arch structures could be revealed by using PFC3D technique. The number of tension and shear cracks, crack initiation sequence, and crack propagation process could be visualized through the PFC. The sensitivity tests of influent factors on the limiting load on the double-layer rock plates were carried out, and the factors which affected the maximum vertical force from large to small were rock plate thickness, rock plate temperature, rock plate particle size, layer cohesive strength between two plates and the boundary conditions change, meanwhile, the maximum horizontal force varied depending on the boundary conditions of two rock plates change. The research results were of great significance in evaluating the roof stability of the mined-out areas. Under the dynamic alternating loading, the studies on the properties of the storage modulus, the loss modulus and damping with temperature variation are of important theoretical significance and practical value. For example, the earthquake wave attenuation is closely related to the characteristics of the energy storage and dissipation for different rocks, and the damping and dynamic mechanical parameters of rock are essential for the earthquake response analysis and site safety evaluation. In addition, the nonlinear viscoelastic characteristics of the different rocks are key scientific issues for the risk estimate and the siting of repositories for disposal of high-level radioactive wastes. Although as early as 1972, Metravib, a French company, developed the dynamic mechanical analyzer, and conducted the test and analysis of the dynamic mechanical parameters for a variety of materials. It was found that the dynamic mechanical parameters of rocks being analyzed at different temperatures were rarely reported through the vast literature. Chinese scholars have made advances on dynamic mechanical parameters of rocks. Experiments were performed by DMA/SDTA861e dynamic thermomechanical analyzer which was imported from Switzerland under sine wave loading. The dynamic load of the sine wave was 0.3 The dry granite, sandstone, and mudstone were respectively selected at room temperature and were processed into rectangular columnar samples (80-mm length, 6-mm width, and 5-mm height). For each rock, at least two samples were processed. The basic parameters of the rock samples are shown in Dynamic thermomechanical analysis method is a testing technique, that is, under the controlled temperature conditions, used to measure the relationship between dynamic modulus, energy loss, and temperature of the test materials under the dynamic loading. The experiment principle is that when elastic material is applied to a sine alternating luffing stress, there will be a lagging phase angle  As shown in The reduced rate of the storage moduli of different rocks with temperature change was significantly different. The curves of the storage moduli for sandstone and mudstone was from steep to flat, and the transition temperatures was nearly 120°C and 30°C, and for granite, the curve was not flat and without the transition temperature until 300°C. The reduced rate of the storage moduli from slow to fast was granite, sandstone, and mudstone, which are consistent with the results in The increased amplitude of the storage moduli of different rocks with frequency increase was significantly different, and the order of the increased amplitude from small to large was granite, sandstone, and mudstone. The results showed that, under the alternating stress, granite has better impact strength and rigidity relative to the sandstone and mudstone with temperature change.  The order from weak to strong for the curves of the loss moduli fluctuation is granite, sandstone, and mudstone. Overall, under the alternating stress, with temperature increasing the curves change amplitude of the loss moduli for granite is small relative to sandstone and mudstone, and it means granite has a lower energy dissipation performance.  According to the order of magnitude of the loss factors from small to large, the order is granite, sandstone, and mudstone. Thus, under the alternating stress, with temperature increasing, the curves change amplitude of the loss factor for granite is smaller, and it means granite with lower energy dissipation performance. With the test temperature and the loading stress changing, the storage modulus, the loss modulus, and the loss factor for granite, sandstone, and mudstone are closely related with the microstructure characteristics of different rocks. As shown in The storage moduli of the three rocks decrease rapidly with increasing temperature, and increase with the frequency increasing for the same rock. But there are two significant differences in the curves of the storage moduli of different rocks with temperature change. Under the alternating stress, granite has better impact strength and rigidity relative to the sandstone and mudstone with temperature change. The loss moduli of different rocks decrease with temperature increasing and frequency increasing, and the curves of the loss moduli show obvious fluctuation. Under the alternating stress, with temperature increasing, the curves fluctuation of the loss moduli for granite, sandstone, and mudstone are from weak to strong. The curve change amplitude of the loss modulus for granite is small relative to sandstone and mudstone, and it means granite with lower energy dissipation performance. The loss factors of granite, sandstone, and mudstone first increase and then decrease with temperature increasing, and decrease with frequency increasing. Under the alternating stress, with temperature increasing, the curve change amplitude of the loss factor for granite is smaller, and it means granite with lower energy dissipation performance. With the test temperature and the loading stress changing, the thermodynamic mechanical properties for granite, sandstone, and mudstone are closely related with the microstructure characteristics of different rocks. It is because of the microstructural differences of three rocks, which make the thermodynamic mechanical properties of three rocks different significantly. Rock-breaking is usually caused by the process of initiation crack, development, expansion, aggregation and transfixion of micro fissures in the rock under dynamic loading. In today's mining, tunneling, quarrying, and construction industries, both rock cutting and drilling processes are widely used. Due to the degree of difficulty, energy consumption and broken effects during the rock-breaking are important parameters and measurement indices, and they are usually used to evaluate the drilling, blasting, mining, and mineral processing. The key to guiding rock-breaking design is to obtain the reasonable parameters and indices through establishing a simple experimental system, which can be used to evaluate and analyze the degree of rock-breaking. Many studies show that broken rocks have a good space–time effect and energy fractal structure ( A test method of mechanical shock rock-breaking was used in the School of Mining Engineering, University of New South Wales (UNSW), which is easy to operate and has a good visual effect. However, the test method has some defects: these indicators of specific energy and rock-breaking production per unit length have characteristics of data dispersion and poor statistical regularity. Furthermore, these indicators do not reflect well the size and distribution of rock fragmentation, and these indicators don't specifically express the integrity and complexity of the rock structure. Thus, some new evaluation indicators should be put forward to improve the test method. Fractal analysis has become a new subject branch since the conception of fractal geometry was proposed by B. B. Mandelbrot, a French scientist, in 1975. At present, fractal geometry has become a powerful tool to study the irregularity of nature sciences, engineering technology, and social sciences. In 1992, Tyler et al. put forward and developed a fractal model of the three dimensional space particle as follows ( Afterwards, based on the hypothesis that the particle density is the same, Tyler et al. transformed The Taking the logarithm of both sides of the It can be seen from Therefore, the rock-breaking tests should show if the factual dimension The cutting test is conducted by using the linear rock-cutting machine in the laboratory of School of Mining Engineering (UNSW). As shown in All the sandstone samples are obtained from the field adjacent to hynds seam in Hunter Valley, New South Wales. For each cutting test, the dynamic monitor fixed on the cutter monitored the voltage change data along the cutting direction and vertical cutting direction ( First, each cylindrical core sample with diameter Ø Second, install the new standard cutting tool, which is a 12.5 Third, adjust the cutter depth of 5 Fourth, start the testing machine to cut the sandstone sample at a constant speed of 150 Fifth, as shown in  According to the size characteristics of the generated debris in the test, the selected aperture sizes of the meshes from large to small are as follows: 11.20, 6.70, 3.33, 1.18, and 0.43 After four cutting test samples are completed, the rock-breaking debris should be sieved according to the different aperture sieves. The sieve cumulative quality and the percentage content of the statistical results are listed in As shown in So, through the core cutting tests, the statistical analysis of the sieve cumulative quality not only directly reflect rock fragmentation distribution, but also reflect rock joints development, as well as the integrity of the rock mass structure. As shown in The rock-breaking fragmentation and fractal features are significant under the mechanical shock-loading conditions for engineering practice. The broken debris fractal dimension of the structural integrity specimens is larger, the range of the fractal dimension is smaller, and the fractal curves have the intensive feature. In contrast, The broken debris fractal dimension is larger, and the broken debris size distribution is more even; the broken debris fractal dimension is smaller, and the broken debris size distribution is less even. The results show that the fractal dimensions not only reflect the quality of the broken debris and the distribution of the particle size quantitatively, but also can reflect the structural integrity and the complexity of specimens indirectly. Thus, the fractal dimension is the ideal test indicator to assess and analyze the rock-breaking degree. Rock-cutting usually caused the process of initiation crack, development, expansion, aggregation, and transfixion of micro fissures in the rock under dynamic loading ( At present, many domestic scholars have done lots of work in evaluating the difficulty of rock-cutting and energy dissipation, and achieved fruitful research results ( In summary, though many research achievements have been obtained for evaluating the difficulty of rock breaking and energy dissipation, there is still a lot of work to be researched in depth due to the nonuniformity of rock material, the difference of geological conditions, and the complexity of engineering conditions. Therefore, the numerical calculation model of rock-cutting was built based on the test by using the linear rock-cutting equipment at the UNSW in Australia. The numerical simulation of rock-cutting energy dissipation was conducted under different conditions, which was of important theoretical significance and practical value in guiding similar engineering to reduce the cost of drilling and blasting and improve the production efficiency. In the cutting experiment, the specific energy (SE) is the energy or work required to cut unit volume of the rock, then SE is calculated as follows: In a given rock the SE is used as a measure of the efficiency of a cutting system with lower values indicating higher efficiency, and what's more, in the context of cuttability assessment, it can be used to both compare the cuttability of different rocks and indicate approximately the potential excavation rate for a particular machine type in a given rock ( As seen from As shown in The rock specimen was treated as the porous material that consisted of particles and the cemented bodies. Before the numerical test, the micromechanical parameters should be adjusted repeatedly until these parameters were consistent with the physical experiment results. The micromechanical parameters required to be adjusted were listed in  Step 1: The specimen was rectangular (width Step 2: The radii of all particles were changed uniformly to achieve a specified isotropic stress so as to reduce the magnitude of Step 3: The floating particles that have less than three contacts were eliminated. Then the parallel bonds where installed throughout the assembly among all particles. The cutter was represented by two wall segments (both of length Step 4: To simulate the compressive stress on the rock surface, a pressure-application algorithm is developed for PFC by continually identifying a connected chain of particles on the rock surface and applying the pressure to those particles as the cutting process proceeds. Step 5: In the process of rock-cutting simulation, the calculation model could trace energy data through the built-in energy function in PFC, and record the crack data through the built-in crack function so as to monitor the variation of SE and AE. Step 6: The variation law of SE and AE would be analyzed statistically with the change of the cutting speed, the cutting depth, and the confined pressure. As shown in  As shown in Compared The AE is commonly defined as transient elastic waves within a material caused by the release of localized stress energy. The rock AE is directly related to the generation of internal micro cracks (damage). A micro crack occurs along with a release of strain energy, that is, there is an AE. Therefore, the rock AE can be simulated by recording the number of micro cracks. The crack function defines a link damage between particles as a crack generation in PFC. As a result, the rock AE can be simulated by the crack function in PFC. As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in The SE of rock-cutting was proportional to the cutting velocity. With the cutting depth increasing, the SE curves of three kinds of sandstones presented the slow-growth trend without the confined pressure, while the medium hard rock began to decline with the cutting depth at a certain value. Under the confined pressure, with the cutting depth increasing, the SE curves decreased at first and then increased, and there was an optimal depth of rock cutting. After applying the confined pressure, the SE curves of hard rock and soft rock demonstrated S-shaped nonlinear change at the high value, while the medium hard rock changed greatly than the others. AE was directly proportional to the cutting velocity and the cutting depth. Failure of rock subjected to compressive loading has been extensively studied and the results tend to be reproducible to some extent depending on the degree of homogeneity of the rock and sample preparation. The ISRM standard for the UCS test was developed in part to ensure a consistent test method is used in the determination of the compressive strength of rock. The standard defines recommended dimensions and a slenderness ratio of test specimens as well as condition of the core. As a result, failed test specimens often exhibit a characteristic shear failure plane that intersects the axis of loading. The uniaxial compressive strength of rock is an important parameter that is being used in many engineering designs. However, the uniaxial compression test is usually a tedious and expensive exercise to be conducted. In addition, the test requires high standard quality samples with regular geometry, which cannot always be extracted from weak rocks ( The main purpose of the study presented herein is to determine the relationship between the uniaxial compressive strength of rock samples and fracturing frequency. These fractures are horizontally parallel with the specimen end face and equally distributed along the specimens, which are to be used to create the segments. “Intermediate layer” are used to simulate different conditions of discontinuities. The ultimate objective of the study is attempting to establish a meaningful correlation between Based on the standard test procedure, a new experiment procedure was adopted to fit the purpose of this study. The size of each specimen will be prepared in right circular cylinder at a diameter of 54 The experiment program consists of three stages; all five sets of specimens will be undertaken in an uniaxial compressive test. The first phase of the experiment program is to conduct tests on each set without putting on any intermediate layers. The sets with segments will be tested by stacking them up. The second phase is to carry out tests on each set with intermediate layer in between each contact faces (excluding both ends). Paper is used as the intermediate layer, as paper itself has such little compressive strength. The use of an intermediate layer is to reduce the friction between contact faces and to simulate the different conditions of discontinuities. The final stage of this program is to further reduce the friction by putting down oil paper. The sample was sourced from Gosford Quarrying, which is located at 300 Johnston St, Specimens were drilled by using the RD900 Core Drill, which is available in the laboratory. Once the samples were drilled, they were cut by the Small-Diameter Diamond Saw. To preserve the nature of the materials, the specimens were put into a LABEC Oven for 24 Due to the availability of the core bits in the Rock Mechanical Laboratory, only a 44 Once all the specimens have been prepared, the test is ready to commence. A platen was placed in the center of the set and the specimen is placed right on top of the platen. Both upper and bottom platens were used to reduce the end effect and is able to adjust the specimen to parallel to the ram. The specimens, the platens, and spherical seat were accurately adjusted to be centered with respect to one another and to the loading machine. As only a qualified person is allowed to operate the machine, the author was trained by a supervisor. Personnel protection equipment is used during the test. Prior to the experiment, the release and load valves are shut as well as the fine adjustment valve. The ram is fully lowered while starting up the machine and while setting the load range. As the normal compressive strength of samples is above 50 Once the top end of the specimen was parallel to the top platen, the load valve was opened to start compression. Manual adjustment was made by turning the load valve to ensure the load card speed is followed with the load needle. After failure, the load valve will shut and then gradually shut the center valve. The results were recorded and the procedure was repeated for all experiments. Readings obtained from the Avery machine are in kN, which were converted into stress using the loading divided by the area of contact face. The average results were calculated with the standard deviation.   Results derived from Phase 2 have also been summarized and analyzed as shown in A similar graph was plotted based on the summarized Phase 2 results. As can be seen from The failure mechanism of sandstone under compression test is studied by investigating the failure patterns. Photos were taken on the specimen after the failure and the most representative photos were selected for analysis. These failures are the most common ones appeared during the compression test. As seen from The most common failure that occurred in Phase 2 for Set B, C, D, and E is the longitudinal In the final stage, longitudinal splitting failure and shear failure both appeared. As seen from the The average uniaxial compressive strength of Set A is approximately 33.3 It is recommended that despite obtaining no meaningful correlation through this study, the author would like to recommend that this study be considered as a starting point of the project in a large scope. A simple prediction model of the