This paper presents the possibilities of separation of yttrium(III)–neodymium(III) and samarium(III)–neodymium(III) pairs by frontal analysis on strongly basic anion-exchangers Wofatit SBW, Wofatit SBK and Lewatit MP 5080 in the systems: 90% (v/v) 2-propanol–10% (v/v) 7 M HNO3 and 90% (v/v) 1-propanol–10% (v/v) 7 M HNO3. The best results are obtained on Lewatit MP 5080 in the 90% (v/v) 2-propanol–10% (v/v) 7 M HNO3 system. In this system, on 1 dm3 of this anion-exchanger, 1.95 kg yttrium(III) and 0.3 kg samarium(III) were purified decreasing the microcomponent content to below 10−3%.Contrary to their name, rare earth elements are not rare at all. They are found in 200 minerals and the earth crust contains more of them, for example nickel, copper, tin and lead. The atmosphere, water, and soil as well as plants and animals As rare earth elements occur together, their physico-chemical properties are similar and their separation is a difficult and expensive process. One of the methods allowing for rare earth elements separation is ion-exchange chromatography. From a practical point of view, a disadvantage of ion-exchange separation is the application of polystyrenesulphone cation-exchangers of slightly differentiated ion-exchange affinity in relation to individual rare earth elements. So far there has not been a perfect eluent which would enable both selective separation of light, medium, and heavy lanthanides and yttrium removal, and would secure their high concentrations in the eluate. Therefore studies on the development of a simple and economic method of rare earth element separation are being carried out in numerous scientific centres around the world. Interesting results were obtained by using solid or liquid anion-exchangers for the separation of complexes of rare earth elements(III) with organic and inorganic ligands. The literature includes much data about the separation of micro- or milligram amounts of rare earth elements on anion-exchangers. Solutions of nitric acid, lithium, aluminium, magnesium, calcium and ammonium nitrates in aqueous–organic solvents were used as the eluants Much attention has been given to the separation of rare earth elements(III) present in nitrate solutions on anion-exchangers. Rare earth elements(III) with NO Analysis of the literature data suggests that the most common cation complexes of Ln(NO Reports in the literature concerning this problem are often controversial. The papers by Korkisch and Marcus Previous studies of sorption and separation of rare earth elements(III) in the polar organic solvent–H The aim of this paper is to study the effect of cross-linking effect of the strongly basic anion-exchanger Wofatit SBW on the effectiveness of separation of Y(III)–Nd(III) and Sm(III)–Nd(III) pairs by frontal analysis in the systems: 90% (v/v) 1-propanol–10% (v/v) 7 All chemicals were of suprapur grade from POCH Lublin, Poland. Yttrium(III), neodymium(III) and samarium(III) oxides of 99.9% purity were supplied by Fluka, Switzerland. The anion-exchangers were used in the nitrate form. The separation by frontal analysis was carried out in glass columns of 2-cm diameter. The percentage of neodymium in yttrium and samarium was determined by means of spectrophotometric analysis using a spectrophotometer Specord M 40 supplied by Zeiss, Germany. Separation of nitrate complexes of yttrium(III) from neodymium(III) and samarium(III) from neodymium(III) (∼1%) on Wofatit SBW of various cross-linkings or Lewatit MP 5080 and Wofatit SBK×7% divinylbenzene (DVB) in 2-propanol or 1-propanol–H Determinations of neodymium(III) were made by means of a direct method using the neodymium absorption maximum for The results of purification of yttrium(III) from neodymium(III) and samarium(III) from neodymium(III) in the aqueous-polar organic solvent medium of nitric acid are presented in The curves make it possible to calculate the weight The bed The number of theoretical plates In the separation process of both yttrium(III)–neodymium(III) and samarium(III)–neodymium(III) pairs, the best results were obtained, as studied by us previously, in the systems with other organic solvents (methanol, ethanol, acetone) Macroporous anion-exchangers possess a well developed specific surface area. They are characterized by great accessibility of all active centres. Therefore the results the separation of rare earth elements(III) on these anion-exchangers are much better compared with the microporous anion-exchangers. In the studied systems on the anion-exchangers Wofatit SBW and SBK, the results of separation were a few times worse. With the increase of cross-linking of Wofatit SBW, a gradual increase of the system effectiveness was observed. The effectiveness of separation increases reaching a maximum at 6% DVB and then decreases which may result from the “sieve effect”, i.e. exclusion of the large ions of Ln(NO However, in the case of separation of the Sm(III)–Nd(III) pair, the ion-exchangers Wofatit SBW and SBK proved completely useless, independent of cross-linking, in the systems 90% (v/v) C The best results of separation were obtained on the strongly basic anion-exchanger Lewatit MP 5080. This system can be successfully applied to obtain rare earth elements(III), particularly yttrium(III) of great purity on the macro scale. It was stated that the strongly basic macroporous anion-exchangers can be regenerated with two to four bed volumes of water after the purification process. Other advantages of this method are relatively low investment costs as well as simple and cheap regeneration of the anion-exchanger bed.