The purpose of this study is to develop froth flotation to separate polyvinyl chloride (PVC) from automobile shredder residue (ASR) plastic mixtures of variable composition. Some polymers in ASR polymer mixtures have similar density and hydrophobicity with PVC and thus selective flotation of PVC from ASR polymer mixtures cannot be achieved. The present study focused on the surface modification of PVC with ozonation, and then the modified PVC can be separated from other polymers by the following froth flotation. The results of this study indicate that the selective recovery of PVC from real ASR polyethylene tetra pethelate (PET), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), polybutyl methacralate (PBMA), ethyl acrylate (EA), polycarbonate (PC) and rubber mixtures can be accomplished in a three-step process involving a gravity separation, ozonation and froth flotation. The rubber was removed from other heavy ASR (PVC, PET, PMMA, PBMA, EA and PC) polymers by froth flotation without mixing. It was found that ozonation process produced the desired difference in contact angle required (from 89.5 to 73.0°) for separation of PVC from other heavy ASR polymers, whereas the contact angles of other polymers was slightly decreased. The most of the load ASR, i.e. about 72.4% is floated away and 27.6% was settled down. The highest component 96.7% of PVC was recovered in the settled fraction. As a result of this research effort, the surface modification of PVC with ozonation can be efficiently useful to separate the PVC from other similar density ASR mixed polymers.Today's automobiles contain more polymers and less metal than older ones The recovery of polymers from ASR as a heat resource has been considered using pyrolysis, gasification and injection to blast furnace. ASR consists of several kinds of polymers viz. polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene (PS), polyethylene tetra pethelate (PET), acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene resin (ABS), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), polybutyl methacralate (PBMA), ethyl acrylate (EA), polycarbonate (PC), nylon, rubber, etc., in which PVC leads to generation of environmental hazardous chlorinated compounds such as hydrogen chloride and dioxins during the treatments with heat Novel separation technologies have been proposed for the removal of PVC from other polymers based on the electro static property, X-ray spectrum, infrared radiation (IR) spectrum and solubility for solvent It is well known that chlorinated organic compounds are dechlorinated by ozone in water treatment field In this study, we applied ozonation following the froth flotation for the separation of PVC from ASR after removing light polymers by the wet gravity separation. The ASR sample was collected at an automobile shredding plant in Hiroshima, Japan. The ASR sample was cut with continuous universal cutter (ASONE, RBK-01) to be particles in a diameter of 5.0 To study the effectiveness of ozonation on the selective surface modification of the PVC, the contact angle of each ASR polymer (PVC, PET, PMMA, PBMA, EA and PC) separated from the ASR was measured before and after ozonation. Light polymers (i.e. PP and PE) with less than 1.0 The selective separation of PVC from the heavy polymers by the ASR by ozonation followed by the froth flotation was evaluated for two samples. Ten pieces of each polymer were collected from the ASR and were applied for the froth flotation after ozonation. Then real weight (3.4 The polymer composition of the ASR is shown in The contact angles were measured for virgin polymers and polymers collected from the ASR before and after ozonation. The result for virgin polymers is presented in For the polymers in the ASR as presented in These results indicate that the ozonation can selectively decrease the contact angle of PVC even in the real ASR. This would be due to the change of the chloride groups on the surface of PVC into hydrophilic functional groups; hydroxyl group and carboxyl group The selective decrease of the contact angle of PVC in the real ASR samples would be able to cause the separation of PVC from other similar density polymers. Therefore, the froth flotation was conducted for each 10 piece of PVC, PET, PMMA, PBMA, EA, PC and rubber collected from the ASR at several mixing speeds after 10 The percentage float for each heavy ASR polymer except for rubber at 50–350 The froth flotation test after10 The results of this study indicate that the selective recovery of PVC and rubber from ASR polymers can be accomplished in a three-step process involving a gravity separation, ozonation and froth flotation. A simplified flow sheet for the separation of PVC is shown in Ozonation was applied for selective modification of the PVC surface among polymers with almost the same density and hydrophobicity. It was found that ozonation could change contact angle of PVC collected from ASR from 89.5° to 73.0°, whereas those of other heavy ASR polymers after ozonation ranged from 83.4° to 76.3°. Rubber could be removed from the ASR polymers with PVC during ozonation as a settled fraction. In the froth flotation following to ozonation, PVC was successfully removed from the heavy ASR polymers and concentrated to be 30% in the settled fraction from 3% in the original ASR. As a result, 93.7 Authors would like to thank Mr. Yamaguchi Takefumi (Master student), for his kind assistance during the experiments. M.S. Reddy thanks Monbukagakusho (MEXT), Japan for providing financial support in the form of a Research Fellowship during this study.