Soil invertebrates have the potential to induce changes in soil physical properties. We have determined the effect of sewage sludge and a biocide (chlorpyrifos) application on faunal activity in the H horizon of an upland grassland soil as expressed in the incidence of faunal excrement and related micromorphological features. This approach allows the accumulated effects of invertebrates on soil physical properties to be compared even if the organisms are no longer present or active. Sewage sludge addition resulted in an increase in faunal activity as indicated by the abundance of excrements and total porosity of the soil, but a reduction in the size of the soil microbial biomass. There were no significant effects of biocide on soil porosity, microbial biomass, or microbial respiration. Undifferentiated or fused excrements were more abundant in the biocide-treated soils, which were also distinguished by a larger amount of amorphous organic matter compared with the control, suggesting a reduced production of new excrements.Soil animals influence many soil processes, in particular aggregation and the organization of void space. Excrement pedofeatures (faecal pellets) constitute most of the microaggregates in organic horizons of soil ( Sewage sludge disposal to land is necessary in Europe because of the ban on disposal at sea. However, sewage sludge usually contains appreciable amounts of the toxic metals Zn, Cu, Cd and Pb ( The biocide, chlorpyrifos, is an organophosphate insecticide widely used in both agricultural and non-agricultural settings ( The aim of this study was to estimate the effect of sewage sludge and chlorpyrifos treatment on soil faunal activity as expressed in micromorphological properties. Specifically, we have evaluated the nature and distribution of excremental pedofeatures and void space in the H horizon of soil from sewage sludge-treated, chlorpyrifos-treated and control plots on an upland experimental site. Soils were sampled from experimental plots established in 1999 at the Sourhope Experimental Farm in the Bowmont Valley, near Kelso in Southern Scotland. The vegetation at the site is an acid upland grassland, dominated by Three undisturbed blocks were collected from the H horizons in November 2002 from each of three sub-plot types (control, biocide- and sewage-treated) for micromorphological analysis using vertically aligned 75 Thin sections were prepared from impregnated blocks using the standard procedure described at Total organic carbon was determined as weight loss on ignition of oven dry soil ( CO Differences in the occurrence of different types of excrement and other features between treatments were evaluated using The metal concentrations were far lower than the limits recommended both in the European Union and by Basal respiration did not differ significantly between the treatments, and the only significant difference in the microbial biomass was between the sewage sludge and control treatments, with the sewage sludge leading to a smaller microbial biomass content than the control ( The effect of treatments is evident by comparing the sample images ( There were significantly more excrements in the sewage sludge-treated soil indicating that there had been increased overall faunal activity relative to the control at some stage ( The large numbers of enchytraeid and oribatid excrements towards the soil surface are consistent with the data of Void space represented 32.2% (S.E. 12.0) of the slide areas for the sewage sludge treatment, 24.7% (S.E. 11.2) for the biocide treatment and 27.6% (S.E. 12.0) for the control, but none of the differences were significant. The pattern in percentage pore area followed the same trend as the frequency of excrements and the inferred faunal activity, with the maximum suggested for the sewage sludge-treated soil and the minimum for biocide treatment. This study has confirmed the association between faunal activity and treatment type and demonstrated the utility of using soil micromorphological features as an integrated record of past and present soil faunal activity. The results demonstrated that enchytraeid activity was dominant at this experimental site, which agrees with a previous study at this site ( The authors wish to acknowledge the Association of Commonwealth Universities for an Academic Staff Scholarship for JKA; George MacLeod, Lorna English and Helen Ewen provided technical support. Access to the experimental site at Sourhope was provided by the NERC Thematic Programme on Biological Diversity and Ecosystem Function in Soils. The referees provided very useful comments.