This work reports the mobility enhancement of p-type organic transistors formed using Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) (P3HT) using the dispersion of ZnO (zinc oxide) nanostructures. The ZnO nanostructures considered here are nanorods that were fabricated via a simple one-step aqueous-based chemical approach. Organic Thin Film Transistors (OTFTs) based on these nanocomposites show a mobility enhancement of more than 60% for the P3HT/ZnO nanorod composite compared to its pristine state polymer devices. The results presented here show a great promise for the mobility enhancement of p-type solution processed OFETs and applications.Nanostructures like nanowires, nanorods and tetrapods exhibit unique properties and are of growing interest for their potential in novel electronic devices and optical applications. The quest for newer physics and applications has led to an increased emphasis on nanostructures. Moreover the unique morphologies exhibited by several nanorods make them ideal for applications such as gas sensors Even though numerous reports exist in this area, OFET devices based on nanocomposite materials fabricated using solution processing are still not fully explored. Hence, dispersing nanomaterials in a polymer matrix to obtain organic–inorganic nanocomposite devices for enhancing its properties is of interest both from the basic research as well as applications point of view. In the present work, we dispersed ZnO nanostructures in the P3HT polymer matrix for the fabrication of organic–inorganic hybrid devices for OFET applications. We chose ZnO nanomaterials and P3HT since the target is to improve the mobility of solution processed materials. Herein, the electrical properties of P3HT/ZnO nanocomposite devices have been found to have enhanced p-type mobility up to 60% compared to pristine polymer P3HT device. In this paper, highly crystalline ZnO samples in the form of nanorods were prepared by an ambient thermal treatment of the reactants in aqueous condition as reported elsewhere The SEM images of ZnO nanorods with a diameter of 85–100 The transistor structures used were bottom-gate-bottom-contact devices fabricated as follows. A heavily doped n-type Si wafer which acts as the common gate electrode was RCA cleaned on which 100 Large area and flexible electronics have recently attracted much interest from industry and academia. Organic semiconductors, on account of their solution processing, have been found to be the most suitable for these applications, but their low mobility has been a limiting factor for device applications The OFET transfer characteristics comparison of pristine P3HT and P3HT/ZnO nanorods composite as the semiconductor ( In summary we have reported the mobility enhancement of p-type of organic transistors formed using Poly(3-Hexylthiophene) (P3HT) when ZnO (zinc oxide) nanostructures are dispersed into it. A facile, low-cost, one-step, aqueous-based chemical approach has been demonstrated for the fabrication of ZnO nanorods. OFETs based on this nanocomposite show a mobility enhancement of more than 60%, the value being 1.8