Arsenic removal from wastewater is a key problem for copper smelters. This work shows results of electrocoagulation of aqueous solutions containing arsenic with three different process designs and operating parameters.
                  Three types of electrocoagulation reactors were tested and compared: (a) a modified flow continuous reactor, (b) a turbulent flow reactor and (c) an airlift reactor. All used iron as sacrificial anodes. The results showed that the electrocoagulation process of a 100mg/L As(V) solution could decrease the arsenic concentration to less than 2mg/L in the effluent with a current density of 1.2A/dm2 with both the modified flow and the airlift reactor. The removal of arsenic with the turbulent flow reactor did not reach the same level but the Fe-to-As ratio (mol/mol) achieved in the coagulation process was in this case lower (approximately 7) than with the other two reactors.
                  In addition, it seems that increasing the current density beyond a maximum value, the electrocoagulation process would not improve any further. This could probably be explained by passivation of the anode.The mineral processing industry in Chile has a large impact on the economical output of the country and the environmental status. The pyrometallurgic copper processing generates large amounts of arsenic that vaporize as arsenic trioxide. This compound is absorbed from the gas flow, and finally fixed as calcium or ferric arsenate, after the wastewater stream has been processed with ferric chloride or sulphate. Since the arsenic concentration in the gas phase changes due to the batch wise operation of the smelter, it is difficult to predict and control the chemical dosage for the precipitation of the arsenic compounds. Electrocoagulation is by now a well known process and has treated different wastewaters for, e.g. from textile industries Typically, aluminium or iron plates are used as electrodes in the electrocoagulation process The purpose of this work is to compare the arsenic removal from wastewaters by three different process designs and geometries: (i) a modified flow sedimentation basin, where iron plates modify the flow in such a way that the solids go to the bottom area as the liquid moves inside the basin, (ii) a turbulent flow batch reactor, and (iii) an airlift batch reactor. The objective to compare different reactors is based on the fact that the efficiency of the electrocoagulation process is strongly favoured by turbulent conditions The actual concentration of arsenic in copper smelter wastewater fluctuates between 100 and 300 Electrocoagulation consists of an in situ generation of coagulants by an electrical dissolution of iron or aluminium electrodes. The generation of metallic cations takes place at the anode, whereas at the cathode, typically a H In the case of the application of iron electrodes, the process generates iron hydroxides, which would co-precipitate with arsenic anions. The main electrode reactions are as shown in the following  Single step oxidation of Fe into ferric ion A two-step process where iron is firstly oxidized to ferrous ion which, depending on anode potential, then oxidises to ferric ion: The second step would take place at the anode; however, it can also be promoted by the presence of other oxidants in aqueous phase:  Typically at the cathode the solution becomes alkaline with time. The applied current forces OH  The oxidation states of As in water are As(III), arsenite, and As(V), arsenate. Typically As(V) is dominant in aerobic surface waters while As(III) is found in anaerobic groundwater. In the pH range of 4–10 the predominating species of As(V) present a net negative charge. On the other hand, the species of As(III) generally has no net charge During the electrochemical production of ferric hydroxide periodic current reversal is advisable for two reasons: (a) to use two iron based electrodes which alternate as anode and cathode, both of them contributing to ferric hydroxide production. This way, they are evenly consumed during the process; (b) to avoid anode passivation by periodic removal of excess ferrous and ferric ions from the vicinity of the anode and of loosely attached reaction products from the anode surface. The major problem of the iron electrode is its passivation, which is caused by iron hydroxide produced during the discharge process and prevents further anodic utilization. Passivation of the anode surface is possible in these systems due to high current densities and high concentrations of Fe The As containing wastewater was prepared by dissolving sodium arsenite (analytical grade) in distilled water until a concentration of 100 The total arsenic content in liquid samples was determined by atomic absorbance spectrophotometer.  The cell ( The cell was made in PVC and consisted of six iron plates as indicated in The rectangular acrylic cell ( A total of nine electrocoagulation experiments were carried out. See In all experiments approximately 100  From Furthermore, In relation to the speciation of arsenic, earlier work Analysing the experiments using EC 2 ( The amount of As removed is measured, and then the ratio Fe-to-As in mol/mol can be estimated. These values are included in  The results shown in this study should act as a guideline for eventual scale-up estimations. The electrode surface area to reactor volume ratio ( Zolotukhin Electrocoagulation of As(V) in wastewaters is a promising remediation tool. Experiments with three different process designs showed the possibility of removing arsenic as adsorbed to or co-precipitate with iron(III)hydroxide. Applying electrocoagulation with a modified flow and an airlift reactor, in both cases practically all arsenic was eliminated from a 100 Arsenic was also removed from wastewater when applying a turbulent flow reactor. Here the Fe-to-As ratio obtained was lower than with the other two remediation cells but the total arsenic removal was lower, too. This was due to the larger quantity of arsenic present in the wastewater originally. Comparing the different set-up, all electrocoagulation cells showed an efficient As removal. The main difference the reactors had was how the turbulence was achieved. In the modified flow sedimentation basin an airbubling assured turbulence. In the airlift reactor, the drag force of the airflow towards the surface created turbulent conditions. The last reactor obtained turbulent conditions due to the liquid flow pattern within the reactor. The electrode surface area/volume ( The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the UTFSM Project N° 27.04.28.