We obtain the energy velocities and quality factors of anisotropic reservoir rocks as a function of pore pressure, partial saturation and frequency. The model is based on Biot's poroelastic theory for anisotropic media. The directional dependence of attenuation is obtained by generalizing the eigenstiffnesses of the undrained medium to relaxation functions (six at most, depending on the material symmetry). The frequency dependence of attenuation is described with constant-Q kernels associated with each eigenstiffness, and viscodynamic functions to model the high-frequency behavior. We apply a uniform gas/fluid mixing law that satisfies Reuss's and Voigt's averages at low and high frequencies, respectively, thus, simulating the unrelaxed state due to non-uniform—patchy—saturation (segregated fluids). Pressure effects are accounted for by an effective stress law.Seismic measurements of wave velocity and attenuation can be interpreted to give accurate estimations of pore pressure and fluid saturation. These measurements can be utilized for a wide range of applications, including rock mechanics, civil and mining engineering, and exploration geophysics. Oil production, for instance, changes the pore pressure and the stress state of the reservoir. This phenomenon is closely related to anisotropy in the transport properties. Fractures and cracks have a large influence on the permeability of reservoirs, since their orientations dictate the directions of preferential fluid flow. Seismic measurements of wave velocity and attenuation can be used for reservoir characterization (provided that the effects of pore-fluid pressure on those quantities are known). On the other hand, pore-fluid pressure affects the aperture of fracture and cracks. The effect of crack aperture on seismic anisotropy is well understood. Therefore, changes in seismic anisotropy can be used to determine changes in pore pressure. Knowledge of pore-fluid pressure is essential in planning the drilling process to control potentially dangerous abnormal pressures, and to characterize the reservoir properties. In terms of seismic measurements, a reservoir containing a set of fractures (or cracks) can be described by a porous medium that is effectively anisotropic. An originally porous medium containing a set of cracks is transversely isotropic (with the axis perpendicular to the plane of the cracks). If the medium has additional structure (layering, grain orientation, etc.), higher anisotropy results (orthorhombic, monoclinic) Anisotropic poroelasticity was introduced by Biot Hudson We describe the frequency dependence of attenuation by using a constant- Various physical processes cause anomalous pressures in an underground fluid. The two most common causes are cracking, i.e., oil-to-gas conversion Pressure effects are introduced by using an effective stress law. At constant effective pressure the acoustic (or transport) properties of the rock remain constant. The effective pressure depends on the difference between the confining and pore pressures, the latter multiplied by the effective stress coefficient. In general, this coefficient is not equal to unity and therefore, Terzaghi's effective pressure law (that is, the effective pressure is the differential pressure) is not appropriate to describe the acoustic properties of the rock versus varying pore pressure. However, a proper determination of the effective stress coefficients requires measurements of wave velocity as a function of confining and pore pressure. To our knowledge, a complete data set has not been published for anisotropic rocks. As Zimmerman shows The effect of partial saturation on velocity and attenuation depends on the frequency range. At low frequencies, the fluid has enough time to achieve pressure equilibration (relaxed regime). In this case, Reuss's model for the bulk modulus of the fluid mixture yields results that agree with the experiments. At high frequencies the fluid cannot relax and this state of unrelaxation induces a stiffening of the pore material, which increases the wave velocity considerably In the following, the spatial variables The constitutive equations for anisotropic poroelasticity were introduced by Biot The variation of fluid content is given by Biot The dynamic equations describing wave propagation in heterogeneous porous media were obtained by Biot Let us consider a time-harmonic field with a time dependence exp(i Let us assume a rock—a sandstone or a limestone—at depth A proper analysis of the dependence of wave properties on pore pressure and confining stress in anisotropic media requires a complete experimental data set, i.e. dry-rock velocity measurements versus confining stress, and wet-rock velocity measurements versus pore pressure and confining stress. These data are necessary to calculate the effective stress coefficients Hooke's law The problem to establish an effective stress law for the anisotropic case is that an hydrostatic loading does not compensate the variations in pore pressure to keep the dry-rock moduli unchanged. For instance, two different confining pressure should be associated with Changes in porosity are not as important as changes in stiffness. In this sense, porosity-based methods can be highly unreliable. In fact, for changes of the confining pressure from 0 to The permeability considered in the viscodynamic dissipation (see next section) is the global permeability, i.e., that related to the connected pores and cracks. Pressure effects are more pronounced in rocks where permeability is due to fractures. The effects are small for stiff pores between spherical grains. The porosity at grain contacts in sandstones can be viewed as a fracture porosity. Thus, the effects can be large or small depending on whether these contacts maintain interconnectivity of the pore network The permeability can be obtained from the classical Kozeny–Carman relation. For a packing of spheres and cylindrical pores, the eigenvalues of the permeability tensor in its natural coordinate system can be expressed by Gangi We assume that the viscosity of water is independent of pressure. For the gas viscosity Attenuation can be related to the strain energy (stiffness dissipation) and the kinetic energy (viscodynamic dissipation). In natural porous media such as sandstones, wave dissipation is due to complex pore shapes and to the presence of clay. This complexity gives rise to a variety of relaxation mechanisms. Stoll and Bryan In the low-frequency range In the high-frequency range ( The description of viscoelastic dissipation is phenomenological. Constant- The attenuation kernels corresponding to a The composite properties of the mixture hydrocarbon/water depend on the relative concentrations and on the properties of the constituents. They are  The gas density and bulk modulus as a function of pressure and temperature are calculated using the van der Waals equation For an anisotropic porous medium, each of the permeability components For homogeneous waves, the propagation and attenuation directions coincide, and the complex wavevector can be written as The Christoffel equation is Making the determinant zero, The slowness and attenuation vectors for homogeneous waves can be expressed in terms of the complex velocity as Following Carcione The stored energy density is then The average power flow can be written as The wave surface is the locus of all endpoints of the energy velocity vectors (it is a surface in velocity space). The wavefront generated by a point source (a surface in location space) at time We consider the dry-rock measurements in transversely isotropic Berea sandstone obtained by Lo et al.  Polar representations of the dry-rock energy velocities are shown in Let us consider the presence of fluid, and obtain the acoustic properties as a function of pore pressures and saturation. We assume To introduce viscoelastic attenuation, we use a constitutive equation based on the fact that each eigenvector (called eigenstrain) of the stiffness matrix defines a fundamental deformation state of the medium. The six eigenvalues (called eigenstiffnesses) represent the intrinsic elastic parameters. In the elastic case the strain energy is uniquely parameterized by the six eigenstiffnesses. These ideas date back to the middle of the 19th century when Lord Kelvin introduced the concept of “principal strain” (eigenstrain in modern terminology) to describe the deformation state of a medium Let us illustrate the method to model stiffness (or viscoelastic) attenuation for a pore pressure of In virtue of the correspondence principle and its application to In transversely isotropic porous media there are five distinct eigenvalues, and therefore five complex moduli (see Carcione and Cavallini We consider three cases: (i) At high pore pressure (microcracks open) the velocities decrease and the medium shows a higher degree of anisotropy and shear-wave splitting than at low pore pressure. Moreover, attenuation increases for increasing pore pressure ( Substitution of gas by water implies higher qP-wave velocities and lower shear-wave velocities—the latter behavior is due to the well-known density effect. Moreover, attenuation is lower for full gas saturation than for full water saturation ( At constant fluid saturation (in particular for We have obtained the phase velocity, attenuation factor, energy velocity and quality factor of an anisotropic porous rock as a function of pore pressure and water saturation. For homogeneous plane waves, they can be explicitly written in terms of the complex velocity, eigenvectors of the Christoffel matrix, stiffness and density matrices, and direction cosines defining the propagation direction. The expressions are easily programmed, and can be used to analyze the acoustic properties of reservoir rocks as a function of confining and pore pressures, saturation and frequency. The theory can be used to predict pore pressure and saturation from seismic data. We thank Fabio Cavallini for useful comments. Cheng Then, under the assumptions of micro-homogeneity and micro-isotropy, we have