Background & objectives
                  As the overall health and life expectancy increases in the United States, the incidence of fragility fractures in elderly patients also continues to increase. Given their medical comorbidities and decreased bone mineral density, acetabular fractures in the elderly population present a significant challenge to the orthopaedic trauma surgeon. The anterior column posterior hemitransverse (ACPHT) fracture pattern is a common fracture pattern in this population, and is often associated with central subluxation/dislocation of the femoral head with articular impaction. This study sought to delineate the most stable fixation construct in ACPHT fracture patterns in the elderly population.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The sample consisted of 3 groups of synthetic hemipelves (N=15), which were tested in order to compare stiffness by measuring motion at fracture lines under applied loads. The three groups of unique quadrilateral plate fixation were as follows: a specialty quadrilateral surface plate; 4 long peri-articular screws parallel to the quadrilateral surface into the ischium,; and an 8 hole infrapectineal buttress plate. Digital imaging system measured construct motion under load. Construct stiffness was estimated by linear regression of load between 50 and 850N versus average relative motion (average of relative motion at 200 points along the line of the osteotomy). Permanent deformation was estimated as the magnitude of relative motion upon unloading.
               
                  Results
                  Using ANOVA with Tukey’s test to determine construct stiffness in loading, the group long peri-articular screws was found to have significantly higher stiffness than either of the other groups. Maximal fracture displacement was located at the intersection of the low transverse fracture line in the posterior column and the free quadrilateral surface fragment.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Results indicate that the best fixation construct for this ACPHT acetabular fracture pattern includes independent lag screws across the anterior column and a pelvic brim plate with long periarticular screws maximizing posterior column fixation and preventing medialization of the free quadrilateral fragment. Although there are potential patient considerations that may complicate the placement of all 4 long screws, in most patients one or more of these screws can be safely placed in order to help prevent secondary displacement.As the overall health and life expectancy of the American population has increased over the last 40 years, the incidence of acetabular fractures in elderly patients has also significantly increased Acetabular fractures in the elderly patient commonly occur as a result of a low energy mechanism with a lateral blow to the greater trochanter and subsequent fracture. These fractures are very commonly include the anterior column and may have free quadrilateral plate fragments The study was conducted using synthetic hemipelves in order to assess the different fixation constructs independent of the variable bone quality seen in cadaveric pelves. Fifteen SAWBONES (Vashon Island, WA. large left hemipelvis 3405) fourth generation composite hemipelves of average density were used in order to ensure uniformity of bone density. Power analysis of a previous biomechanical acetabular fracture study A reproducible associated anterior column posterior hemi-transverse acetabular fracture was created in all 15 models by osteotomy along identical pre-marked lines. The fracture model consisted of a high anterior column fracture beginning in the iliac crest, a free central fragment of the quadrilateral surface, and a low transverse fracture line exiting the posterior column. All models were stabilized with uniform base fixation followed by three unique types of fixation of the free quadrilateral surface fragment. The base fixation included 2 independent lag screws, one between the tables of the pelvis beginning at the ASIS perpendicular to the high anterior column fracture, and a second lag screw perpendicular to the anterior column fracture from the inner table just above the pelvic brim into the intact ilium. Next an appropriately contoured 12 hole 3.5 The three groups of unique quadrilateral plate fixation were as follows: a specialty quadrilateral surface plate (Synthes, Paoli PA). 4 long peri-articular screws parallel to the quadrilateral surface into the ischium, (all screws extra-articular) an 8 hole under-contoured infrapectineal buttress plate All fractures were internally fixed with all residual fracture gaps with <1 After all specimens were osteotomized and instrumented, each hemi pelvis was mounted and oriented in the test frame (Instron 5566, Norwood, MA) so that force into the acetabulum was directed 45° superomedially and 15° posteriorly in the sagittal plane which approximates the femoral neck in the standing position Each specimen was subjected to one pre-programmed test cycle in compression under load control using the test frame controller software (Bluehill, Instron). The programmed load profile included Preload cycling, Load to peak followed by Unloading. Preload cycling consisted of five 50N-100N-50N ramps at 5N/s. Load to peak force of 1050N was achieved in ten 100N increments at 5N/s plus a 10 A digital imaging system was used to measure construct motions. The system utilized two digital cameras (Pulnix CCD, Nikon CMOS) and post processing image correlation software (VIC-2D, Correlated Solutions, Columbia, NC). One camera was oriented with its sensor plane roughly parallel to the quadrilateral surface (normal view) to obtain 2D measurements of in-plane displacements Construct stiffness was estimated by linear regression of load between 50 and 850 An analysis of variance was used to check for the effect fixation treatment on stiffness and permanent deformation. Tukey’s test was used to check for significance of the differences in stiffness and permanent deformation.  Using ANOVA with Tukey’s test to determine construct stiffness in loading from 50N to 850N, Group 2 (long peri-articular screws) was found to have significantly higher stiffness (p The maximal fracture displacement in these models was near the intersection of the low transverse fracture line in the posterior column and the posterior margin of the free quadrilateral surface fragment. There were no significant differences in permanent deformation between the three groups (Group 1 Elderly acetabular fracture fixation is increasing in frequency over the last several decades in North America and Europe Using our model of a high anterior column fracture with low posterior hemitransverse fracture line and a free quadrilateral surface fracture fragment, the fixation group with long periarticular screws was a significantly stiffer construct than the other fixation constructs tested. We believe that this is likely a result of both increased fixation in the posterior column and the “rebar effect” of the screws in preventing medialization of the quadrilateral surface. The maximal displacement in our models was seen at the intersection of the low transverse fracture line in the posterior column and the posterior margin of the free quadrilateral surface fragment. Based on this displacement we conclude that the most common mode of failure of fixation with regular stance loading is displacement of the posterior hemitransverse fracture and the free quadrilateral plate fragment followed by recurrent medial subluxation of the quadrilateral fragment and femoral head. Recently newer specialty quadrilateral plating systems have been developed by several vendors, and these implants were not tested here and may have improved performance in comparison to the specialty plate used in this study. These devices were not tested and therefore no conclusion about their utility can be made. Gras et al. have recently reported biomechanical data on the use of infra-acetabular screws in an anterior column fracture model The authors acknowledge some weaknesses of this study. The use of sawbones with normal bone quality allowed for standardization of bone quality in order to independently assess the stiffness of the fixation constructs. The expense and availability of cadaveric pelves of similar bone density also contributed to the choice of sawbones for this study. It is possible that in osteoporotic bone the differences in stiffness might not be as great as seen in this study using normal density sawbones. Elderly osteoporotic fractures are also commonly more comminuted than can be reproduced in a sawbones model, and in vivo this comminution could potentially alter our results. Additionally our model only loaded the fracture fixation constructs in a simulated standing position, not through the full range of motion seen in the hip in the gait cycle. This stance model was chosen as the authors do not believe that early full weightbearing on the affected hip is advisable in any surgically treated acetabular fracture, and the standard rehabilitation protocol in use at our facility includes toe-touch weightbearing on the affected extremity but allows stance for transfers. It is possible that point of maximal displacement would be different if the entire gait cycle had been tested, and the use of a gait model is a potential direction for future investigation. Other future directions include the possibilities of cadaver model testing to more accurately reproduce in vivo results, and assessing other specialty quadrilateral plating systems. We also acknowledge that there can certainly be some technical challenges in the placement of these long screws in vivo related to patient body habitus, exposure, as well as the varying width of the available osseous corridor for screw placement. In our experience, adequate mobilization through the lateral and middle windows of the ilioinguinal approach allows for the appropriate drill trajectories in all but the most centrally obese patients. The available osseous fixation corridor can be determined from careful study of the uninjured hemipelvis on the radiographs and CT scan. A corridor for all 4 long periarticular screws is not always present, but a careful oscillating drill with the use of fluoroscopic guidance is able to maximize the available osseous corridors. In some cases only 1–2 screws can be confidently placed and in this circumstance the authors often apply supplemental fixation in the form of an infrapectineal buttress plate. Letournel describes screws that enter the cotyloid fossa but do not encroach upon the lunar articular surface of the acetabulum or contact the femoral head as safe for use in fixation constructs. At times, long periarticular screws may in fact penetrate the cotyloid fossa while remaining extraarticular. In this study with use of a standard sawbones model, all 4 long periarticular screws were safely placed in every specimen without articular encroachment. Based on the results of this biomechanical study we conclude that the best fixation construct for this ACPHT acetabular fracture pattern includes independent lag screws across the anterior column and a pelvic brim plate with long periarticular screws in order to maximize posterior column fixation and prevent medialization of the free quadrilateral fragment. Although there are potential patient considerations that may complicate the placement of all 4 long screws, in most patients one or more of these screws can be safely placed in order to help prevent secondary displacement. The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.