The characteristics of typical source waters in northern China and their enhanced coagulation features were studied in this paper. Through bench scale tests, a composite coagulant (HPAC) was selected for this kind of high alkalinity and pH water. It can be 30% more efficient in organic matter (OM) removal than the traditional coagulants (AlCl3, FeCl3), and polyaluminum chloride (PACl), especially more efficient in removing high SUVA, hydrophobic and high molecular weight dissolved organic matter (DOM). It is found that some DOM with low SUVA has precedence over that with high SUVA to be removed at conventional dosages in some seasons, and that the priority of DOM removal is in the same sequence for all the coagulants. DOM with high SUVA is not always more easily removed. When applying HPAC as coagulant, flotation process can remove hydrophobic OM more efficiently than sedimentation process in pilot scale tests.Organic matter (OM) in natural water can cause odour, taste, colour, and bacterial regrowth problems. Furthermore, lead to the formation of disinfection by-products (DBPs) and increase chlorine demand in the disinfection process. Effective removal of OM, the precursor of DBPs, is one of the major challenges in modern drinking water treatment. The US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) Disinfectants/DBP (D/DBP) Rule of 1998 mandates that utilities remove predetermined concentrations of total organic carbon (TOC) as a means to reduce DBP precursors ( OM in natural water supplies may be of three different sources: synthetic organic matter, by-product from the treatment process or natural organic matter (NOM). In the well-protected natural water, NOM is by far the largest source of OM, which could be defined as two main constituents: humic and non-humic substance. Synthetic organic matter pollution increases the complexity and difficulty of OM removal. Some synthetic organic matter, being lower molecular weight, and more hydrophilic, and with low SUVA value, is more difficult to be removed in water treatment, especially for coagulation process ( To remove OM in natural water, the source water quality, coagulant speciation and optimized integrated process as well all need further considerations. This paper, as a case study of typical northern China source waters, focuses mainly on: (1) studying the OM characteristics of source waters and their coagulation features; (2) optimizing coagulants and comparing their characteristics in terms of OM removal; (3) studying the effect of solid liquid separation processes on OM removal. The coagulants, AlCl Jar tests were performed with 1 UF membranes (A/G Technology), hollow-fiber modules with nominal molecular weight cut-offs of 30, 10, 3 and 1 Amberlite XAD-8 and XAD-4 were used to fractionate DOM following the procedure of TOC was analysed using a phoenix 8000 system (Tekmar-Dohrman Co., USA). Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC) was analysed after filtrated through a 0.45 The source water for Jieyuan water plant changes seasonally. In the rainy seasons, Summer and Autumn, the source water was Luan River water (LW). The Luan River is a local river running through industrial estates and residential areas in northern China. In the drought seasons, Spring and Winter, the Luan River is short of water and the plant introduces downstream water from the Yellow River (YW). The Yellow River is one of the Chinese two largest rivers. It runs through several geological areas from west to east of China. Water quality in northern China changed regularly with season in the past 3 years, as exemplified by the daily water quality reports provided by the plant. The alkalinity was more than 110 Although the chemical oxygen demand (COD The percentage of particulate organic matter (POM) accounting for TOC in YW is only 4.25%, which appears to be consistent with the results obtained in the literatures, less than 10% ( Specific UV absorbance (SUVA) varies greatly. The SUVA value of YW is 1.3 higher than that of LW, 3.41 and 2.12, respectively. High SUVA waters are generally enriched in hydrophobic and high molecular weight OM, such as humic substances. It can be used to estimate the chemical nature of the DOC at a given location ( The results of resin absorption fractionation and molecular weight fractionation by ultrafiltration are in accordance with this conclusion (shown in DOM with molecular weight lower than 1 The typical northern China water could be separated into six water quality periods in a year round based on alkalinity and temperature. The coagulation feature with representative coagulants in each period was studied. Here we only show two groups of representative results using AlCl  From FeCl  DOC increases slightly by FeCl No matter how big the difference is in the efficiency of DOC removal by the four coagulants, all of them exhibit a plateau in the plot of SUVA vs. dosage ( The plot of SUVA versus the residual content of DOC ( It can be seen from OM in natural waters is complicated. Many OM molecules are both amphiphilic and amphoteric and the complexing of metals with humates effectively makes the humates larger and more hydrophobic, particularly for FeCl The results indicate DOM removal is very complicated. The removal of DOM in nature water depends not only coagulant dosage and pH in water, but also the characteristics of DOM and coagulant speciation. DOM shows different ability to react with coagulant, at the same time, coagulant speciation plays different role and ability to remove DOM. pH and dosage control in combination with source water DOM analysis and coagulation speciation optimization would yield cost effective and optimum OM removal. In addition, solid/liquid separation process may also affect OM removal. Several researchers ( When using HPAC as coagulant, TOC removal efficiency via single flotation is about 5% higher than by sedimentation. Meanwhile, the TOC removal ratio of flotation–filtration increases up to about 9% higher than that of sedimentation–filtration, though the residual turbidities are almost the same between flotation-filtration and sedimentation-filtration. Additionally, the optimum dosage for flotation is less than that for sedimentation, which is 0.03 and 0.04 Flotation can remove hydrophobic DOC more efficiently because hydrophobic air bubble is affinitive to hydrophobic DOC. Hydrophobic basic and neutral DOC can be almost completely removed by flotation process and the residual DOC with molecular weight >10 Coagulation–flotation with HPAC is capable of removing not only DOC, but also volatile suspended solids (VSS) more efficiently. HPAC is also more efficient in hydrophobic DOC removal. More hydrophobic humates are destabilized and attached onto flocs, and the surface of flocs of HPAC are more hydrophobic. The hydrophobic surface of HPAC flocs enhances their removal by hydrophobic air bubbles in flotation. VSS decreases from 4.0 to 2.8 The flocs of humate are incompact, and therefore easily broken in the flotation unit by air agitation. The broken small flocs cannot be removed efficiently by flotation, but can be removed by the subsequent sand filtration process. Then difference of TOC removal between flotation and sedimentation increases about 4% after filtration. Enhanced coagulation in a typical North-China water treatment plant is investigated in this paper and main conclusions can be drawn as following. Source waters in North-China exhibit high alkalinity and high micro-contamination. The percentages of hydrophilic, weakly hydrophobic and low molecular weight DOM are higher than normal values, particularly for Luan river water in Summer. Coagulation behavior also changes seasonally with water quality. A specially developed HPAC can be 30% more efficient than the traditional coagulants for removal of OM with the typical water. It is specifically effective in removing DOM with high SUVA, and hydrophobic and high molecular weight DOM, especially at low dosages. Although the effectiveness of the coagulants investigated differs greatly, the priority of DOM removal can be observed in a certain sequence for each of them. Moreover, a portion of DOM with low SUVA can also be removed efficiently at conventional dosage in Yellow river water. Not only hydrophobic and larger molecular weight DOM can be removed, but also some hydrophilic and intermediate molecular weight DOM can be removed. When applying HPAC as a coagulant, a flotation process can be more effective than a sedimentation process in removing OM, especially for hydrophobic and high molecular weight DOM. VSS is also more effectively removed. The authors are very grateful to the people who provided full supports to this research. The kind suggestions from the anonymous reviewers are greatly acknowledged. This work is supported by China NSF under 20477054/50578155 and 863 water program under 2002AA00601140.