In this paper, the microstructures and mechanical properties of tungsten inert gas (TIG) welded joints were studied. Three zones were formed in these joints: a heat-affected zone (HAZ), a partial melting zone (PMZ) and a fusion zone (FZ). In the FZ, the microstructure consisted of only α-Al and eutectic Mg2Si. The α-Al segregation phenomenon occurred when the welding current increased from 125 A to 135 A. The low-angle grain boundaries (LABs) found in the base material (BM) transformed into high-angle grain boundaries (HABs) in the FZ. The texture of the BM was concentrated in three specific preferred orientations, whereas the texture was eliminated in the FZ. The hardness in the FZ was 45 % higher than that in the BM. The eutectic Mg2Si phase in the welded joints became fine and dense, and the needle-like β″ phase in the BM was replaced by a high density of fine precipitates, which led to an increase in hardness. The ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and elongation of the joints welded at 125 A were lower than those of the BM and the joints welded at 135 A. Furthermore, no cracks were generated in the joints after multiple thermal shocks.Aluminum alloys are lightweight metal materials that have been used in many fields, including the transportation, aerospace, and petrochemical industries. Al-Mg In contrast to the work that has been done on Al-Mg Among the common welding methods for Al alloys, tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding has received the most attention from researchers. Many studies have been performed on the use of TIG welding with common Al alloys. Zhang et al. [ In this paper, the effects of the TIG welding process on the microstructures and performance of Al-Mg The smelting and forming methods of Al-Mg Thin sheets of the Al-Mg Each sample used for microstructural observation was cleaned with ethanol and ethylene glycol, and then all samples were polished using standard procedures. Optical microscopy (OM) was used to observe the sample microstructures. The precipitates were studied using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The changes in the grain boundaries and texture were analyzed by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). A HF solution (0.5 %) was used to etch the samples prior to microstructural examination. A phase change analysis of the fusion zone (FZ) before and after TIG welding was performed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a step size of 4°/min. The holding time and load used for the hardness measurements of the butt joints were set to 20 s and 0.2 kg (ISO 6507−4), respectively. Three tests were executed under the same conditions. The UTS measurements were performed using an MTS machine. The crosshead speed was set at 0.3 mm∙min The TIG welded joints produced with different welding currents of 125 A and 135 A are shown in The microstructure of the Al-Mg To determine the changes in the FZ phase, XRD analyses were conducted, the results of which are shown in The microstructure of the FZ is shown in As previously mentioned, the microstructure of the PMZ had a The segregation phenomenon also occurred in the FZ of the joints produced with a current of 135 A. According to a study by Liang et al. [ A pseudobinary phase diagram of Al-15 Mg Generally, the main reason for the generation of porosity is the evolution of hydrogen during the TIG welding process of Al alloys. Hydrogen is mainly derived from moisture, as shown in the following reaction: The moisture was mainly derived from three sources: the atmosphere, the BM and the welding wire. The results of TIG welded Al-2219 alloy reported by Li et al. [ The change in the crystal structure of the TIG welded joints was analyzed by EBSD. The inverse pole figure (IPF) images from the EBSD data for the joints produced at a welding current of 135 A are presented in Generally, two factors resulted in an increase in the transformation of HABs. One of these factors was dynamic recrystallization, in which the LABs partially disappeared and transformed into HABs. In the present work, the experimental results verified this phenomenon. The composition of the crystal structure in the FZ and BM is shown in  The hardness values of the TIG welded joints are shown in The results of the TEM analysis also verified the abovementioned trend ( A fracture surface from one of the TIG welded joints is shown in The thermal shock test of the welded joints was performed by rapid cooling and heating cycles from room temperature to 150 °C. The number of cycles was set to 100. The test results are shown in The mechanical properties of the Al-Mg The changes in the hardness were affected by two main factors. One of these factors was the effect of the rapidly solidified microstructure in the FZ. It is well known that the solidification speed of the weld pool (i.e., FZ) is much higher than the solidification speed of the BM casting process. At this solidification rate, part of the Mg and Si atoms dissolved into the Al matrix, causing lattice distortion and increasing hardness. The disappearance of the primary Mg The UTS and elongation were also affected by the microstructure. After TIG welding, as previously mentioned, the primary and eutectic phases were both reduced in the FZ. In particular, for the joints produced with a 135 A welding current, a large amount of α-Al phase formed due to the addition of the welding wire, and the eutectic Mg  The microstructures of the TIG welded joints exhibited different characteristics after welding at 125 A and 135 A. In the FZ of the joints welded at 125 A, the microstructure consisted of only 〈-Al and eutectic Mg With different welding currents, the grain boundaries in the FZ all transformed from LABs (in the BM) into HABs. The composition of the crystal structure changed from the substructure (in the BM) to the recrystallized structure in the FZ. Moreover, the texture was eliminated in the FZ. The joints welded at 125 A and 135 A exhibited similar hardness, and the hardness in the FZ of these joints was 45 % higher than that in the BM. The UTS of the joints welded at 135 A was close to that of the BM and higher than that of the joints welded at 125 A. The same trend was observed for elongation, wherein the joint welded at 135 A exhibited the best performance. The enhancement of the mechanical properties was affected by the sample microstructures. The elimination of the Mg The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the