A very detailed scheme for the Fe3+-catalyzed electro-Fenton mineralization of malachite green as a model triarylmethane dye is presented. Bulk electrolyses of 250-mL aqueous solutions of 0.5mM malachite green with 0.2mM Fe3+ as catalyst have been carried out at room temperature and pH 3.0 under constant current in an undivided cell equipped with a graphite-felt cathode and a Pt anode to assess the performance of the electro-Fenton system. In situ electrogeneration of Fe2+ and H2O2 from quick cathodic reduction of Fe3+ and dissolved O2 (from bubbled compressed air), respectively, allows the formation of the very oxidizing species hydroxyl radical (OH) in the medium from Fenton's reaction. A pseudo-first-order decay kinetics with an apparent rate constant of k
                     1,MG
                     =0.244min−1 was obtained for total destruction of malachite green by action of OH at 200mA, requiring 22min for total decoloration of the solution. In the same experimental conditions, overall mineralization was reached at 540min. Up to 15 aromatic and short-chain carboxylic acid intermediates were identified along the treatment. The evolution of current efficiency was calculated from the chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal. Based on the time course of most of the by-products and the identification of inorganic ions released, some plausible mineralization pathways are proposed and thoroughly discussed. It has been found that the electro-Fenton degradation of malachite green proceeds via parallel pathways, all of them involving primary splitting of the triaryl structure initiated by attack of OH on the central carbon, thus yielding two different N-dimethylated benzophenones. Successive cleavage of the aromatic intermediates generates oxalic acid as the ultimate short-chain carboxylic acid, whereas N-demethylation of some of them produces formic acid as well. Oxalic acid and its Fe2+ complexes, as well as formic acid, can be slowly but totally mineralized by OH.According to financial reports, the worldwide market for synthetic organic colorants is projected to increase up to $11 billion in 2008 and the production of dyestuffs is over 7 Triarylmethane dyes constitute the most ancient class of synthetic dyes, but keep still their outstanding commercial position. Among them, we have selected malachite green ( There is growing interest in the behavior of Recently, the development of water remediation technologies with lower economical requirements is attracting a major interest. Electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) are a promising alternative, because they are environmentally clean and can produce larger amounts of Carbon is widely used as a cathode material for H Reaction In previous works we have examined some fundamental aspects of the Fe This paper reports a very detailed discussion on the electrochemical oxidation pathways for the overall mineralization of acidic aqueous solutions containing malachite green ( The triarylmethane dye malachite green ( Constant current electrolyses were performed with an EG&G Princeton Applied Research 273A potentiostat/galvanostat. The solution pH was measured with an Eutech Instruments CyberScan pH 1500 pH-meter. The mineralization of solutions of The instantaneous current efficiency ( The decays of Bulk electrolyses were conducted in an open, cylindrical and undivided glass cell of 6-cm diameter and 250-mL capacity. The performance of the Pt/carbon-felt cell was tested under electro-Fenton conditions, with a 4.5 Stock solutions of Recently, we have suggested that the fast regeneration of Fe It is important to study the ability of the EF system to mineralize aqueous solutions of The decay of COD with time was analyzed for the same solutions to follow the mineralization of To study the behavior of the aromatic intermediates formed during the mineralization of Reversed-phase chromatograms of treated solutions, obtained with HPLC conditions mentioned in The time course of the concentration of the two benzophenones detected, 4-dimethylaminobenzophenone ( The time evolution of the concentration of benzoic acids (benzoic acid (  The last group of aromatics include quinones (hydroquinone ( As pointed out above, the mineralization of The overall mineralization reaction can then be written as follows: Prolonged oxidation of aromatics weaken them and make them prone to oxidative ring opening reactions From the large number of aromatics and aliphatic carboxylics identified along the electro-Fenton treatment of Given the identification of The pre-eminence of path A making Following the course of the major primary intermediate The appearance of path B is simpler because the fate of intermediates formed has already been discussed. Thus, attack of Interestingly, it must be noted that all the pathways proposed lead to the formation of From the electro-Fenton treatment of aqueous solutions of malachite green as a model triarylmethane dye, it has been corroborated the great Fe I. Sirés acknowledges support from the Laboratoire Géomatériaux et Géologie de l’Ingénieur to obtain the ATER position in the Université Paris-Est Marne-la-Vallée.