In general, the modeling errors of dynamic system model are a set of random variables. The traditional performance index of modeling such as means square error (MSE) and root means square error (RMSE) cannot fully express the connotation of modeling errors with stochastic characteristics both in the dimension of time domain and space domain. Therefore, the probability density function (PDF) is introduced to completely describe the modeling errors in both time scales and space scales. Based on it, a novel wavelet neural network (WNN) modeling method is proposed by minimizing the two-dimensional (2D) PDF shaping of modeling errors. First, the modeling error PDF by the traditional WNN is estimated using data-driven kernel density estimation (KDE) technique. Then, the quadratic sum of 2D deviation between the modeling error PDF and the target PDF is utilized as performance index to optimize the WNN model parameters by gradient descent method. Since the WNN has strong nonlinear approximation and adaptive capability, and all the parameters are well optimized by the proposed method, the developed WNN model can make the modeling error PDF track the target PDF, eventually. Simulation example and application in a blast furnace ironmaking process show that the proposed method has a higher modeling precision and better generalization ability compared with the conventional WNN modeling based on MSE criteria. Furthermore, the proposed method has more desirable estimation for modeling error PDF that approximates to a Gaussian distribution whose shape is high and narrow.Many complex industrial processes, such as blast furnace ironmaking process, are difficult to establish a practical first-principle model, because these processes have extremely complex nonlinear time-varying dynamics As for data-driven modeling of complex industrial process, the traditional approaches take the MSE and RMSE of modeling error as performance evaluation index, and leverage various multivariate statistical analysis or artificial intelligence technologies to construct the mathematical relationship between the inputs and outputs. In other words, the square error between the actual process output and the model output is used as objective function to determine the model parameters, so as to make MSE or RMSE as minimum as possible. However, when modeling a dynamic system, because the modeling errors are actually random variables, one-dimensional performance index such as MSE and RMSE cannot clearly express the connotation of modeling errors with stochastic characteristics in both spatial and temporal scales. Therefore, if modeling method merely minimizes performance index based on the perspective of a single sample without considering the spatial distribution of data, it is essentially a local approximation and thus cannot guarantee the generalization performance of the model. In addition, the conventional modeling approaches that depend on MSE or RMSE as the performance index do not consider the case of non-Gaussian interference. As a result, such methods are difficult to obtain satisfactory performance when modeling dynamic processes with non-Gaussian disturbances. The modeling error PDF fully considers the spatial distribution of the modeling error, it can evaluate the modeling performance of the model comprehensively, thus has wider scope of application than MSE and RMSE In the realization aspect, one can resort to output PDF control technique to realize the tracking of the modeling error PDF to a given PDF. The output PDF control, also named as stochastic distribution control (SDC), was first proposed by Wang in 1996, which aimed to make the system output PDF track the given PDF by adopting an appropriate control strategy As a new feedforward network based on wavelet analysis, WNN uses wavelet function instead of Sigmoid function to define the activation function. By establishing a relationship between wavelet transforms and network coefficients with affine transformation, WNN can approximate the given functions with arbitrary precisions. Moreover, the training process effectively avoids local minimum problem thus WNN possesses powerful nonlinear function approximation and adaptive fault tolerance ability. Therefore, WNN and its variants have been used with great success in a wide range of applications Wavelet neural network (WNN) is a kind of network model based on back-propagation neural network topology, which uses wavelet function instead of the traditional Sigmoid function as transfer function of the hidden layer node The Sigmoid function is used as activation function in output layer, namely Assuming that the node number of the input layer, hidden layer and the output layer is The output of The WNN learning process includes forward signal propagation and backward error propagation. In the forward process, the input signal goes through input layer, hidden layer to output layer. Every layer only affects the neuron state of the next layer. In the backward process, the correction of weights and thresholds goes from output layer to input layer. The error of output node is as follows: The corrected parameters with negative gradient descent method are  As a matter of fact, the proposed method based on modeling error PDF shaping turns the problem of adjusting WNN model parameters by minimizing one-dimensional modeling errors into the problem of adjusting model parameters by optimizing the 2D modeling error PDF shaping. When the random disturbance follows Gaussian distribution, a narrow and high shaping of Gaussian distribution function can be set as the target PDF; When the random disturbance follows non-Gaussian distribution, it is necessary to estimate the PDF of the random disturbance first so as to set the target PDF. Then the proposed method is used to make the actual modeling error PDF approximate the PDF shaping of the random non-Gaussian disturbance. Because most of the disturbance in reality obeys Gaussian distribution, in this paper, the case that random disturbance follows Gaussian distribution is only considered. Based on the modeling strategy shown in  The modeling strategy shown in The WNN modeling error can be expressed as: Kernel density estimation (KDE) is a non-parametric estimation method for estimating the density function of the random variables distribution, which was first proposed by Parzen From the above definition, the kernel density estimator The detailed procedures for estimating the WNN modeling error PDF based on KDE method are as follows:  The common used kernel functions include Gaussian kernel function, rectangle window kernel function, Epanechnikov kernel function, etc. The different kernel functions are not sensitive to KDE. When the sample data is enough, different selection method has little effect on KDE. In this paper, the Gaussian kernel function is chosen as follows:   By substituting the WNN modeling error PDF shown in Further simplifying: Based on the optimization objective function shown in The objective function derivation of each parameter is: The items in the right of The corrected parameters with negative gradient descent method are  The selection of the momentum factor The proposed method is validated by the following 3 inputs and 1 output nonlinear system: The proposed method is used to model the above nonlinear system. In order to verify the effect of the proposed method, this paper establishes a conventional WNN model at the same time. The number of hidden layer nodes is identified as 6 and the iteration step is determined as 0.003. Using the gradient descent method to minimize the performance index, we can obtain the performance index decreasing with the number of iterations as shown in  Furthermore, some standard statistical indices are adopted to evaluate the modeling performance, including root mean square error (RMSE), mean absolute error (MAE), hit rate (HR), and relative error (RE). As an important production link of steel manufacturing, the blast furnace (BF) ironmaking is to chemically reduce and physically convert solid iron oxides into liquid iron called ‘hot metal’. As shown in Among the 21 points of temperature measuring device in the typical cross thermodetector shown in The proposed method is applied to estimate the temperature of center point in the BF cross thermodetector. The authentic production data from #2 BF in Liuzhou iron & steel plant of China is chosen to establish the model. This data is discrete time series data with sampling time of 10 s, and then turn the data into discrete time random data by mean elimination method. The BF system has many process variables, some lower temperature measuring points such as No.5, No.6, No.15 and No.17 are selected as input variables and the center temperature measuring point No.16 is selected as output variable. In order to eliminate the effect of dimension among variables, the training and testing data need to be normalized. The number of hidden layer nodes is identified as 6, and the iteration step is 0.003. First, an initial WNN model is trained by using the normalized training data, and the KDE technique is used to estimate the PDF of modeling error. Then, the gradient descent method is adopted to minimize the quadratic sum of 2D deviation between the estimated modeling error PDF and the target PDF, so as to optimize and adjust the WNN parameters.  In summary, the proposed approach can exactly estimates the real-time temperature of center point and provides a scientific basis for the operator to judge the distribution of the gas flow and adjust the relevant system. Aiming at the insufficient of traditional data-driven modeling methods by employing MSE or RMSE as performance index, this paper proposes a modeling error PDF shaping optimization based WNN modeling method by introducing 2D PDF to completely describe the modeling errors in both spatial and temporal scales. Simulation and the application in estimating the temperature of center point in the BF cross thermodetector show that the proposed method has a higher modeling precision and better generalization ability compared with the conventional WNN modeling method based on MSE criteria. In addition, the modeling error PDF shaping also can be adjusted to overcome the influence of the process noise and interference on the modeling performance. And the proposed method would not limit by Gaussian interference case. When the random disturbance of dynamic system follows non-Gaussian distribution, a well-trained model with high modeling performance can be achieved by adjusting the model parameters to make the modeling error PDF approximate to the PDF of the non-Gaussian disturbance. Furthermore, although the proposed method takes WNN modeling as an example, the modeling idea and related technologies can be extended to many existing data-driven modeling methods whose objective function is MSE or RMSE. This work was supported by the