In this paper, recovery covariances were used to estimate the kinetic parameters from batch flotation tests to account for the lack of statistical independence and homoscedasticity in the cumulative recoveries. Non-linear parameter estimations were compared by using unweighted least squares estimation (ULSE), weighted least squares estimation (WLSE) and non-linear generalized least squares estimation (NLGLSE). Three autocorrelated time-recovery curves were used as base case to simulate theoretical kinetic response. Single Rate Constant, Rectangular and Gamma models were employed to describe the kinetic response.
                  The NLGLSE allowed for significant precision improvements in the parameter estimation with respect to ULSE and WLSE, under known and constant covariance estimates. The variability of k
                     SRC (SRC), k
                     max (Rectangular) and k
                     mean (Gamma) decreased by approximately 40% with respect to ULSE, and 28% in comparison to WLSE. For R
                     ∞, the dispersion decreased 33% in comparison to ULSE, and 17% regarding WLSE. The limitations of ULSE and WLSE were caused by a lack of validity of the assumptions of independence and homoscedasticity in the time-recovery curves. The advantages of NLGLSE were only observed with accurate estimators of the covariance matrix, which were obtained in the simulations and in a laboratory flotation test that involved 11 replicates.
                  Incorporating the covariance matrix in the parameter estimation allowed for improvements in the kinetic characterization. Thus, uncertainties related to the ore potential and circuit sizing (obtained from R
                     ∞ and the rate constant estimates) might be decreased using accurate covariance estimators in the objective functions.Laboratory batch flotation tests are routinely performed in industrial operations to compare metallurgical results of different geo-metallurgical units as well as to define maximum achievable performances for continuous operation. In addition, kinetic characterization together with different scale-up methodologies have been also used to design industrial flotation circuits. For example, Several model structures have been proposed to describe flotation kinetics at laboratory, pilot plant and industrial scale. Goodness-of-fit of kinetic models have been extensively analysed and compared based on flotation tests at laboratory scale.  This paper presents the impact of using recovery covariances on the estimation of the kinetic parameters from batch flotation tests. From replicate tests, the sample covariance matrices were obtained. Such matrices were used as baselines to simulate kinetic data under different model structures (Single Rate Constant, Rectangular and Gamma). These simulations allowed opportunities for improvements in the kinetic characterization to be identified by including the covariance effect on the parameter estimation. Three samples of a porphyry copper ore deposit were used for flotation tests. These three samples have chalcopyrite (CuFeS The grinding time to obtain a P Concentrates were collected at 1, 2, 3, 6, 12 and 20 min. Manual scraping was conducted at a rate of one every 5 s for the three first minutes, and then one every 15 s. Concentrates and the tailings were dewatered, dried, weighed and analysed for Cu by atomic absorption spectroscopy. The samples were digested by a solution of nitric, perchloric and sulfuric acid. The salts were dissolve by a solution of hydrochloric acid in a second digestion. Ten, fourteen and eleven flotation runs were performed for each ore sample (Tests 1, 2 and 3, respectively), according to the sample availability. The higher possible number of replicates was evaluated to improve the accuracy of the recovery covariance matrix, which is required in the proposed methodology (   Different methodologies for non-linear parameter estimation were compared: unweighted least squares estimation (ULSE); weighted least squares estimation (WLSE); and non-linear generalized least squares estimation (NLGLSE). Eq. In Eq. Weighted least-squares error minimization is a special case of Eq. In case of statistical independence among the recoveries and homoscedasticity (i.e., constant The kinetic responses of the data shown in The objective function of Eq. Recoveries obtained from flotation tests present significant auto-dependence due to the tailing dependence on previous recoveries and the common and variable feed characteristics ( The covariance matrices presented in Appendix C along with modelled kinetics were used to simulate 1000 batch conditions. The parameters obtained from the modelled kinetic data were used as references to compare the ULSE, WLSE and NLGLSE methodologies in terms of parameter estimation. In the baseline, maximum recoveries, The kinetic parameters as well as the maximum recoveries were estimated for the chosen models by minimizing the objective functions of Eqs.   The use of NLGLSE to determine the kinetic parameters requires accurate covariance estimators, which are typically obtained with a sufficiently large number of replicates ( Design of a flotation circuit is based on flotation tests of different geo-metallurgical units. Several runs are typically carried out to characterize the ores and to improve the accuracy of the key performance indicators. Thus, more precise estimations of potential recoveries and kinetic parameters might be obtained by including unbiased covariance matrices in the parameter assessment. The kinetic parameters along with scale-up factors and a proper model for continuous operation allow circuit sizes to be determined. In addition, the overall effect of maximum recovery and the kinetic response in continuous operation make it possible the potential recoveries to be estimated. The results showed that improvements in the kinetic characterization can be obtained by incorporating the covariance matrix in the objective function of Eq. The results were obtained by assuming a known and constant covariance matrix for the metal recovery. Further developments must be made to estimate covariances when this condition is not fulfilled. Furthermore, additional efforts must be also carried out to incorporate the mass recovery as well as the concentrate grades as a function of time in the regression analysis. These variables are a function of the mineral recovery by true flotation (including different species such as chalcopyrite, bornite, among others, and the associated gangues), the true flotation of non-valuable sulphides ( The impact of using recovery covariances on the estimation of the kinetic parameters was studied from batch flotation tests. Three replicated tests were used as baselines to simulate correlated time-recovery curves under Single Rate Constant, Rectangular and Gamma models. These data presented significant autocorrelation due to the tailing dependence on previous recoveries and the common feed characteristics (i.e. grade, particle size, liberation). The use of cumulative mass as a function of time propagates any correlation that is present in the batch flotation process or the experimental data. Using the simulations, the kinetic parameters were obtained by unweighted least squares estimation (ULSE), weighted least squares estimation (WLSE) and non-linear generalized least squares estimation (NLGLSE) for comparison purposes. The comparisons were carried out by means of the relative inter-decile range (RIDR). The NLGLSE led to significant precision improvements in the parameter estimation regarding ULSE and WLSE. The average RIDR decrease for The use of NLGLSE requires accurate covariance estimators, which are typically obtained with sufficiently large number of replicates. The NLGLSE results allow opportunities for improvements in the kinetic characterization to be identified by including the covariance effect on the parameter estimation. Thus, the uncertainties related to the ore potential and circuit sizing, which are associated with the estimates of The authors are grateful for the financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Vale Base Metals, Teck Resources Ltd., Barrick Gold Corp., COREM, SGS Canada Inc., Shell Canada, ChmIQA and XPS Consulting & Testwork Services, under the Collaborative Research and Development Grants Program (CRDPJ – 445682-12). The McGill Engineering Doctoral Award (MEDA) from the Faculty of Engineering at McGill University is also acknowledged for providing funding for L. Vinnett.    