Objectives. A new combination intracorporeal lithotripter (Lithoclast Ultra) has been developed that incorporates the beneficial effects of pneumatic lithotripsy (rapid stone fragmentation) and ultrasound lithotripsy (rapid fragment removal). An in vitro study was performed to assess the efficiency of stone fragmentation and clearance of this new combination intracorporeal lithotripter compared with currently available ultrasound and pneumatic units.
                  
                     Methods. Pneumatic and ultrasound lithotrites, along with the combination pneumatic/ultrasound unit, were used through a rigid 27F nephroscope to fragment and remove phantom stones made of BegoForm. The mean fragment removal times and stone fragment sizes for the standard ultrasound and pneumatic devices were compared with the combination unit to determine the completeness and efficiency of stone fragmentation and removal.
                  
                     Results. The average time for stone clearance using the pneumatic and ultrasound devices was 23.8 and 12.9 minutes, respectively. The combination pneumatic/ultrasound unit was significantly more efficient, requiring only 7.4 minutes to completely fragment and clear all stone material (P <0.002). In addition, the average size of the 15 largest fragments removed was significantly less with the combination device than with the pneumatic and ultrasound lithotrites (1.67 mm versus 9.07 mm and 3.67 mm, respectively, P <0.00001).
                  
                     Conclusions. The combination of pneumatic and ultrasound capabilities in a newly developed lithotrite exhibited a significantly enhanced ability to fragment and clear phantom stones compared with standard ultrasound or pneumatic devices alone. These preliminary studies suggest that this combination pneumatic/ultrasound lithotripter may be an ideal device for the expeditious removal of large-volume renal or bladder calculi. Additional studies are warranted to better assess the capabilities of this new device in treating human stones of various compositions and its safety, as well as the optimal power and frequency settings.Percutaneous nephrostolithotomy has become the preferred method for removal of calculi larger than 1.5 cm since the early 1980s. The at-traction of this less morbid means of managing renal calculi has resulted, in part, from significant technological advances in fragmentation devices. Pneumatic and ultrasound lithotrites are quite effective and have been regarded as the instruments of choice for stone comminution. A new combination intracorporeal lithotripter has been developed that incorporates the rapid stone clearance capabilities of the ultrasound lithotripter with the effective stone fragmentation capabilities of the pneumatic lithotripter into one unit. We performed an in vitro study to compare the efficiency in stone fragmentation and clearance of the new combination pneumatic/ultrasound device with ultrasound and pneumatic devices. The phantom stones used for the study were cylindrical in shape and measured 10 mm in height by 27 mm in diameter The stones were placed into a 60-mL Toomey syringe followed by a 30F percutaneous access sheath stabilized by an assistant. The outflow (catheter-tipped) end of the syringe was partially occluded to allow slow but continuous flow of irrigation fluid without allowing large fragments to pass. Each of three intracorporeal lithotripsy devices (Swiss Lithoclast, LUS-2, and Lithoclast Ultra [EMS, Germany]) was used in succession through a standard right-angle 27F nephroscope (Richard Wolf Medical Instruments, Vernon Hills, Ill) to fragment and extract five phantom stones. After stone comminution, the fragments were removed using grasping forceps placed through the working channel of the nephroscope (pneumatic device) or suction (ultrasound and combination units). The machine settings were as follows: (a) pneumatic device: continuous mode at 2 bar air pressure with a 6F probe; (b) ultrasound device: output 2, suction 2 with a 9F probe; and (c) Lithoclast Ultra: pneumatic 6 Hz at 100% power with a 1.8F probe and ultrasound 100% output at 80% duty with a 9F hollow probe. These power settings were maintained throughout the experimental course to ensure consistency and standardization. Unlike the holmium laser, no special electric outlet or adapter is necessary to power the new combination lithotripsy device. However, just as with activation of standard pneumatic lithotrites, the new unit requires compressed air for activation of the pneumatic portion of the device. The time to complete stone fragmentation and removal were recorded and compared among the three devices. Additionally, the size of the largest 15 fragments removed with each device were measured and compared All five stones were completely fragmented with each device. The mean times for complete calculus removal are noted in When comparing the size of the largest fragments removed, the combination pneumatic/ultrasound unit again proved superior to the other two devices, producing an average fragment size of 1.67 mm versus 3.67 mm and 9.07 mm for the ultrasound and pneumatic lithotrites, respectively ( Percutaneous nephrolithotripsy is widely accepted as the treatment of choice for large renal stones, reserving open surgery for perhaps the most complex of staghorn calculi. Studies have repeatedly demonstrated the safety and efficacy of this minimally invasive technique, maintaining acceptable stone-free and symptom-free results, while minimizing associated complications. Moreover, a reduced hospital stay and more rapid return to normal activity have enhanced the popularity of percutaneous nephrolithotripsy. Although the pneumatic lithotripter is capable of safely fragmenting virtually all types of stones without concomitant adjacent tissue injury, Ultrasound lithotripsy uses a high-frequency ultrasound wave to mechanically fragment most stone compositions. This device requires a hollow rigid probe that fragments and suctions the stone concurrently. A combination device for intracorporeal lithotripsy has been developed that incorporates the expeditious fragmentation ability of pneumatic lithotripsy with the disintegration and suctioning capabilities of the ultrasound lithotrite (Lithoclast Ultra, EMS, Germany). The two modalities can be used concomitantly or separately, depending on the operating surgeon’s preferences and the clinical situation. Early reports have demonstrated the rapid and safe fragmentation capability of this instrument and its proficiency in eliminating large renal or bladder calculi, ranging in size from 1.5 to 10 cm in greatest dimension. One can speculate that the new unit activated in combination may not be required to fragment and clear soft calculi, such as struvite stones, because stones of soft composition are easily removed using standard ultrasound devices. In such instances, the ultrasound portion of the combination device can be used alone, without the additional pneumatic probe. Cost containment becomes a concern when new technology is introduced, at times limiting access to the new devices. The cost for the new combination unit is anticipated to be comparable to currently available pneumatic units, with an upgrade program or trade out offered by the manufacturer, for those who currently have a standard pneumatic or ultrasound unit, respectively. The development of new intracorporeal lithotripsy energy sources continues to improve on existing technology. Although ultrasound and pneumatic lithotrites are highly effective when used as separate entities for the fragmentation of renal and bladder calculi, the combination of pneumatic and ultrasound lithotrites appears to be far superior to currently available equipment in this in vitro study. Despite the encouraging results from our investigation, additional studies are warranted to determine the ability of this combination device to fragment human stones of varying compositions, as well as to determine the optimal settings for efficient operation. These additional assessments are currently ongoing at our institution.