Extraction of manganese from manganese dioxide ores was investigated using corncob as a reducing agent in dilute sulfuric acid medium. The effects of corncob amount, concentration of sulfuric acid, leaching temperature, reaction time and ore particle size were discussed. The leaching efficiency of manganese reached 92.8% while iron dissolved was 24.6% under the optimal condition which was determined for 10g of manganese dioxide ore as corncob amount of 3g, ore size of 75μm, sulfuric acid concentration of 1.9mol/L, leaching temperature of 85°C for 60min. In a word, the method provided a good leaching yield while making a productive use of corncob.Hydrometallurgical treatment of low-grade manganese dioxide ores has attracted great attention in recent years. Hence, many efforts have been applied to develop an efficient and economical process to recover manganese from low-grade manganese dioxide ores. Manganese dioxide ores are stable in acid or alkaline oxidizing conditions so the extraction of manganese must be carried out under reducing condition ( As we know, corncob is a low cost, rich resource, containing renewable and non-hazardous reducing agent compared to other available raw materials that can be used for manganese leaching under mild acidic conditions. In this system, corncob was hydrolyzed to release glucose in the acid condition, so that manganese dioxide would be reduced at the low temperature. Glucose would reduce MnO Making use of corncob to reduce manganese dioxide ores cannot only widen the channels of energy to lower the cost, but also comply with the requirement of green economy. The aim of this work was to state a new leaching process of the low-grade manganese dioxide ores from Hunan by sulfuric acid in the presence of corncob as reductant. The extraction of iron from ores was demonstrated. The effects of corncob amount, concentration of sulfuric acid, leaching temperature, reaction time and ore particle size were investigated. Manganese dioxide ore used in the present work was obtained from Hunan. Both the bulk and sieved samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) to define the mineralogical composition. From the XRD pattern ( The reductant used in the experiment was corncob which had been processed by pulverizer. The proximate analysis of corncob was shown in The leaching experiment was carried out in a 250 In order to evaluate the effect of reductant, a series of leaching experiments was carried out. The variation of leaching efficiency of manganese with the amount of corncob was shown in The effect of ore particle size on leaching efficiency was studied by varying the size fractions from 75  Manganese dioxide ores cannot be leached by the sulfuric acid directly. But its oxidizing ability gets stronger in the acidic medium. In order to obtain high leaching efficiency of manganese, reducing substances must be added in acidic solution. Leaching experiments at different initial H  Fixing the corncob amount of 3 The mineralogical forms of ore samples before and after leaching treatment were studied by XRD and shown in A reductive leaching process for low-grade manganese dioxide ores has been successfully demonstrated using corncob as reductant. The optimal condition for reductive leaching manganese was determined for 10 We are grateful to the