Posteromedial elbow instability has been described as an injury to the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) and an anteromedial coronoid fracture, typically with absence of a radial head injury and mild incongruity of the elbow that can lead to a rapid onset of degenerative joint changes When assessing an elbow injury, we naturally interpret the available data to try to understand the mechanism of injury and it follows to assess the integrity of the typically associated injuries. However, the observation of a posterolateral elbow dislocation with absence of injury to the radial head may be interpreted as a simple elbow dislocation. The finding of a coronoid tip fracture may indicate a complex pattern of instability. The failure to adequately recognise the severity of coronoid fractures may lead to inadequate treatment. We present a case that presented in the emergency room (ER) with a radiographic posterolateral elbow dislocation and absence of radial head injury with an unrecognised fracture of the anteromedial coronoid, typically associated with a posteromedial pattern of instability treated like a posterolateral simple elbow dislocation and a similar case with adequate recognition of the pattern and severity of the coronoid fracture.  A 60-year-old bricklayer presented in the ER with a radiographic posterolateral dislocation after a fall on the outstretched hand from his own height. After an initial x-ray exam, his elbow was reduced and placed in a splint at 90° of flexion after testing for stability in flexion and extension ( At 2-month follow-up, the patient showed the decrease of the ulnohumeral joint with full range of motion and slight pain when loading the elbow ( A 30-year-old man presented in the ER referring a fall on his outstretched hand and exhibiting pain and clinical signs of elbow dislocation. On his x-ray examination, a posterolateral elbow dislocation with a readily recognisable fracture of the anteromedial coronoid is apparent ( The observation of a posterolateral elbow dislocation on a roentgenographic exam may lead the treating physician to consider the existence of a posterolateral mechanism of injury with injury to the lateral ligamentous complex of the elbow and may direct the attention for associated injuries including radial head fractures and fractures of the tip of the coronoid O'Driscoll described the pathomechanics of posteromedial and posterolateral dislocation and it is believed that the injuries to the different ligamentous structures are sequential The detection of associated injuries is critical to identify the type of elbow instability and to apply the correct treatment. The majority of posterolateral elbow dislocations presenting in the ER are due to a posterolateral pattern of injury, but these cases show that some of these may be produced following a posteromedial pattern of instability. Obviously, the detection of the anteromedial fragment is obvious in Simple elbow dislocations typically obtain good outcomes after reduction and a short period of immobilisation Evidence of a posterolateral elbow dislocation on a presenting x-ray exam in the ER does not equate to the assumption of a posterolateral elbow mechanism. In posterolateral elbow dislocations, the search for associated injuries should include the anteromedial coronoid fractures, specifically in cases with absence of fracture of the radial head or with an associated tip fracture of the coronoid and appropriate management should be instituted to avoid early degenerative changes of the joint. Posterolateral elbow dislocations are the most frequent type of elbow dislocation but may follow a posteromedial instability pattern. The failure to detect and treat correctly an associated anteromedial coronoid fracture may compromise the outcome. A high index of suspicion for the presence of an associated anteromedial coronoid fracture may be established when a posterolateral elbow dislocation presents with absence of a radial head fracture and appropriate imaging techniques utilised for its detection.