 There are two reasons for me to write this book. First, there is still some further work to be done for the book In the view of the theory and methods for metallurgy and metallurgical engineering, the methodology of the reductionism played an important role in contemporary science and the development of the modern science. In the traditional knowledge system, it is true that the steel manufacturing process has been divided into single production procedures or devices and then these procedures have been further divided into chemistry reactions and transformation processes of motion, heat, and mass. However, time and space are not included in the study of the steel manufacturing process. This relationship and some interface technologies among procedures for the dynamic operation have been ignored. In the steel production practice, the traditional organization mode is that every procedure or devices operates, respectively, upstream procedures and upstream procedures wait for each other, then, the procedures combine randomly. The entire manufacturing process is in a state of disorder or chaos. For example, there are many phenomena of deadlock, waiting, and randomly combining in the entire process during blast furnace tapping→mixer→open hearth furnace→ingot casting→blooming/cogging→rolling. It is concluded that the production efficiency is low, the consumption is high, and the quality is unstable. In the original research and development, the traditional method is to analyze and segment an independent procedure. This way of thinking has been limited by the idea of the “isolated system.” The open and dynamic ideas are lacking, and the study of dynamic-orderly structure and coordinated operation in the process has been ignored. At the same time, in the original process of manufacturing and engineering design, the production scale of an enterprise is calculated habitually by simply selecting and combining in series or in parallel from the appearance of the local operation of process/device. The study on the physical essence of the manufacturing dynamic operation and the innovation of the theory and method for dynamic-accurate design has been overlooked. In order to design, build, and operate a new generation steel manufacturing process, some traditional ways of thinking and design methods had to be replaced, and the new integration theory and method needed to be proposed and created. Hence, the author has written 27 academic papers, research reports, and consulting reports, etc. for different demands and cases. During the writing process, the way of thinking and direction of the author has been expanded and deepened, and the new research works include the following. The physical essences and running rules of the metallurgical manufacturing process dynamic operation have been studied. The basis of the theory has not only included Newtonian dynamics, classic thermodynamics, and chemistry thermodynamics but also paid attention to the application, transplant, and conversion of Prigogine’s Dissipative structure theory. Based on On the basis of an understanding of the physical essences and operational rules of the metallurgical manufacturing process, the function of the steel manufacturing process has been expanded to three functions, including steel product manufacturing, energy transformation, and waste elimination (or recycling). Expanding the functions of the steel manufacturing process is helpful in order to increase the competitiveness and sustainable development ability. Furthermore, some new concepts, such as high-efficiency and low-cost clean steel production platform, behavior of energy flow, and energy flow network, have been proposed. The theoretical research has been applied to the field of engineering design and metallurgical engineering discipline development besides manufacturing enterprises and research institutes. Actually, marketing competitions include not only product competition but also design competition, especially the competition of new concept research and top-level design. In order to achieve an optimized top-level design for the steel manufacturing process, a new design theory and method system should be studied and established. Procedure and equipment adoptions should be optimized according to the new top-level design. Hence, the perfect top-level design should include optimization adoption of procedure/device, expansion or reasonable arrangement of manufacturing process functions and high efficiency of manufacturing process operation. From another point of view, the innovation of engineering design philosophy, integration theory, and method should be promoted. The dynamic-accurate design theory and method has been further studied, including concepts and connotations such as flow, flow network, and operation program. This theory includes the compiling rules and methods of dynamic operation GANTT and the innovation and design of interface technologies. A perfect engineering design should provide not only the engineering drawings but also the operation physical system frame for the manufacturing process. The manufacturing process operation dynamics for a new steel plant or an existing steel plant has been studied. Under the principle of dynamic-orderly and coordinating-continuous operation, six rules of dynamic operation have been summarized. These rules have referential value for engineering design, production technology, production management, and technology management, etc. In other words, it means transformation and Seven chapters are included in this book, ie, introduction on overview and thinking method, concepts and theories of dynamic operation of the manufacturing process, basic elements in dynamic operation of the steel manufacturing process, characteristics and analysis of the dynamic operation of steel manufacturing process, dynamic design and integration theory of steel plants, case studies, engineering thinking and new-generation steel manufacturing process. The characteristics of the dynamic operation of the steel manufacturing process have been studied in the current book. It is helpful for readers to concentrate on the dynamic integration of mass–energy–time–space–information in order to realize further promotion of the steel manufacturing process and optimization of steel plant structure. The study of “space of point,” ie, metallurgical reaction or physical phase change, and “space of field,” ie, process/device, is not enough. Only the study of “space of flow,” ie, the steel manufacturing process, can reveal new understandings, new concepts, and new rules of dynamic operation. In conclusion, this book is the extension and furtherance of “ February 28, 2013