A large number of experimental studies have been conducted over the last two decades to understand the behavior of FRP-confined concrete columns. This paper presents a comprehensive test database constructed from the results of axial compression tests on 832 circular FRP-confined concrete specimens published in the literature. The database was assembled through an extensive review of the literature that covered 3042 test results from 253 experimental studies published between 1991 and the middle of 2013. The suitability of the results for the database was determined using carefully chosen selection criteria to ensure a reliable database. This database brings reliable test results of FRP-confined concrete together to form a unified framework for future reference. Close examination of the test results reported in the database led to a number of important observations on the influence of important parameters on the behavior of FRP-confined concrete. A new design-oriented model that was developed to quantify these observations is presented in the final part of the paper. It is shown that the predictions of the proposed model are in close agreement with the test results and the model provides improved predictions of the ultimate conditions of FRP-confined concrete compared to any of the existing models.average absolute error parameter in compressive strength expression parameter in ultimate strain expression diameter of concrete core (mm) elastic modulus of fibers (MPa) elastic modulus of FRP material (MPa) ultimate axial compressive stress of FRP-confined concrete (MPa) peak axial compressive stress of unconfined concrete (MPa) axial compressive stress of FRP-confined concrete at first peak (MPa) ultimate tensile strength of fibers; ultimate tensile strength of FRP material; confining pressure (MPa) threshold confining pressure (MPa) nominal lateral confining pressure at ultimate; actual lateral confining pressure at ultimate; FRP confined concrete specimen height (mm) lateral confinement stiffness (MPa); axial strength enhancement coefficient axial strain enhancement coefficient hoop strain reduction factor hoop strain reduction factor of fibers hoop strain reduction factor of FRP material mean standard deviation total nominal thickness of fibers (mm) total thickness of FRP material (mm) axial strain of unconfined concrete at axial strain of FRP-confined concrete at ultimate axial strain of FRP-confined concrete ultimate tensile strain of fibers ultimate tensile strain of FRP material hoop rupture strain of FRP shell hoop strain of FRP-confined concrete at Axial compressive behavior of FRP-confined concrete has received significant attention over the last two decades, and it is now well understood that the confinement of concrete with fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composites can substantially enhance concrete strength and deformability. A large number of experimental studies have produced over 3000 test results on FRP-confined concrete and resulted in the development of over 90 axial stress-axial strain models, 88 of which were recently reviewed and assessed in Ozbakkaloglu et al. In this paper, a carefully prepared database of circular FRP-confined concrete specimens tested under monotonic uniaxial compression is presented. The database was assembled through an extensive review of the literature that cataloged 3042 test results from 253 experimental studies published between 1991 and the middle of 2013. These results were then assessed according to criteria that had been critically determined to establish a reliable database. Assessment using these criteria resulted in a final database of 832 test results from 99 different sources. This database serves as a valuable reference document for: (i) future model development and verification; (ii) assessment of existing models; and (iii) future database establishment. The important factors that influence the overall behavior of FRP-confined concrete, as identified from the results reported in the comprehensive database, are then discussed. In the final part of the paper, a new design-oriented model developed using the database to predict the ultimate condition of FRP-confined concrete is presented. Due to the inherent complexity of the behavior of FRP-confined concrete, test databases serve as a vital verification tool in assessing the performance of a model. Recognition of the importance of systematically collecting and categorizing the existing test results has led to a number of previous attempts to develop test databases for FRP-confined concrete. All relevant details of these previous databases are summarized in The suitability of the results for the database was assessed using carefully established selection criteria to ensure both the reliability and consistency of the test data. This resulted in a final database of 832 datasets, which makes it by far the most comprehensive database reported in the literature. The test results included in this database, summarized in Only the specimens with unidirectional fibers orientated in the hoop direction were included in the database. Specimens with transverse and/or longitudinal steel or internal FRP reinforcement were excluded. Only the specimens that were confined with continuous FRP jackets were included. Specimens with partial wrapping (i.e., FRP strips) were excluded. Specimens with a height-to-diameter ( Specimens with unconfined concrete compressive strengths greater than 55 Only the specimens that failed due to FRP rupture at the ultimate condition were included. Specimens that failed prematurely due to other types of failure, such as FRP shell debonding or premature failure due to excessive eccentricity were excluded. Specimens for which the ultimate conditions were not recorded accurately due to inadequate testing equipment or instrumentation errors were excluded. Specimens reported with insufficient details in regards to material and geometric properties were excluded. The specimens that satisfied the above conditions, and hence were included in the test database, were then subjected to an additional set of conditions to establish their suitability for their inclusion in the assessment of the existing models and development of the new model. The specimens with compressive strengths ( The complete test database assembled in the present study is displayed in The test data presented in the database were sorted into eight groups based on two main confinement parameters: confinement technique (wraps or tubes) and type of FRP material [carbon FRP (CFRP); S- or E-glass FRP (GFRP); aramid FRP (AFRP); high-modulus carbon FRP (HM CFRP); or ultra-high-modulus carbon FRP (UHM CFRP)]. 755 specimens in the database were FRP-wrapped, whereas 77 specimens were confined by FRP tubes. 495 of the specimens were confined by CFRP; 206 by GFRP; 79 by AFRP; 40 by HM CFRP; and 12 by UHM CFRP. The results of FRP-wrapped specimens are presented in The diameters of the specimens ( In FRP-confined circular concrete sections, the lateral confining pressure ( However, it has been well documented that the ultimate strain measured on the FRP shell at the time of FRP hoop rupture ( To establish the relationship of the hoop rupture strain of the FRP shell ( In Eq. In the database provided in A potentially important distinction, often recognized by the models assessed in the present study, is the one that is made between FRP-wrapped and FRP tube-encased specimens. Previously, both Mirmiran et al. In the present study, the test database was sorted into two categories and the results of the FRP-wrapped and FRP tube-encased specimens are presented in separate tables. Several previous studies have focused on the influence of the types of FRP materials on the behavior of FRP-confined concrete (e.g., Given its direct influence on the actual confinement ratio ( The ultimate axial strains ( Similarly, different measuring methods have been used in measuring the hoop strains, including methods (i) and (iii) noted above, with strain gauges or measuring devices oriented in the hoop direction. Information regarding the specific methods in the measurement of both of these strains is reported in the final column of Test databases inherently produce a scatter of test results. Bisby et al. As was reported previously in De Lorenzis and Tepfers Similarly, it should be expected that the average recorded hoop rupture strains ( This section presents a new design-oriented model to predict the ultimate condition of FRP-confined concrete. The model contains closed-form expressions that were developed using the test database presented in  The proposed compressive strength expression (Eq.  As reported in Ozbakkaloglu et al.   To establish the relative performance of the proposed model, its prediction statistics were compared with those of a group of selected models, which were identified as the best performing models This paper has presented a comprehensive test database of 832 datasets that was assembled by the authors through an extensive review of the literature that covered 253 experimental studies published on the compressive behavior of FRP-confined concrete. Initially, 3042 test results were collected from the published literature. The suitability of these results for the database was then assessed using carefully composed selection criteria to ensure the reliability and consistency of the database. Using the criteria to refine the contents of the database resulted in a final database size of 832 datasets collected from 99 experimental studies published between 1992 and the middle of 2013. Key features of each study included in the database, including the range of the key test parameters and the specimen instrumentation information, have been summarized and important observations regarding these studies have been marked on the database tables. The database that has been presented in this paper will serve as a valuable reference document for future model development efforts. In the final part of the paper, a design-oriented model for predicting the ultimate conditions of FRP-confined concrete is presented. The proposed model provides improved predictions of the compressive strength and ultimate axial strain of FRP-confined concrete compared to the existing models. Based on the observations made during the compilation of the experimental database, the following conclusions can be drawn: Analysis of the results reported in the database indicates that the average values of the hoop strain reduction factors based on fiber and FRP properties ( Two key ultimate condition properties, namely ultimate axial strain ( There are differences between the strength and strain enhancement ratios of FRP-wrapped and FRP-tube encased specimens included in the database of the present study. However, due to the differences between the number and parametric ranges of FRP-wrapped and FRP tube-encased specimens, it is not possible to draw a definitive conclusion based on these observations. As noted previously, it was not possible to include all the test results published in the literature in the database presented in this paper, due to a lack of information in regards to the material properties, geometric properties or ultimate conditions of these specimens. Therefore, in future studies, effort should be made to ensure that the results of the experiments are presented with a complete set of information, providing as much relevant information as possible about the material and geometric properties of the specimens, test setup and instrumentation, recorded capacities of the specimens and their failure modes. Furthermore, in future experimental studies due consideration should be given to the instrumentation of the specimens for the accurate measurement of ultimate axial strains and hoop rupture strains. The authors would like to thank Mr. Thomas Vincent, who is a PhD candidate at the University of Adelaide, for his help with the construction of the test database presented in this paper.