Sulphidising flotation of oxide copper–cobalt ores with sodium hydrosulphide used as sulphidising agent is common practice in Katanga, Democratic Republic of Congo.
                  From laboratory investigations, sodium hydrosulphide proved to enhance flotation selectivity of copper and cobalt towards the gangue minerals, while ammonium sulphide emerged as a strong non-selective sulphidiser. Best results were recorded with a synergistic combination of sulphidisers; a 1/1 mixture of sodium hydrosulphide and ammonium sulphide.Sulphidising flotation of oxide copper–cobalt ores has found widespread application at Gécamines, a state owned mining company operating in southern Katanga, Democratic Republic of Congo. Copper mineralisation in this area is mainly composed of malachite, sometimes with the presence of pseudomalachite and chrysocolla. Cobalt essentially occurs as heterogenite. The oxide minerals are first sulphidised and then floated similar to sulphide minerals with xanthate collectors. Sodium hydrosulphide is the single sulphidising agent employed in the Congolese industry. Its consumption makes up approximately half of the total cost of flotation reagents. An improved flotation method, which uses inert gas instead of air as flotation gas, has been investigated in order to reduce its consumption ( The present study aimed to investigate new sulphidising reagents combinations in order to improve the efficiency of flotation of oxide copper–cobalt ores. The ore sample used in this study whose composition is given in After grinding the ore to 30% +74 μm and adjusting the pulp specific weights at 1350 g/L, flotation was conducted with a mechanical laboratory machine using a 2.5 L cell at natural pH for 12 min. The pulp redox potential was continuously measured with a Cu The reagents NaSH and (NH It is obvious that concentrates of best quality were produced with NaSH. However, higher metals recoveries were achieved with (NH From the above, it was thought to combine the effect of best flotation selectivity due to NaSH with the ability of achieving higher metals recoveries with (NH Metallurgical results obtained with the use of the different sulphidising systems are comparatively presented in The average flotation results obtained with the optimum sulphidiser dosage (6 kg/t) have been summarised. With sodium hydrosulphide, nearly 77% copper and 75% cobalt have been recovered with a concentration ratio of 3.0. The use of ammonium sulphide instead induced copper and cobalt recoveries of approximately 88% respectively, with a concentration ration of only 1.7. With a 1/1 combination of NaHS and (NH From economical point of view, the new sulphidising method would bring in real benefits given that the costs of the two reagents used in this study are of the same order of magnitude. From the above, it can be concluded that sulphidising flotation of oxide copper–cobalt ores with sodium hydrosulphide as sulphidising agent exhibits a good selectivity of copper and cobalt flotation towards the gangue minerals. On the other hand, the use of ammonium sulphide induces higher metals recoveries with very low selectivity. The best method consists in a controlled addition of a 1/1 combination of sodium hydrosulphide and ammonium sulphide. This new method significantly improved flotation efficiency and would bring in real economical benefits. The authors would like to thank the members of the Gécamines Metallurgical Research Centre in Likasi, D.R. Congo, for their contribution to this work.