Chemical and physical characterization methods were used to analyze ferric, alum, and lime water treatment residual solids (WTRSs) in order to describe why phosphate or arsenate adsorption occurred on the WTRSs, and why ferric WTRSs were the stronger adsorbent for both phosphate and arsenate. In total, five WTRSs, two ferric, two alum, and one lime, were analyzed. Elemental analysis of the WTRSs showed lime residuals contained the greatest molar amount of the primary element (7.04mol Ca/kg solid), followed by the ferric residuals (4.86–4.96mol Fe/kg solid) whereas alum residuals contained the least amount of primary element as compared to the ferric or alum residual solids (3.62–4.67mol Al/kg solid). Mercury porosimetry identified more small pores (<0.006μm) in a ferric WTRSs when compared to an alum WTRSs, indicating that a more detailed pore structure allowing for intraparticle phosphate or arsenate diffusion might be present in the ferric solid. Similarly, SEM images at 1000 times magnification showed a porous surface in both ferric WTRSs, whereas the alum WTRSs showed a smooth surface at the same magnification. Several general equations to describe phosphate or arsenate adsorption on WTRSs were provided.Water treatment residual solids (WTRSs) are a solid waste resulting from drinking water treatment processes. Typically these residual solids contain by-products from coagulation if ferric or alum coagulants were used during treatment, colloidal material and microbial species removed during treatment, residues of other chemicals used during treatment (i.e., polymers), and/or species that were removed from the water during treatment (i.e., iron or arsenic). Large quantities of these residual solids are generated by drinking water treatment plants, leading to research into the reuse of WTRSs. Recent literature has suggested that several hundred thousand tons of solid residuals are produced each year in Europe The similarities between arsenate (AsO Coagulation is commonly used to remove arsenic in drinking water treatment Understanding the physical or chemical behaviors that may enable a certain type of residual (i.e., alum or iron) to perform better than another is unclear, as residual solids are normally characterized as being amorphous The overall objective of this paper was to examine the adsorption of phosphate or arsenate onto WTRSs. Several physical and chemical characterization tests were utilized, including scanning electron microscopy, elemental analysis of the residual solids, and mercury porosimetry. A comparative look at adsorption of phosphate or arsenate onto WTRSs was also studied. A detailed description of the WTRSs used in the adsorption experiments, and of the collection, drying, and storage procedure of the residual solids in the Water Quality Laboratory at Dalhousie University was outlined in Ref. WTRSs were collected from five drinking water treatment plants: Lake Major Water Treatment Plant (Al-WTP-LM), Mannheim Water Treatment Plant (Al-WTP-M), Brandon Water Treatment Plant (Ca-WTP-B), Tampa Bay Water Surface Water Treatment Plant (Fe-WTP-TB), and the Albany Avenue Well Field Iron Removal System (Fe-WTP-NY). Al-WTP-LM and Al-WTP-M use alum as a coagulant, and these residual solids are referred to as “alum residual solids” because of the high aluminum content. Fe-WTP-TB uses ferric sulfate as a coagulant, and Fe-WTP-NY is an iron removal system, and these residual solids are referred to as “ferric residual solids” because of the high iron content. Ca-WTP-B uses alum as a coagulant and lime as a softener, and Ca-WTP-B residual solids are referred to as “lime residual solids” because of the high calcium content. A summary of the treatment plant processes is provided in Four types of water were used in the batch adsorption experiments discussed in this paper: two waters containing phosphorus, and two waters containing arsenic. The phosphorus adsorption experiments used phosphate-spiked deionized (DI) water at a phosphate concentration of approximately 2 Analytical procedures outlined in Metal analysis of the WTRSs was performed at the Minerals Engineering Center at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada). One gram of each dried residual was digested with 30 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed in the Process Engineering and Applied Science Department at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada). Dried residuals were mounted on resins in a conductive paste and examined under a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, S-4700). Each sample was examined in a qualitative scan, between 50 times and 2000 times magnification. Mercury porosimetry was performed at the Dalhousie Geo-Environmental Laboratory in the Civil Engineering Department at Dalhousie University (Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada). The mercury porosimeter (Quantachrome Instruments, PoreMaster) applied pressures up to 3.32 Langmuir adsorption modeling was used to analyze the results of the batch adsorption experiments presented in Gibbons et al. The concentration of iron in the ferric solids was very similar between the Fe-WTP-TB solids and the Fe-WTP-NY solids, between 4.86 and 4.98 The lime residuals contained the highest concentration of the primary element on a molar basis, calcium, followed by the ferric residuals (with a primary element, iron). The alum residuals contained a slightly lower concentration of the primary element, aluminum. The average concentrations in all of the ferric or lime solids in Two physical characterization techniques, mercury porosimetry and SEM imaging, were used to investigate the physical structure of the WTRSs. Mercury porosimetry analysis was performed on two residual solids, Al-WTP-LM residual solids and Fe-WTP-NY residual solids. Mercury porosimetry analysis showed that there was a difference in pore size between the Al-WTP-LM residual solids and the Fe-WTP-NY residual solids ( The pore sizes of two commercial adsorbents, GFH and granular activated carbon (GAC) were similar to the pore sizes found in the ferric WTRS examined in this paper and the results found by Makris et al. SEM images were taken of the Fe-WTP-NY, Fe-WTP-TB, Ca-WTP-B, Al-WTP-LM and Al-WTP-M residual solids before arsenic adsorption, and the images can be compared on a qualitative basis. The Ca-WTP-B residuals consisted of small particles when dried (<250 The surface of the Fe-WTP-TB residual solids appears to be irregular, with pores visible at a 130 times magnification ( The surface of the Al-WTP-M residual solids appears rough at a 130 times magnification, however, few cracks or crevices are apparent, and the surface does not appear to be porous ( An SEM of the Al-WTP-LM residual solids appears smooth with some crevices at 130 times magnification, confirmed by Mortula The surface of the Fe-WTP-NY residual solid appears smooth and sculpted at 130 times magnification ( The maximum adsorption density ( The results of the adsorption experiments were examined to determine the differences in arsenic or phosphorus adsorbed per mass of aluminum, iron, or calcium in the alum, ferric, or lime WTRSs, respectively. While the calculation of mass adsorbed per mass of element ignored the amount of secondary elements in each solid, i.e., iron and calcium in the alum residual, the concentrations of secondary elements were usually small in comparison to concentration of the primary element, generally <20% of the primary element ( Looking at the molar ratio of phosphorus adsorbed per primary element, the alum residual solids adsorbed less phosphorus per primary element as the ferric residuals, and a similar amount to the lime residuals ( Overall, the ferric residual solids were stronger adsorbents than the alum residual solids for both phosphorus and arsenic adsorption from a variety of water sources, as evidenced through a higher Throughout this paper, the alum, ferric, and lime WTRSs have been characterized for the chemical make up and physical or surface structure, and comparisons have been made between the ability to remove phosphorus and arsenic during batch adsorption experiments. Additionally, the differences in phosphorus or arsenic adsorption appear to be partially tied to the mass of primary element in the solid. Four main results were identified through analysis of the water treatment residuals and batch adsorption experiments: Ferric residual solids are stronger adsorbents for phosphorus or arsenic than lime or alum residual solids with the greatest amount of phosphorus or arsenic adsorbed on a molar basis ( Ferric and lime residual solids contain more of the primary element (iron or calcium) per mass of solid than the alum residual solids ( Mercury porosimetry analysis and SEM images showed evidence of a porous structure present in the iron residual solids; and Overall, ferric residual solids were a better adsorbent for phosphate or arsenate than alum residual solids. In order to explain these results, it is prudent to look at coagulation science literature explaining why and how ferric or alum coagulants remove arsenic or phosphorus during water treatment. Edwards Phosphate and arsenate speciation is largely pH and redox dependent. Similarly, adsorption of phosphate or arsenate onto alum, ferric, or calcium hydroxides is pH dependent, with the pH in solution affecting the amount of adsorption as the surface chemistry changes. pH seemed to affect adsorption of arsenate onto ferric residuals, with more arsenic adsorption at pH 5 and pH 6 compared to pH 7 and pH 8, whereas pH did not seem to change arsenic adsorption for the alum or lime residual solids used in these experiments. However, general chemical equations can be used to explain how phosphate or arsenate adsorb onto alum, ferric, or calcium hydroxides, such as those present in WTRSs. Duffy and vanLoon As previously mentioned, differences between the alum and ferric residuals were identified in two physical characterization analyses: mercury porosimetry and SEM, both of which can contribute to the discussion on why ferric WTRSs adsorb more phosphate or arsenate than alum WTRSs. In the mercury porosimetry analysis, small pore sizes were identified in the Fe-WTP-NY residual solids, and virtually no small pore sizes were identified in the Al-WTP-LM residual solids. The presence of these macropores in the Fe-WTP-NY residual solids might contribute to increased phosphate or arsenate adsorption, as the phosphate or arsenate particles are able to diffuse into the porous structure of the Fe-WTP-NY residual solids. Makris et al. SEM images at 1000 times magnification identified a porous surface on both ferric residual solids, while the alum solids did not show a porous structure. A porous surface structure was identified on GFH in SEM images In all batch adsorption experiments the ferric residual solids adsorbed more phosphate or arsenate than the lime and alum residual solids. By looking at a chemical characterization of the residuals, and the results of a mercury porosimetry analysis and SEM imaging, this trend was explained. The ferric residual solids contained more iron per mass of solid than the alum residuals contained aluminum, allowing for more opportunities for phosphate or arsenate adsorption onto the surface. Furthermore, mercury porosimetry and SEM imaging identified a porous structure in the ferric residual solids and not in the alum residual solids, indicating that a more detailed pore structure allowing for intraparticle phosphate or arsenate diffusion might be present in the ferric solid. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding provided by the