Nonsymmetric (2,3-dimethylbutyl)(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (INET-3) may be a superior extractant for extraction and separation of heavy rare earths (REs), as its extraction ability falls between that of P507 and Cyanex 272. Its purity and pKa were determined using potentiometric titration methods. The extraction mechanism and extraction equilibrium constants of INET-3 for heavy REs from chloride media were studied. The effects of the anion types (Cl−, NO3
                     − and SO4
                     2−) and concentrations (0.1, 0.5 and 1.0mol/L) on RE(III) extraction were investigated. The extraction capacity and separation factors of INET-3 for heavy REs were determined. The stripping behaviours of heavy RE complexes with INET-3 by HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4 were examined. The results showed that the pKa of INET-3 was 5.45. The extraction capacity of INET-3 was approximately twice that of Cyanex 272 and only one-third that of P507. Loaded heavy RE(III) extracted by INET-3 was completely stripped out by HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4 solutions when the pH was at or below 1.2. Among the three inorganic acids, H2SO4 was the most effective stripping agent. INET-3 can separate heavy RE(III) efficiently, and the separation factors of adjacent heavy RE(III) β
                     Er/Ho, β
                     Tm/Er, β
                     Yb/Tm and β
                     Lu/Yb were 3.25, 2.73, 2.96 and 1.53, respectively, when extracted from a Ho/Er/Tm/Yb/Lu quinary system.The rare earths (REs, lanthanides, Sc and Y) are hailed as ‘the vitamins of modern industry’ and ‘the treasure house of new materials’ because they are indispensable or irreplaceable strategic resources for renovating conventional industries and developing new technologies, including cutting-edge national defence technologies ( Solvent extraction is currently the main method used for large-scale REs separation, and the most commonly used commercial extractants are 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA, PC 88A or P507) and di-(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)-phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) (see Nonsymmetric dialkylphosphinic acid (R′R″POOH, R′ We synthesized and purified the novel extractant (2,3-dimethylbutyl)(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (INET-3) ( The extractant purity was determined using a Metrohm 907 Titrando potentiometric titrator at the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. A model KB-5010 Test Tube Shaker (Kylin-Bell Lab Instruments Co., Ltd., Haimen, Jiangsu) was adopted for shaking and mixing the aqueous and organic phases. The pH of the aqueous phase was measured with a model FE20 METTLER TOLEDO pH meter with an LE438 pH electrode that was calibrated daily with 4.01 and 6.86 standard buffer solutions. The concentration of rare earth ions (RE(III)) in the aqueous phase was determined at the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallurgy at the University of Science and Technology Beijing using an Optima 7000DV ICP-OES manufactured by PerkinElmer. Rare earth chlorides were prepared by dissolving the corresponding oxides in concentrated HCl at 60–70 The preparation of RE(III) standard solutions and extractant solutions was similar to a previous report ( Equal volumes of the RE(III) standard solution and extractant solution (10 INET-3 solutions preloaded with RE(III) were prepared as follows: 180 Equal volumes (10 All experiments were performed at ambient temperature. The potentiometric titration pH-V curve and corresponding equivalence point recognition criterion (abbr. ERC, namely, the first derivative curve) of INET-3 in 75% alcohol (v/v) with 0.1127 INET-3 is a monoacid, and its dissociation in 75% alcohol (v/v) can be expressed as To obtain the solubility of INET-3 in water, a drop of pure INET-3 was added to 20 The effect of shaking time on the extraction of 4 The effect of the equilibrium pH on heavy RE(III) extraction from chloride media using INET-3 was studied. The INET-3 concentration in That is Eq. This indicated that the value of n in Eq. These non-integral slopes between 2 and 3 could be explained by the extraction of both RE It can also be seen from To obtain the m values in Eq. According to Eq. In part 3.4, all of the slopes of logD vs pH fell between 2.0 and 3.0, which indicated that there were other anions in the aqueous phase participating in the formation of extracted complexes. It has been hypothesized that the anion is OH The extraction percentage of Lu(III) decreased in the order NO From The extraction capacity of INET-3 for heavy RE(III) was determined by mixing a 150-mL INET-3 solution (1.0 The stripping behaviours of Ho, Tm and Lu extracted by INET-3 were investigated using three common inorganic acids (HCl, HNO To examine the separation efficiency of INET-3 for heavy rare earths, the separation factors of adjacent heavy RE(III) ( The separation efficiency of INET-3 for heavy REs was further studied by extracting RE(III) from a Ho/Er/Tm/Yb quaternary system in a HCl solution at pH The ratio O/A  The pK The solubility of INET-3 in deionized water was 1.56 The extraction equilibrium constants The extraction capacity of INET-3 was approximately twice that of Cyanex 272, but only one-third that of P507. The loaded heavy RE(III) extracted by INET-3 can be easily stripped by HCl, HNO INET-3 was a potential extractant for separating heavy RE(III) efficiently. Its separation efficiency for heavy RE(III) was superior to Cyanex 272. The separation factors of adjacent heavy RE(III) The authors are grateful to Lihua Wang from the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallurgy at the University of Science and Technology in Beijing for the ICP-OES measurements. Special thanks to Dr. Ruobing Du from Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences for the purity determination of the extractant (2,3-dimethylbutyl)(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid. This work was supported by the