Surface modifications of thin films based on chitosan (Ch), pure Ch and either Ch/montmorillonite (MMT) or Ch/nanoclay composites, were characterised by infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Biomineralisation of the Ch-based materials without any prior surface treatment was evaluated by immersing films in simulated body fluid (SBF) at 37 °C for 14 days. Samples were compared before and after soaking. Results obtained from SEM-EDX, AFM, and infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) were compared, and all prepared films showed growth of a new phase containing calcium. The composition of thin films influenced the amount of new phase formed as well as the degree of crystallinity of the newly formed phase. The largest increase was observed for the Ch composite with modified nanoclay. Moreover, increased growth of the new phase on the surface of films after immersion in SBF solution significantly influenced the thermal properties of the materials.Currently, there is a growing tendency toward the use of natural polymers obtained from renewable sources, especially those sourced from food industry waste and the agricultural and pulp and paper industries [ In this paper, the influence of type of nanoclay used in Ch composites on the morphology and thermal properties of prepared films before and after immersing films in SBF solution at 37 °C for 14 days is discussed. To ensure good miscibility between biopolymer and montmorillonite (MMT) in composites, layered silicate has been modified with alkylammonium surfactants, quaternary ammonium salts or organosilicon compounds to produce organoclays [ Unless otherwise stated, all materials, chemicals, and reagents used in this work were supplied by Sigma Aldrich (Poznan, Poland). All chemicals were of analytical grade. Chitosan powder with a degree of deacetylation (DD) of 78% and viscosity-average molecular weight of 0.59 × 10 To create thin films, 1.0 wt% aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving Ch powder in an acetic acid solution (1 wt%). Montmorillonite and nanoclay powder (3% relative to Ch) were dispersed in 10 ml of 1% acetic acid solution and stirred for 24 h. Then, the Ch solution was slowly added to the MMT dispersion and the resulting mixtures were vigorously stirred for 24  h at room temperature. Polymer and composite films were achieved by a solution casting method. All films had a similar thickness of approximately 20 μm. The SBF solution was prepared according to Kokubo [ Morphology of composites were observed with SEM (Quanta 3D FEG, D9399, FEI Company, Eindhoven, the Netherlands). An energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) microanalysis was performed using a spectrometer (Quantax 200 with XFlash 4010, Bruker AXS) coupled to the scanning electron microscope. Surface roughness and morphology of thin films were analysed at room temperature in air using a commercial multimode scanning probe microscope with a Nanoscope III controller (Digital Instruments, Santa Barbra, CA, USA) operated in tapping mode. The scan size was 1 μm FTIR spectra of the Ch samples and composites were recorded on a Genesis II FTIR spectrophotometer (Mattson, USA) equipped with an ATR device (MIRacle PIKE Technologies) with a zinc selenide (ZnSe) crystal, in the wavelength range of 4000–600 cm A Thermal Analysis SDT 2960 Simultaneous TGA-DTA analyser (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA) was used to carry out thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) within a temperature range of 20–650 °C at a heating rate of 20 °C/min in nitrogen. Characteristic temperatures of decomposition were obtained from thermogravimetric curves. Both the temperature of initial decomposition (T SEM images and EDX analysis of Ch films and Ch composite films before and after immersion in SBF solution are shown in Small topographical changes in the AFM images of Ch films were observed after mixing Ch with MMT or nanoclay. Surface morphologies of the composites are similar to the Ch film and no significant differences can be observed. It can clearly be observed that the roughness parameter for all of investigated composites decreases compared to the unmodified Ch film. The lowest roughness parameter values (R In this work, unmodified Ch and its composites before and after immersion in SBF were analysed by means of the FTIR technique, which is one of the basic methods for investigating molecular structures and intermolecular interactions. After 14 days of immersion, the spectra of Ch and composite films exhibit characteristic phosphate and carbonate bands, thus providing evidence of apatite layer formation. The absorption bands of phosphate groups are found between 1100 and 1000 cm  Surface morphologies of pure Ch and modified Ch films were analysed by SEM and AFM and showed the growth of new phases containing calcium in all films. Immersion in SBF solution leads to surface changes and an increase in roughness of the relatively smooth surface of composite films. The largest increase was observed with Ch/nanoclay composite films. Thus, surface modification of nanoclay with octadecylamine has a significant effect on the mineralization process. Calcium, phosphorus, and sodium peaks were revealed via EDX analysis and an increase in the intensity of carbon and oxygen peaks indicates the formation of a new inorganic phase. The ATR-infrared spectra also confirmed apatite layer formation on the Ch and Ch composite films. An increase in the amount of new phase on the film surface (after immersion in SBF solution) significantly affects the thermal properties of the resulting materials. Moreover, the new phase provides a thermal barrier and decreases mass loss. Thus, immersion in SBF solution enhances the thermal stability of Ch and its composite films. Based on these results, it can be concluded that the Ch composites with surface-modified nanoclay may have potential uses for biomedical, cosmetic, and tissue engineering applications.