Nickel laterites represent the major ore reserves of this base metal present in the lithosphere. However, processing these ores by conventional technologies involves considerable energy or reagent expenditure and consequently is less cost-effective than extracting nickel from sulfide ores. Biological options, using metal-complexing organic acids and mineral acids generated by fungi and bacteria, have been investigated but generally found to be ineffective in terms of extraction dynamics or yields. We have examined the possibility of using bacteria that can bring about the reductive dissolution of ferric iron minerals and thereby facilitate the extraction of nickel from a lateritic ore at relatively low (<30–45°C) temperatures.
                  Four species of iron-reducing acidophilic bacteria were screened for their abilities to solubilise nickel from a limonitic laterite ore in which the major iron mineral present was goethite. One of these (Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans) was selected for further study only the basis of it being able to use a cost-effective energy source (elemental sulfur) to mediate the dissolution of goethite at mildly acidic conditions (pH<2). Cultures were set up in 2L bioreactors, maintained at pH 1.8 (±0.1) and 30°C, and initially aerated (to promote growth of the bacteria on sulfur) and then switched to anaerobic conditions when nickel laterite ore (crushed to <6mm, with a nickel grade of 0.5%) was added. Over 70% of the nickel present in the ore was solubilised within 14days, and solubilised metals remained in solution due to the low pH of the leachate. In contrast, only 10% of the nickel was solubilised (by non-reductive acid dissolution) when the cultures were continuously aerated. The results suggest that biological processing of limonitic nickel laterites is technically feasible and, more generically, that reductive dissolution can be used to bioprocess ferric oxide mineral ores.“Biomining” has been defined as the technology that harnesses the ability of micro-organisms to accelerate the dissolution of sulfide minerals to enhance the recovery of metals ( Nickel laterites represent the most abundant reserve (>70%) of this metal remaining in the lithosphere ( Many species of extremely acidophilic bacteria (i.e. species that grow optimally at pH We have tested the hypothesis that, by causing bacteria to accelerate the reductive dissolution of ferric iron minerals in laterite ores, metals associated with these minerals (most notably nickel) can be released into solution. By carrying out the process in an acidic milieu (i.e. by acidophilic microorganisms), the extracted nickel would remain in solution and thereby facilitate its recovery. Low-grade nickel laterite ore samples were sourced from a mine in Western Australia. The ore contained quartz (76%) and goethite (10%) as major mineral phases, as well as significant amounts of magnesium silicates (lizardite and serpentine). The nickel content was 0.4% (w/w) most of which (56%) was deported in goethite with smaller amounts associated with quartz (19%) and magnesium silicates (18%). In addition to nickel and iron (7%, w/w) the ore also contained chromium (0.27%), manganese (0.13%) and cobalt (0.04%). Two grade sizes of ore were prepared from the same material: “milled ore” contained particles of <1 Four cultures of acidophilic bacteria held at the The four bacterial species selected were tested for their relative abilities to solubilise nickel from milled ore under anoxic conditions. Cultures were set up in sterile 100  Ferrous iron was determined using the ferrozine colorimetric technique ( Only two of the four acidophiles tested ( Solubilisation of nickel, iron, cobalt and manganese from milled and crushed laterite due to reductive dissolution of the ore is shown in There was a weak correlation ( The reductive dissolution of goethite, coupled to the oxidation of elemental sulfur, is an alkali-generating (proton-consuming) reaction, as shown in Eq. Measurement of the sulfuric acid that was continuously added to the bioreactor to maintain pH stasis revealed a very strong correlation ( A comparison of the metals solubilised from milled laterite ore under aerobic (i.e. via non-reductive acid dissolution) and anoxic (i.e. via biological reductive dissolution in an acidic milieu) illustrated very clearly the greater effectiveness of the reductive process ( The residual solids in the bioreactor separated into two distinct layers when stirring was stopped. The upper was mostly residual sulfur and the lower was mainly non-leached laterite ore, which was notably darker in colour than the untreated ore. Comparison of the metals remaining in the laterite residue with that of the unprocessed ore by XRF analysis confirmed that nickel, manganese and cobalt had been leached from the ore (data not shown), though the XRF data suggested bioleaching was less effective than did the results obtained from solution chemistry analysis. One reason for this discrepancy was that the laterite residue also contained an unknown quantity of residual sulfur, so that its mass was over estimated. Mass balance of metals in the untreated ore and the bioleach residue based on metals released following dissolution in Nickel laterites are predicted to be used increasingly as primary ores of this metal in future years due to the depletion of the more economically-attractive sulfidic ores. Conventional (pyrometallurgy) processing of nickel laterites is heavily energy-demanding, and biological options which operate at ambient temperatures have been considered. However, the latter have not, so far, proved to be attractive or effective. We have examined a novel process in which bacteria reduce the ferric iron present in the mineral phase of the ore (often, as in this case, goethite) which leads to the destruction of the ferric mineral and release of the associated nickel. This process of “reductive dissolution” is essentially the reverse of the principle invoked in current biomining operations, where oxygen is essential to allow microbiological regeneration of the primary oxidant (ferric iron) which degrades sulfide minerals by a process of oxidative dissolution ( Whereas in the oxidative dissolution process, the mineral phase itself provides the energy source (reduced sulfur and/or ferrous iron) required by the microorganisms that mediate it, in the case of reductive mineral dissolution an external energy source (electron donor) must be supplied. Both organic and inorganic substances can be used for this, depending on the bacteria carrying out iron reduction, as demonstrated in the current study. The heterotrophic acidophile However, while glycerol is currently a relatively low cost material due, in part, to it being a by-product of bio-diesel production, it is still more expensive than sulfur (estimated costs of $5.3 and $0.6 per kilomole of electrons, respectively, based on 2009 prices). An additional advantage to using sulfur is that less acid is required than is the case with glycerol (1.66 H The experiments carried out in bioreactors where pH, temperature and aeration status were all controlled showed clearly that reductive dissolution of laterites under extremely acidic conditions can be highly effective at solubilising nickel, as well as other metals such as cobalt and manganese. The data obtained were in agreement with the predicted chemistry in that there was a strong correlation between the greater part of the nickel released and the goethite that was solubilised, and the process is acid-consuming. Whereas dissolution of nickel laterite ore by sulfuric acid has previously been reported, data presented here shows that this is far inferior to reductive dissolution in an acidic milieu. Finally, addition of iron-chelating citric acid was found not to enhance the dissolution of the laterite ore under reducing conditions. Citric acid is not used by the obligate autotroph This work has demonstrated that bacterial reductive dissolution of ferric iron minerals can be used to accelerate the extraction of nickel from a limonitic laterite ore. Using an acidophilic sulfur-oxidizing bacterium, such as This project was financed by BHP Billiton. D.B.J. is also grateful to the Royal Society (UK) for the provision of an Industrial Fellowship.