Plasma nitriding is an important thermo-chemical surface treatment which is widely used in order to enhance the surface hardness, fatigue strength and wear and corrosion resistance of steels. In this research, the effects of plasma nitriding parameters including temperature and time on the microstructure and fatigue strength of quenched and tempered DIN 1.2210 cold work tool steel were investigated. The microstructures of base material and nitrided layer were examined in details by optical microscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Micro-hardness measurements were used to determine surface hardness and case depth. Fatigue tests were performed using a rotating bending machine. The results indicated that the plasma nitriding process led to a considerable increase in the micro-hardness and fatigue strength values. Furthermore, the maximum fatigue strength was attained after plasma nitriding at 550°C for 6h, which increased the fatigue life of the specimens by about 67%. It was also found that the dominant fatigue crack initiation mechanism in the plasma nitrided specimens was subsurface ‘fish eye’ type crack formation originated from internal nonmetallic inclusions.Many industrial components, such as automotive parts are subjected to high dynamic loads, wear and corrosion Several researchers have investigated the effect of plasma nitriding treatment on the rotating bending fatigue behavior of a range of steels The material used in this study was DIN 1.2210 cold work tool steel whose chemical composition (in wt.%) is shown in Before plasma nitriding (P.N), the specimens were cleaned and degreased in acetone. The plasma nitriding treatment was carried out using a semi-industrial 10 After plasma nitriding, the cylindrical specimens were sectioned, mounted and prepared for metallographic studies and micro-hardness measurements. In order to perform metallographic studies using optical microscopy, the treated specimens were etched in 1% Nital solution after being polished. Micro-hardness measurements were also used to determine the case depth. This was carried out on a TIME-HVS-1000 instrument at a constant load of 1.96 The room temperature fatigue strength of the specimens was determined by means of a rotating bending fatigue test machine operating at the frequency of 97  Typical X-ray diffraction patterns of the surface layer of the plasma nitrided specimens at 450 The micro-hardness distribution curves after plasma nitriding at different conditions are plotted in The curves of stress versus logarithm of number of cycles to failure (S-Log N) obtained from the rotating bending fatigue tests of untreated (quenched and tempered) specimens and plasma nitrided specimens at different temperatures and times are plotted in The fatigue strength of the investigated steel is strongly affected by the surface hardness and the thickness of nitrided case. An increase in the surface hardness and case depth values would result in higher fatigue resistance, mainly due to the transfer of fatigue crack initiation site from the surface to the core. This means that a higher bending stress should be applied at the surface to create the required stress for the initiation of fatigue crack at the case/core interface and the ultimate failure of material The section size is one of the most important factors in determining the fatigue performance of machine parts. Therefore, some dimensionless parameters are defined for round specimens to express the proportion of nitrided case zone in the whole cross-section. As can be seen in The SEM micrograph of fracture surface of the plasma nitrided specimen at 550 The basic aim of this study was to understand the effects of plasma nitriding temperature and time on the microstructure and fatigue strength of quenched and tempered DIN 1.2210 cold work tool steel. The results showed that the compound layer thickness and case depth increased by increasing temperature and time, while the core microstructure remained unchanged. The compound layer of the treated specimens were consisted of The researchers are grateful of Yazd Pitch Company for helping with instrumentations.