Through high pressure oedometer-undrained triaxial tests and dynamic triaxial tests, researches were conducted on the static and dynamic strength characteristics of the tailings silty sand of No. 4 tailings reservoir in De-xing copper mine. The Mohr-stress circles of the tailings silty sand under all the testing confining pressure show that the single line failure envelope cannot represent the strength characteristics absolutely, the double line failure envelope can express the strength properties when confining pressures are less than 1400kPa, and the parabolic failure envelope can reflect the strength characteristics well under all the testing confining pressures. The grading curve of the tailings silty sand indicates that the grain composition is relatively homogeneous. Thus, the tailings silty sand is susceptible to liquefy under the dynamic loading. Dynamic triaxial tests of the tailings silty sand show that the tailings silty sand in deep areas has more liquefaction resistance strengths than in shallow. The possible explanation is that the structure of the deep tailings silty sand is more stable than the shallow one. The tests also reveal that the liquefaction resistance increases with the dry density when it is in the range of 1.51–1.61. The results can be used to guide the construction and ensure the safety of No. 4 tailings dam or other high tailings dams.Tailing is an ore waste in the mining industry ( At present, a lot of scholars have studied static characteristics of tailings material and have achieved great progress. The properties of copper, gold, and oil sand CT tailings were studied. The results stated that the void ratio had a linear relationship with the logarithm of effective stress and saturated hydraulic conductivity ( In recent 20 Previous studies were mainly focused on lower height tailings, whose heights were less than 100 No. 4 tailings pond locates at Xiyuan ditch which is in the north of Dashan mineral processing plant of Dexing copper mine. The altitude is 72 Three exploration lines with 200 The laboratory investigation and field observation results show that the liquefaction resistance and strength characteristics of soil have great influenced with the grain gradation ( The shear strength indexes of tailings material are important for the stability analysis of tailings dams. In order to evaluate the stability of No. 4 tailings dam at present and in the future, we must obtain the strength parameters of the tailings silty sand under high pressures. The principle of the high pressure triaxial test is similar to the conventional triaxial test. The difference between them is the magnitude of confining pressures. The cylinder specimen size is 39.1  Besides above high confining pressure experiments, the conventional undrained oedometer triaxial test under the low confining pressure (100 The GDS/DYNTTS dynamic triaxial testing system, which is made in England, is adopted in the test ( In order to reduce the perturbations of undisturbed samples in the process of sampling and transporting, static pressure with wax sealing up method are adopted to avoid the water contents change. The preparation of undisturbed samples and disturbed samples refers to literature ( In order to make the test results to reflect the reality as much as possible, it is essential that the stress states of the samples should be close to the site. For example, the buoyant unit weight of the tailings silty sand is 11.5  In It is also shows that the liquefaction resistance of the deep samples is larger than the shallow one if the condition is the same. The particle character and physical parameters between the deep samples and the shallow are almost the same from From The mechanical parameters of the tailings silty sand by triaxial test are fitted through Origin software, and the results are in From The following conclusions are obtained through the high confining pressure triaxial tests and the dynamic triaxial tests of the tailings silty sand in Dexing No. 4 tailings reservoir. The stress–strain curve of the tailings silty sand under the high confining pressure represents strain-softening pattern. The shear strength achieves its maximum when the axial strain approaches to 5%. The mode of the pore water pressure is different between the high confining pressures and the low confining pressures. The results of the Mohr circle under all the testing confining pressures show that, the single line strength envelope are not able to express the shear strength characteristics of the tailings silty sand, the double line strength envelope basically presents the shear strength characteristics of the tailings silty sand when the confining pressures is less than 1400 The cyclic stress ratio and the logarithm of the liquefaction vibration times display a good linear relation for the samples from the same depth. The stress history of the deep samples is larger than the shallow one. Thus, the structure of the samples tends to be more stable, and the liquefaction resistance increases. The cyclic stress ratio and the logarithm of the liquefaction vibration times display an approximate linear relation for the samples of the same dry density. Considering the same dynamic stress ratio, the liquefaction vibration times and the liquefaction resistance increase with the dry density when it is in the range of 1.51–1.61. Through the analysis to a typical section, the results state that using the mechanical parameters of single line lead to insecurity results, using the mechanical parameters of double line is The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51004099) and the frontier project of the State Key Laboratory of Geomechanics and Geotechnical Engineering at the Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics of the Chinese Academy of Science (SKLQ003) for providing the financial support for conducting this research.