Manganese peroxidase (MnP) is the most common lignin-modifying peroxidase produced by almost all wood-colonizing basidiomycetes causing white-rot and various soil-colonizing litter-decomposing fungi. Multiple forms of this glycosylated heme protein with molecular weights normally at 40 to 50 kDa are secreted by ligninolytic fungi into their microenvironment. There, MnP preferentially oxidizes manganese(II) ions (Mn2+), always present in wood and soils, into highly reactive Mn3+, which is stabilized by fungal chelators such as oxalic acid. Chelated Mn3+ in turn acts as low-molecular weight, diffusible redox-mediator that attacks phenolic lignin structures resulting in the formation of instable free radicals that tend to disintegrate spontaneously. MnP is capable of oxidizing and depolymerizing natural and synthetic lignins as well as entire lignocelluloses (milled straw or wood, pulp) in cell-free systems (in vitro). In vitro depolymerization is enhanced in the presence of co-oxidants such as thiols (e.g. glutathione) or unsaturated fatty acids and their derivatives (e.g. Tween 80). The review summarizes and discusses different approaches to prove lignin decomposition in vitro and lists, in addition, other recalcitrant substances oxidizible by MnP.Lignin, like cellulose and hemicelluloses, is a major component of plant materials and the most abundant form of aromatic carbon in the biosphere. As a complex aromatic macromolecule, it provides strength and rigidity to cell walls and tissues of all vascular plants by acting as a glue between the polysaccharide filaments and fibres. In addition, lignin is involved in water transport in plants and forms a barrier against microbial destruction by protecting the readily assimilable polysaccharides The production of MnP is apparently limited to certain basidiomycetous fungi and so far, no bacterium, yeast or mold, and also no myccorhiza-forming basidiomycete The catalytic cycle of MnP resembles those of other heme peroxidases such as horseradish peroxidase (HRP) The catalytic cycle is initiated by binding of H Most MnPs described so far seem to follow this “classic” catalytic cycle MnP crystal structures and molecular models based on gene sequences have been published, e.g. for Chelates of Mn Certain co-oxidants such as organic sulphur compounds (e.g. glutathione = GSH, L-cystein, etc.) as well as unsaturated fatty acids and their derivatives (e.g. linoleic acid, Tween 80) are oxidized by the MnP system to form particularly reactive thiyl and peroxyl radicals, respectively MnP is in the first place regarded as a phenol-oxidizing enzyme because Mn The mechanism given in A second mediating system based on unsaturated fatty acids and their derivatives (lipids) has been proposed to explain destruction of nonphenolic lignin structures by MnP Another possibility to extend MnP activities to nonphenolic lignin moieties has been described by Hildén et al. Previous reports claiming the direct cleavage of nonphenolic lignin model dimers, for example, by MnP from The first indication that chelated Mn A loss of methoxyl groups from lignin after MnP treatment was shown in a study using Approaches to bleach wheat straw as well as hardwood pulp by MnP from We have shown recently that milled pine wood is—at least in part—disassembled in the presence of MnP from “Profitable” cooperation of MnP with other extracellular fungal oxidoreductases has been shown for both MnP and laccase The remarkable degradative potential of MnP is not limited to lignin. Over the last decade, geo-biochemically modified derivatives of lignin such as humic substances or brown coal as well as various organopollutants including persistent xenobiotics have been shown to be subject to MnP attack. The MnP system is a potent biochemical tool, acting figuratively speaking as a “radical pump,” to attack the recalcitrant lignin polymer. The production of the enzyme seems to be limited to basidiomycetous fungi Of course, MnP is not the only enzyme that generates reactive radicals and other systems exist to do this job by other mechanisms. Thus, an alternative system—although its involvement is controversial The remarkable degradative potential of MnP makes this enzyme attractive for biotechnological applications, e.g. in pulping and bleaching of cellulose, in removing of hazardous wastes This work was supported financially by the European Union (project “Fungal metalloenzymes oxidizing aromatic compounds of industrial interest,” QLK3–1999-00590) and by the Academy of Finland (Finnish Biodiversity Research Program; project “Biodiversity and Humus in Forest and Lake Ecosystems”; senior researcher project “Bioconversion of recalcitrant soil organic matter by litter-decomposing basidiomycetous fungi,” projekti 52063).