An experimental investigation was carried out to study the mixing performance and flow behavior in a continuous powder mixer for a typical pharmaceutical mixture. Blender performance, characterized by the relative standard deviation (RSD) of composition of blend samples taken at the blender discharge and by the variance reduction ratio (VRR) of the blender, was measured as a function of impeller rotation rate, flow rate and blade configuration. The flow behavior in the continuous mixer was characterized using the residence time distribution (RTD) and powder hold-up measurements. To quantify the strain applied to the powder in the blender, the number of blade passes experienced by the powder in the blender was calculated using the residence time measurements. The relationship between different experimental parameters and mean residence time and mean centered variance was examined. The mixing performance was largely dominated by the material properties of the mixture, which had a larger effect than the ingredient flow rate variability contributed by the feeders. Holdup was strongly dependent on impeller rotation rate; as impeller rotation rate increased, holdup (and therefore, residence time) decreased sharply. As a result, intermediate rotation rates showed the best mixing performance. Blade configuration affected performance as well; blade patterns where some of the blades push the powder backwards improved the mixing performance.Continuous processing is considered as an advantageous choice in many industries, including chemicals, food, household goods, microelectronics, and many others. The main advantages are better controllability, and, for sufficiently large volumes, lower manufacturing cost by decreased footprint and labor. The pharmaceutical industry, however, due to the rigid nature of its regulatory framework, has remained largely focused on conventional batch manufacturing. However, since the inception of the Process Analytical Technologies initiative (PAT Continuous processing for secondary pharmaceutical manufacturing is an attractive option because processes such as tabletting, roller compaction, and capsule filling are already carried out in the continuous mode Continuous mixing is important in many processes in pharmaceutical manufacturing, including some obvious ones such as API and lubricant mixing, and some less apparent, such as wet granulation, coating, extrusion, and drying, where mixing often plays a critical role. Design of continuous mixing operations requires evaluation of a large parametric space, including selection and design of mixing and feeding equipment; evaluation of operating parameters such as impeller rotation rate and flow rate; characterization of the effects of material properties such as particle size distribution and powder cohesion, and controlling environmental variables such as relative humidity and temperature. This large number of variables (and their interactions) makes it difficult to implement the process for a new entity without detailed studies. Thus, identifying critical process parameters is a key step towards effective implementation of continuous manufacturing. Information in the literature on continuous mixing can be found in reviews such as Pernenkil et al. Recent experimental investigations using PEPT (Positron Emission Particle Tracking) have provided deeper insights into the detailed flow patterns in powder mixers and rotating drums So far, studies have been specific to a particular material and the type of mixer. Very few studies have attempted to explain the mixing mechanisms controlling performance as a function of process parameters. This paper focuses on the characterization of a continuous mixer with respect to design parameters (impeller design, weir position) and process parameters (flow rate, impeller rotation rate) for a model mixture of Acetaminophen and micro-crystalline cellulose (Avicel). Characterization follows two main approaches. The first approach examines the flow behavior in the mixer. RTD and powder hold-up measurements were conducted. Calculation of strain and RTD parameters were used to understand the flow behavior in the mixer. The second approach consists of characterization of blend uniformity for which NIR spectroscopy was used. This approach provides an improved understanding of the mixer performance as a function of the flow behavior in the mixer, which can be applied to other cases with different materials. The paper is organized as follows. Mixing equipment, feeder units and other components of the experimental set-up are described in Section 2. Materials and methods used in the study are described in The experimental set-up is shown in Additional details are shown in Materials used in the experiments are presented in A Nicolet Antaris NIR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) was used to quantify APAP in the samples. Spectral data was collected using the software “Omnic” and “TQ Analyst” was used for calibration model development. The instrument measures the spectrum in the range of 4000 Residence time distributions in the mixer were measured by the impulse response method. Initially, the bulk material (Avicel) was fed in the mixer until steady state flow was reached. Tracer (APAP) was inserted manually in the inflow stream as an “instantaneous” pulse. Approximately 11 Residence time distribution ( Mean residence time ( Mean centered variance ( In this paper, RTD parameters, mean residence time (MRT) and mean centered variance (MCV) were used to quantify the flow behavior in the continuous mixer. For a perfectly mixed system, which is often described as a perfectly mixed CSTR (Continuously Stirred Tank Reactor), residence time distribution function Mixing behavior in the continuous blender can be described as a combination of axial and radial mixings. Axial mixing is important in order to mitigate the variability introduced by the feeding process. Radial mixing is necessary to mix the initially unmixed ingredients to the required degree of homogeneity. Powder hold-up in the mixer is important because it determines the average residence time, and thus the total average strain experienced by the powder as it travels through the mixer. Hold-up was measured by simultaneously monitoring the weight of the powder collected at the outlet of the mixer and that of the powder being fed. Powder was collected in a collection bucket resting on a scale at the exit of the mixer. Weight of the powder being fed was monitored by the in-built scale present in loss-in-weight feeders. The difference between the two weights (at the outlet and at the inlet) at a given time gives the hold-up. In preliminary measurements, hold-up is initially zero; it increases with time, and finally reaches a plateau. The mixer operating under constant hold-up was considered to be operating at steady state. In the absence of stagnant regions, hold-up measurement is complementary to the measurement of mean residence time calculated from the RTD curve. As mentioned, hold-up measurements can be used to calculate the bulk residence time [hold-up (kg) In the continuous mixer, energy input is provided by rotating the impeller. This energy is dissipated in the convective transport of the powder, random fluctuations of the velocity of the particles (granular temperature), friction between the impeller and the powder and the mean strain (velocity gradients in the powder). Since the impeller rotation rate has an effect on the residence time (which will be explained in the results section), the strain is proportional to the product of the shear rate and the residence time, which is essentially proportional to the number of blade passes in the mixer. Using the residence time, number of blade passes at various experimental conditions were calculated. For a fixed set of materials, the parametric space for the continuous mixer consists of manipulated (independent) process parameters (impeller rotation rate and flow rate) and manipulated (independent) design parameters (blade configuration, angle of weir). The various experimental conditions examined are presented in Most of the experimental work was conducted with weir angle of 20°. An explanation for this choice is provided later in the results. The effect of the weir position was studied independently by performing experiments for varying weir angles of 0, 20, and 45°, and also for a ‘No weir’ condition. The following sections focus on the effect of rotation rate and flow rate on the powder flow behavior in the continuous mixer.  Flow rate is a key process parameter that is directly related to the capacity of the manufacturing system. Although it was stated that continuous processes can be scaled up simply by time extension, in certain cases where higher or lower production rates are required, throughput also needs to be changed. Residence time distributions under different flow rate and rotation rates are compared in  To clarify the effect of flow rate on residence time, hold-up was measured for a wider range of flow rates (5–60 Our results can be compared with studies from the literature. Sudah et al The following sections focus on the effect of weir angle and blade configuration on the powder flow behavior in the continuous mixer. The weir angle is an additional design parameter that can be used to change the residence time of the powder in the mixer. Powder hold-up in the continuous mixer was measured for different weir angles. Two blade configurations ( The mean centered variance (MCV) showed a complex dependence between the two blade configurations. As shown in The previous section described the characterization of macroscopic flow behavior in the continuous mixer using the RTD. However, the RTD does not provide the complete description of the system. Micro-scale properties of mixtures, including the scale of segregation as well as blend homogeneity, are not directly captured in the RTD. This section focuses on the characterization of the blend homogeneity as a function of process and design parameters. To determine the homogeneity of the stream coming out of the mixer, samples were retrieved from the outlet stream. The relative standard deviation (RSD, Eq. In Eq. In Eq. Experiments were performed to study the effects of rotation rate, flow rate, concentration of APAP and impeller design on blend homogeneity. All the experiments were performed at ~ The following sections focus on the effect of flow rate and rotation rate on the blend homogeneity. The rotation rate is one of the important process variables. In a continuous process, for a given throughput capacity, the rotation rate is the only manipulated variable which can be easily changed online to control the blend homogeneity. Four rotation rates (39, 100, 162 and 254 The other critical operational variable is the flow rate through the system. During operation, this variable is typically determined by the capacity of other process components (for example, the tablet press), thus it is critical during process design to determine that the mixer is properly sized to achieve optimum performance at the intended flow rate. As shown in However, increase in total flow rate has an impact on fill level in the mixer and also on the input variability, because feeders operate more accurately at larger flow rates. Increasing the flow rate improves feeder performance, which leads to lower variance in the input concentration. Variance at the input decreases from A clear effect of the blade configuration was not observable for the conditions examined here, possibly because the blade configuration effect interacted with the other parameters. For the lower flow rate (30 The entire experimental investigation performed to assess mixing performance showed that the lowest achievable RSD was about 0.08 ( The focus of this study was to assess the flow behavior and mixing performance of a continuous powder mixer. The main observations of this study are as follows. The mean residence time decreases with increase in the rotation rate, but the degree of dispersion increases. Intermediate rotation rates exert the maximum number of blade passes on the powder, thus maximizing strain and homogenization. Increasing the flow rate also decreases the mean residence time, but this effect diminishes with increases in rotation rate. At the highest rotation rate (254 Out of the two blade configurations examined, the ‘Alternate’ blade configuration showed greater powder hold-up than the ‘All Forward’ blade configuration. The degree of dispersion (MCV) did not show any particular trend between the two blade configurations since it was also dependent on rotation rate and flow rate. Mixing performance was largely dominated by the material properties of the mixture and the extent of total shear (strain) applied in the mixer. Rotation rate was found to be the most significant process parameter affecting mixing performance. Intermediate rotation rates showed the best mixing performance. The effect of blade configuration on the blend homogeneity was statistically significant. Since this effect was also interacted with the rotation rate and the flow rate, more investigation is required for better understanding of the physical phenomenon. Some insights were also gained regarding the mixing mechanisms in the continuous mixer. For cohesive powders, a certain minimum shear rate is often required to break large clumps or agglomerates present in the mixer. In a batch mixer, this is usually achieved by applying shear using an intensifier bar. Although the uniformity of shear in a batch mixer is questionable, by providing the appropriate mixing time, total strain can be controlled. In batch mixing, the shear rate depends both on blender rotation speed and blender size, further complicating scale-up of batch processes. In a continuous mixer, shear rate and total shear are also difficult to control independently, since other parameters such as hold-up and bulk density also change by changing the shear rate (RPM). In the present case, when the shear rate is increased, the hold-up decreases. Increasing the shear rate changes flow conditions inside the mixer from a ‘dense powder bed stirred by the impeller’ regime to a ‘fluidized bed’ regime. Once the powder is fluidized, bulk density drops significantly, which decreases the total strain applied to the powder; as a result of fluidization, void regions are formed in the powder bed. Increasing the flow rate reduces such void regions, which in turn increases the strain applied on the powder. In the work reported here, relationships between hold-up, strain and process/design parameters were identified. In conclusion, the lowest RSD which represents the best possible mixing performance was achieved at the intermediate rotation rates and ‘Alternate’ blade configuration. The lowest value of RSD was a result of the sample size analyzed and due to the inherent material properties of APAP. Measurement of strain partially helps in understanding the mixing performance at various experimental conditions.