The fungal mycelium ingrowth and the rates of mass loss and respiration of needle litter of Pinus pinea, Pinus laricio, Pinus sylvestris, and Abies alba were investigated, in three coniferous forests, over a 3-year period by means of a composite set of incubations. In the early stages, the fungal flora of the decomposing needles was dominated by dematiaceous hyphomycetes and coelomycetes. Basidiomycetes reached a peak after 6 months on pine needles, but were absent from the N-rich needles of A. alba. Soil fungi (Penicillium, Trichoderma, Absidia, Mucor sp. pl.) became most frequent in later stages. At the end of the study period, the total mycelium amount showed the lowest values in all pine needles incubated in the P. laricio forest and the highest ones in P. pinea needles incubated in the P. pinea forest. In all data sets, as in data for boreal forests examined for comparison, the concentration of litter fungal mycelium versus litter mass loss followed a common exponential model. However, in later stages, the amount of litter fungal mycelium was very close to that of the humus at the incubation site, thus supporting the hypothesis of a logistic growth pattern. Respiration rates of decomposing litters varied with season and decreased with litter age to values close to those of the humus at the incubation site. Respiration of water-saturated litter was negatively correlated with the total mycelium concentration, and this was consistent with the observation that in far-decomposed litter only a minor fraction of the total mycelium is alive.Microbial activity is known to have a key role in the decomposition of plant litter. While soil-fauna organisms also influence litter decomposition, their functional role is due to their grazing effects on the microbial populations as well as to their litter comminution activity that increases the surface-to-volume ratio and the pattern of colonization by microorganisms  The activity of decomposers in litter and soil may vary with season due to changes in temperature or water availability The aim of the study was (1) to determine the pattern of fungal ingrowth in decomposing needle litters with attention to the succession of taxonomic groups of fungi; (2) to examine the relationship between fungal ingrowth and decomposition activity measured as litter mass loss and litter respiration. The study was carried out in southern Italy at sites with different climates ( To assess the general pattern of fungal mycelium accumulation with decomposition, we followed a composite experimental plan. (1) To discriminate between climate and substrate quality (= litter chemical composition) effects, we incubated, in stone pine forests, both local needle litter and a unified Scots pine needle litter from a Scandinavian forest system. Pine litters were also transplanted from one site to the other, and the litters were incubated in the spring of two different years and in the autumn. (2) The influence of soil fauna on litter fungal colonization and decomposition was assessed by incubating pine litters in containers with a net bottom (mesh size of 1.5 mm) and in containers without bottom and therefore with free access to fauna. Finally, we reviewed literature data for boreal monocultural Scots pine and white birch forests concerning total The present study was carried out in three different coniferous forests: a stone pine ( The Terzigno site is located 20 km southeast of Naples (Campania) at 40° 49' N; 14° 29' E on Mount Vesuvius at 250 m altitude. The stone pine forest, about 50 years old, was planted on a 1-m-thick layer of volcanic lapillus that, in 1944, covered the soil of a former mixed-species forest during the latest eruption of the volcano. The stand has a very sparse understory of herbs and young oaks ( The Golia Forest stand, with 50–80-year-old Corsican pines, is located at 1300 m altitude in the Sila mountains (Calabria) at 39° 20' N; 16° 27' E. The sandy soil forms a shallow profile on the parent material. The stand has a dense understory of bracken ( The Monte Taburno site, with an 80–100-year-old (in 1989) stand of silver fir, planted on a former common beech ( The Jädraås site at which the reference material was collected is located at the former site of the Swedish Coniferous Forest Project, in east-central Sweden, at 60° 49' N; 16° 30' E. The site, covered by a 130-year-old monocultural Scots pine forest (at the time of collection), is located at an altitude of 185 m on a flat area of deep glacifluvial sand sediments. The soil profile is an orthic humoferric podzol (iron podzol), with a weakly developed A The needle litter from the stone pine and Corsican pine stands was collected in October 1988. Silver fir needle litter was collected in November 1988. Scots pine needle litter was collected at the Jädraås site in the year 1986 in early September, which is the regular period of the year, at that latitude, at which Scots pine sheds needles. Brown needles from the needle generation to be shed were taken at abscission from the trees by shaking their limbs. After collection, the litter was dried at room temperature and stored dry at room temperature until incubation. For each species of litter, before sample preparation, the collected needles were thoroughly mixed to obtain homogeneous samples. Stone pine and Corsican pine litters were incubated in their native stands and transplanted, respectively, to the Corsican pine and the stone pine stands. Scots pine needle litter was transplanted to the stone pine and Corsican pine stands. For the incubation, we used sieve-like containers which measured 100 × 100 cm and were 5 cm high. For each type of litter, up to 600 g dry mass were exposed in each of two containers at each site. The lid cover and bottom were constructed of terylene net with a mesh size of 1.5 mm. At Terzigno, three different incubations were made. The first incubation included all the pine species and started in March 1989. The second incubation also included all the pine species, had two kinds of containers, i.e., with and without a bottom, and started in November 1989. The third incubation, which started in April 1990, included only stone pine litter incubated in containers both with and without a bottom. At Monte Taburno, two sets of silver fir litter were incubated in containers with bottom, one in April 1989 and the other in November 1989. Every 2 months, 35–60 g of litter were taken from each container and divided into several subsamples for the determination of: (a) total mycelium, (b) fungal succession, (c) litter mass loss, and (d) respiration. The linear determination method Complete chemical analysis was carried out on initial samples only. The samples were ground in a laboratory mill equipped with a filter allowing particles of less than 1 mm to pass. The amounts of water-soluble and ethanol-soluble substances were determined by sonicating the milled samples three times in a sonicator bath and weighing the samples after filtration and drying. The analyses for sulfuric-acid lignin and soluble substances were carried out according to Nitrogen was determined by combustion (Elemental Analyzer NA 1500; Carlo Erba, Milan, Italy). For analysis of P, S, Mg, K, Ca, and Mn, samples were digested for 2 d in a 2.5:1 (v/v) mixture of nitric and perchloric acid. The analyses were performed by plasma atomic emission spectrometry ICP–AES (Jobin YVON JY-70 Plus, Longjumeau, France). Ash concentration was determined by combustion at 550 °C for 2 h. At the start of the incubations and at each sampling of the incubated litter, colonizing fungi were detected by two techniques Total mycelium was determined by the membrane filter technique after To measure respiration, we used both litter at the actual moisture and water-saturated litter. Saturation of needle litter was effected by submerging the needles in water at room temperature and allowing them to soak for 18 h. CO Soil respiration was measured as described above for litter on sieved samples (2 mm mesh) in three replicates of about 5 g. Soil samples (humus plus mineral soil) had been collected from the top layer (0–5 cm depth) after litter removal; at Terzigno, soil was also collected from the well-developed fermentation layer. The values for total mycelium determined on litter investigated in this work were compared to literature data for Scots pine and white birch leaf litter To assess the pattern of variation of live mycelium during decomposition, we used published data on live (FDA) fungal biomass from a paper by The distribution of the data for (a) decomposition and total mycelium versus time, (b) total mycelium versus litter mass loss, and (c) respiration versus total mycelium was analyzed using the statistical package Sigma Plot 4.0 for Windows. The best curves fitting the data have been presented. To assess the significance of the correlation between total mycelium and litter mass loss, the data were normalized through log transformation, and the linear regression was tested. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by the Student–Newman–Keuls test (Sigma Stat 1.0 for Windows), was used to assess the significance of differences for fungal groups frequency and for fungal mycelium between (a) litter species, (b) incubations (first, second, third), (c) type of incubation (containers with or without bottom), and (d) different stages of fungal colonization and ingrowth within the whole study period. The chemical composition of the brown needle litters varied among species ( Among the litters investigated, fir needles showed the highest values of lignin and ash concentration; among the pine litters, stone pine needle litter was the richest in both lignin and ash. The highest concentrations of water- and ethanol-soluble substances were found in the litters of Scots pine and Corsican pine and the lowest in silver fir needles. The pattern of fungal colonization was very similar in all litter species. Results for the incubation in containers with bottom, obtained by damp-chamber observations, are presented in On pine needles incubated in the spring, the frequency of basidiomycetes (assessed by the occurrence of clamp connections) became significantly (ANOVA test: Data from particle plating showed that in early stages, dematiaceous hyphomycetes, as observed in damp chambers, and coelomycetes ( The most conspicuous feature of fungal colonization on silver fir needles ( In all pine litters, the concentration of total fungal mycelium increased during decomposition ( The concentration of total fungal mycelium increased somewhat differently with time depending on the type of incubation (containers with and without bottom). In the very early stages (<20% mass loss), there was no significant difference for litter incubated in containers with or without bottoms for any of the litter species ( At the Golia site, only low values of total mycelium in the range of 0.2–0.5 mg g At the Monte Taburno site, only silver fir needle litter was incubated. In this case, a slow increase with time could be seen ( As shown in For the litters incubated at the Terzigno site, the increase in total mycelium was relatively low until a mass loss of 20% was reached; above 20% mass loss, the increase was quick. The initial mycelial concentration was about 0.2–0.3 mg g Different models were tested using the data sets originating from the different incubations of stone pine, Corsican pine, and Scots pine at the Terzigno and Golia sites and silver fir at the Taburno site. An exponential model gave a very good fit to most single data sets as well as to pools of data for single species ( At the Terzigno site, a significant relationship between total mycelium and litter mass loss ( Although the pooled data sets for each species followed an exponential function, there were some differences among the litter types ( At the Golia site ( At the Monte Taburno site, the amount of total mycelium growing into silver fir needle litter was lower than that growing on pine needles at the Terzigno site ( We compared our results to data on total mycelium and mass loss of decomposing Scots pine and white birch litters reported in The measurement of fungal ingrowth as performed in this work does not allow distinguishing between dead and live mycelium. The evaluation of live active fungal mycelium is commonly made through the FDA method At the Jädraås site, ingrowth of live fungal (FDA) biomass was followed by In the present study, we compared the FDA values to the values for accumulated mass loss separately for leaf and needle litters. For all litter types, we considered only the samples collected in early winter, when water was not limiting due to heavy autumn rains. After an initial increase, there was a decrease in FDA biomass with increasing mass loss in the interval of 40–60% of decomposition for deciduous litter ( The FDA fungal biomass did not reach values higher than about 0.86 mg g Respiration rates of decomposing litter showed a seasonal variation ( Based on the assumption that fungi are a dominant group of microorganisms for the decomposition of organic matter, we compared litter respiration rates to the concentration of litter total mycelium. To avoid the seasonal variation, mainly determined by water availability, we investigated the respiration of water-saturated litter, thereby eliminating the influence of possible water limitation. We thus obtained a respiration response related only to substrate quality. We used only the data from Terzigno, where studies have been more numerous and long-term observations are available. At this site, soil respiration and the amount of total mycelium in soil were also measured over about 800 d, thus covering seasonal variation. We calculated the mean value of soil respiration and soil total mycelium for comparison with litters. Litter respiration rates and litter fungal mycelium showed a highly significant and negative relationship ( Respiration was relatively intensive in the early stage of decomposition with a low count of total mycelium, and considerably lower at later stages. The early stage with higher respiration rates was characterized by the interval up to 20% litter mass loss and a concentration of total mycelium of up to 1 mg g We may speculate that the high respiration rate in the very early stage is connected with a high turnover of an easily metabolized substrate—for example, soluble C sources. Decomposition of such substrates could be carried out by the invading fungi with a high turnover, whereas the lower rate in the later stages would be carried out by fungi with slower metabolism adapted to the more resistant substrate, dominated by lignin. We may also assume that the total mycelium of these fungi was more resistant to decomposition and thus accumulated. The bulk of the data presented shows that the total amount of mycelium increased with accumulated mass loss while the decomposition activity (decomposition rates and respiration) decreased. In far-decomposed litter, consistently, only a minor fraction of the total mycelium is live (FDA mycelium), as data published for, e.g., Scots pine show. Although an exponential function fitted well to all the experimental data analyzed, two considerations suggest limits to the concentration of total mycelium and thus of a pattern mathematically described by a logistic equation and represented by a sigmoid (S-shaped) curve. First, space for the ingrowing total mycelium could be limiting in far-decomposed litter (far-decomposed needles were completely covered by mycelia of basidiomycetes). Second, substrate quality could become limiting in the late decomposition phase. Support for the latter argument is the observation by We found similar rates of respiration and similar amounts of total mycelium in far-decomposed litter and in soil humus. This observation further supports the hypothesis of a logistic curve as the most appropriate to describe the growth in concentration of fungal mycelium on decomposing litter, and allows the affirmation that the litter, close to the limit value, is similar to some humus forms. This means that far-decomposed plant components contribute to humus carbon by direct transformation and are integrated in soil organic matter. This study was undertaken within the framework of the Trans-European DECO project launched by Björn Berg with the support of the European Science Foundation. Financial support for this work was provided by the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche and the Ministero dell’Università e della Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica. Financial support for this work was also provided to Dr Björn Berg, while working as a guest scientist at BITÖK, University of Bayreuth (BMBF, Grant No BEO-51-033947617), by the German Ministry for Education, Science, Research and Technology.