Historically, reconciliation has been viewed as a quality test of model estimates as well as a powerful tool for detecting and correcting problems in all stages of mine operations from resource estimation to metal production. If used correctly, reconciliation helps to better predict the life of mine (LOM), improves the adherence of production plans to the respective budget, and allows for effective control of the mining and milling processes. However, the accuracy of reconciliation results requires that all input data must be generated in accordance with the principles of sampling correctness. Furthermore, complete reconciliation systems can become extremely complex and must be carefully analyzed in order to provide realistic and helpful conclusions. Based on these concepts, this paper presents a successful proactive reconciliation system applied to a copper and gold mine in Brazil for monitoring and integrating mining and milling operations.Reconciliation is carried out by most of the world’s mining companies and is based on the calculation of the so-called “mine call factor” (MCF). The MCF represents the ratio between the grade, contained metal or mass of produced ore with the grade, contained metal or mass of ore estimated by the resource models. In order to more accurately predict what the processing plant will be able to produce, the MCF can be applied to future estimates in a practice called “reactive reconciliation”. However, such an approach is disadvantageous because it does not resolve the reconciliation problems. The main objective of any reconciliation system should not be to correct estimates but rather to allow for timely adjustments within production processes so that results are consistently within acceptable uncertainty limits. Holtham et al Following the previously presented logic and aiming to extract from the practice of reconciliation more useful information other than calculating and applying the MCF, several authors have conducted reconciliation studies and proposed new reconciliation practices and models. Thomas and Snowden presented a case study from an open pit gold mine and proposed statistical and geostatistical analysis to improve reconciliation between exploration estimates and grade control estimates, and between exploration estimates and true head grades and production tonnages Even though many reconciliation studies were carried out all over the world, it was Morley This paper presents the results of proactive reconciliation practices carried out in a copper and gold mine in Brazil with the goal to integrate its mining and milling operations. The objectives of this study are as follows: (1) increase the reliability of resources and reserves reported by the company; (2) improve the adherence of the short-term plans in relation to the budget; and (3) increase the reliability of the predicted quality of the ore fed to the plant. Reconciliation problems are very common in the mining industry, especially when dealing with precious metals or deposits with high nugget effect or heterogeneity. It turns out that these problems very often occur as a result of improper sampling practices and/or resource modelling. Therefore, special attention must be given to the procedures of data collection and processing. According to Morrison Instead of using the common names found in the literature – F1, F2, F3, and so on –, which suggest that these numbers are to be used as ‘factors’, the proposed model defines five reconciliation ‘indicators’ instead, which are named as: Model Indicator (MI), Planning Indicator (PI), Operation Indicator (OI), Mine Reconciliation (MR) and Plant Reconciliation (PR), in addition to the well-known MCF. These factors work as performance indicators of each individual stage, which allows for the detection and correction of the causes of reconciliation problems along the mining chain. Based on the calculations presented in It is important to emphasize that MR is often called ‘mine-to-mill reconciliation’ because it reconciles the plant feed with model estimates. Some operations do not include a sampling stage at the plant feed or, as in the case of the mine selected in this study, fragments may be so large that they preclude the installation of a sampler. This often happens when the first comminution stage is carried out using a semi-autogenous (SAG) mill at the plant. In these cases, the company back-calculates the ore fed to the plant using metal contained in the concentrate and tailings and, as a consequence, PR will always be 100%. Another important consideration is that the indicator PR should not be misused as ‘plant recovery’ (64% in the example of Since 2011, the proactive reconciliation model described above has been used in the Brazilian copper and gold mine. We present and discuss the results in the following sections. The reconciliation matrix presented in Over a period of six months, the company noticed that all indicators were repeatedly below 100%, which means that each stage overestimates the next. Each individual monthly matrix, as well as the accumulated matrix ( It’s worth emphasizing that indicators close to 100% do not necessarily mean good reconciliation. Successful reconciliation can be illusory when errors generated at one point of the process are offset by errors generated at other points, resulting in apparently excellent reconciliation Estimate reliability depends, among other things, on correct use of geostatistical methods for grades and tonnes estimates, minimization of mining losses, correct short-term geology estimation, correct ore delineation and correct sampling practices. According to Pitard To prevent an illusory reconciliation from taking place, ensuring reliability in reconciliation results, a complete diagnosis of geostatistical modelling and of sampling equipment and procedures was carried out for three years at this copper and gold mine, and improvements were made with regard to sampling and geological modelling. For example, in a study comparing twin holes drilled by a rotary drilling rig and by a diamond drilling rig, El Hajj et al Changes were then introduced to the sampling procedures in order to achieve more reliable mass and metal content data, resulting in the reconciliation matrix presented in The main improvements were as follows: (1) purchase of a reverse circulation (RC) drilling rig with automatic sampling system to increase the quality of short-term samples; (2) reduction of the short-term sampling grid generating more data for the short-term model to reach the accuracy and precision needed; (3) calculation of minimum sample masses and optimization of sample preparation protocols based on heterogeneity tests for copper and gold to minimize the fundamental sampling error. Further sampling studies were conducted at the mine over the next three years. In order to estimate the representativeness of the samples generated by the old and new drilling rigs, three 10 m holes were drilled using each rig. Average size distributions of the recovered material are presented in The first graph presents very different distributions, which suggests that manual sampling using the old rotary drilling rig generates biased samples. El Hajj The second graph shows that the RC drilling rig distributions are very similar and that there is no selection of a particular size fraction at the expense of others, which suggests that the new RC rig generates unbiased samples. El Hajj The MR (or ‘mine-to-mill reconciliation’) indicator contains information about the metals in the reserves and in the plant feed. In essence, it relates that which was planned to feed the plant to that which was actually fed to the plant but provides no information about plant recoveries. As previously stated, the main goal of the proactive reconciliation practice is to bring MR as close to 100% as possible, indicating a complete use of the declared reserves that generated the production plan and allowing the company to present a reliable annual budget. Obviously, for this statement to be valid, all possible error-generating operations must be previously optimized in a way that illusory reconciliation is avoided. The plant recovery should also be treated and optimized separately from reconciliation.  The consistent overestimation trend in the 2011 reconciliation matrix ( As a consequence, The reconciliation system for contained gold shows the following: High adherence between the geological models (MI = 100%). Low planned dilution (PI = 96%). No operational dilution and high mining recovery (OI = 103%). Excellent reconciliation between the mine and the mill (MR = 99%). The same analysis can be done for copper, based on the results in High adherence between the geological models (MI = 94%). Low planned dilution (PI = 97%). Very low operational dilution and high mining recovery (OI = 99%). Good reconciliation between the mine and the mill (MR = 90%). This example demonstrates that successful reconciliation is based on the integration of geology, mining and milling operations. Even though plant recoveries were kept low after process changes, the improvements in reconciliation results show that proactive reconciliation is an effective tool for the company to demonstrate that the information provided on resources, reserves and operation performance are reliable and auditable. Following Pitard Reconciliation problems will always exist in mining operations but the most important aspect for assessment is to identify their causes and minimize their effects. A separation of the reconciliation problem into its basic components and resolution of each aspect individually is the key for understanding and controlling mine operations. This is the basic concept of proactive reconciliation practices that have been applied to a copper and gold mine in Brazil and proven to be a useful tool for integrating and controlling mining and milling operations. The analysis of the reconciliation matrices and its indicators was of utmost importance to correctly diagnose errors that were masking the operation results and preventing the company from reaching its annual budget. In order to correct these errors, consistent action plans were drafted for the following themes: geological and grade modelling; mine and plant sampling; geometallurgical modelling; selectivity of mining operations; management of mining operations; reliability of mass measurement systems; and reliability of sampling preparation and chemical analysis. All of these actions converged for the fulfilment of the annual budget related to the metal production and operating costs, which established a reliable life of mine (LOM) plan and execution. As part of a new monthly routine, the company now monitors reconciliation indicators as key performance indicators (KPI), and evaluates reconciliation matrices every quarter in order to develop more reliable forecasts for future quarters. Every year, such matrices are used to evaluate the review of the LOM and the reconciliation of resources and reserves. Mine-to-mill reconciliation problems often have multiple causes but the problems can be solved, or at least minimized, if a good strategy is undertaken. Verification of the ten suggestions for diagnosing the causes of reconciliation problems and separation of the complex problem into its basic components so as to individually solve each problem at a time are the keys for correct use of proactive reconciliation as a tool for effective control of mining and milling processes. The first author gratefully acknowledges the support of Yamana Gold Inc., Brazil. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.