As ore grades fall, the amount of tailings production for the same copper production is expected to rise. Flotation recovery of copper sulfide from the El Teniente plant has deteriorated in recent years, in this regard ultrasound treatment of tailings for enhanced copper recovery was evaluated in laboratory experiments. The impact of the ultrasound wave was examined under different conditions, with the conclusion that improved recovery occurs when ultrasound is applied during conditioning and flotation. The results can be explained by the effect of acoustic cavitation that cleans particle surfaces and minimizes slime coatings, facilitating the action of the reagents. In this way, improvement in copper recovery of up to 3.5% were obtained.One of the biggest challenges facing the mining industry is the deterioration of mineral grades. This problem makes it necessary to improve the recovery of current operations to offset the steady decline of Cu grades. Such a decline of average saturation grade has meant a fall of 1.0% Cu to 0.86% of global average grade during the last decade ( Ultrasound treatment is used in various industries for surface cleaning ( Following this line of research,  Previous work ( This study suggests that the cavitation phenomenon caused by ultrasound could improve the flotation tailings of copper sulfides. The tailings consist of fine and ultra-fine particles of gangue, and a percentage of particles containing copper that were not floated due to lack of release and surface contamination. Copper sulfides inside the tailings might have been oxidized and ultrasound treatment may have removed the oxidized layer from the particles surfaces as well as helping the desliming. This would mean an improvement in the overall recovery of the system before sending the tailings to their final deposition. Subsequently, the methodology of the development and evaluation of laboratory flotation tests for processing the tailings of copper sulfide is presented. For this evaluation a ‘Denver’ flotation cell has been changed to be able to control the ultrasound field applied to the particles. The results are analyzed via obtaining the kinetic curve flotation, its parameters and the resulting Cu grade. To develop this study, copper sulfide tailings, provided by Valle Central Mine, were used. The tailings have an average copper grade of 0.12%, with most in the form of chalcopyrite, and with a specific gravity of 2.7 [g/cm Three tailings samples of 500 In this study we evaluated the use of ultrasound to improve the recovery of copper sulfides by applying three different conditions, derived from experience gained from evaluating heavy minerals in previous research ( The flotation tests were conducted in a ‘Denver’ cell with a stainless steel reactor of 8 A calibrated probe, designed especially to measure cavitating acoustic fields ( The acoustic pressures within the cell at the three levels indicated are presented in The transducers have a fundamental excitation frequency of 20.804 The operating conditions for the flotation experiment were kept constant for all tests and are summarized in A similar procedure was follows for each flotation test. At the start of each test, the percentage of solids of the material was measured through a Marcy pulp density scale, adjusting the concentration with water until the required value in the cell was reached. Originally, time counting initiates the conditioning stage under stirring only (without aeration) by adding the respective doses of each reagent. Regarding reagent addition, pH is adjusted by adding CaO until pH 10 is reached, then 30 To calculate the copper content, the products were dried and analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry on a Perkin Elmer Analyst 100 instrument. The test was considered valid if the difference between the measurements of each Cu content between replicates was less than 2.5%. Regarding the calculation of the recovery, the results were adjusted to an equation of first order recovery ( As The first order flotation model also helps to evaluate the kinetic response of the flotation process. In this regard, once the recovery limit (  Regarding the concentrate grade (% Cu), it was found that when ultrasound was applied the concentrate grade improved in relation to standard flotation. As shown in One explanation for these improvements is that fine and ultrafine particles are superficially cleaned by the microjets from the collapse of cavitation bubbles. Cleaning the surface facilitates the action of the collector on the cleaned surface, increasing the percentage of available surface for adhesion of the collector, and so fomenting the action of the reagents. Another hypothesis is that the detected beneficial effect is due to an agglomeration action of ultrasound on the ultrafine particles (6–50 An analysis of some particle tailings has been conducted to determine if any surface cleaning ocurred. This analysis was undertaken via electronic scanning by SEM (Scanning Electron Microscopy), obtaining images presented in Based on the experimental results, ultrasound could be a complementary technology to process tailings in classical flotation processes given its potential to improve the recovery of the fine and ultrafine particles. For a standard copper concentrator overall recovery is around 90%, therefore 10% of the feed Cu is lost in the tailings and could be potentially recovered. As shown from the current results, if a 30% recovery is achieved from this 10% copper lost in the tailings, it could mean an increase of about 3.1 percentage points in the overall recovery, achieving a total of 93.1% Cu recovery. Therefore the use of ultrasound during conditioning and flotation of fines and ultrafines deserves further consideration although the economical incentive to apply this technology will depend on the balance between the marginal benefit obtained with the extra Copper production and the investment cost need to apply an equivalent ultrasound treatment to high volumes. Given the current cost of the high frequency ultrasound equipment there is still significant work to be done to make the technology attractive. It is believed that improvements are mainly explained by the phenomenon of surface cleaning via fluid cavitation produced by ultrasonic waves and bubble jets, resulting in cleaning the particle surface and improving the functioning of the collector. However, more research is required to understand and properly control the applied pressure field and the effects on the flotation of ultrafine particles. It would be particularly convenient to make further progress in understanding the potential action of agglomeration and deagglomeration. of the ultrafine particles via ultrasound. Other possible effects to be considered is the ultrasound effect on the liquid. It was observed that the energy density heats up the slurry in some degrees, which potentially leads to changes in the chemical equilibrium in solution, which may have an effect in pH, redox potential, z–potential and contact angle. According to the results shown, ultrasound applied at any stage of the process improves final recovery and kinetics of the flotation process of fine and ultrafine copper sulfide particles under evaluation. This improvement is above measurement errors of the tests and represents significant increase in recovery compared to the recovery obtained by standard flotation. Importantly, the latter feature may allow reduction in the volume of reactors needed to reach a given throughput level for the same Cu recovery, allowing reduction of facilities lay-out and/or increasing production capacity with the same equipment.  The presented research work has been limited to evaluation of ultrasound impact on the particle solid surface. However ultrasound irradiation impacts on solid-liquid interfaces and liquid-air interfaces changing for instance the contact angle. Some of our preliminary studies have shown that a significant change in contact angle can be achieved by the solid surface vibration lead by an ultrasound field. These impacts require further attention and should be addressed in future research.