Simple measurements of H2O2 concentration or CO2 evolution were used to evaluate the effectiveness of the use of Fenton's reagent to mineralize organic compounds in water and soil contaminated by crude petroleum. This methodology is suitable for application in small treatment and remediation facilities. Reagent concentrations of H2O2 and Fe2+ were found to influence the reaction time and temperature, as well as the degree of mineralization and biodegradability of the sample contaminants. Some H2O2/Fe2+ combinations (H2O2 greater than 10% and Fe2+ greater than 50mM) resulted in a strong exothermic reaction, which causes peroxide degradation and violent gas liberation. Up to 75% TOC removal efficiency was attained in water and 70% in soil when high H2O2 (20%) and low Fe2+ (1mM) concentrations were used. Besides increasing the degree of mineralization, the Fenton's reaction enhances the biodegradability of petroleum compounds (BOD5/COD ratios) by a factor of up to 3.8 for contaminated samples of both water and soil. Our experiments showed that low reagent concentrations (1% H2O2 and 1mM Fe2+) were sufficient to start the degradation process, which could be continued using microorganisms. This leads to a decrease in reagent costs in the treatment of petroleum-contaminated water and soil samples. The simple measurements of H2O2 concentration or CO2 evolution were effective to evaluate the Fenton's reaction efficiency.Surface water and groundwater pollution problems needs to be controlled through effective and feasible intervention steps like minimization of wastewater generation, treatment and optimal reuse of nutrients, and enhancement of the self-purification capacity of receiving water bodies In this regard, the objective of this study was to investigate the feasibility of simple monitoring methodologies, such as spectrophotometric measurement of H To avoid adsorption interference due to the suspended solids, the original contaminated water was passed through a separatory funnel and then filtered (FG membrane, 0.45 The experiments were carried out in a 400 Organic compounds in the crude petroleum were analyzed using a Varian GC 3400 equipped with a DB-WAX column (60  Crude petroleum is a complex mixture containing many different chemical species with different physico-chemical properties, solubility being the most important parameter concerning its ecotoxicity or threat to public health A single methodological validation was carried out to assess the CO Data from Oxidation of 500–50 Fenton's reaction is exothermic and is more effective when carried out between 10 and 20 Besides the reagent concentrations selected for each experiment, another important factor to be considered is the reaction time. With H From When organic compounds are absent and the Fe For each oxidation experiment, degradation of organic compounds was related with the amount of CO In the oxidation of petroleum-contaminated water and soil samples, parallel quantification of CO Many reported studies have proposed values for the [Fe An interesting optimization study of Fenton's reaction has been carried out using the central composite design (CCD) technique to evaluate the effect of Fenton's peroxidation on the removal of organic pollutants from olive oil mill wastewater (OMW) The effects of the initial concentration of Fenton reagents (H The reagent cost is a very important factor in selecting a recalcitrant waste treatment technology. The results in If we consider that cost is a priority in treating contaminated samples, the biodegradability of treated samples must be considered, which could avoid unnecessary use of reagents, since the use of microbial degradation can lead to high TOC mineralization. At the end of the oxidation reactions, the samples were analyzed for COD and BOD Ratios of BOD Spectrophotometric measurements of H This study forms part of a project supported by CNPq-Brazilian Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (Grant N# 479384/01-0). L. Mater and E.V.C. Rosa acknowledge fellowships from CNPq.