A phenomenological erosion model, which captures the effects of impingement velocity, angle, particle size, properties of target, has been developed. The model incorporates removal of material due to both deformation damage and cutting. For the cutting removal, the volume loss has a power-law relation with particle's impingement velocity, angle, mass and size and the exponents depend on the particle's shape (cutting ways). Two critical cases, line cutting and area cutting, indicate that the range of the exponent of impingement velocity is 2∼2.75 which is consistent with the experimental findings. For deformation damage removal, the model indicates that the exponent of the particle's mass is independent on the target material, while the exponents of particle's impingement angle, velocity and density depend on the properties of target material. To validate the model, the simplified version of the model was applied to predict erosion rates, impingement angle where the maximum weight loss occurs and particle size effect. The predictions are in good agreement with the experiments conducted by Finnie. Such models could be used locally together with CFD models to predict erosion and wear patterns under varying flow scenarios.Erosion–corrosion is a form of material degradation involving the mechanical erosion and electrochemical corrosion, which exists in many industrial situations, such as oil production and refining, mineral processing and mining, engine components and other slurry handling equipment In this paper, we focus on developing a new phenomenological model which includes the effects of abrasive particles and target material, and captures many of the observed phenomena. The model includes mechanisms due to deformation damage removal and cutting removal. The first one is obtained by analyzing the force, volume of indentation, strain introduced into the surface layer of target, critical strain and Coffin–Manson equation. The second one is obtained by an energy equation and analyzing the cutting mechanism. The cutting removal model shows the range of exponent of impact velocity to be 2∼2.75 by two important mechanisms, viz. line cutting and area cutting. A simplified version of cutting wear gives that the exponent of impact velocity is 2.375 and the attack angle where maximum erosion is 23.4° both of which are consistent with experiments. This model also demonstrates the effect of particle size on erosion. Reasonable agreement is obtained between the predictions and the experimental data of Finnie In erosion–corrosion cases, the total weight loss consists of three parts, weight loss by mechanical erosion, weight loss by electrochemical corrosion and weight loss by synergism of erosion and corrosion. It can be expressed by the following equation, There are many factors that affect the weight loss in a pure erosion. The major factors associated with the particles are impingement velocity, angle, size, shape, density, stiffness, hardness and load concentration. The chief factors associated with the target or impingement surface are its hardness, ductility, etc. The functional relationship can be expressed as,  When a hard particle impacts on a target, the force produced by impacting is not only associated with the particle's mass, velocity and impact angle, but also with properties of the target, such as its local hardness. The process of impact can be described by particle's momentum equation. For simplicity, the following assumptions are made. Firstly the particle's shape is a sphere. Secondly the particle's hardness is larger than the target material's hardness so that the particle's deformation can be neglected during the impact process. Third, compared to the particle's size, the depth of indentation is small. According to Newtonian second law, the following equation is obtained, Integrating above equation under the boundary condition When the particle's total momentum is consumed, namely, Using the third assumption (compared to the particle's size, the depth of indentation is small), the maximum width of the deformation on the target surface can be expressed by the following equation approximately, The volume of indentation, called the “elementary indentation volume”, can be obtained by the following equation, For normal impact, Martel in 1895 first determined the relationship shown in above equation empirically When a particle impacts with target, there are two stresses produced along the surface layer of indentation. One is the normal stress and the other is tensile stress. The normal stress makes the target material move down along the normal direction of indentation; the tensile stress makes the material of the target surface layer elongate. The tensile stress will play an important role in deformation damage removal. The strain produced by tensile stress on the surface layer of indentation can be calculated by the change of target surface after and before impact approximately, namely, Unlike normal force that causes the deformation damage removal, the tangential force is like a small knife cutting or a small plough plowing the material from the surface of the target. In practice, there are many ways of cutting. The elementary cutting volume produced by the tangential force can be expressed by following relation, As shown in Fig. The cutting resistance force is associated with the properties of the target and the blade shape (edge of particles). When a particle is a cutting material from the target, the energy consumed is equal to the reduction of the kinetic energy of the particle. The energy equation is, Substituting Eqs. The process of deformation damage removal is an accumulation of plastic deformation in the surface layer around indentation. So the material removed depends not only on the properties of target and work hardening, but also on the deformation volume. In practice, the deformation volume is comparable with the elementary indentation volume. Similar to the Hutchings' method Eq. It clearly shows that the cutting removal is the function of the exponent First, we assume that the cutting mechanism is by area cutting ( Comparing this equation with Finnie's equation in reference Second, we change the area cutting mechanism into line cutting ( In this equation, the exponents of impingement velocity and particle's mass increase from 2 to 2.75 for velocity and from 1 to 1.375 for mass, namely, the sharper the particle is, the more target material is eroded. Several experiments find that the volume loss variation with impingement velocity has an exponent in the range of 2∼2.5. Finnie Third, as mentioned before, the blade shape is neither a line nor a flat area. It should be between them (0.5 Finnie In the previous paragraphs, we obtained the materials removed by the particle's vertical force and the tangential force separately. In practice, there are some interactions between them. If we ignore this influence, thus the sum of volume losses produced by vertical force and tangential force can be used to express total volume loss approximately. The total volume loss is, This equation includes the effect of particle's shape, mass, size, velocity, impact angle and properties of target on the volume loss. All the coefficients exponent must be determined from the experiments. In In this study, three sets of Finnie's experimental data are used to compare with the predictions. In these three sets of experiments, all abrasives are silicon carbide (SiC); their average diameter is 250 μm; the impact velocity is 107 m/s and the total amount of the abrasive material is 23–53 g; the target materials are aluminum, copper and SAE-1055 steel (as received), respectively. From the study, we found that coefficients  In practice, there are many situations, such as transport of solids laden in liquids in slurry pipeline etc., in which the impact angle is small. From the above study, we know that the erosion in these cases is dominated by cutting wear. So the volume loss can be expressed by Eq. One sees that the effect of particle size on erosion rate has a power-law relation with the exponent of diameter as 0.5. Finnie A new phenomenological erosion model, which captures the effects of the impingement velocity, angle, properties of abrasives and target, is developed. In the model, erosion consists of two parts, deformation damage removal and cutting removal. For the cutting removal, the model clearly shows the relationship between material loss with impingement velocity, angle, particle's mass and properties of abrasive and target material. Two critical cases give that the exponent of impact velocity ranging from 2 to 2.75 that is consistent to experimental findings; for the exponent of cos