Objectives
                  The purpose of this study was to predict the possibility of transverse iliosacral (TIS) screw fixation into the first sacral segment (S1) and introduce practical anatomical variables using conventional computed tomography (CT) scans.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A total of 82 cadaveric sacra (42 males and 40 females) were used for continuous 1.0-mm slice CT scans, which were imported into Mimics® software to produce a three-dimensional pelvis model. The anterior height (BH) and superior width (BW) of the elevated sacral segment was measured, followed by verification of the safe zone (SZS1 and SZS2) in a true lateral view. Their vertical (VDS1 and VDS2) and horizontal (HDS1 and HDS2) distances were measured. VDS1 less than 7mm was classified as impossible sacrum, since the transverse fixation of 7.0 mm-sized IS screw could not be done safely.
               
                  Results
                  Fourteen models (16.7%; six females, eight males) were assigned as the impossible sacrum. There was no statistical significance regarding gender (p
                     =0.626) and height (p
                     =0.419). The average values were as follows: BW, 31.4mm (SD 2.9); BH, 16.7mm (SD 6.8); VDS1, 13.4mm (SD 6.1); HDS1, 22.5mm (SD 4.5); SZS1, 239.5mm2 (SD 137.1); VDS2, 15.5mm (SD 3.0); HDS2, 18.3mm (SD 2.9); and SZS2, 221.1mm2 (SD 68.5). Logistic regression analysis identified BH (p
                     =0.001) and HDS1 (p
                     =0.02) as the only statistically significant variables to predict the possibility. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis established a cut-off value for BH and HDS1 of impossible sacrum of 20.6mm and 18.6mm, respectively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  BH and HDS1 could be used to predict the possibility of TIS screw fixation. If the BH exceeds 20.6mm or HDS1 is less than 18.6mm, TIS screw fixation for S1 should not be undertaken because of narrowed SZ.The shape of the posterior pelvic ring structure is extremely complex with respect to percutaneous ilio-sacral (IS) screw fixation as a fluoroscopically-guided procedure. Moreover, bone overlap, obesity, poor bone quality, and bowel gas are obstacles in the identification of these relevant anatomical structures and compromise safe placement. Intraoperative interpretation of fluoroscopic images is also aggravated by the high degree of variability in the shape of the upper sacral segment Compared with the oblique method, strict transverse placement of an IS screw could prevent the unrecognized cortex violation, especially in sacral dysplasia The purpose of this study was to predict the possibility of TIS screw fixation into the first sacral segment and introduce the practical anatomical variables using a novel computed tomography (CT) measurement technique. Human body digital data were collected from the Korean Institute of Science and Technology Information and used with permission. We used CT data of 82 adult cadavers (42 males and 40 females), who underwent continuous 1.0-mm slice scans (Pronto, Hitachi, Japan) in the supine position. The mean age of the enrolled cadavers was 52.1 years (range, 21–60 years; SD, 9.2). The mean height was 161.3 After obtaining a 3D model of the pelvis, the transparency mode (low, medium, high, and opaque) was controlled to differentiate between the sacral canal, foramens, and cancellous bone ( For statistical analyses, descriptive statistics included the mean, minimum, and maximum. To predict the possibility of TIS screw fixation, logistic regression analyses (forward stepwise model) were performed with the anatomic variables including the BH, BW, number of foramen, VD Among the 82 models, 14 (16.7%) were identified as impossible sacrum in the Asian cadavers ( All measurements of the anatomic variables are summarized in ROC curve analysis using the BH revealed an area under the curve of 0.962 (95% CI, 0.924–1.000), which indicated the suitability of BH to predict the impossible sacrum. The BH cut-off value was 20.6 Neurovascular injuries related to IS screw malposition continue to be one of the most serious complications in the management of pelvic ring injury. To prevent these complications, some authors recently reported the innovative techniques of fluoroscopic imaging We hypothesized that anatomical variables can predict the impossibility of transverse fixation of an IS screw owing to the narrowed and angulated features of the sacral ala (< Despite theoretical minimum limits of VD The variable of HD Henceforth, we could propose that the preoperative criteria for possible sacrum was < With respect to verification of sacral variations, our standards may be different compared with previous studies However, our computational analysis has several fundamental limitations. Firstly, since all measurements were from normal sacrum, our results may only be useful in anatomically reduced fractures without comminution or free fragments around the SI join and, thus, have a rather descriptive character. Secondly, since the distance and safe zone had to be measured manually using the distance measurement tool in the Mimics Nevertheless, our practical method of measuring BH is valuable for predicting the safe placement of TIS screw. Thus, we suggest that the true lateral 3D view of the opposite sacral side without two iliac bones in conventional CT scans should be taken to measure the anatomical variables of BH, when IS screw fixation has to be performed. To preoperatively recognize whether TIS screw fixation into the first sacral segment can be performed, the variables of BH and HD The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The author, their immediate family, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.