The development of mining and underground excavations under high stress conditions, where the occurrence of seismic events may induce sudden energy release, has generated new challenges and additional research related to the dynamic response of reinforcement systems. To ensure safety of underground excavations, the development of new reinforcement elements able to resist dynamic events and yielding during the loading process has advanced in the last 30 years as a result of research studies and testing programs carried out by recognized institutions. The execution of these testing programs involves a considerable time and requires validation. In Chile, the development of a new laboratory-scale dynamic test facility has required several studies in which numerical modelling is considered as an important part of the design process. This paper presents the implementation and results of a numerical model used to simulate the dynamic response of threadbar under laboratory-scale test conditions. A comprehensive calibration of the numerical model using the results of laboratory-scale dynamic tests available from the literature is presented. The continuous and split configurations for the encapsulating tube are tested and compared. A parametric analysis is performed with the calibrated model. The verification of the model is established with an additional laboratory-scale result not considered in the calibration process. A summary of the results in terms of the dissipated energy and the maximum displacement is presented. The results indicates a linear trend between the dissipated energy and the maximum displacement, and a significant improvement of the dynamic response of threadbar when the steel grade or the diameter of the rockbolt is increased.In the last century, as the mining industry has expanded in depth, new related technologies have been developed. These technological developments have responded not only to production and planning issues but also to problems related to the physical phenomena that take place at the field and hinder the mining progress. Prompting research related to mining seismicity and rockbursting under high stress conditions has increased internationally in the last few years. Efforts to understand, quantify damage, and mitigate the effects and occurrence of these events have been the object of many studies carried out by recognized institutes within the mining industry and based on the work done by the Canadian RockBurst Research Program ( Institutions such as the CanMet - Mining & Mineral Sciences Laboratories (CanMet-MMSL) of Canada, the Western Australia School of Mines (WASM) and recently the Dynamic Impact Tester (DIT) of New Concept Mining, have been studying the behaviour of reinforcement and retainment elements under dynamic loads. Their studies have evolved from simply comparing loads, to analyze the capacity of support element systems to absorb energy from dynamic impacts and deform during the process. Through laboratory-scale tests representative of in-situ conditions, the aforementioned institutions have worked to quantify the deformation and energy absorption of these elements, resulting in comparative parameters and an adaptable design under dynamic loads. However, laboratory-scale tests involve a high cost in preparation time and validation; hence a limited number of these tests are carried out. Numerical modelling is an alternative that may complement the results from laboratory tests, and can be useful to explain the deformation and energy absorption process. In Chile, a new laboratory-scale dynamic test facility, supported by the University of Chile and the Geomechanics Research Center MIRARCO, is under development. This frame uses a mechanism similar to the CanMet-MMSL facility. As a part of the design process several studies related to numerical modelling have been considered. In this study, a methodology is proposed to numerically model the dynamic response of reinforcement elements under laboratory-scale test conditions. The model was developed with a specific focus on the dynamic response of threadbar (also known as rebar or gewibar), which is widely used as rock reinforcement in Chilean underground mining and globally. At the present time, there are mainly two laboratory facilities, recognized by the industry, for testing reinforcement elements under dynamic loading conditions. The first started between 1992 and 1994 by Yi and Kaiser under the Canadian Rockburst Research Program (CanMet-MMSL facility), and the second, started in 2004 by Player and Thompson with the support of ‘Minerals & Research Institute of Western Australia’ (WASM facility). The difference between the CanMet-MMSL dynamic testing facility and the WASM dynamic testing facility lies in the principle used for their conceptual model and experimental tests. The CanMet-MMSL facility is based on the energy transfer principle, whereas the WASM facility is based on the momentum transfer concept. However, it should be considered that the two facilities physically involve both principles depending on how the problem is addressed. In this sense, the CanMet-MMSL facility transforms potential energy into kinetic energy through the fall of a mass from a given height that impacts the lower end of a rockbolt embedded in a pipe with grout causing deformation and possible failure (simulating the in-situ conditions). On the other hand, the WASM dynamic facility operates by measuring the effects of the fall of a complete system including a beam, the reinforcement, and a loading mass. The system falls freely to a point where it is abruptly stopped by buffers. Under this condition, the rockbolt continues to move and could lengthen and/or slip and possibly fail. Furthermore, it is important to consider that depending on the requested response of the rock reinforcement, there are two main sample configurations for the dynamic test. The first is the conventional sample configuration, where a rockbolt sample is embedded in a continuous steel pipe with grouting material simulating the field conditions. The second is the split-tube sample configuration, where the rockbolt sample is embedded with grouting material in a split steel pipe that simulates a discontinuity in the rock mass. Both configurations are shown in The development of the numerical model described in this communication has been motivated by two facts: on the one hand, in Chile the development and construction of a future laboratory-scale dynamic testing facility supported by the University of Chile and MIRARCO with a mechanism similar to the CanMet-MMSL. On the other hand, several authors have questioned the effects of dynamic loads on rock reinforcements ( In recent years, various efforts have been made to numerically represent the behaviour of dynamic tests for reinforcement elements used in underground excavations. Two approaches have been widely used within the computational mathematical area for the representation of this problem, the lumped-mass models and the dynamic deformation models in a continuum media. The lumped-mass models describe the reinforcement elements as discrete masses array in series connected to each other by springs and dampers, and have been used in models proposed since the beginning of dynamic studies programs for reinforcement elements. Dynamic deformation models use discrete elements to describe the behaviour of the reinforcement element as a continuous and deformable medium. In this approach, stress and deformation waves characterize the material behaviour in the elastic and plastic ranges through the propagation of the discretized elements in the medium. With this approach, It is important to note that dynamic deformation models and lumped-mass models have different objectives. The dynamic deformation models are more detail-oriented and focus on resolving problems related to specific components of a system, whereas lumped-mass models are more global and produce solutions involving the complete system. The approach used in this paper corresponds to the lumped-mass, in which the reinforcement element is represented by secondary elements (segments) joined together by nodes, as shown later in Diverse models that characterize the dynamic structures under certain applied force use resolution schemes in which the whole system is simplified and described through a damped oscillator. In this sense, the equations that describe the process and their solution are well known. However, the complexity of these systems lies in how the conditions of stiffness and damping are applied, incorporating difficulties in the representation of the real conditions of the problem. To solve the numerical model, the system is divided into a two-step problem. The first problem is described by the free falling of the mass used in the dynamic test until the impact with the plate (damping cushion in the current test) at a particular time ( The stiffness of the rockbolt and the grout shown in Eqs. The rockbolt properties under static conditions are well established from the manufacturer catalogues. However, it is well known that steel changes its yield limit and ultimate strength under dynamic loading conditions. According to The normal modes of vibration for rockbolts can be approximated from a steel bar embedded at one extreme ( The grout is a more difficult material to model given its less homogeneous and less isotropic nature. On the other hand, to estimate the shear stiffness Finally, the normal modes of vibration for the grout are determined by the eigenvalues of the modal matrix, where the values of the normal modes are extrapolated to a damping system, as illustrated by To ensure that the damped model described by the Eqs. The threadbar is represented in the model by a discretized cable structural element that responds to the tension through a perfectly plastic constitutive model. A grid that envelops the threadbar and represents the grout and the steel pipe in which the rockbolt is inserted into the laboratory-scale dynamic tests. The grout behaviour is taken into account through this grid in the numerical model. A loading mass represented by a geometric element, which is released in a free fall condition along the threadbar before the impact. After the impact the loading mass is joined to the final discretized element simulating the dynamic impact generated at the laboratory-scale test. A structure that supports the whole system in which the dynamic test is performed. In the case of laboratory-scale dynamic tests with the split-tube configuration, the grid that represents the grout and the encapsulating pipe is divided in two segments.  To characterize the encapsulating effect of the pipe, a time dependent routine in FISH (FLAC  Note that the model available in FLAC The entire numerical model is solved by an iterative numerical method – explicit in time combined with an unbalanced force criteria. In this process the results of the numerical model are compared with the laboratory-scale results from the literature in terms of the displacement and dissipated energy, adjusting the initial stiffness of rockbolt and grout at the yielding point ( It is has to be recognized that longer computational times are required to achieve the convergence of the numerical model when a smaller Summarizing, the numerical model considers the following input parameters. For the rockbolt: length, diameter, the yield and ultimate load of the steel under static conditions, the modulus and the stretching limit (specified by the manufacturer) under static conditions. For the grout: the modulus and uniaxial compressive strength under static conditions. For the dynamic test: the loading mass, and the inner and outer diameter of the encapsulating tube. On the other hand, in the continuous tube configuration the monitoring point is located between the loading mass and the lower end of the encapsulating tube. Whereas, in the split-tube configuration the monitoring point is located at the discontinuity of the encapsulating tube.  The desired result is to replicate the dynamic response of reinforcement elements under laboratory-scale test conditions, in particular for the threadbar. In this section, the calibration of the model, a parametric analysis and the verification of the model are presented.   Considering the response of the calibrated model for a 3.2 m rockbolt length as a reference, a parametric analysis of the most incident parameters at the laboratory-scale dynamic tests is performed. Different values for the loading mass, the length, the diameter of the threadbar, and the water-cement ratio of the grout are considered. The change in the dynamic response when the diameter of the threadbar is modified for a fixed rockbolt length of 2.3 m and a constant loading mass of 2 tonnes is illustrated in To verify the performance of the calibrated numerical model, an additional laboratory-scale dynamic test result for threadbar from an impact test facility is used. The result of this test was not considered during the calibration process and the rockbolt presents different diameter and steel grade. Finally, the tendency between the dissipated energy and the maximum displacement induced on rockbolts during the numerical simulations and laboratory-scale tests is analysed. For the case of the numerical model simulations, the results considering different parameters are included in the analysis. For the laboratory-scale tests the results from both dynamic and static tests for threadbar and D-bolt are considered ( The comparison between the simulations of the numerical model and the laboratory-scale test results from the WASM facility for the dynamic response of threadbar presents a reasonable similarity. In this sense, the numerical model represents a feasible approach to simulate the dynamic response of threadbar under laboratory-scale conditions. The results are discussed in this section. Based on the results of the numerical model ( It is interesting to note, that the dynamic response in terms of the load-displacement curve is practically the same for both the continuous tube and the split-tube configurations ( The parametric analysis presented in It has to be noticed, that the initial stiffness of the reinforcement system, illustrated in Based on the results illustrated in By analyzing the isolated behaviour (state) of the grout, it can be observed, that the yielding condition depends directly on the value of the cohesive strength. At this point, the yielding condition is propagated partially or completely through the rockbolt given the cohesive strength value used in the numerical model. In some sections of the rockbolt the yielding condition is reached before the grout, independently of the encapsulating tube configuration. This generally agrees with the observations made from laboratory-scale results of dynamic tests for threadbar ( The proposed numerical model does not considers the friction angle of the grout (Eq. It is remarkable, that the simulation used to verify the performance of the numerical model ( It is important to note, that the model represents a loading condition similar to the CanMet-MMSL testing facility, while the tests results used to calibrate the model are from the WASM testing facility. As was noted in  The diameter of the rockbolt or the steel grade modifies the yielding limit, and therefore, the dissipated energy and the maximum displacement of the reinforcement element. The implication is that, when the steel grade of a rockbolt is changed preserving its geometry, the properties of the material determines the nominal yielding limit and the nominal ultimate strength. When the diameter of the rockbolt is changed preserving the material, the yielding load changes, modifying the response. These variations lead to a change in the slope of the linear trend between the maximum displacement and the dissipated energy, and helps to explain the behaviour of different reinforcement elements. The results found from the simulations of the numerical model are consistent with the results from the literature ( Finally, it should also be observed that the results shown by the CanMet-MMSL facility and the WASM facility for reinforcement elements other than the threadbar are similar in terms of the dynamic load-displacement curve within an acceptable range ( The proposed modelling approach has demonstrated to have a satisfactory performance to simulate the dynamic response of threadbar under laboratory-scale conditions. The model is adaptable and can be continuously adjusted as necessary, and represents a feasible tool to improve the understanding of the dynamic behaviour of reinforcement elements. In this paper, a numerical model to evaluate the dynamic response of threadbar under laboratory-scale conditions was developed and implemented into a finite difference software (FLAC As a consequence from the simulations of the numerical model, the dynamic response of threadbar under laboratory-scale conditions using the continuous tube and the split tube configurations are very similar. This is related to the monitoring point that depends on the encapsulating tube configuration and the homogeneous properties of the materials assigned to the tested elements. The configuration of the encapsulating tube influences the distribution of displacement, force, rockbolt yielding state and grout yielding state along the reinforcement element. In this sense, the response is concentrated at the free edges (discontinuity) along the encapsulating tube. The direct relationship between the propagation velocity of the reinforcement element, the dynamic increase of the yielding point, and the ultimate strength is appreciated through the numerical simulations of the model. These parameters, evidenced during the simulation time, have a distinctive influence on the limit and the oscillatory profile of the yielding condition in the reinforcement element and are consistent with the observations made by Grout plays a limited role in the ultimate load capacity of the reinforcement system. The main effects of grout are related to the initial stiffness, damping and of course ensure a proper anchorage of the rockbolt. Furthermore, through the simulations of the numerical model, it can be concluded that the constitutive model of the grout, available in the commercial software FLAC It is remarkable that the dissipated energy and the maximum displacement follows a linear trend. Based on the model results, this behaviour depends mainly on the diameter of the rockbolt and the specified steel grade, which modifies the slope of the linear trend. Results from previous research ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the basal CONICYT Project AFB180004 of the Advanced Mining Technology Center (AMTC) and to project 16CONTEC-65103 ‘ J. Azorin and Laboratory of Geomechanics and Mine Design from the University of Chile are especially acknowledged for their contribution to the structure of this paper. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of any other individual or organization.