High speed microscopy was utilized to allow real time visualization of the movement of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) with magnetically sensitive nanoparticles (Fe2O3) and a chemical surfactant (NaDSSB) in water. Initially, entangled SWNT, Fe2O3 and NaDSSB mixtures were randomly dispersed in the fluid. Upon extended exposure to the magnetic field, the mixture slowly vibrated, the nanoparticles straightened and aligned with respect to the magnetic field. The aligned nanoparticle chains appeared to be continuous and unbroken, forming a combination of aligned particles and clusters. Because of the semi-continuous nature of these nanosuspensions and the inherent viscosity of the fluid, some minutes are required for the mixtures to respond to the applied magnetic field and align. Time dependent thermal conductivity experiments indicate that the alignment process dominates the thermal conductivity enhancement as opposed to micro convection. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images also show that the SWNT and Fe2O3 particles are well aligned under the influence of the magnetic field. Verification of the assumption that electrostatic attraction between nanotube/surfactant and metal oxides makes aggregation happen was obtained, by changing the nature of the charge of the surfactant from a negative charge (NaSDDB) to a positive charge (CTAB). Compared with the alignment of Ni coated SWNTs that contain chemical bonds between Ni and C atoms, this electrostatic force induced alignment could maintain nanotube perfect conjugate structures which result in excellent thermal, electrical, and mechanical properties. The alignment of the carbon nanotubes in nanosuspensions may offer new opportunities for the development of nanofluids. In addition, these nanosuspensions could be applicable in a wide variety of potential applications, such as thermally conductive films, reinforced polymer composites, transparent electrodes for display and solar cells, electromagnetic interference shielding, new sensors, etc.Due to the wide range of applications, the thermophysical and electrical properties of carbon nanotubes (CNT) have been the subject of intensive study Fluids with carbon nanotubes in suspension are referred to as nanofluids, and may exhibit substantially improved thermal conductivity values One possible explanation for the observed lack of significant thermal conductivity increases in these nanosuspensions, may be attributed to a lack of alignment or orientation of the nanotubes. In a typical nanosuspension, individual carbon nanotubes are irregularly positioned in the fluid with only a random and infrequent chance for them to be in contact with each other. Therefore, only very high concentrations of CNTs produce any noticeable increase in the effective thermal conductivity. In the following investigation, a new concept of incorporating “magnetically guided carbon-nanotubes” in a nanofluid to enhance the thermophysical properties is presented and evaluated. Magnetic particles in a liquid medium can assume a variety of configurations, depending on the nature of the magnetic particles and the strength of the magnetic field Initially, magnetically sensitive nanoparticles (Fe It has been reported that thermal conductivity of heat transfer nanofluids containing carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and magnetic-field-sensitive nano particles of Fe In this paper, real time images of the movement of single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT) and magnetically sensitive nanoparticle (Fe Single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT) were purchased from Helix Material Solutions Inc. in Richardson, Texas. The magnetically sensitive Fe Sonication was performed using a Branson Digital Sonifier, model 450. A magnetic field was provided by a pair of spaced, Ba–ferrite magnet plates (4 A Redlake Model PCI 2000S Motion Scope (MASD Inc, San Diego, CA) was used to observe the behavior of nano particles mixture. The detection parameters used were: record rate 250, Shutter 1/250, trigger 70%. The lens were a WHB 10×/20 and MPlan 10×/0.25. Images of the solvent effects were observed using an Olympus I×71 optical microscope and recorded using a Princeton Instruments PIXIS CCD camera. The pH values were measured using a pH Mettler Toledo model SevenEAsy S20. The thermal conductivity data was obtained using a Hot Disk™ thermal constants analyzer The magnetic field intensity was recorded using a F.W. Bell Gaussmeter Model 5060. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were acquired using the backscattered electron detector on a Zeiss Supra40VP variable pressure system. Microscope images of 0.017  It is intuitive that the particles would move towards the direction of magnetic field. However, these nanotube and metal oxide mixtures do not exhibit significant movement under the influence of the magnetic field. Instead, the aligned nanotube lines continue to stretch longer and move closer together, forming longer and thicker lines. After some time (>12 This observed phenomenon coincides very well with the previously reported time dependent thermal conductivity results of carbon nanotubes and metal oxides in water In the presence of the magnetic field, the thermal conductivity of the nanofluids demonstrates a very interesting behavior. The thermal conductivity initially increases with time, but eventually reaches a peak value of 0.95 As observed in microscopy images, the carbon nanotube lines stretch longer, move closer together and form longer and thicker lines under the influence of an external magnetic field and as a result, enhance the effective thermal conductivity. In order to determine the influence of the time in residence, nanofluids (0.017 The macrogeometrical effect of magnetically aligned 0.017 In order to ensure that the alignment process is the dominant factor influencing the thermal conductivity enhancement (as opposed to micro convection), the position of the magnetic field was modified (and hence the magnetic field intensity and orientation) during the time dependent thermal conductivity measurements. This resulted in a change of stability in the fluid. However, no significant differences in the thermal conductivity were observed. The influence of the direction of the magnetic field was observed by manually switching the magnets during the experimental tests to determine if the tangling and contacts among nanotubes, metal oxides and chemical surfactants would be affected. Again, the thermal conductivity did not show any significant differences. Further evidence indicates that the thermal conductivity enhancement could be observed along the applied magnetic field direction, but not along the perpendicular direction (data not shown). If the micro convection assumption is true, then thermal conductivity enhancement in all directions should be comparable. Normally, micro convection effects only last several minutes. The longer time scale of the thermal conductivity enhancement presents strong evidence that thermal conductivity enhancement is not due to micro convection The above microscope and thermal conductivity results demonstrate that alignment and orientation of the nanotubes in a fluid are critical and essential to the enhancement of the thermal conductivity of the composite fluid. However, the increase in the ratio of the thermal conductivity is not as significant as anticipated due to the thermal contact resistance in the nanofluids As illustrated in Due to the technical limitations of the optical microscope, it is very difficult to obtain real images of the aggregation among the individual carbon nanotubes, the surfactant and the metal oxide. Based upon the initial assumptions, the electrostatic attraction between the nanotube, surfactant and metal oxide causes the aggregation to occur. It is interesting to speculate on the following: if the charge of the surfactant is changed, for example from a negative charge (NaSDDB) to a positive charge (CTAB), then no electrostatic attraction would occur and the Fe It is clearly evident that initially ( To further support this hypothesis, it would be beneficial to be able to observe some real images of the Fe In summary, observations and real time images of the movement of SWNT, Fe Time dependent thermal conductivity experimental results using different magnetic field intensities and orientations indicate that the alignment process dominates the thermal conductivity enhancement rather than micro convection. Scanning Electron Microscopy images also show that the SWNT and Fe The assumption that the electrostatic attraction between the nanotube, surfactant and metal oxide causes aggregation by changing the charge nature of surfactant from a negative charge (NaSDDB) to a positive charge (CTAB) is verified. The significance of electrostatic force induced alignment is that perfect conjugated structure of carbon nanotube is maintained. Therefore, those nanotubes still show excellent thermal, electrical, and mechanical properties. Meanwhile, in Ni coated nanotubes, C and Ni atoms form chemical bonds and it is uncertain how damaged conjugated structure will influence the physical properties of nanotubes. The use of magnetic guidance for aligning carbon nanotubes in a fluid may open up new routes for the research and applications of nanofluids. Also, it could be applicable to a variety of potential applications, such as thermally conductive films, reinforced polymer composites, transparent electrodes for display and solar cells, electromagnetic interference shielding, new sensors, etc. The financial support of