Treatment of humeral shaft fractures has come a long way from its initial conception of non-operative methods like coaptation splint, Functional bracing to operative interventions like plate osteosynthesis and intramedullary nailing. The aim of the present study was to compare the functional and radiological outcome in patients with humerus shaft fractures treated with antegrade or retrograde nailing technique. A Prospective randomized study was conducted at a Tertiary care hospital between May 2014 and June 2016 on 43 patients with diaphyseal humerus fractures treated by antegrade or retrograde nailing technique. The inclusion criteria were closed fractures, compound grade 1 and grade 2 fractures and segmental fractures. Patients with prior radial nerve palsy, compound grade 3 fractures, patients with a narrow medullary canal (<6  mm at the isthmus) and with severe medical co-morbidities like cardio-pulmonary dysfunction were excluded from the study. Randomization was done using the closed envelope technique. The patients were asked to open a sealed opaque envelope just prior to the surgery, depending on which the procedure was decided and the patients were divided into two groups. Patients who were operated using the antegrade nailing technique were included in group A (n = 24) while the patients with retrograde nailing were in group B (n = 19). A total of 47 patients who had humerus shaft fracture were screened amongst which, 4 patients refused to participate in the study and were thus excluded from the study. All the necessary pre-operative work-up was done in form x-rays and hematological investigations. Prior well written informed consent was taken from all the patients. Ethical committee approval was obtained before the commencement of the study. Similar post-operative pain control and mobilization were followed for all the patients. Regular follow-up was done at 3,6,12 and 24 months respectively. The primary endpoints were functional recovery, radiological and clinical union and the rate of complications with both the techniques. The secondary endpoints were surgical time, intra-operative bleeding and duration of the hospital stay. The Final outcome was determined using the modified criteria of Stewart and Hundley General anaesthesia combined with a regional block was used in all the cases. Standard surgical steps were followed. A total of three doses of second-generation cephalosporin was administered in the peri-operative period. In the supine position, an anterolateral approach for proximal humerus was used. A 5 cm incision was made starting distal to the lateral aspect of the acromion. Deltoid muscle was split carefully along its anterior and middle fibres, and the sub-deltoid bursa was excised. The supraspinatus tendon was split along the line of its fibres and the cut ends were tagged for future closure. Entry was made with the curved awl just lateral to the articular cartilage and around 0.5 cm posterior to the bicipital groove. Following that, the guide wire was passed and a closed reduction was done by gentle traction and manipulation under C arm image intensifier. Reaming of the canal was done till the level of the isthmus. Appropriate size nail was then inserted. Proximal locking was done with the help of zig. Distal locking was done under visualization by a mini-open incision using freehand technique ( In lateral position, the affected limb was prepared and kept in 90° abduction at theshoulder and 90° flexion at the elbow joint. A posterior approach was used. Triceps muscle was split in the line of its fibres and entry point was made just above the level of olecranon fossa with the help of 3.2 mm drill bit. Reaming was performed only at the entry point to avoid iatrogenic shaft fracture at the time of nail insertion. Appropriate size nail was then inserted. Proximal locking of the nail was done with the help of zig and freehand technique was used for distal locking ( Similar post-operative pain management and physiotherapy protocol were used for all the cases. Mobilization was started from Post-operative day 1 in the form of shoulder and elbow movements. All the patients were asked to use an arm pouch for a period of 3 weeks. Assisted passive mobilization at the shoulder (forward elevation and abduction) and elbow (flexion and extension) were started from second post-operative day within the limits of pain tolerance. The mean age of the patients was 42.4 ± 1.8 and 44.1 ± 2.4 in group A and B respectively. There were 19 (44.18%) females and 24 (55.9%) males in the present study. Dominant side was involved 27 (62.7%) cases. The commonest mechanism of injury was road traffic accident accounting for 24 (55.8%) cases. Thirty-seven (86%) cases had closed fracture humerus. As per the AO-OTA classification system and there were 21 (48.9%) cases of type 12-A, 10 (23.2%) cases of type 12-B and 12 (27.9%) cases of type 12-C. Majority of the cases 24 (55.8%) had middle third shaft fracture, which was followed by lower third 12 (27.9%) and proximal third 7 (16.3%) fractures respectively. Five (11.6%) patients had associated head injury, and 3 (6.9%) patients had either a chest or abdominal injury while 12 (27.9%) patients had multiple fractures among both the groups. There were 17 (39.5%) patients with transverse fracture pattern, 21 (48.9%) patients with spiral and 5 (11.6%) patients with segmental fracture observed in the present study ( Chi-square test was used for demographics such as side involved, mechanism of injury, fracture type, fracture level, fracture pattern. Fisher's exact test was used for parameters such as nature of injury and complications such as superficial infection, iatrogenic fracture, radial nerve palsy, delayed union and shoulder stiffness. Two sample independent Intramedullary nailing has been the preferred modality of treatment for lower limb bones like femur and tibia owing to its load sharing principle. However, the implications of the same have been popularised only since the past few decades for humerus7. The initial first-generation nails like Kuntscher nail, Rush nail, Enders nail or J nail gave a three-point fixation but lacked rotational stability which was the primary reason for their failure. With the advent of interlocking nailing technique, these issues were minimized to a large extent. The first antegrade nailing was described by Derweduwen in 1979 with a limited experience However, the Seidel nail with two proximal locking screws and three distal flanges changed the concept of intramedullary nailing for shaft humerus fractures. Retrograde nailing was introduced in order to elude these aforementioned complications and technical difficulties. However, apart from being technically demanding procedure, this technique has pitfalls like posterior cortex comminution due to high nail resistance (due to the triangular geometry of distal the humerus providing less space for the nail insertion), stiffness at the elbow joint due to the violation of triceps muscle. Tsai EH et al. Ajmal et al. Shoulder impingement has been one of the pivotal reasons for the introduction of the retrograde humerus nailing techniques. The entry for the retrograde nail is not in the line of the humerus owing to the presence of olecranon. Thus, the nail is directed towards the anterior cortex making it prone for a fracture at the supracondylar level which can be as high as 20%. Baltov et al. Cheng et al. We believe that with due precautions, both the nailing techniques can be used at a different level of humeral shaft fractures. Fixation stability can be increased when the nail is inserted from the shorter to the longer fragment. In the present study, No statistically significant difference was noted in terms of functional outcome in either of the techniques. The small number of sample size and short duration of follow-up are the limitations of the present study Antegrade and retrograde nailing have favorable outcomes in humeral shaft fractures at different levels. Selection of the technique as per the fracture geometry, patient comorbidities is of paramount importance. In our opinion, antegrade nailing can be done in more proximal fractures at the meta-diaphyseal junction especially in a younger population with smaller medullary canal and polytrauma, whereas retrograde nailing can be opted for patients with wider medullary canal and more distal fractures due to the ease of its insertion and better stability. The middle third fractures can be operated using either of the two techniques. Multi-centric randomized control trials will help further to develop proper guidelines and consensus for this particular type of fracture. NIL. NONE.