Background
                  The complication rate after locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures is high. In addition to low bone mineral density, a lack of medial support has been identified as one of the most important factors accounting for mechanical instability. As a result of the high failure rate, different strategies have been developed to enhance the mechanical stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures. The aim of the present article is to give an overview of the current biomechanical and clinical studies that focus on how to increase the stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A comprehensive search of the Medline databases using specific search terms with regard to the stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures was performed. After screening of the articles for eligibility, they were subdivided according to clinical and biomechanical aspects.
               
                  Results
                  Medial support screws, filling of bone voids and screw-tip augmentation with bone cement as well as the application of bone grafts are currently the most frequently assessed and performed methods. Although the evidence is weak, all of the mentioned strategies appear to have a positive effect on achieving and maintaining a stable reduction even of complex fractures.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Further clinical studies with a higher number of patients and a higher level of evidence are required to develop a standardised treatment algorithm with regard to cement augmentation and bone grafting. Although these measures are likely to have a stabilising effect on locking plate fixation, its general use cannot be fully recommended yet.Fractures of the proximal humerus are the fourth-most common fracture among geriatric patients after distal radius, proximal femur and vertebral fractures To overcome these problems, many efforts have been made in recent years, and clinical and biomechanical studies have focussed on three principles to increase the stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures: augmentation of screw tips in regions of low BMD, the use of medial support screws (calcar screws) and autograft or allograft augmentation in fractures with comminution of the medial column The aim of the present article is to give an overview of current biomechanical and clinical studies that focus on how to increase the stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures in order to help develop a standardised treatment strategy for this complex and challenging injury. The Medline database was searched using the keyword ‘proximal humerus fracture’ in combination with either ‘stability’, ‘medial support’, ‘augmentation’, ‘cement’, ‘bone graft’, ‘autograft’ or ‘allograft’. Only those articles published in the English language were included. After screening, the eligible articles were separated into three groups: (1) medial support screws, (2) cement augmentation and (3) bone grafts. In addition, they were further subdivided into biomechanical and clinical studies. At first, the basic principles of medial support screws, cement augmentation and bone grafts and the rationale for their use in proximal humerus fracture are explained, and then the results of the included studies are described and evaluated with regard to their clinical relevance. Gardner et al. suggested parameters to define whether medial support of a proximal humerus fracture was restored during surgery Biomechanical studies on the use of medial support screws in locking plate fixation are rare. To date, only two biomechanical studies on locking plate fixation with medial support screws have been published. Most recently, Katthagen et al. evaluated the effect of medial support screws on fixation strength in an unstable two-part fracture model In contrast to the inconsistent biomechanical data, all of the available clinical studies show the positive effects of medial support screws in locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Gardner et al. presented the first clinical study on the use of additional medial support screws Zhang et al. confirmed these initial results in a prospective randomised study In the most recent clinical study, Jung et al. also found better results after locking plate fixation if medial support was successfully restored In trauma, augmentation with bone cement has successfully been used in proximal femur fractures, and it has been proven to enhance the stability of fixation in various biomechanical studies Kwon et al. performed the first biomechanical study investigating the effect of calcium phosphate cement on proximal humerus fracture fixation in 2002  One major concern when using bone cement is the temperature increase over the physiologic level during cement curing due to the exothermic reaction of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)-based cements. The heat released may result in damage to the bone and cartilage with subsequent necrosis and implant loosening. Blazejak et al. assessed heat generation during screw augmentation in cadaveric proximal humerus specimens placed in a 37 Robinson and Page were the first to report results of internal fixation with screws or buttress plates and augmentation with injectable calcium phosphate in the treatment of proximal humerus fractures in a series of 25 patients Egol et al. focussed on fracture settling and screw penetration into the glenohumeral joint after internal fixation of proximal humerus fractures with metaphyseal defects Somasundaram et al. used calcium sulphate (Stimulan, Biocomposites, UK) to fill metaphyseal bone voids and to augment head screws in locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures in a series of 21 patients (22 fractures) To date, no clinical study exists that reports the results of locking plate fixation and augmentation of cannulated and perforated head screws. Furthermore, randomised studies comparing screw augmentation with locking plate fixation alone are yet to be conducted. Walch et al. initially described the use of an intramedullary bone peg for patients with non-unions of the surgical neck The first biomechanical comparison of locking plate fixation with an intramedullary bone peg versus locking plate fixation alone was performed by Mathison et al. Bae et al. obtained similar results Chow et al. performed a similar study using eight pairs of cadaveric humeri, and they found no varus collapse in specimens with augmented reconstructions. By contrast, six of eight specimens in the non-augmented locking plate fixation group failed due to varus collapse ( Osterhoff et al. assessed the effect of an intramedullary fibular graft on intercyclic motion, fragment migration and plastic deformation in 20 composite analogue humerus models with the use of a testing set-up to simulate active abduction, and they found five times lower intercyclic motion, two times lower fragment migration and two times lesser plastic deformation in constructs augmented with a fibular graft In a more recent study, Katthagen et al. examined the performance of locking plate fixation augmented with a corticocancellous femoral head allograft that was impacted into the medial fracture gap of an unstable two-part fracture Despite considerable variations in the testing set-ups and protocols, augmentation with either an intramedullary fibular graft or a medially impacted bone graft showed significantly higher stiffness values and maximum loads as well as lesser intercyclic motion compared with locking plate fixation alone. The first clinical series of seven patients treated with locking plate fixation in combination with an intramedullary fibula allograft was published by Gardner et al. Since that initial report, several level IV studies have been published. The only comparative case–control study was performed by Zhu et al. The aim of this overview was to present current biomechanical and clinical data on measures to enhance the stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Literature research revealed that the use of medial support screws, cement augmentation and bone grafts are currently the most frequently used and assessed tools to increase the stability of locking plate constructs. Although the evidence is low and prospective randomised clinical trials on the use of either technique are still missing, all of the presented strategies appear to have a positive effect on achieving and maintaining a stable reduction even of more complex proximal humerus fractures. Locking plates are most likely the most widely used implant to treat fractures of the proximal humerus. However, the high complication rates after locking plate fixation, particularly in elderly patients with osteoporosis, have made it necessary to develop strategies to prevent failure of the reconstruction. Although not every complication requires a surgical revision, the reported revision rates of up to one-third of patients are unacceptably high With regard to medial support screws, a positive effect on maintaining the reduction over time has been reported throughout all clinical studies Although the test set-ups vary considerably between the different studies, the use of cement augmentation of either the head fragment itself or the head screws is associated with increased stiffness values, higher failure loads and lesser interfragmentary motion compared with locking plate fixation alone, regardless of the fracture type Bone grafting appears to be a safe and effective strategy to enhance the primary stability of locking plate fixation, even if a more extensive approach may be required to insert an intramedullary graft into the proximal humerus. Rates of general complications, for example, haematoma and infection, are not increased compared with rates reported for locking plate fixation alone. Although the reported follow-up periods have been short, using an intramedullary allograft does appear to effectively prevent failure from the loss of reduction and varus collapse. In the study by Neviaser et al., the loss of reduction was only observed in one patient To summarise the results of the studies included in this work, medial support screws as well as cement augmentation and bone grafting can enhance the primary stability of locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Although the evidence is weak, all of these strategies appear to have a positive effect on achieving and maintaining the stable reduction even of complex fractures. Because they do not require a more extensive approach and no adverse events are expected, medial support screws should be used in all cases to support the medial column. However, further clinical studies with a higher number of patients and a higher level of evidence are required to develop a standardised treatment algorithm with regard to cement augmentation and bone grafting. Although these measures are likely to have a stabilising effect on locking plate fixation, its general use cannot yet be fully recommended. None. All other authors, their immediate families and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. There is no conflict of interest.