Triaxial strength tests were performed on artificially jointed standard-size granite specimens with two sub-vertical and three sub-horizontal (2+3) joints. A fully servo-controlled press was used to load the samples and attain residual strength. These tests add to an existing test database for intact and artificially jointed (1+2 joints) samples of the same rock. The main parameters from each test were used to analyse tendencies, in particular, changes in elasticity and peak and residual strength in line with increased jointing. Peak strength and apparent Young's modulus decreased from the intact to the jointed specimens, reflecting a tendency analogous to that deriving from the use of classification systems to characterize rock masses. Mohr-Coulomb and Hoek-Brown failure criteria were fit to peak and residual strength tests results. In the case of the Hoek-Brown criterion, it seems that an equivalent of the geological strength index (GSI), which reflects structure at the specimen scale, could be of use in estimating the decrease in strength of increasingly jointed samples. Residual strength envelopes were practically the same for the intact and jointed specimens. Our results for granite would suggest that the so-called rock mechanics scale effect at large (i.e. the relevant change in material properties from rock samples at lab scale to that of the rock mass including the occurrence of natural discontinuities at the engineering work scale), is more due to structure (number, orientation, spacing and features of occurring joints), than to sample scale effect (i.e. the variation in properties when testing different size, from a few mm to some decimetres, unjointed intact rock samples at the laboratory).The Hoek–Brown failure criterion is an empirical relation that characterizes the stress conditions that lead to failure in intact rock and rock masses. The fact that the Hoek-Brown criterion has been extensively applied with reasonable success in a wide number and variety of engineering projects all over the world would indicate that the approach is sound and conservative enough to provide appropriate designs and good explanations for questions posed in practice. Moreover, large-scale in-situ shear tests have demonstrated a reasonable degree of agreement between observed shear strength and Hoek-Brown estimates. Throughout this paper, the authors refer to scale effect at large when considering the relevant change in material properties from rock samples at lab scale to that of the rock mass including the occurrence of natural discontinuities at the engineering work scale. The authors allude to sample scale effect when considering the variation in properties when testing different specimen size – from a few mm to some decimetres – unjointed intact rock samples at the laboratory. The reduction in strength properties in line with diminishing rock mass quality reflected in the Hoek-Brown approach tends to imply strength reduction in line with undifferentiated sample scale and jointing. At smaller scales, for specimens measuring from a few centimetres up to one meter, a significant strength reduction (up to 70% of the original value) was evident for coal Starting from the classical Hoek-Brown idealized diagram showing the transition from intact to increasingly heavily jointed rock mass, It should be clear that (1) although circles Although this mode of thinking may be considered speculative, it remains the case that there have been only some efforts to perform complete triaxial testing of rock specimens from the same rock but with different simple structures. Previous studies of the behaviour of jointed rock models are reviewed in the following section, to put forward the drawbacks and advantages of the presented set of tests in the context of jointed rock models. This article describes triaxial testing results for complete stress-strain curves in intact and differently structured granite specimens, whose interpretation could provide insights into rock and rock mass behaviour. Physical model experiments on the mechanics of jointed rocks to study their strength and deformability appeared in the literature in the 1960s with the seminal study by John. Einstein and co-workers Brown and Trollope Ladanyi and Archambault Interpretation of these results by Hoek Although the authors of this paper do not fully agree with the statement above, it is clear that in practice there is not usually a crystal clear simple mechanism explaining the observed response of jointed rock systems but a combination of mechanisms producing a strength response. In this sense, the authors consider that the results presented need not to be assigned to particular failure mechanism – in fact, they combine various mechanisms – and they have a value by themselves in that they can be interpreted from different scopes. Ramamurthy and Arora Singh et al. Kulatilake and his co-workers These cited above and other several studies have been conducted and reflected in the literature on jointed rock mass physical model behaviour, even if many of them do not seem to have been adopted in engineering practice. They encompass both persistent In the present study, two sets of perpendicular joints were cut in cylindrical rock specimens. These joints were oriented in samples in order to avoid slip through them. Accordingly, sub-horizontal joints were cut forming an angle of roughly 22° with the sample bases, a value smaller than the tested friction angle slightly over 30°. This was done to make sliding through joints statically impossible, accounting for the response of a sample with a joint as described, for instance, in Brady and Brown Although the here presented tests only include two sets of persistent joints cut in particular orientations and tested in one direction, this study differentiates from previous approaches in various aspects. Blocks are made up of an intact hard rock instead of plaster or other engineered typically weak materials; samples present a standard size that makes it comparable to intact rock tests; various unloading-loading cycles are performed in every test to reflect post-failure evolution and, finally, various tests are carried out for every stress conditions to ensure representativeness. The testing equipment has been described elsewhere The tested rock was a bright, white-coloured, coarse-grained granite rock locally known as Blanco Mera. This rock has previously been geologically and chemically characterized and tested, both on intact Preparation of the 54-mm diameter jointed specimens has also been described elsewhere. The low sub-horizontal angle was chosen to avoid sliding through the joints, as otherwise, strength results would be controlled, not by the general structure, but by joint strength, as reported in other studies. Dershowitz and Herda In addition to the tests performed on intact and 1+2 jointed specimens, Radial strain was computed from axial strain as measured by means of two LVDTs and volumetric strain as derived from fluid and platen displacement. The tests were performed with unloading-reloading cycles in order to check that failure criteria were evolving, that is, once peak strength was attained, to check — for every forward reloading cycle — that peak axial stress marked the strength of the yielded rock characterized by a particular damage level or plastic parameter. The unloading-reloading cycles were also used to obtain the irrecoverable strain locus. This locus, linking the lowest volumetric strain values of the cycles ( The specimens were photographed before ( A significant and fairly constant decrease in strength was observed from intact to 1+2 jointed specimens and even more so to 2+3 jointed specimens (  Given the number of studies that are currently investigating rock mass behaviour by means of advanced numerical techniques,  It is interesting to note the greater classical initial concave curvature of the axial stress-axial strain curves observed in the fissured samples, particularly in the unloading and reloading cycles. It seems logical that this phenomenon, traditionally attributed to the closure of micro-cracks, might be more evident in a tested sample with more sub-horizontal joints. Since Blanco Mera is a brittle granite, in unconfined tests on intact rock it was difficult to control the failure of the samples and achieve the kind of stable transition from peak to residual strength that occurs with more confined cases and jointed samples. This would suggest that the rate of strength loss observed in unconfined and less confined tests may be influenced by hydraulic press velocity. However, although stress–strain relationships during the strength loss portion of the tests may not be considered reliable for this rock type, the axial–radial strain relationships should still be representative. After strength loss and once the press could control stable unloading–reloading cycles, the stress–strain relationships shown once again became representative. Results for the 2+3 jointed samples were analysed together with results — published elsewhere Apparent tangent and secant elastic Young's moduli The apparent elastic Young's moduli as plotted against confining stress ( Noteworthy is the significant impact of confinement on elastic moduli, corroborating different studies that have reported this dependency, whether in laboratory experiments, It is well known that the elastic modulus of a jointed rock mass depends on geotechnical quality. Introducing, in Eq. The apparent Poisson's ratio, unlike the elastic modulus, remained fairly constant for variable confining stress in tests on intact specimens. For the jointed sample tests, the corresponding ratios showed greater variability in slightly confined tests and lesser variability in confined tests in the range 8–12 The scatter in the elastic parameters may appear significant. Coefficients of variation are in the range 10% and 13%, for the intact rock tangent and secant moduli. These are slightly higher than those derived by Santi et al. Peak strength for each test (see For the 2+3 jointed samples, two different relative orientations of the joints — normal and angular — were configured ( It is common to use linear regression for fitting the Mohr-Coulomb criterion to peak strength data in the However, recognising that in each experiment And the regression model becomes The Mohr-Coulomb failure peak criterion fits relatively well to the results for all the tests, with coefficients of determination ( Note that the statistical significance for fitting intact rock data (particularly high due to sample homogeneity) was not much higher than that for fitting jointed rock data. This would suggest that it should be possible to develop a reasonably accurate method for predicting strength based on sampled rock properties and structure. The Hoek-Brown failure criterion in its simplest form ( The regression model for fitting this criterion to the data becomes:  For the jointed specimens, the fact that values for In order to estimate strength for jointed specimens, it would seem more reasonable to treat these as small-scale rock masses and assign them a GSI that would enable application of the generalized Hoek-Brown failure criterion for rock masses, Note that The generalized Hoek-Brown failure criterion was fit to the peak strength results for the jointed specimens using nonlinear regression. We first fitted Eq. Alternatively, it is possible to first substitute Eq. In view of Martin et al. A reduction in strength to 70% of UCS associated to sample scale effect was finally adopted according to the following reasoning. Martin et al., Some researchers consider that computing residual strength is not practical, since it strongly depends on inhomogeneous deformation modes (bifurcation and localization) that are greatly controlled by boundary conditions. However, other authors have shown that residual strength is important in practice and that it seems to tend to a particular value. The procedure for estimating residual strength was not as straightforward as for the case of peak strength. First it was estimated for each test as the strength value for an axial strain of 30 millistrain (the typical endpoint of our tests) when an increase in the last 5 millistrain did not produce any significant decrease in strength (5 On the other hand, residual strength results for the different jointed and unjointed specimens tended to coincide. The residual strength for the two types of jointed specimens compared to the intact specimens seemed to increase slightly with confining stress, possibly attributable to the appearance, in the jointed samples, of macroscopic failure traces combining existing joints and new shear bands ( The Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion fitted the residual strength data reasonably well in all the tests. The generalized Hoek-Brown failure criterion was fitted by means of the GSI to the residual strength data. We obtained a value of Residual strength values for all the tests were more or less the same in terms of compressive strength or GSI-equivalent. This is possible evidence of no significant structural effect and also probably indicates no scale effect. Similar observations were reported by Exdaktylos and Tsoutrelis Cai et al. Closer analysis of the residual strength data shows that the GSI-equivalent for the jointed specimens increased with confining stress, but remained more or less constant for the intact specimens ( The authors have presented in this manuscript a suite of jointed rock model tests with standard size specimens. The presented tests include only two sets of persistent joints tested in one direction. However, unlike previous studies, blocks are made of real rock, various unloading-loading cycles are included in every test and test repetition is performed for every stress condition. Results are computed based on average measured stresses and strains as recovered by the system. The mechanical response described through the continuum concepts of average stress and strain does not imply, according to the authors, testing of a representative volume element. A simple interpretation in terms of observed deformability and strength at the scale of the sample is given in typical Mohr-Coulomb and Hoek-Brown axes. The data provided can contribute to bring out methodologies for more rational estimates of strength and deformability of rock masses or jointed rock elements in line with developments by Ramamurthy and Arora, Interpretation of previous studies by Ladanyi and Archambault More theoretically advanced frameworks can be used to study the observed phenomena, for instance studying the initiation and development of shear bands or axial splitting zones and their interaction with pre-existing joints in line with developments by Riedel and Labuz. In view of the results of tests on intact and jointed specimens as described above, empirical correlations For a standard 4-m diameter tunnel excavated in a granite rock mass with a regular pattern of normal discontinuities and fair surface quality, a GSI of around 60 would be obtained for spacing of 0.9 These results would suggest that, at the engineering scale, once the sample scale effect was accounted for — by considering 70% of the computed peak strength value — the stress-strain response would be that of equivalent rock masses. It can therefore be concluded that the testing of jointed samples, as performed in the research described above, can contribute insights to rock mass behaviour. Note that, as happens with rock joints, peak strength but not residual strength seems to be affected by scale. Results for laboratory studies regarding the impact of structure on peak and residual strength and deformability of intact and jointed granite specimens indicate that changes in deformability and strength in these small-scale rock masses and the results for 2+3 jointed samples generally follow the tendencies derived from 1+2 jointed samples. Peak strength and elastic Young's modulus clearly depend on jointing, and peak strength also seems to be somewhat dependent on sample scale. The level of fracturing (joint intensity, GSI at a larger scale) can therefore be used to observe the evolution of these parameters in particular circumstances. The fact that residual strength does not seem to be much affected by the degree of initial jointing, as suggested by other authors, Our results suggest that strength and stiffness reduction in hard rock masses is more significantly linked to structure than to sample scale. Small samples with a structure homothetic to large-scale rock masses could thus provide useful information on rock mass behaviour at the engineering scale. Further laboratory studies of different rocks with different jointing patterns would contribute to identifying which components of strength reduction from laboratory to engineering site are related to sample size and to rock structure. The authors thank the