Developing an economical algae harvesting system still remains a challenge today. One of the strategies to decrease harvesting costs prior conversion is employing technologies that can have additional benefits apart of separation. In this work we explore ozoflotation as a technique to recover microalgae grown in treated wastewater and we evaluate the effect of ozone on lipid and FAME recoveries. A high percentage of biomass can be harvested (79.6% as TSS) when using an ozone dose of 0.23 mg/mg of dried biomass. Additionally, two interesting effects of ozone were found in this study. The amount of lipid extracted and FAME recovered from the biomass, at least, doubles when using ozoflotation (with ozone doses of 0.12–0.23 mg/mg of dried biomass) than when using centrifugation. And, the oxidative stability of biodiesel can be enhanced by the effect that ozone has in the degree of FAME saturation.In recent years, there has been increased research in the potential of using microalgae for biodiesel production. One of the limitations in the microalgae process is the operational costs needed before obtaining biodiesel. Reusing wastewater has been proposed as a way to decrease microalgae growth costs, as a nutrient removal from wastewater and carbon sequestration can also be achieved. Pittman et al. After growth, biomass harvesting, is estimated to account between 20 and 30% of total biodiesel production costs One of the strategies to decrease harvesting costs prior conversion is employing technologies that can perform several treatments apart from separation. In this case, the harvesting of microalgae grown in wastewater could be combined with water treatment by using technologies that perform both. Ozoflotation is a process currently utilized in wastewater treatment when separation needs to be combined with organic matter oxidation. In this ozoflotation process, bubbles of ozone, provided by diffusers, adhere to suspended solids (e.g. microalgae), break the superficial tension, and travel to the upper part of the bulk liquid to be physically separated. There have been previous reports using ozoflotation for microalgae separation in drinking water, to ensure that the toxic metabolites produced by microalgae are oxidized in water for drinking purposes There is limited literature on the use of ozone for harvesting microalgae. However, the concept of combining the oxidizing properties of ozone with flotation process has been applied by Van Vuuren et al. Separation of microalgae using ozoflotation is advantageous over dissolved air flotation and gas bubble flotation because it does not require a flocculant or to lower the pH Eight sampling visits were done during the months of Autumn (September, October, November) and Spring (February, March and April) to the Nabor Carrillo Lake located in Texcoco. In the visits, fresh treated wastewater containing native mixed microalgae were sampled from the lake and immediately used for experiments. The Lake is located in a high salinity soil and receives effluent from a wastewater treatment plant consisting of two facultative lagoons. Water characterization was done according to Standard Methods for the examination of water and wastewater Ozoflotation experiments were conducted immediately after sampling, using 950 ml of fresh homogenized treated wastewater containing a native culture of microalgae. Batch flotation tests were performed in a glass column reactor (height: 66 cm; inner diameter: 4.9) designed for microalgae ozoflotation with a volume of 1.3 L. Ozone was generated in a LABO 76, (Emery-Trailigaz Co., USA), using oxygen-enriched air as a feeding gas (90% ± 5% purity) which was supplied by an Air Separator AS-12 (AirSep Co., USA). Ozone was injected using a glass diffuser (10–15 μm pore-size) located at the bottom of the reactor. During the experiment the foam formed accumulated microalgae at the top of the reactor and was collected using a side exit connected to a collection vessel. Once the contact time finished and microalgae biomass were separated, the turbidity, microalgae concentration and total suspended solids of the remaining bulk liquid (wastewater) were measured again. A factorial experimental design 3 TSS and turbidity removal efficiencies obtained from the experimental design were analysed using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine the significance of tested variables in ozoflotation. A Fisher's Least Significant Difference (LSD) test at Ozoflotation effect on microalgae lipid extraction and FAME production were evaluated by changing the ozone concentration in the gas phase and fixing the ozone contact time to 5 min and flowrate to 0.4 L/min. In this case, a wide range of applied ozone doses were evaluated (0–140 mgO Algal samples collected by ozoflotation were centrifuged at 15,000× Lipids contained in dried microalgae samples were converted to FAME by the one-step FAME extraction as used previously by our group Gas chromatography was used to quantify and profile the FAME produced. The gas chromatograph used was the Hewlett Packard 5890 series II fitted with a FID detector. The run time selected was 30 min using helium as a carrier gas. Air and hydrogen input pressures were set at 48.26 kPa, 220.63 kPa and 151.68 kPa, respectively and column head pressure was fixed at 31.03 kPa. A sample of the upper layer (250 mg) was mixed with 250 μl of the standard solution (C17:0 Sigma Aldrich, 10 mg/ml) in a 2 ml vial. Before injecting 5 μl of the sample mixture, 5 μl of methanol and 5 μl of standard solution (C17:0) were sequentially injected to ensure a clean column, and to check C17 retention time and purity. All data was collected using DataApex Clarity software. Once all samples were injected, 3 μl of the grain FAME mix (Sigma Aldrich, 10 mg/ml) were analysed to enable classification of the peaks obtained. FAME concentrations were obtained as a mass fraction in percent of the total sample weight (including methanol), using the following equation: ∑     It has been demonstrated that microalgae can successfully grow in wastewater and produce biomass with high lipid content, suitable for biofuel production, with the added benefit of wastewater treatment  The effect of ozone on the cells was observed after 2 min of gas contact time, when the biomass began to produce a foam in the top of the reactor and a concentrate started to be released into the collection vessel. A similar effect was reported by Cheng et al.   The results of this study compared with those published by other authors are shown in The purpose of harvesting algae by ozoflotation is to obtain biodiesel precursor lipids in the algal biomass, therefore the effect of ozone on total lipid content was determined. When the microalgae biomass was harvested by centrifugation, the amount of extracted lipids was 2.35% and 5.85%, in Autumn and Spring, respectively. The amount of extracted lipids, increased with the ozoflotation according to the applied ozone dose ( The types of FAME obtained by transesterification of lipids from microalgal biomass for the two seasons (Autumn and Spring) are shown in  Nabor Carrillo Lake fed with secondary effluent presented a variety of microalgae cultures. Authors thank Isaura Yañez-Noguez for fitting the technique to identify microalgae. This research was supported by the Project 3302 of International Cooperation Fund of the Instituto de Ingeniería, UNAM.