This study is dedicated to characterising the chemical composition and biochemical methane potential (BMP) of individual material fractions in untreated Danish source-separated organic household waste (SSOHW). First, data on SSOHW in different countries, available in the literature, were evaluated and then, secondly, laboratory analyses for eight organic material fractions comprising Danish SSOHW were conducted. No data were found in the literature that fully covered the objectives of the present study. Based on laboratory analyses, all fractions were assigned according to their specific properties in relation to BMP, protein content, lipids, lignocellulose biofibres and easily degradable carbohydrates (carbohydrates other than lignocellulose biofibres). The three components in lignocellulose biofibres, i.e. lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose, were differentiated, and theoretical BMP (TBMP) and material degradability (BMP from laboratory incubation tests divided by TBMP) were expressed. Moreover, the degradability of lignocellulose biofibres (the share of volatile lignocellulose biofibre solids degraded in laboratory incubation tests) was calculated. Finally, BMP for average SSOHW composition in Denmark (untreated) was calculated, and the BMP contribution of the individual material fractions was then evaluated. Material fractions of the two general waste types, defined as “food waste” and “fibre-rich waste,” were found to be anaerobically degradable with considerable BMP. Material degradability of material fractions such as vegetation waste, moulded fibres, animal straw, dirty paper and dirty cardboard, however, was constrained by lignin content. BMP for overall SSOHW (untreated) was 404mL CH4 per g VS, which might increase if the relative content of material fractions, such as animal and vegetable food waste, kitchen tissue and dirty paper in the waste, becomes larger.In Europe, the biological treatment of organic household waste is stipulated due to both waste management and energy production strategies; anaerobic digestion (AD) is the main technology suggested for application in this respect ( In Denmark, the AD of source-separated organic household waste (SSOHW) is going to be implemented, and consequently there is a need for good data on the quality of different organic waste material fractions, especially in the form of BMP. A thorough assessment of Danish SSOHW in relation to BMP was previously performed by Another issue related to the source-separation of organic household waste is determining which material fractions should be accepted for SSOHW. According to sorting guidelines used in different countries, allocation to SSOHW of materials rich in fibres (e.g. vegetation and paper waste) may vary significantly. For instance, paper waste, such as kitchen towels, is accepted in the United Kingdom, Finland and Denmark ( The main objective of this study is to provide characterisation data in terms of chemical composition and BMP for individual material fractions in untreated Danish SSOHW. First, SSOHW data from different countries, available in the literature, were evaluated. Secondly, laboratory analyses for eight organic material fractions comprising Danish SSOHW were conducted, in which BMP and composition regarding the content of different organic components such as proteins, lipids, lignocellulose biofibres, easily degradable carbohydrates (carbohydrates other than lignocellulose biofibres) and volatile fatty acids (VFA) were determined. For lignocellulose biofibres, the three components therein, i.e. lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose, were differentiated. Based on the occurrence of all the components mentioned above (proteins, lipids, lignin, cellulose, hemicellulose and easily degradable carbohydrates) the theoretical BMP (TBMP) was estimated for each material fraction. The material degradability (the BMP from laboratory incubation tests divided by TBMP) and the degradability of lignocellulose biofibres (the share of volatile solids of lignocellulose biofibres degraded in laboratory incubation tests) were calculated, in order to establish the relevance and readiness of each material fraction for AD treatment and subsequently for being included as a part of SSOHW. Finally, the BMP for average SSOHW composition in Denmark (untreated) was calculated and the BMP contribution of the individual material fractions evaluated. The literature review compiled SSOHW data relevant to the work conducted in the present study on waste characterisation analysis. Data related to waste BMP were in focus, i.e. waste composition regarding the content of total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), organic components (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and VFA), carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), nitrogen (N)-content, which alternatively could be applied to estimate the TBMP of material fractions, the BMP as well as material degradability were included. International scientific articles and reports dealing with waste characterisation were reviewed. The targeted waste streams in the literature search were SSOHW (untreated as well as after any type of physical pre-treatment, e.g. screw press) and individual material fractions comprising the waste. Studies investigating single food waste products (e.g. banana peels) were excluded. Based on commonplace Danish sorting guidelines (e.g. The fractional composition of untreated Danish SSOHW was investigated by SSOHW for material characterisation and analysis was collected from 83 single-family households located in Halsnæs municipality in Denmark. The area represents one of the most well-functioning practices of SSOHW in Denmark that involves provision of biodegradable waste collection bags to the households by a local waste management authority. Regarding individual material fractions accepted for SSOHW in this area, sorting guidelines according to In the present study, the direct waste analysis method based on hand-sorting of the collected waste into material fractions, as in For AFW, VFW, KT and AS, the sample amounts were still too large to allow for sample preparation for chemical analysis. As a consequence, sample size reduction was performed following several representative sampling techniques used also by For BMP determination, the batch incubation test method suggested by Material composition regarding the contents of proteins, lipids, VFA, lignocellulose biofibres and easily-degradable carbohydrates was established as follows. Protein content was calculated by multiplying organic nitrogen (N organic) by a factor 6.25 that is deviated from a N-content of 16% in the total protein ( The TBMP of individual material fractions was calculated as the weighted average of the specific TBMP of each organic component distinguished, i.e. proteins, lipids and carbohydrates. The VFA contents detected in the present study were negligible for all the material fractions, as seen in Section To express the share of degradable lignocellulose biofibres, differences between measured BMP and TBMP deriving from proteins, lipids and easily-degradable carbohydrates (organic components that under batch conditions might degrade fully) were evaluated. Positive differences (obtained when measured BMP was greater than TBMP) were assumed to originate from the cellulose and hemicellulose of lignocellulose biofibres. Using a TBMP of cellulose (i.e. 415 BMP for the overall SSOHW was calculated as a weighted average based on the BMP and the physio-chemical properties (i.e. TS and VS) of the individual material fractions, as established in the present study. This was supplemented by the average fractional composition of Danish SSOHW, as presented earlier (see  Most of the studies analysed pre-treated SSOHW samples ( Regarding data quality, differences regarding characterisation properties presented in different studies were observed. These were most evident for the lignocellulose biofibres, because all three components comprising them (i.e. lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose) were rarely quantified. For instance, in For overall (untreated) SSOHW (as analysed by As noted, no dataset fully satisfying the purposes of the present study, i.e. characterisation of individual material fractions in Danish SSOHW, could be found in the literature. The most comprehensive data setup was for SSOHW in Japan ( Individual waste material fractions in Danish SSOHW were characterised in relation to the chemical composition of proteins, lipids and carbohydrates as well as BMP. This chemical composition was determined based on a number of chemical analyses on homogenised waste samples of each material fraction. The BMP was determined using a laboratory batch incubation test as described in the methodology Section    In general, the BMPs obtained in the present study were comparable to those reported in the literature, as presented earlier in Section Regarding material degradability, no direct comparison was possible, since the units used in the two studies were different, i.e. percentage share of TBMP achieved in batch tests in the present study and percentage VS removed in A share of lignocellulose biofibres was assumed to be degraded when the BMP measured in the batch incubation test was larger than the TBMP calculated from proteins, lipids and easily degradable carbohydrates. As can be seen from  For average Danish SSOHW (untreated), a BMP of 104 The BMP per tonne of wet weight for individual SSOHW material fractions can be calculated from The BMP of untreated Danish SSOHW cannot be characterised based solely on available data in the literature. In most cases, only pre-treated SSOHW is characterised in the literature, and data on untreated SSOHW, as well as on individual material fractions, is scarce. In order to characterise individual material fractions in SSOHW, data from Japan are the most comprehensive. To apply these data to characterisation, Danish SSOHW differences in waste composition between the two countries need to be considered. In the present study, individual material fractions with the potential to generate methane gas and to contribute to Danish SSOHW in considerable quantities were investigated. All fractions were found to have their own specific properties regarding BMP and chemical composition. Material fractions of the two general waste types defined herein – food waste and fibre-rich waste – were found to be anaerobically degradable with considerable BMP. Therefore, even fibre-rich waste fractions might be sufficiently degradable for AD and therefore allowed for SSOHW. For material fractions other than animal food waste and kitchen tissue, pre-treatment aimed at increasing the availability of cellulose and hemicellulose for degradation may be relevant. Based on the results obtained in the present study, untreated Danish SSOHW was assigned with a BMP value of 404 This study was partly financially supported by the