Objective
                  This study aims to investigate the risk of total knee replacement (TKR) following tibia plateau fractures. Secondary the study aims to investigate the risk of knee arthroscopy following tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Method
                  The study was designed as a matched cohort study. All patients who sustained a tibial plateau fracture in Denmark between January 1, 1996, and December 31, 2000, were included and followed until December 31, 2015. For each patient with a tibial plateau fracture, 10 matched citizens without a tibial plateau fracture were included as a reference group.
               
                  Results
                  7,950 patients sustained a tibial plateau fracture in Denmark during the study period. The median age of patients was 52.6 (IQR: 32.4–71.5) years. The mean observational period was 13.9 years. 5.7% were treated with a TKR (N = 452), and 2.0% of patients from the reference group were treated with a TKR (N = 1,623). Patients with a tibial plateau fracture had a 3.5 (95%CI: 3.1–3.9) times higher hazard ratio (HR) compared to patients from the reference group. 7.6% of patients with a tibial plateau fracture were treated with a secondary knee arthroscopy (N = 603) and 2.0% of patients from the reference group were treated with a knee arthroscopy (N = 1,565). Patients with a tibial plateau fracture presented with a 5.0 (95%CI: 4.5–5.6)) times higher HR compared to patients in the reference group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Tibial plateau fractures are associated with a 3.5 times increased risk of TKR compared with an age- and gender-matched reference group with a mean follow-up of 13.9 years.Fractures of the tibial plateau are reported with an incidence of 10.3/100,000/year A common and well-known complication following tibial plateau fractures is an increased risk of post-traumatic knee osteoarthritis total knee replacement (TKR) as a salvage procedure in the treatment of patients with end-stage knee osteoarthritis is widely accepted Intra-articular soft tissue lesions and restrictions in knee joint motion following tibial plateau fractures are commonly reported The primary question is: What is the national risk of TKR following tibia plateau fractures regardless of treatment modalities compared to an age- and gender-matched reference group without a prior tibial plateau fracture? The secondary questions were to investigate the incidence of secondary knee arthroscopy following a tibial plateau fracture and compare this to an age- and gender-matched reference group without a prior tibial plateau fracture. A further secondary question was to compare the time to TKR and secondary arthroscopy following a tibial plateau fracture compared to that of the age- and gender-matched reference group. The study was designed as a matched cohort study. Prospectively obtained registry data including all citizens of Denmark were used. All patients who sustained a tibial plateau fracture in Denmark between January 1, 1996, and December 31, 2000, were included and followed until December 31, 2015, regarding treatment with TKR and/or secondary knee arthroscopy. Secondary knee arthroscopy was defined as all knee arthroscopy procedures performed at least 30 days after the primary operation. Arthroscopic procedures performed during primary operative treatment of the tibial plateau fracture were excluded from this analysis. Danish law requires that all patient contacts with hospital and outpatient clinics in Denmark are registered in the Danish National Patient Register The Danish Data Protection Agency approved the study (J. nr. 2008-58-0028, Id: 2016-176). A full study protocol and study analysis plan was published online before the start of the study The group of patients with a tibial plateau fracture was identified through a retrospective review in the Danish National Patient Register. All Danish citizens registered with a tibial plateau fracture between January 1, 1996, and December 31, 2000, were included. Information regarding gender and age at the time of fracture was registered. Patients with prior tibial plateau fractures and TKR were excluded from the study. All patients were followed with regard to surgery with TKR and/or secondary arthroscopic surgery of the knees throughout the observational period. The matched reference group consisted of individuals identified from the Civil Registration System matched to the tibial plateau patient group on age and gender. For each patient with a tibial plateau fracture, 10 matched citizens were included. Both groups were censored in case of emigration from the country or at the end of follow-up. Death was considered a competing event as was receiving a TKR when considering secondary knee arthroscopy as the outcome. The primary outcome was treatment with a TKR. The secondary outcome was treatment with secondary knee arthroscopy. The risk of experiencing a TKR was assessed using cumulative incidence proportions which were calculated using the Aalen-Johansen estimator The effect of tibial plateau fracture on the incidence of TKR was performed using a Cox proportional hazards regression model comparing the group of patients with tibial plateau fractures and the matched reference group. The effect estimate was reported as a hazard ratio (HR) with a corresponding 95% confidence interval to estimate the incidence rate ratio. Results from the crude analysis without adjustments were reported. Furthermore, we repeated the analysis stratified by age groups (0–50, 51+) and gender. To investigate the assumption of proportional hazards, the follow-up time is divided into 5-year periods. Additional analyses were performed to investigate the effect of tibial plateau fracture on the secondary outcome (secondary knee arthroscopy) following the same methods as for the main analysis except that TKR, in addition to death, was considered a competing event for secondary arthroscopy. All analyses were performed using Stata statistical software (StataCorp LP), and the significance level for analyses (α) was set to 0.05. A total of 7,950 patients sustained a tibial plateau fracture in Denmark during the study period. The matched reference group consists of 79,300 citizens. Only 13 patients with a tibial plateau fracture were matched by age and gender with less than nine citizens from the reference group (0.16%). The median age of patients was 52.6 (IQR: 32.4–71.5) years. The gender distribution was 56.4% women and 43.6% men. The mean observational period was 13.9 years. The analysis showed that 5.7% of patients with a tibial plateau fracture were treated with a TKR ( Patients with a tibial plateau fracture had a 3.5 (95%CI: 3.1–3.9) times higher HR compared to patients from the reference group. The effect was highest during the first 5 years after the fracture (HR: 8.6 (95%CI: 7.1–10.3)) ( The cumulative incidence of TKR during the entire observational period expressed for the two groups is shown in Both men and women presented with a significantly increased incidence of TKR in patients with a tibial plateau fracture compared with the reference group. Compared to men, women presented with an increased incidence of TKR throughout the observational period. The incidence of TKR for women showed a substantial increase during the first 5 years compared to men. The age group above 50 years presented with a substantially increased risk of TKR compared to the age group below 50 years ( The analysis showed that 7.6% of patients with a tibial plateau fracture were treated with a secondary knee arthroscopy ( Patients with a tibial plateau fracture presented with a 5.0 (95%CI: 4.5–5.6) times higher HR compared to patients in the reference group. As for TKR, the effect was highest during the first 5 years after the tibial plateau fracture. (HR: 9.7 (95%CI: 8.5–11.0)) ( The cumulative incidence of secondary knee arthroscopy throughout the observational period is shown in The analyses of age and gender differences in the incidence of knee arthroscopy show that men presented with increased risk during the first 5 years compared to women, with almost equal risk of receiving a knee arthroscopy past 5 years. The analysis of age differences showed that the age group below 50 years of age presented with considerably increased risk compared to the age group above 50 years of age ( This large-scale matched cohort study based on high-quality data showed that patients following a tibial plateau fracture increase the likelihood of TKR 3.5 times and knee arthroscopy 5.0 times. By a mean of 13.9 years follow-up, 5.7% of patients were treated with a TKR, and 7.9% with knee arthroscopy. The incidence of TKR and knee arthroscopy was highest during the first 5 years following the tibial plateau fracture. These findings indicated a long-lasting elevated risk of knee pain and decreased knee function in patients following a tibial plateau fracture. The association between tibial plateaus fracture and TKR have been discussed extensively in the literature. However, most available studies are limited by small samples, short follow-up periods, and methodological quality. Recently, a study by Wasserstein This study showed that patients following a tibial plateau fracture presented with an increased likelihood of TKR throughout life. However, end-stage osteoarthritis and treatment with TKR are rare. In the present study, 5.7% of patients were treated with TKR by a mean of 13.9 years follow-up. Investigating the association between a tibial plateau fracture and subsequent treatment with TKR is challenging due to the rarity and the long-term follow-up needed to capture the development of end-stage osteoarthritis. To the author's knowledge, the present study presented the largest cohort and longest follow-up of patients following a tibial plateau fracture. Although the incidence of knee arthroscopy in patients with knee osteoarthritis is decreasing, the operative procedure is still common before treatment with TKR Nevertheless, the present study included the entire Danish population of patients with tibial plateau fractures and compared this to a 10-fold non-exposed age- and gender-matched control group; some important limitations may be addressed. Information regarding laterality of tibial plateau fracture, TKR, and secondary arthroscopy is missing as side-specific information was not mandatory in the Danish National Patient Register. This is a limitation, and as a result, the ipsilateral risk of TKR and arthroscopy is likely higher than the risk estimates reported in the present study. Moreover, clinical information regarding comorbidity, fracture severity, treatment methods, and outcomes is not available from the register. It is likely that such clinical factors may affect secondary treatment with TKR and knee arthroscopy in subgroups In conclusion, tibial plateau fractures are associated with a 3.5 times increased risk of TKR and a 5.0 times increased risk of secondary knee arthroscopy compared with an age- and gender-matched reference group with a mean follow-up of 13.9 years. Larsen, Elsoe and Johansen contributed all to the conception and design of this work. Larsen, Elsoe and Johansen contributed to analysis and interpretation of the data. Johansen contributed the data analysis. All authors were involved in drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content, and granted final approval of the manuscript. The authors declared no conflicts of interest. None. The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at