There is an increasing demand for the use of high performance concrete in buildings to reduce significant damage due to extreme loadings. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) with their superior properties are among new materials, which can be used in concrete members. A hierarchical multiscale approach is adopted in this research to obtain the monotonic behavior of CNT-reinforced concrete, noting that, to the best knowledge of the authors, no experimental results are available for its monotonic behavior. At the nano scale, the mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes (CNT) is derived by the molecular dynamics approach. Afterwards, a micromechanical finite element method is adopted at the micro scale to determine the stress-strain curve of CNT-reinforced cement. The whole structure of a concrete sample, including all its major phases, is simulated at the meso scale by the finite element method. Finally, at the macro scale, the monotonic behavior of a concrete column made of CNT-reinforced cement is studied. The results of simulations indicate that by increasing the volume fractions of CNTs, the energy absorption capacity, the curvature ductility and the ultimate moment capacity of the CNT-reinforced concrete columns increase significantly.Concrete buildings, which are amongst the most common structures, are vulnerable to earthquakes. There is an universal increasing demand for production of effective and efficient types of modified concrete material to reduce damages caused by severe earthquakes. Columns at lower stories of the buildings play a significant role in ductile behavior of concrete structures during earthquakes. These columns should provide sufficient ductility, load-carrying capacity and large plastic deformations without major loss of strength. Unfortunately, low tensile strength, cracking and brittleness of concrete at the plastic hinges of columns result in strength degradation and consequently, the overall behavior of structure may become unstable. Consequently, production of concrete material, which possess high energy absorption capacity while is nearly immune to the high level of damage, is desirable. Recently, several methods have been developed to increase the strength, ductility, and damage tolerance of concrete columns against cyclic loadings. Implementation of different types of fiber reinforced concrete (FRC) The primary focus of this study is to investigate the effect of adding a new class of reinforcing material for concrete at the nano scale, called carbon nanotubes (CNTs), on the monotonic behavior of CNT-reinforced concrete columns (CNRC) through a series of finite element simulations. CNTs are hollow cylindrical atomic structures made of carbon atoms at the nanoscale, which were first discovered by Iijima Due to the fact that, to the best knowledge of the authors, no report is available on the experimental behavior of CNT-reinforced concrete columns, numerical simulations is a useful tool to predict their mechanical behavior. The paper begins with molecular dynamics simulation of CNTs at the nanoscale in Section At the nanoscale, the mechanical properties of CNTs under tensile and compressive loadings are derived by the molecular dynamics (MD) approach using the LAMMPS (Large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator) The results of the tensile and compressive stress-strain curves and mechanical properties of CNTs are provided in Two different responses are observed for tensile and compressive behaviors of CNTs, as depicted in At the micro scale, a 50 × 50 μm cement hydration model with the thickness of 1 μm is adopted to randomly disperse CNTs with different lengths and orientations on the surface of the cement. Matsumoto and Nishimura algorithm Four independent models are considered: a pure cement and three CNT-reinforced cement models with 1%, 2% and 3% volume fractions (VF) of CNT with 5 μm length, which are named CNT-1%, CNT-2% and CNT-3%, respectively. The results of the tensile and compressive tests are presented in At the meso scale, a 2D 100 × 100 mm concrete sample containing three major phases including, cement, large aggregate and interfacial transition zone (ITZ), is simulated. The effects of small aggregates are neglected Similar to the micro scale, an isotropic damage behavior with linear softening is assigned to the cementitious material. The thickness of ITZ layer is assumed to be 200 µm, as mentioned in earlier investigations Researchers have studied different volume fractions of aggregate in concrete such as 53% and 45% The stress-strain curves of the concrete samples are depicted in In this section, the behavior of CNT reinforced concrete columns (CNRC) under static monotonic loading is simulated and the results are compared with an ordinary reinforced concrete column (RC). The OpenSees 2.4.4 (Open Systems for Earthquake Engineering Simulation) The obtained stress-strain curves of the materials at the meso scale ( Due to the fact that in the concrete members, confined and unconfined concrete materials with different stress-strain curves are incorporated, the fiber element method is chosen to simulate their response In order to verify the simulation method, an experimental concrete column (U6) which was investigated by After imposing a constant compressive force of 600 kN to the column, a lateral quasi-static cyclic displacement, with the magnitude of 11, 23, 46, 69 and 91 mm, is applied on top of the column. The Newton-Raphson approach is implemented for nonlinear simulation. Comparison between the results of the numerical simulation and experiment is illustrated in Afterwards, based on The ratio of the ultimate to the yield curvature of the column, denoted as the curvature ductility, is calculated for each column and the results are illustrated versus CNT volume fraction in The area enclosed by the monotonic moment-curvature curve of the column indicates the amount of energy dissipation per length. The energy dissipation of the column and its ultimate moment capacities are shown in In the case of ultimate moment, it is observed that columns with smaller axial forces have higher moment capacity than columns with larger ones, however the difference is not substantial. ( In this research a hierarchical multiscale approach, including nano, micro, meso and macro scales, is adopted to investigate the mechanical properties and ductility of carbon nanotube (CNT)-reinforced concrete columns under monotonic loading. The results of the simulations at the nano scale indicate that the mechanical properties of CNTs in tension is superior than compression. At the micro and meso scales, the results indicate that increasing the volume fraction of CNTs can significantly increase the fracture energy, tensile and compressive strength of the CNT-reinforced cement and concrete. Finally, concrete columns made of different CNT volume fractions are analyzed under monotonic loading and the results reveal that CNRC sections with higher volume fraction of CNTs can sustain larger amount of curvature and lateral displacement. In addition, by increasing the axial force of the columns, the amount of dissipated energy and curvature ductility decreases. Furthermore, addition of CNTs to the concrete columns can significantly increase their energy absorption capacity. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.