In this study, an effect of microwave treatment on electrostatic separation of boron minerals namely colemanite and ulexite, obtained from Eti Mines Inc.’s Bigadic Mines in Turkey, was studied in order to determine the changes of electrostatic properties. The X-ray diffraction analyses for the samples showed that colemanite structure was not affected by microwave heat treatment till 900W power level; however ulexite structure was decomposed after 360W power level. In addition, TG/DTA results showed that colemanite started to lose its crystal water content at 370.1 (260–427)°C, whereas ulexite lost its crystal water content at 621.9 (60–855)°C. The SEM pictures for the samples also confirmed that microwave treatment affects considerably the particle surfaces in a certain level. The electrostatic separation tests for pure colemanite and ulexite minerals of 1×0.5mm size range at the 10kV, 18kV, 20kV, and 22kV applied voltages without heating and with heating at 65°C showed that the colemanite mineral particles behaved as non-conductive up to 18kV at room temperature and it kept its non-conductivity after heating it at 65°C and 22kV. On the other hand, ulexite minerals behaved as conducting at low voltage and room temperature, but it became non-conductive after heating at 65°C by increasing voltages. These results clearly indicate that separation of these two hydrated borates from each other might be possible for recovery of boron minerals in the industry due to electrostatic properties difference of colemanite and ulexite by heat treatment.Colemanite (Ca Microwave is a form of electromagnetic energy which travels in high frequency waves from 0.001 to 1 Microwave applications as a pretreatment technique in industry, particularly in mineral processing, have been used extensively ( Various applications of microwave heating have been proposed for the processing of minerals ( Although there are several studies focused on applications of microwave energy within copper, lead and zinc minerals and some coal types, there is a few studies for microwave treatment on boron minerals ( The following studies showed that ulexite was illustrated as conductive at room temperature after electrostatic separation tests, however, it gained insulating (non-conducting) properties at 80 In this study, an effect of microwave treatment on electrostatic separation of colemanite and ulexite minerals was investigated in order to determine the changes of electrostatic properties of the minerals. The chemical and mineralogical analyses were also conducted to reveal the effects of microwave energy on the mineral surfaces. Pure colemanite and ulexite samples used in this study were obtained from the Eti Mines Inc.’s Bigadic Mines. The mineral surfaces were washed by tap water for removal of clayish minerals, and dried at room temperature (22 The chemical analyses of the minerals were also performed at Eti Mines Inc.’s Bigadic Mines, and the results are presented in The X-ray diffraction analyses were also performed to determine the mineralogical structure of original and microwave treated samples using Rigaku D. Max. 2200 PC XRD 200 Vac 3g 20 A/50 The graphical results of X-ray diffraction analyses confirmed that colemanite surfaces were not significantly affected when heated up to 65 Thermo gravimetry (TG) and differential thermal analyses (DTAs) for the minerals were performed to reveal the amount of crystal water inside the lattice of these hydrated borates, the decomposition temperature of colemanite and ulexite and the mechanism of this decomposition and re-crystallization due to changes in temperature during heat applications on the samples. A Rigaku Thermal Analyzer ver. 2, 22E1 was used for this purpose. The results of TG/DTA tests on original samples and those thermally heated by a microwave oven at 360 As seen from The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) analyses were performed on the original and microwave treated samples at 360 After exposure to microwave energy at 180, 360, 540, 720, and 900 According to In these tests, three group samples of colemanite and ulexite of 100 A laboratory model electrostatic separator manufactured by Boxmag Rapid Inc. of England with max 22 The conducting properties of colemanite minerals were not changed in electrostatic separation tests without any heat treatment. Namely, in the electrostatic separation test at room temperature a very tiny amount colemanite mineral particle was attached to electrostatic separator drum. In other word all colemanite mineral particles have behaved as conductor up to 18 While a very tiny amount of colemanite was attached to separator drum without any heat treatment, the amount of attached colemanite mineral particles to the separator drum was 9.3% in the electrostatic separation tests with heating at 65 The results from the separation tests showed that ulexite minerals behaved as conductor up to 18 The results of microwave heating at 65 Consequently, the electrostatic separation of colemanite and ulexite minerals seems to be more affected by the electric field than the temperature. As known from the literature that colemanite behaves as an insulator material both with static and beam type electrodes whereas ulexite and borax and the associated clay minerals exhibit features common to conductor minerals ( The electrostatic separation tests for pure colemanite and ulexite minerals of 1 Overall, these results indicate that the change of properties from conducting to non-conducting behaviour of ulexite mineral particles might be due to crystal water loss and its degree. Due to electrostatic properties difference of colemanite and ulexite by heat treatment, separation of these two hydrated borates from each other might be possible for recovery of boron minerals in the industry. The present work was supported by the Research Fund of Istanbul University, Project Nos. UDP-13658, UDP-2531, ACIP-3609, T-576/17032006, and YADOP-6944.