Experimental studies on the influence of scraper movement on the fluidization of air dense-medium fluidized bed (ADMFB) have been conducted. The maximum bed pressure drop is about 3% when the scraper speed changes from 0 to 0.5m/s. The minimum fluidized velocity Umf decreases as the scraper speed increases. At the same time, the bed density only declines by 3.7%, and the density standard deviation decreases significantly which is mainly caused by the horizontal motion of the medium. The separation tests indicated that the most appropriate scraper speed is between 0.1m/s and 0.3m/s and it was reasonable to move the scraper at the appropriate rate to get the better separation performance.China is the largest country in terms of both the coal production and consumption, and the proportion of coal in total energy consumption has been up to about 70% ( The lab scale ADMFB system consists of a fluidized bed, a roots blower, an air bag, a rotor flow meter, a scraper system (including motor and reducer, inverter and scraper) and a pressure measuring device ( The dense media used in this study are the magnetite powders, with the true density of 4.53 In order to measure the bed pressure drop, the measuring ports of minimum fluidized velocity and bed density were drilled on the side wall of fluidized bed both in horizontal and vertical directions with the equal distance. U-tube was used to measure the pressure gap between different measuring ports. Coal particles of − If the scraper moves too fast, the light and heavy composites will be directly discharged before efficient separation. Therefore, the maximum scraper speed is determined to 0.5 The static bed height was fixed at 300 This appearing of the protuberant points can be attributed to the change of internal friction form of the medium as the result of scraper movement. The movement of scraper provides part of the energy required by the fluidization bed in the form of mechanical energy, which overcame part of the static friction among medium powders. During the conversion from static bed to fluidized bed, the friction among particles in bed converts from static friction force f The minimum fluidization velocity (U The effect of scraper movement on the value of U The bed density determines the proportion of floated and sunk materials in the separation product. The stability of bed density associates with the accuracy of separation. Thus, the measurement of the medium density for the fluidized bed with moving scraper is of great importance. In order to reflect the total density stability of the cuboids bed in this study, 9 well-distributed measuring ports are selected. The standard deviation ( As indicated in Due to the back-mixing of the dense medium powders in ADMFB ( In order to investigate the effect of scraper movement on the separation performance of ADMFB, separation tests were conducted with 500 painted tracing particles. The tracing particles were in the size of − As mentioned in  The protuberant points in fluidization characteristic curves with scraper speed of 0 is caused by the static friction force among the particles in bed, and disappeared with the movement of scraper. The bed pressure drop decreases gradually as the scraper speed increases. As the scraper speed increases from 0 The appropriated scraper speed is in the range from 0.1