In this work, the average particle size of metal organic framework (MOF) MIL-100(Fe) was modulated notably from 100nm to 20μm by changing the valence state of iron in iron sources and the amount of HF during hydrothermal reactions. The sorption capacity of MIL-100(Fe) for methylene blue (MB) increases with the particle size, and the maximum sorption capacity of the largest particles reached 1105mg/g, much higher than previous reports on MOFs. The high sorption capacity could be attributed to high surface area and suitable pore structure. Additionally, the particle size determined the adsorption rate. The smaller the particle size, the higher the adsorption rate. The adsorption isotherms were adequately fitted with the Langmuir model and the kinetic data were followed by the pseudo-second-order model. Besides, MIL-100(Fe) possessed good recyclability which can be regenerated by washing with ethanol. These results identified that MIL-100(Fe) exhibited great potential for purification of MB wastewater.Recently, the dyestuff industry has been springing up in large scale. It is reported that the dyestuff production in the world has reached 1492 thousand ton until 2013. Methylene blue (MB) is one of the most widely used dyes in textile industry. However, a high dose of MB could induce methemoglobinemia in body, tending to be poisonous and harmful to human. Thus, the water contaminated by MB needs to be tackled without second pollution. Unfortunately, the MB wastewater is difficult to degrade on account of complex aromatic structures. Moreover, owing to the development of dye technology, the dye materials could resist common oxidizing agent and traditional heating treatment In the past 20 In the present work, we prepared MIL-100(Fe) by hydrothermal reaction and investigated the influence of iron valence in iron sources (Fe 1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid (trimesic acid, H MIL-100(Fe) was synthesized mainly according to the typical hydrothermal synthesis reported by Ferey. G The small angle X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab (9) diffractometer using Cu KαX-rays at a scanning rate of 4 An aqueous solution of MB (C Adsorbents (20 To investigate the influence of pH on adsorption for MB, the pH of MB solution (200 According to the previous reports The SEM images of MIL-100(Fe) synthesized by mixed valence iron sources are shown in It is noted that the Langmuir surface area of MIL-100(Fe) is remarkable. The Ar adsorption isotherms and pore size distribution of MIL-100(Fe) samples are shown in To shed light on the mechanism why HF promotes the crystallization process, the same amount of H Generally, pyridine is used to probe the acidic strength on oxide surface The equilibrium MB solution concentrations ( The Langmuir isotherm model as well as Freundlich isotherm model was applied to depict the adsorption isotherm data of MB on MIL-100(Fe) with different particle sizes. The fitting plots are shown in In addition, the adsorption rate may be influenced by the length of the diffusion path. The particle size for all the adsorbents ranges from 100 Two classical kinetic models, the pseudo-first-order kinetic model and the pseudo-second-order kinetic model, were used to analyzing the mechanism of dye adsorption, and the results are shown in The comparison of available capacities of MOFs for adsorption of MB is shown in The ability of MIL-100(Fe)-4-3F in adsorbing other dyes including anionic dye MO and another cationic dye RhB with molecular size larger than MB have been investigated. The adsorption capacities of MIL-100(Fe)-4-3F for MO, RhB and MB under the same conditions were 233, 134 and 489 pH is one of the most important factors in adsorption from aqueous solution, therefore, the influence of the solution pH on the adsorption ability was investigated. As illustrated in The stability and recyclability of adsorbents are important factors for industrial application from the viewpoint of energy saving. The FTIR spectra of MB-adsorbed MIL-100(Fe)-4-3F and the as-synthesized MIL-100(Fe)-4-3F are shown in In summary, the surface area and suitable pore volume of MIL-100(Fe) could be controlled by changing the iron valence in iron sources and the amount of HF under hydrothermal conditions. Although the dye molecules MB could diffuse faster in the smaller crystals, the larger particle size with higher surface area and more volume of appropriate pore has higher adsorption capacity. MIL-100(Fe)-4-3F with largest particle size was observed to have highest adsorption capacity of 1105 This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 