This paper presents a numerical study on thermal shock assisted percussive drilling. For this end, a finite element based numerical approach for solving the governing thermo-mechanical problem explicitly in time is presented. Rock fracture is described in the continuum sense by a damage-viscoplasticity model with separate damage variables for tensile and compressive failure types. In the numerical simulations, an axisymmetric numerical rock is dynamically indented with a spherical tool in cases of intact and heat shocked heterogeneous rocks. In realistic simulations with an initial borehole, the heat shock treatment of rock enhances the mechanical breakage, increasing especially the tensile damaging, in unconfined and confined conditions with and without down-the-hole pressure. However, according to the simulations, down-the-hole pressure effectively prevents the thermal spallation phenomenon crucial for thermal jet drilling.Drilling, in general, is one of the basic rock excavation methods widely used, for example, in open pit mines, quarries, and construction sites. Percussive drilling, in particular, is still probably the most efficient excavation method in hard rock formations. In this method, the rock breakage is due to the dynamic indentation of the drill bit into the rock by an impact induced stress wave. As a result of these research efforts, the understanding of the fracture mechanisms behind the percussive drilling action has been increased with the ability to optimize specific drill setups. Notwithstanding, the percussive drilling method still suffers from major cost-incurring drawbacks, such as the wear of the hard metal inserts in drill bits. Accordingly, when the surface of granite rock is heated rapidly, the ensuing sharp temperature gradient induces a lateral compressive stress state into a layer adjacent to the rock surface. Consequently, the favourably oriented inherent microcracks in rock grow (by the wing crack mechanism) parallel to the surface and, when the crack reaches the critical strength, a heated fragment buckles and is ejected out as a spall (see Therefore, the combined thermal-mechanical drilling, or hybrid drilling, where the thermal weakening of the rock material facilitates the subsequent mechanical removal performed by conventional cutters, seems the most promising approach. The experimental feasibility studies by Rossi et al., Motivated by these works, the present paper considers numerically the thermal shock assisted percussive drilling described in To the best of the author's knowledge, the simulations presented here are the first ones of their kind. Therefore, the direct experimental validation cannot be carried out here due to the absence of such experiments. The experiments closest to the present simulations found in the literature are those by Mardoukhi et al. The theory of the numerical approach is presented here. First, the constitutive model based on viscoplasticity and damage mechanics is briefly explained for the convenience of the reader. Then, a solution procedure for the thermo-mechanical problem governing the thermally induced damaging of rock is outlined. Finally, the principle of the bit-rock interaction model is presented. The constitutive model for rock chosen here is the damage-viscoplasticity model originally presented by Saksala. Assuming perfectly viscoplastic behaviour for the DP and Rankine parts, the dynamic cohesion and tensile strength in Eq. Highly asymmetric behaviour of rocks in tension and compression is accounted for by separate scalar damage variables in these stress regions. The damage is chosen to be driven by the viscoplastic strain. By this choice and the perfect viscoplasticity assumption made above, both the strength and the stiffness degradation both in tension and in compression are governed by the damage part of the model. The damage part of the model is defined by equations The stress integration process of this model is illustrated in In this model, the MR and DP criteria account for tensile and compressive (shear) failures, respectively, while the viscosity accommodates the strain rate effects. Heterogeneity of rock is also included, as described later. In passing, it is noted that the DP criterion has the intermediate principal stress ( Modelling of the thermal shock drilling illustrated in The governing uncoupled thermo-mechanical problem is solved with explicit time marching. The forward Euler method is employed here leading to following equations for the new temperature and mechanical response: The modelling principle for the indentation simulation is illustrated in The bit is axially deformable (linear elastic) but laterally rigid. The dynamic indentation of the spherical bit into the rock is modelled by imposing kinematic (impenetrability) contact constraints between the bit virtual geometry and the rock. These contact constraints are of form The kinematic contact constraints are imposed with the forward increment Lagrange multiplier method, which is compatible with explicit time integrators (see Carpenter et al. The solution of Eq. Simulations are carried out in this section. First, the material parameters used in the simulations, if not otherwise stated, are given in In The viscosity values given in The drilling technical parameters are as follows: the length of the drill rod (made of steel) is 1.2 m and its diameter is 22 mm while the radius of the spherical bit depends on the particular setting and specified later. The reference simulations of dynamic indentation on intact rock are carried out in this Section. In the simulations without an initial borehole, the indenter radius ( Due to the refined mesh in the contact area, the time step dictated by the explicit time integration of the mechanical problem to keep the simulations stable is very small, of order 1E-8 s. The simulation results with a typical rectangular stress pulse with an amplitude of 200 MPa as an input load are shown in First, the results for homogeneous and heterogeneous (shown in While the deviations between homogeneous and heterogeneous numerical rocks in the reflected (at the bit-rock contact) parts of the stress pulse traveling in the drill rod are quite small, they are more pronounced in the bit force-penetration curve in As to the damage patterns in Second, the deviations between the results in The thermal shock simulations with the heterogeneous and homogeneous numerical rocks are carried out here. The heating time must be extremely short, and consequently the heat flux intensity extremely high, in order this method to be practical and competitive with the mechanical percussion drilling, where the frequency of percussions is typically tens of Hz. The initial temperature is 293 K, and the radius of the thermal jet exposed are is 5 mm. The maximum temperatures reached at the nodes subjected to the heat flux vary from 200 to 370 °C ( Heterogeneity adds some reality to the results by blurring the smooth details of the homogeneous fields and increasing the deviations between the temperature evolutions at different nodes, as can be observed in When the flux intensity is 5 MW/m The final simulation in this Section demonstrates that shorter heating times can be used if the flux intensity is increased. The simulations results for the heterogeneous rock with A clear tensile crack-like damage pattern parallel to the rock surface is attested in The dynamic indentation tests are carried out here on the heat shock treated rocks from the previous Section, excluding the simulation leading to spalling. More specifically, the thermally shocked state of rock is set to the initial state for the dynamic indentation. This means that, in addition to the damage fields and internal variable values for each element in the mesh, the temperature field from the end of the thermal shock treatment simulation is brought to the indentation simulation as an initial state. Thereby, the stress fields from the heat shock simulations, such as those in The results in Final simulation here is the dynamic indentation for the heat shocked heterogeneous rock in Despite of having more initial tensile damage (see The simulations carried out above are unrealistic in that most of the time the in-situ drilling takes place at the bottom of a borehole. Therefore, it is reasonable to study the influence of the borehole to both the heat shock and indentation induced damage. For this end, a non-structured axisymmetric mesh consisting of 18,491 four-node quadrilateral elements shown in As the radius of the initial borehole is 15 mm, the radii of the drill rod, drill bit and the area subjected to the heat shock are reset to 15 mm, 14 mm and 10 mm (see The general features of the results in With the heat flux magnitude of 5 MW/m The enhancing effect of the heat shock on the damage patterns due to dynamic indentation can be observed ( The simulations above represented drilling conditions at shallow depths. However, as many mining engineering and rock mechanics applications involve deep holes, such as drilling for geothermal heat in Scandinavia, it is or primal importance to study the effect of confinement on the resulting damage patterns. It seems, a priori, that the thermal spallation drilling is sensitive to the down-the-hole pressure as it would effectively prevent the spallation. These aspects are addressed here. First, a scenario (LC1 in With this slightly increased heat flux intensity, the temperatures at the surface nodes vary mostly between 400 °C and 500 °C ( The damage patterns induced in the intact rock shown in Finally, the effect of down-the-hole pressure (10 MPa) is tested with LC2. The results are, again, first shown for the heat shock simulation in Comparing the results in Upon close inspection of the results in Quantification and reliability of the simulation results are discussed here at some length. This is carried out by calculating the volume of the craters, which is, however, not a trivial task due to two different damage variables and their continuous nature. Therefore, in order to get some estimates to the crater volume, the following criterion is used: when It also interesting to quantify the amount of different damage types in order to see which of them is more enhanced due to the heat shock treatment. These are calculated in In terms of the crater volumes, the case without confinement and initial borehole is by far the most beneficial for the thermal shock assisted dynamic indentation. Indeed, the area of elements where the tensile damage exceeds the threshold value (0.1 The detrimental effect of the down-the-whole pressure (LC2) mentioned above becomes now clearer with the quantified analysis of the simulation results. More specifically, the crater volume and the area of damaged (due to indentation) elements, when calculated according to the criterion specified above, is slightly smaller after the heat shock than before it. However, the figures become reversed when the area of the damaged elements is calculated separately for both damage types with a less stringent threshold of 10% of the corresponding maximum damage values. Therefore, in all simulated cases there is more indentation induced damage in the rock with the heat shock treatment than without it. It should be noted here that only a single, albeit a representative, geometry in both the flat rock and the initial borehole cases was tested. However, different combinations of thermal jet diameter, and the drill bit diameter might affect the results. In any case, this kind of study of finding optimal geometry, while certainly being an important topic, is beyond the scope of the present numerical feasibility study on the concept of thermal jet assisted percussive drilling. Finally, the reliability of the present results is briefly addressed. The material model used here has been widely tested and validated in the previous studies. A numerical feasibility study on the heat shock assisted percussive drilling was presented in this paper. Putting the technological challenges related to the present study aside, the simulation results yield the following conclusions: Granitic rock can be effectively penetrated or drilled by an exploitation of thermal spalling phenomenon where the application of high intensity (~3–5 MW/m The thermal spalling phenomenon is highly sensitive to down-the-hole pressure, which effectively prevents the spallation phenomenon, thus making this drilling method ineffective. Heat shock treatment and the thermal stress field thereof enhance tensile fracturing considerably, thereby facilitating the formation of side (lateral) cracks, which is the most important failure type with respect to material removal in percussive drilling. This enhancement is much weaker for the compressive or shear fracture type. In dynamic indentation, confined conditions (overburden and lateral pressure) decrease the rock fracturing in the absence of down-the-hole pressure. Interestingly enough, when down-the-hole pressure is applied, the damage reducing effect of the same confinement becomes weaker. Heat shock treatment enhances the rock fracturing due to dynamic indentation in all cases, under confined and unconfined cases with and without down-the-hole pressure. Finally, as the present study considered only a single-button drill bit under axisymmetric conditions, a genuine 3D extension should be carried out in future. Such a study should consider the multiple-button bit in order to investigate the effect of heat shock treatment on the interaction between the side cracks induced by individual bit-buttons. Moreover, given the technological challenges related to producing the thermal jet of the present intensity are overcome, an experimental study should be also carried out in order to properly validate the present numerical approach. I declare that I do not have any conflict of interests This research was funded by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at