Excavation of long tunnels by shielded TBMs is a safe, fast, and efficient method of tunneling that mitigates many risks related to ground conditions. However, TBM applications in difficult conditions such as squeezing ground, which often happens in a combination of weaker rock and/or high depth, may lead to problems such as shield jamming. Insufficient thrust force, which cannot overcome the shield skin friction between the machine and the ground, causes shield entrapment. For successful tunneling in such conditions, it is essential to study the pertinent ground and operational factors and their impact on ground behavior, to assess the possibility of shield entrapment and to develop possible safeguards to mitigate the related risks. In this study, the controlling parameters influencing the risks of tunneling by single shield TBMs in squeezing ground are examined. For this purpose, a parametric study was performed by using a full 3D numerical simulation to quantify the influence of various factors on machine entrapment. Sensitivity analysis of most important parameters and their impacts on entrapment risks has been conducted and the results are discussed in this paper. Furthermore, nonlinear regression analysis was performed to develop a relationship between ground and machine parameters, and the required thrust force needed to overcome contact/frictional forces for propelling machine forward. The result of the modeling was compiled in a database to observe the trends and develop relationship between different parameters and risk of machine entrapment. This allows for assessment of the applicability of shield TBM in weak formations along the tunnel. Furthermore, the results of the analysis can be used to evaluate the operational parameters such as the installation of a higher thrust force to overcome contact friction loads and to make a choice between increasing the overcut or using lubricants between shield and ground. The results of this study show the role of ground conditions and in-situ stresses, as well as machine operational parameters on convergence and shield pressures.Application of Tunnel Boring Machines (TBM) in excavating long and deep tunnels has become the preferred choice of tunneling methods in recent years, as TBMs have become more adaptable to various ground conditions. To cope with difficult geological situations, single and double types of shielded TBMs were introduced. Despite successful use of these type of shielded TBMs in various fast track projects, several cases of machine entrapment have been reported when tunneling in squeezing grounds. Some of the recent examples include Arrowhead Tunnels (USA, L = 9.3 km, D = 5.82 m), Pajares Tunnel, Section Entrapment incidents of the shield, cutterhead jamming, and back-up seizure are major problems, which can bring the operation to a halt and reduce the advance rate drastically. In many cases, resuming the operation requires manual excavation to release the shield that is confined by the excessive ground convergence. This is a time consuming, costly, unsafe, slow, risky, and labor-intensive work that should be avoided as much as possible ( Shield jamming is becoming a common issue in many cases of TBM applications at higher depth. In such conditions, insufficient thrust force, which cannot overcome the shield skin friction, have often led to TBM jamming. Therefore, accurate prediction of the thrust force required to overcome the high skin friction forces between shield and ground due to high stresses is important. This is for efficient tunneling operation and preventing the extended delays in excavation process, and perhaps implementation of countermeasures beforehand. Studies on this topic involve the empirical methods presented by To examine stress-strain behavior of the ground, advanced 3D models have been developed in recent years by This paper focuses on realistic evaluation of the interaction between ground and a single shield TBM and the possibility of machine jamming in squeezing ground. For this purpose, 3D finite difference modeling of the tunnel being mined by a single shield TBM through squeezing ground was used to simulate the ground behavior and calculate the amount of the contact loads between shield and ground. Estimation of ground pressure on the shield makes it possible to predict the required thrust force needed to propel the machine forward in squeezing ground conditions. The most important factors in the numerical analysis of tunneling by shielded TBMs were described in the previous studies. The follow up studies have led to better understanding of the ground behavior as will be explained in this paper. Moreover, this paper offers some recommendations on the most efficient handling of the important TBM and tunnel parameters when evaluating machine entrapment risks. A parametric study has been conducted for various combinations of rock mass and TBM parameters for evaluation impact of different tunneling conditions on the required thrust force. Based on the results of 200 numerical simulations, a nonlinear regression analysis was performed to find a relationship between ground and machine parameters, and anticipated ground loads on the shield. It should be noted that the impact of uncertainties regarding the geological conditions such as tectonic stresses, adverse ground conditions with low Q values and blocky ground on shield jamming may not be evaluated using the relationships developed in this research. This is due to the possibility of generating errors in calculations for out of bound values. The risk of jamming in such difficult situations should be investigated in detail using data and relevant reports from field by considering the real mechanism and sometimes by means of the advanced simulation methods. Typical example for TBM jamming in tectonic zones due to excessive ground stresses is Dogancay Tunnel in Turkey. Furthermore, Kargi Tunnel in Turkey can also be referred as another jamming event within tunneling through a blocky rock mass with low Q values. More discussion about these tunneling projects and jamming events through difficult grounds can be found in the studies by The results of numerical simulations allow for evaluation of the effective design and operational parameters of the TBM such as the shield length and installation of a higher thrust force on the machine. Furthermore, the results of this study can be used for assessing the role of overcut and ground improvements methods (grouting of the ground or lubricating the shield-ground interfaces). The results allow for objective evaluation of entrapment risks of single shield TBMs in difficult grounds. The suggested relationships make it possible to perform a quick preliminary assessment of the thrust force required to overcome shield skin friction in various formations and sections of a long tunnel. It also allows for the assessment of effective design parameters and operational measures such as reduction in the shield length and installation of a higher thrust force for single shield machines. The impacts of changes in overcut and implementing ground improvements methods or lubricating the shield surface can also be assessed. FLAC3D software, which is based on Finite Difference Method (FDM), was used for modeling of the stress-strain behavior of the rock mass in a tunnel construction by a single shield TBM. Critical input parameters for simulation of tunnel in squeezing conditions are uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock, Poisson’s ratio was assumed in numerical analyses according to the following relationship: The in-situ state of stresses is assumed to vary linearly with tunnel depth ( Calibration and adjustment of the numerical simulation was also carried out based on controlled displacements at contact points between the shield and ground with respect to applied overcut. For example, the contour line drawing of the calculated displacements and contact pressures for 40 m of tunnel length, as well as the cross-sectional profiles of the calculated displacements and contact pressures around the shield with non-uniform overcut for selected rock mass properties, in-situ stress, and machine components are illustrated in The total of contact normal forces, The required thrust force for the selected numerical analysis shown in The impact of various parameters on estimated ground load against the shield and consequently the required thrust force is discussed in this section. For this purpose, various parameters listed in  Increased in-situ stresses require higher thrust force to propel the shield forward for a given machine diameter. The effect of shield length on required thrust force can also be explained in the same manner. Plot of  The effect of GSI and  The effect of overcut (DR) on the required thrust force are also shown in The main objective of regression analysis is to establish a model that relates variables to the predicted or measured results with a minimum possible error. Multi-Variable Regression (MVR) is a practical approach to correlate an objective parameter with a set of independent variables. In MVR, data are modeled using linear functions and unknown model parameters are estimated from data. In this study, a relationship between contact loads and the independent variables, including geomechanical and TBM parameters is established using MVR method in MATLAB. The result of correlation was the relationship for predicting the required thrust force for given machine and ground conditions as follows:  It is very important to assess the residual scatter with respect to the independent variables in the model in order to evaluate the accuracy for the model. The plot in  The validity of the concept and developed 3D models was verified by using measured data from a tunneling project that has experienced shield jamming. For this purpose, Uluabat Tunnel in Turkey was selected. The 5.05 m diameter tunnel was mined using a single shield TBM. The specifications of the TBM used in this project are summarized in The pressure profile for the ground around the shield, estimated from the numerical analysis, is shown in The required thrust force to overcome the skin friction was calculated and compared with the measured field values in For GSI = 19 (average value) It can be seen that the thrust forces estimated by numerical simulation are in a good agreement with the observed thrust forces as measured on the machine and reported in the study by Risk of shield jamming while tunneling through adverse ground conditions with shielded TBM is a critical problem. To avoid jamming, the required thrust of the machine needs to be predicted with reasonable accuracy by accounting for different geotechnical and machine parameters. There are several important factors, which affect the required thrust force. Investigation of the effect of each factor can help to understand their impact on machine thrust and to develop proper formulas to apply these parameters for estimating thrust force at design stage of a tunneling project. In this paper, the effects of eight of the most significant factors including uniaxial compressive strength, The results indicated that the RLP Based on the results of about 200 numerical simulations, a nonlinear regression analysis was performed to find a relation between ground and machine parameters with contact loads on the shield. The developed relationship allows for a rapid preliminary assessment of the thrust force that is required to overcome shield skin friction. It also allows for evaluating effective design parameters and operational measures such as reduction in the shield length and installation of a higher thrust force. Besides, it can be used for evaluating impacts of overcut, implementing ground improvement, or lubricating the shield surface. The comparison of the estimated thrust and those observed in the field show that the calculated loads on the shield from numerical analysis is in good agreement with field observation for a case that was studied in more details. The results also proved that the developed relationship could be used for preliminary prediction of loads on the shield during the excavation to assess risks of machine entrapment along the various sections of the tunnel. It should be noted that the study is the result of the computational simulations for combinations of the rock mass properties, machine components and performance parameters of single shield TBMs. Additional numerical analyses and verification of the results with the observed and measured data from real tunneling projects can be utilized for modifying the developed equations to assure accurate prediction of the required thrust force. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 