The stress–strain behaviour and microstructural evolution of the Ti–6Cr–5Mo–5V–4Al (Ti6554) alloy was systematically investigated using Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) tests over a wide range of strain rates from 1000s−1 to 10,000s−1 and initial temperatures from 293K to 1173K. Dislocation slip is the main deformation mechanism for plastic flow of the Ti6554 alloy at high strain rates. The flow stress increases with increasing strain rate and decreasing temperature. Also the flow stress is more sensitive to temperature than to strain rate. For high strain rate deformations, the strain hardening rate is found to be negative at 293K and increases with increasing temperatures. Flow softening observed at 293K is potentially caused by adiabatic heating. The increment in the strain hardening rate with increasing temperatures may be the result of interactions between thermally activated solute Cr atoms and mobile dislocations. When the temperature is raised to 873K, a novel α precipitate morphology consisting of globular α aligned in strings was observed in specimens deformed at strain rates of 4000 and 10,000s−1. It has hardening effects on the β matrix and is purported to nucleate on dislocations introduced by the high strain rate deformation. Adiabatic shear bands were observed in specimens deformed at higher temperatures (873K). The microstructure inside the shear bands is harder than that outside of the shear bands in the Ti6554 alloy.Beta titanium alloys have been developed for use in large section structural aerospace components due to their high hardenability and improved forgeability The response of metals at high strain rates is quite different to that of quasi-static deformation. Over the past decade, researchers have investigated the dynamic response of various metals under the conditions of strain rates ranging from 10 It is generally accepted that the volume fraction, distribution and morphology of α phase precipitates will have effects on the mechanical properties of β titanium alloys. The Ti6554 alloy is able to be strengthened by large numbers of uniformly distributed fine lath-like α precipitates formed through solution and aging heat treatment at suitable temperatures In this work, the stress–strain behaviour of the Ti6554 alloy was investigated under high strain rates ranging from 1000 Hot rolled cylindrical rods of the Ti6554 alloy were solution treated at 1100 The high strain rate tests were achieved using a Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) arrangement at strain rates ranging from 1000 For the experiments at elevated temperatures, the specimens were heated by an in-situ induction coil and the temperature was regulated by a thermocouple not in contact with the specimen. After heating, the specimen was maintained at the designated temperature for approximately 2 Specimens for microstructural observation and X-ray diffraction were wet ground using silicon carbide papers, mechanically polished and ultrasonically cleaned. Specimens for Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) were etched using Kroll׳s Reagent (2% hydrofluoric acid, 6% nitric acid and 92% distilled water). SEM was performed on a XL30 instrument. XRD was conducted on a D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer equipped with a graphite monochromators and a Ni-filtered Cu K The true stress–strain curves of Ti6554 at different strain rates and temperatures are shown in The dependence of the strain rate hardening and thermal softening effects on the strain rate and temperature are always quantified by strain rate sensitivity, In Eq. The undeformed specimens of the Ti6554 alloy are solution treated and aged. According to the XRD analysis shown in Optical images of samples deformed at the strain rate of 4000 The dominant morphology of intragranular α precipitate in the specimens deformed at temperatures of 293 Adiabatic shear bands were only observed in the samples in which the aligned α precipitate morphologies have been observed as shown in Considering the high stability of the β phase in the Ti6554 alloy and the absence of twinning and martensite through microstructural observation, it can be confirmed that the dominant deformation mode of the Ti6554 alloy during high strain rate deformations is dislocations slip. According to dislocation dynamics The strain hardening rate is dependent on the competition between strain and strain rate hardening and thermal softening effects. Under quasi-static conditions, the heat generated by deformation can dissipate quickly thus the thermal softening effects can be neglected. This explains why the strain hardening rate in the stress–strain curve performed under quasi-static conditions is pronounced in The negative slope of curves performed at strain rates higher than 1000 The strain hardening rate for tests performed at temperatures higher than 293 To our knowledge, this is the first time that the continuous morphology consisting of globular α precipitates has been observed in a metastable β titanium alloy. A similar string-like morphology consisting of chevron α precipitates has been observed in the Ti5553 alloy Adiabatic shear bands were absent in the sample deformed at 1000 The dynamic response of the β titanium alloy, Ti6554, has been characterised at strain rates ranging from 1000 The dominant deformation mode for the Ti6554 alloy during high strain rate deformations is dislocation slip. The flow stress of the Ti6554 alloy is more sensitive to temperature than strain rate. It increases with increasing strain rate and decreasing temperature. Flow softening observed in tests performed at 293 When the temperature is raised to 873 Adiabatic shear bands tend to form in specimens deformed at higher temperatures (873 The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the