 Large household appliances Small household appliances Information technology and telecommunications equipment Consumer equipment Lighting equipment Electrical and electronic tools (with the exception of large-scale stationary industrial tools) Toys, leisure, and sports equipment Medical devices (with the exception of all implanted and infected products) Monitoring and control instruments Automatic dispensers However, these ten categories will be regrouped into the six following categories by 2018 Temperature exchange equipment (refrigerators, freezers, air conditioning equipment, etc.) Screens, monitors, and equipment containing screen having a surface greater than 100 cm Lamps (fluorescent lamps, sodium lamps, LED, etc.) Large equipment, that is, any external dimension more than 50 cm (washing machines, dish washing, cookers, copying equipment, photovoltaic panels, etc.) Small equipment, that is, no external dimension more than 50 cm (vacuum cleaners, caper sweepers, Hi-fi equipment, musical equipment, etc.) Small information technology and telecommunication equipment (mobile phones, GPS, project calculators, routers, personal computers, printers, telephones). WEEE belongs to the fastest growing waste stream in the world, with an increase from 33.8 million metric tonnes (Mt) in 2010 to 41.8 Mt in 2014 and an expected amount of about 50 Mt by 2018 the increase of the world population (from July 2010 to July 2015, the world population has increased from 6.92 to 7.32 billion, with a possible extrapolation at 10.8 billion by 2100) the rapid socio-economic development including reinforced urbanization with facilitated access to modern technologies (in 2014 the WEEE generated per capita ranged from 0.2 kg/inh. in low-income countries such as Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, etc., up to 28.3 kg/inh. in Norway the change in consumer patterns (eg, in March 2014 there was still nearly twice the percentage of desktop-only internet users as mobile-only users in USA, while the number of mobile-only internet users in March 2015 exceeded that of desktop-only users the rapid technological advancement (most US consumers used to upgrade their mobile phones after about 2 years Various correlations can be plotted between the total amount of WEEE generated worldwide and parameters representative of the society evolution. As an example, From all the aforementioned considerations, it is clear that the world WEEE stream is expected to significantly increase in the next decades. Considering that the WEEE contains in average about 2.2% (by weight) of Printed Circuit Boards (PCB), 4.6% of mineral fraction, 9.2% of residues from grinding, 44.7% of ferrous metals, 7.5% of nonferrous metals, 18.3% of plastics, 12.2% of glass, and 1.3% of other type of materials In reality the circular economy scheme represented in The circular economy scheme represented in The global efficiency of the chain value is not purely technical in nature. Thus, the societal aspects are also important. In particular, it is necessary that the consumers contribute voluntarily to the collection of end-of-life EEE (Step 1— Presently the chain value is not optimal, even if techniques for separation of glass, main ferrous and nonferrous metals, and plastics are reasonably operational. A possible driving force for improvement lies in technical advances. A typical example is the development of sorting techniques for black plastics and/or brominated plastics. However, in spite of this type of advances, the necessity to dismantle and/or to shred the WEEE to recover the minor elements by hydrometallurgy or bio-hydrometallurgy is a serious obstacle. For instance, today the smartphones are treated by pyrometallurgy which leads to the recovery of copper, gold, PGMs, but to the loss of gallium, indium, tantalum, etc., which concentrate in the slag The objective of the present book is to give an overview on these various subjects. In