Introduction
                  The majority of patients with bone sarcoma or an aggressive benign tumor of the toe can be successfully treated by amputation. However, limb-salvage surgery for toe tumors remains challenging.
               
                  Presentation of case
                  A 26-year-old female presented with an enlarging mass on her right 5th toe. Imaging studies revealed an expansile osteolytic, destructive lesion of the proximal phalanx of the 5th toe with metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint invasion. A biopsy specimen confirmed a grade 1, giant cell tumor of the bone. An en bloc resection of the proximal phalanx was performed, and the defect was reconstructed with a patient-matched, three-dimensional, printed titanium proximal phalanx endoprosthesis with an MTP joint extension. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient has walked with full weight-bearing since early postoperatively. No local recurrence or metastases were evident. However, scar formation occurred after two years, causing an overriding toe deformity.
               
                  Discussion
                  This case represents the first use of a toe prosthesis with MTP joint reconstruction. The complex MTP structure with a preserved metatarsal head facilitates the effort to mimic normal weight-bearing.
               
                  Conclusion
                  A three-dimensional printed prosthesis of the 5th toe is a viable alternative to a bone graft or amputation. However, to avoid stiffness and complications, further study is needed to improve the prosthesis design.Giant cell tumors of the bone (GCTB) in the small bones of the hands or feet are rare, accounting for 1.7%–5.4% of all GCTBs [ A limited number of limb-salvage procedures have been reported for GCTB of the phalangeal bone of the hand and foot [ Recently, three-dimensional (3D) printing technology, capable of precisely reconstructing bone defects, has been successfully used in the orthopaedic field [ We report the surgery and outcomes of a total proximal phalangeal resection of the 5th toe, which was reconstructed with a 3D-printed titanium phalangeal prosthesis with finite element study. A previously healthy, 26-year-old female presented with a 2-year history of right 5th toe pain and progressive swelling, but walked well with normal gait. Radiographs revealed expansile geographic osteolytic lesions of the proximal phalanx of the right 5th toe ( The prosthesis, custom-made by an Electron Beam Melting 3D printer (Concept Laser Mlab, Lichtenfels, Germany), was based on the contralateral side of the patient’s 5th toe on a CT scan. It was designed to replace the whole proximal phalanx, with connection to the 5th metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint to reduce cartilage wearing ( For the finite element study ( Surgery was performed by orthopaedic oncologist (CC), using the dorsal approach. The dorsal slip and lateral hood of the extensor tendon was retracted medially, enabling access to the entire proximal phalanx ( A short-leg posterior slab with a toe plate was applied for two weeks after surgery. Weight-bearing was then permitted gradually to full weight-bearing over three months. During the first 4–5 months, the postoperative course was uneventful ( This study has been reported accordingly with the SCARE 2018 criteria [ GCTB of the metatarsal or toe phalangeal bone often presents as an advanced stage and requires extensive en bloc resection. [ The use of such a prosthesis offers the following advantages: The ability to manufacture a custom-made endoprosthesis with a mobile joint attached accurately from CT data (not previously possible). The prosthesis is connected in two places: distally to the middle and distal phalanx with a smooth knob, and proximally, with MTP joint arthroplasty, using a key-ring design ( The proximal stem is divided in two to allow passage through the small entry point of the MT head and easy gliding into the metatarsal canal. Titanium alloy is used due to its weight, strength, and biocompatibility. The ready-made, anatomically matched prosthesis reduces the intraoperative time. The prosthetic design development and manufacture took 4 weeks, including 3 minor revisions, a finite element study, and cadaveric surgical fitting. The patient achieved satisfactory clinical outcomes with normal weight-bearing of the 5th metatarsal head. There were no symptoms of irritation. However, the patient showed dorsiflexion contracture of the 5th toe after 8 months and gradually developed a full-fixed, overriding toe deformity at 18–24 months. To prevent excessive contracture, the authors suggest reducing the size of the 3D printed prosthesis by 10–15% or tightening the loop of the MTP joint to preclude hyperextension deformity. Neutral-position casting is recommended, but beware not to push the phalanx proximally. Early recognition and prompt treatment (massage or serial splinting) should be initiated should this occur. Longer follow-up is needed to ascertain if soft-tissue stiffness affects the foot function. However, we can report that this method is an effective alternative for toe reconstruction because of its less invasive nature without donor site morbidity. Further study of 3D-printed prosthetic designs, especially in the rare area, is needed to facilitate limb-sparing surgery and reduce complications. We reported the novel 3D-printed, proximal phalanx toe prosthesis with total arthroplasty of the 5th MTP joint reconstruction. This is significant because it is the first model of a customized endoprosthesis with a connecting mobile arthroplasty that can be reproduced by a simple 3D printer, among other 3D prostheses which only replace the bone without joint reconstruction. The short-term clinical outcomes were satisfactory, with early rehabilitation. However, scar contracture led to an overriding toe 2 years postoperatively. Although 3D-printed prosthesis for the toe can be considered as an option for the treatment of toe tumors, longer follow-ups and methods to reduce scar formation should be studied to improve treatment quality. No conflicts of interest to declare. Decision to submit the manuscript for publication was supported by Siriraj Research Fund, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University. This study was exempt from our institutional review board process due to its retrospective design and as the research involved benign behavioural intervention Written, informed consent was obtained from the patient for this article and the online publication of this case report and accompanying images.       Research registry UIN: researchregistry5556. Chandhanarat Chandhanayingyong. Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed. We appreciate the kind support of Surasak Prachapipat, M.D., Danai Chokchaisakul, M.D., and Kankanit Ruangrungchaikun, M.D., for the primary prosthesis design.