The physical properties of biochars greatly influence biochar functions in soils, particularly in pore size distribution, structure, and surface area. These physical properties can be both directly and indirectly related to the way in which the biochar affects soil systems. The physical properties of biochars are determined by processing conditions during pyrolization, and the highest temperature time (HTT) and reaction residence time may be the most critical factors. As a soil amendment, biochar could effectively contribute its functions in soil, including decreases of bulk density, penetration resistance, and soil losses, and increases of pH, water retention capacity, aggregation stability, retention ability of nutrients, and crop production. In the future, the effects of aging (from fresh to old) on the physiochemical properties of biochars in soils (different soil types) should be studied and the related field experiments carried out. This chapter mainly focuses on the physical properties of biochars, relating how their surface characteristics influence soil quality, particularly in soil physical properties. Surface properties, including surface area, charge density, pore structure, and distribution, are important characteristics as they influence the essential functions for retention capacity of water, nutrients, and microbial activity. The physical features of biochars are important in soil processes. Based on our unpublished data ( In order to identify the changing functional groups during the pyrolization process of biomass, semiquantitative analysis of functional groups of the biochars were determined by CPMAS To realize the surface morphology of biochars, the biochar samples were viewed by optical microscopy with reflected light and then scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Hitachi, S-3000N, Japan) to identify microscale structure. A back-scattered electron image representing the mean atomic abundance in a back-and-white image was observed from the surface of the samples coated by Au. The mineral phases of the sample were identified using SEM and energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (Horiba, EMAX-ENERGY EX-200, Japan), with 15  From our unpublished data, the lignosulfonate (LS), which was a byproduct of the process of neutral sulphite semichemical pulping (NSSC) for pulp manufacturing, was used to produce biochar under different temperatures (  Regarding mesopores and micorpores, We have published some articles on the impacts of the biochar application on soil physical properties ( We further extended our study into field scale in a highly weathered soil (Typic Paleudult), and some physical properties after 1 year were estimated to evaluate the variation after biochar application, such as aggregative stability, water retention ability, and porosity ( In our earlier-mentioned field experiment, the water characteristic curve was also carried out for the treatments of the control, wood biochar_4% (WB_4%), compost_1%+wood biochar_4% (CWB_4%), and PAM 50 After our results for aggregation and water retention capacity, we further tried to look into microscale of the soil peds to evaluate the changing of the soil structure especially for porous structure between the control and the biochar-amended soil by X-ray computed tomography (CT). The CT technique permits nondestructive investigation of the soil pore system and results in 3D maps of X-ray attenuation ( Based on our X-ray microscope results, the numbers of pores and throats (connection channels between pores) obviously increased by 3 to 7 times compared with the control ( Based on our previous study ( To determine the interactions among the compost, biochar, and soil particles, microstructures were observed using a polarized microscope (Leica DM EP, TX, USA). To illustrate, the microscope images of the thin section of a clayey soil and a sandy soil treated with 1% compost and 2% biochars are shown in Furthermore, in this study, the biochar produced at lower pyrolization temperature seemed to induce more cumulative CO Biochar application in degraded soil could also be useful to prevent nutrients loss due to erosion or runoff. In our previous study ( All treatments decreased the total IN loss through runoff, except for the WB2 and GWC treatments ( Studies regarding biochar application in pot and/or field scale have recently been published to evaluate the effects on soil physiochemical properties and crop production. Application rate and production process (HTT and retention time) of biochars are purpose specific. Different porous characteristics, electric charge, and charge density through different produced conditions may be controlled or adjusted to adapt to specific purposes, such as for pollutant adsorbents, soil amendments, prevention of plant diseases and insect pests, etc. In future, the aging effects on surface behaviors of biochars in soils and a long-term field experiment could further determine new directions to evaluate biochar functions in soil systems.