At this moment, the global energy consumption in buildings is around 40% of the total energy consumption in developed countries. Thermal energy storage (TES) is presented as one way to address this energy-related problem proposing an alternative to reduce the gap between energy supply and energy demand. One way to store energy is using thermochemical materials (TCM). These types of materials allow accumulating energy through a chemical process at low temperature, almost without heat losses. In addition, it is a stable way to perform the heat storage and TCM can be implemented for seasonal storage or/and long term storage. This study compares the cyclability, from the thermophysical point of view, CaCl2 which follows a chemical reaction and zeolite which follows a sorption process to be used as TCM for seasonal/long term storage. The main results show that the chemical reaction TCM is more energy-efficient than the sorption TCM. The CaCl2 calculated energy density is 1.47GJ/m3, being the best option to be considered to be used as TCM, even though the dehydration process of the zeolite is simpler and it occurs at higher temperatures its calculated energy density is only 0.2GJ/m3.In the current scenario, the importance of reducing energy consumption in the building sector is a key point as it involves more than 40% of total energy consumption implying up to 22% of CO Thermal energy storage (TES) is presented as one way to address this energy problem proposing an alternative to reduce the gap between energy supply and energy demand There are three methods to store thermal energy. The first one is using the sensible heat (SH-TES) when one thermal gradient is applied which was the first method to store energy investigated and e.g. Bauer reviewed in 2013 the material aspects of Solar Salt for sensible heat storage Finally, the last and most efficient way to store energy is by using thermochemical materials (TCM). These types of materials allow accumulating energy through a chemical process at low temperature and almost without heat losses being the one with the highest accounted energy density. In addition, it is a stable way to perform the heat storage and TCM can be implemented for seasonal storage or/and long term storage TES systems containing TCM are being extensively investigated. Recently, Energy research Centre of the Netherlands – ECN The main used materials to store energy as TCM are salt hydrates and sorption materials like zeolites. In a previous study Additionally, Yu et al. The study presented in this paper, one substance that undergoes a chemical reaction with water and one substance that uses a chemisorption process with water are compared. Thereby, the main objective of this study is to compare and discern the most appropriate material to be used as TCM under the defined analysis conditions, taking into account its cyclability. Thermophysical properties were analyzed using thermogravimetrical analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). In this study, two of the most studied TCM are compared. The first material analyzed is CaCl On the other hand, zeolites are ceramic sorption materials that do not present corrosion problems when are put in contact with metals and its sorption process is extremely stable. The zeolite used in this study is zeolite 5A commercialized by Sigma Aldrich. Moreover, zeolite follows a sorption/desorption process to hold/release water molecules During the charge process (which is the process studied in this paper), the hydrated TCM is heated up and the energy stored is absorbed by the TCM being an endothermic reaction/process. Several researchers have been studied and characterized the substances here selected to be used as TCM which are under study TGA is a widely used technique to characterize thermally TCM as it provides information on whether a material is stable or it decomposes when it is cycled, how the reaction products are charged and discharged, if the reaction is completely reversible, if the material has the same number of water moles before each cycle, etc. The analyses for the thermogravimetrical material characterization were performed using a TGA/SDTA 851e device from Mettler Toledo under 20 Furthermore, both TCM under study were cycled 4 times each and sample preparation was required before reaching the thermophysical characterization in order to guarantee the TCM rehydration achieving a stable/constant composition, because their sample mass is strongly dependent on ambient humidity. For that reason, the samples were prepared and left for at least three days in experiments tray before being analyzed. Moreover, analyses were performed in triplicate in order to confirm the reproducibility. On the other hand, the moles of water lost per mole of dried TCM were calculated taking into account the Eq. Differential Scanning Calorimetry – DSC is one of the most powerful techniques to characterize thermally substances in order to obtain their melting point, melting enthalpy as well as the specific heat capacity. DSC has been widely used to characterize TES materials as e.g. in the study performed by Günter et al. The DSC characterization of TCM under study was performed applying a 10 The measurements were performed under controlled room conditions: 21 TGA results of one sample cycled 4 times are shown in In addition the same thermal dehydration behavior was followed by zeolite: all samples followed exactly the same profile and the final result was identical: 87.7 On the other hand, triplicate analyses were performed in order to assure the reproducibility of the TGA results. In this case, The obtained mass loss results for CaCl DSC results are shown in However, CaCl On the other hand, zeolite has only one peak which corresponds to the zeolite dehydration; besides this process shows a broad peak. Note that this energy-related process is almost finished at 400 The energy involved in these processes was calculated following Eq. For both materials, the temperature and the theoretical energy density are listed in The effect of the heating rate was evaluated performing DSC analyses using three different heating rates (2 As it is observed for the CaCl On the other hand, results obtained for zeolite showed that the highest heating rate the lowest process temperature: 279.3 Finally, the peak is sharper when the slower heating rate is used and the calculated energy density decrease when the heating rate is slower (0.18 In summary, from the thermophysical point of view the chemical reaction TCM is more energy efficient than the sorption TCM as shown by the much higher calculated energy density as was state by N’tsoukpoe et al. Thereby, the salt hydrate is the best substance to be considered to be used as TCM (see right upper corner of Based on the results presented in the previous section it can be concluded that both materials tested had no change after being performed four thermal cycles. In addition, three repetitions were carried out of each sample and the results showed that the reproducibility of the charging/discharging process is assured under analysis conditions obtaining a standard deviation of mass loss lower than 0.6%. On the other hand, the energy involved in the CaCl Moreover, applying different heating rates to perform the DSC analyses, it was observed that the peak reaction temperature for CaCl Finally, considering the materials under study, CaCl The research leading to these results has received funding from the