Background
                  Ulnar nerve lesions represent a rare complication of wrist fracture. The present manuscript describes the case of a particular traumatic mechanism in which the nerve resulted crushed between radial fracture fragments.
               
                  Case presentation
                  A 47-year-old man suffered a subtotal lesion of the ulnar nerve following an open displaced distal radius fracture. Symptoms of ulnar nerve deficiency worsened after reduction and temporary stabilization. Further surgery was performed to achieve definitive stabilization and ulnar nerve neurolysis. The ulnar nerve was found to be jammed inside the fracture side, and so was repaired with a direct suture. Progressive recovery was observed in the following months.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Given the paucity of reports of ulnar nerve injury in the literature, clear recommendations for treatment of nerve lesions after wrist fractures have not yet been defined. Nevertheless, in our experience, peripheral nerve function should be assessed before and after fracture reduction, as a worsening of symptoms after surgical intervention could indicate nerve entrapment inside the fracture site.The occurrence of ulnar nerve lesion after distal radius fracture is rare. While median nerve injury occurs as a complication of 5%–7% of distal radius fractures, the ulnar nerve is involved in only 0.05% of such fractures. We report the case of a patient with ulnar nerve injury following a high-energy open distal radius fracture. Open reduction and fixation were performed and the nerve was found to be jammed in the fracture site. A 47-year-old male sustained right wrist pain and deformity after falling while playing soccer. He presented to the emergency department of his local hospital, where physical examination revealed bone exposure on the volar ulnar side of the wrist, paraesthesia on the fourth and fifth digits and deficiency of intrinsic muscles graded as 3/5 according to the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale. Plain radiographs revealed an extra-articular distal radius fracture with severe dorsal and radial displacement (AO/OTA 2R3A2.2) ( Although rare, nerve injuries are possible complications of wrist fractures which should be considered during clinical management. Combined median and ulnar nerve palsy has been reported, but this represents an exceedingly rare complication of distal radius fractures. The data regarding ulnar palsy after wrist fracture demonstrate that this lesion is typically observed among young patients, and generally occurs after high-energy trauma such as traffic accidents, falls from a height and sports injuries. Furthermore, it is associated with severe displacement and comminution, distal ulnar fractures and open fractures. In the present case, the wrist injury was a consequence of a high-energy trauma during sport, and severe dorsal displacement of the distal radial fragment was observed. Considering the aspect of the ulnar nerve on dissection, we hypothesised that, at the moment of trauma, the ulnar nerve, which is tethered in the Guyon's canal, was first pulled dorsally and then pinched by the sharp proximal radial fragment. During the reduction manoeuvre, it is likely that the nerve was jammed between fracture fragments, resulting in worsening of ulnar palsy symptoms. This mechanism has been previously described by Pazart et al. Guidelines for management of these lesions have not yet been developed, and there are discordant opinions in the literature. Most authors agree that, in the case of acute ulnar palsy after open wrist fracture or associated acute carpal tunnel syndrome, early surgical nerve exploration is indicated. In conclusion, ulnar nerve injury following wrist fracture is a rare condition, usually observed in young males and after high-impact trauma. The condition is often associated with severe dorsal displacement and open fracture. Here, we present the case of a patient in whom the ulnar nerve was jammed in the fracture side, as has been previously described by Pazart. Given the small number of cases reported in literature, appropriate treatment guidelines for ulnar nerve injury are unclear, especially in the case of closed fractures. Based on our experience, we suggest that nerve function should always be assessed before and after reduction is performed, as worsening of symptoms after reduction can indicate that the nerve is being squeezed at the fracture site. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of clinical details and clinical images. A copy of the consent form is available for review by the Editor of this journal. No funding was received. AP and SP performed the surgical intervention, AB followed the clinical recovery of the patient, AMN was a major contributor in the writing of the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript for publication. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. None.