Periprosthetic total knee arthroplasty fractures of the distal femur and proximal tibia can be among the most difficult complications to effectively manage within the realm of joint replacement. These fractures can occur intraoperatively or postoperatively. Intraoperative fractures can be avoided by early removal of hardware, use of stems for stress risers, and use of intraoperative radiographs whenever further visualization is required. Intraoperative fractures should be fixed and then protected by a stem and avoidance of weight bearing until healed. Postoperative fractures can occur with significant trauma, or minor injury when osteolysis is present. Operative management is almost always required. The method of treatment depends upon factors such as the stability of implant fixation, location of the fracture, quality of the bone, and presence or absence of an open-box femoral component.With an ever-increasing number of total knee arthroplasties (TKAs) being performed each year, the incidence of periprosthetic fractures is likely to continue to rise. Periprosthetic fractures adjacent to knee implants can occur intraoperatively or postoperatively. Fractures can occur in the early postoperative phase as a result of intraoperative technical issues such as the formation of stress risers, excessive patellar bone resection, and cortical perforations Many classification systems have been described to help guide management of these types of fractures. The classification of Neer et al Despite a relatively large volume of literature which addresses the management of these complex problems, a simple yet effective classification system has yet to be published. The classification developed at our institution is as follows:  Type F1: Extent of distal fracture fragment provides adequate bone for retrograde nail locking screws. Type F2: Extent of distal fracture fragment does not provide adequate bone for retrograde nail locking screws.  Type T1: Extent of proximal fracture fragment large enough to allow internal fixation. Type T2: Extent of proximal fracture fragment not large enough to allow internal fixation. Additional qualification of all fractures includes the prosthesis stability and the bone stock quality, as follows: S—Stable prosthesis; L—loose prosthesis g—Good bone stock; p—poor bone stock For example, supracondylar periprosthetic fracture of the femur 5 cm from the intercondylar notch with stable implant and with good quality of the bone stock is classified as F1Sg fracture. The fundamental purpose of this classification system is to differentiate those periprosthetic fractures that can be fixed definitively or temporarily with some method of osteosynthesis, from those that are likely to require revision. This is the primary difference between the type 1 and type 2 fractures in each category. Type 1 fractures are more amenable to intramedullary nail or plate fixation, whereas type 2 are more likely to require revision. The g/p subtype distinction is based on bone quality with subtype p fractures more likely to require structural allografts or megaprostheses for revision than subtype g. Intraoperative or early postoperative periprosthetic fractures may be avoided by several preventative measures. For primary knee arthroplasty, one should consider removal of previously placed hardware at least 3 months before knee arthroplasty, or if removed at the same time as knee arthroplasty, stems should be used to bypass stress risers In revision arthroplasty, guide wires and x-rays can be used before reaming. Stemmed components should be used routinely in revision situations. Intraoperative radiographs should be taken with trial stems in place whenever there is any concern regarding cortical perforation or trial component position The treatment of periprosthetic fractures depends on the stability of the fracture, the stability of the implant, and the quality of the bone stock. Fractures that are identified intraoperatively during primary or revision arthroplasty should be fixed and protected by a stem so that range of motion exercises can proceed as usual, although weight bearing may have to be delayed Fractures that occur postoperatively can be caused by significant trauma or by minimal trauma, if the bone has been weakened by osteolysis, osteoporosis, or osteopenia Most of these fractures are metaphyseal and adjacent to the implant. If the fracture is diaphyseal and distant from the implant, then the TKA is usually stable and the fracture is fixed using modern plating techniques. Metaphyseal fractures of the femur with a stable implant can be fixed by a buttress plate, a periarticular plate, a locking plate, or a retrograde locking intramedullary nail ( Metaphyseal fractures of the tibia are not as common as the femur. If the implant is stable, these fractures can be managed by buttress plates or periarticular plates. Fractures of either the femur or tibia in association with an unstable implant require revision with stemmed components. The stem should provide some fixation for the fracture, but additional internal fixation may be necessary. As a rule, we recommend that stems should not be cemented unless the patient is of very low physiologic demand and unlikely to require further revision surgery. A cemented stem may interfere with fracture healing and would also make further surgery very difficult. The most difficult periprosthetic fracture is one with loose implants combined with poor bone stock. Once loose implants are removed from a periprosthetic fracture, there are often major bone deficiencies. Revision can be carried out with augments to replace mild to moderate bone loss (approximately 2 cm on the femoral side and 5 cm on the tibial side). Augments can compensate for greater bone loss on the tibial side because of the combination of metal augments and thicker polyethylene. If the bone loss is beyond augments, then either a megaprosthesis or structural allograft-implant composite must be used Allograft-prosthetic composite reconstruction allows reattachment of residual host bone with its attached host collateral ligaments and thus a constrained, rather than a hinged, prosthesis can be used The ultimate goal of periprosthetic fracture treatment has been described by Cain et al A simple and reliable classification system can assist surgeons in obtaining optimal clinical results for their patients by allowing for better communication of the best treatment modalities particular to specific fracture patterns. We feel that the strength of our classification system is its connection to a treatment algorithm which can be used to direct management decisions.