Montmorillonites used as functional fillers in polymer compounds so far are based on natural sodium bentonites. It has been seen as a scientific challenge to process European calcium bentonites to comparable products. In order to exfoliate the calcium montmorillonite layer packages in a first step, a sophisticated technique was used to transform the calcium into sodium montmorillonite (alkaline activation). A new method to determine the necessary amount of sodium ions for that transformation has been developed and a “Chemical Degree of Activation” as well as a “Technical Degree of Activation” defined. Under the condition of both degrees at their optimum the second step, the organophile modification successfully has been completed with different reagents. Exfoliated montmorillonite platelets were detected by REM pictures. It could be shown that out of selected European calcium bentonite deposits nanofillers with even higher aspect ratios than in older publications reported can be achieved. Criteria for the selection of raw bentonites, the alkaline activation and the achievable aspect ratios have been proposed.Introduction Definitions Morphology of montmorillonite which is important for use in the polymer industry Introduction—the activation of calcium bentonites to achieve a high aspect ratio Problems in determining the soda ash dosage for the deposit-specific optimized cation exchange Chemical–mineralogical basis of the alkaline activation of bentonites and technical problems in the realization Thixotropy and yield point of bentonite suspensions Definitions of a chemical and technical degree of activation Activation technique Determination of the yield point Criteria for the selection of calcium bentonites, their alkaline activation, and the achievable aspect ratio Conclusions References  These montmorillonite products, which are natural sodium montmorillonites, have all been modified to be organophile and made hydrophobic by various methods and using different reagents in order to achieve the necessary compatibility with the nonhydrophilic polymers. Although the manufacture of organophile derivates from alkaline-activated montmorillonite was already mentioned by Lagaly The exchange of sodium ions of the interlayers by cationic surfactants, especially primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary alkylammonium ions, lower the surface energy of the inorganic host and improve the wetting characteristics of the polymer matrix. In addition, the alkylammonium cations can provide functional groups that can react with the polymer matrix or in some cases initiate the polymerization of monomers to improve the strength of the interface between the inorganic and the polymer matrix One example of this is an overview of the alkylammonium surfactants and their use for the different polymers ( There are, however, investigations which start with the assumption that certain surfactants negatively influence the mechanical and thermal properties of polymers and suggest for flame retardants the use of natural, non-organophile modified sodium bentonite which in poly 4,4′ diaminodiphenyl ether phenyl dichlorophosphate can be exfoliated very well Along with these organophile modified montmorillonites, acidic-activated montmorillonite has also been described as a new class of fillers, where, through the development of strong mineral acids which destroy the crystal structure of the montmorillonite, a silica structure results. Beyond that, even pure calcium montmorillonite has been suggested as a multipurpose filler The focus of the investigations lies both in the evaluation of the property changing qualities of the montmorillonite products in the polymer compounds and also in the understanding of the influence of the different reagents on the organophile modification of these There was no mention in these publications of the geology and genesis of the deposits, the mining and processing technology for the preparation of the montmorillonite products from the different raw bentonites. The organophile modification is generally referred to in the process steps of “filtering,” “drying,” and “grinding” of the flocculating hydrophobic montmorillonite The commercially used products are, depending on the type of product on the market, always dry, free-flowing, and dosable ground products with a maximum particle size limit of The montmorillonite products which are produced in this way and currently on the market should thus be named as micron-particles rather than nanoparticles. It can also be assumed that in the following steps of plastics processing, for example with melt-compounding plants common in industry, only with a great deal of extra effort and only to a partial degree does the exfoliation of these grain agglomerations take place in the process steps “intercalation of the polymer between the layers” and “exfoliation by shearing forces” ( Especially the first is a time-dependent process step, the second a question of the shearing forces which can be utilized only to a limited degree because of the properties of the polymer. But the state of the measuring technology for particle sizes is still a scientific challenge for the mineral processing engineer since no precise thickness measurements on the montmorillonite lamellas are possible and/or limitations in the exactness of the measurements have to be put up with. It is surprising that, in the publications that have been reviewed, the thickness of a montmorillonite lamella is given as 1 No mention could be found in the literature of the industrial use of calcium montmorillonite for the modification to organophile montmorillonite. It can be assumed that the reason for this is that experience up to now has shown that it has not been possible in an alkaline activation process to transform the calcium montmorillonite into a sufficiently homoionic form of the loading of the interlayers with sodium ions and thereafter modify it to be organophile so as to be equal to the natural sodium montmorillonite in its technical applications. The I.B.O.—Ingenieurbüro für Bentonit-Technologie Dipl.-Ing. Ohrdorf—has taken on the task—together with the Institute for Mineral Processing of the The commercially most important regions of bentonite production in Europe are the island of Milos (Greece), the island of Sardinia (Italy), and Bavaria (Germany). The reasons for focusing on the European bentonites are their availability and economic efficiency. In addition it has been seen as a scientific challenge to design the processing of the raw bentonite through highly developed process technology so that the necessary loading of the interlayers with sodium ions (“alkaline activation”) is possible to a sufficient extent. The terms bentonite and montmorillonite are used in industrial practice as synonyms. However, it is important for this paper to differentiate for better understanding.  In the framework of this book chapter, the term Montmorillonite, a layer silicate of mostly volcanic origin and known by its cation exchange capacity (CEC) and its intracrystalline swelling characteristic in general, is subdivided in two types: The “swelling type” (often described as “Wyoming” or “Western” type) with Na The mostly irregular form of its platelets agglomerated in packages of up to 500 lamellas All commercially available European bentonites are of the nonswelling type. In order to produce similar application-related properties like natural sodium bentonites, the Ca Besides the morphology, it has been detected that a higher content of Mg Most important for the use as active fillers in polymer compounds is the aspect ratio of the lamellas. Single lamellas are very often folded, rolled, or twisted. Therefore, the aspect ratio here is defined as the ratio between the effective length or largest extension and the diameter of the single lamella or thin package of several lamellas. The reinforcement function of such lamellas in polymer compounds is expected to be similar to steel bars in reinforced concrete. Aspect ratios>500 are desired values. As a kind of benchmark, the morphology of lamellas of the “Wyoming type” is useful ( It has been found that in some European deposits, similar morphological structures occur independent from different geological and genetic conditions ( The effective length of up to approximately 2200 Nevertheless, the detected diameters from 3.8 to 7.2 Therefore, the desired aspect ratio of>500 is feasible also from calcium montmorillonites mined from European bentonite deposits. The dissertation of the first author, written at the Institute for Mineral Processing at the Montanuniversität Leoben, was an intensive study of this topic. As both the irregularities of the lamella diameter and the thickness are given from the deposit origin, the focus is set only on the target of maximizing the aspect ratio on the degree of delamination of the layer packages. The potential for delamination itself is, in calcium bentonites, first a question of the alkaline activation since the bonding forces from the bivalent interlayer cations could not otherwise be overcome. There is no direct, organophile modification of calcium bentonite. Even when there is a general reference to calcium bentonite, the primary counter ions in the interlayers of all European deposits are a mixture of calcium and magnesium ions. Ever since the granting of the German Patent Number 613037 and especially the patent of addition Number 644315, at the beginning of the 1930s, the technology of the alkaline activation—the cation exchange of calcium and magnesium ions with sodium ions by adding soda ash (Na Since the complete cation exchange is an important prerequisite for the subsequent organophile modification and the attainment of the highest possible aspect ratio, that is, the attainment of a high degree of delamination of the layer packages, the question of the dosage of soda must be answered. The method of using methylene blue adsorption according to VDG P 69 Guideline There is general consensus that the Ca Montmorillonite is characterized by tetrahedron–octahedron–tetrahedron layers. A special attribute, of the mineral montmorillonite, differing in its occurrence and It can be assumed that first the counter ions near the edges are exchanged. In the initial phases of the exchange in the surface, it was possible to observe the formation of wedge-shaped pores in the layer packages which successively expanded and intensified the intracrystalline swelling through the exchange of the Na The technical difficulties in the production process are of manifold nature: Lumpy, wet, and often sticky raw bentonite from the pit with edges up to a two-digit centimeter range must be homogenized with a relatively small amount of hygroscopic soda ash of about 2.5—6.0 There has to be a uniform distribution of the soda ash in the raw bentonite to avoid local over- or under-dosage. Applying the soda ash as a solution leads to nearly uncontrollable problems in the conveyance of the slurry-like bentonite and uneconomic costs for drying. The grinding and mixing equipment (pan mills, fine rolling mills, circular screen feeders, single and twin-screw extruders) must be adjusted to fit the special conditions at the site of the deposit. Thixotropy is a rheological phenomenon which can also be observed in bentonite suspensions and occurs when the montmorillonite lamellas form a network of the well-known “house-of-cards” structure. If the counter ions are monovalent Na By reason of the influence of electrostatic and van der Waal’s bonding forces in the resting state the individual lamella forms again into knot-like, intertwined structures and solidify to a gel, which when shearing forces are applied, will return to the sol condition. This gel-sol-gel transition can be repeated endlessly and is called thixotropic, whereby the short period for regeneration—which is a nearly instant flipping back to the gel condition—is typical for all alkaline-activated bentonites ( Certain shear energy is necessary to break up the gel structure. If a shear stress is applied, the suspensions behave initially like a solid body, that is, the shear stress leads to an elastic deformation which is directly proportional to the shear stress. If the shear stress overcomes the bonding forces between the montmorillonite lamellas, there is a gradual and accelerating breaking-up of the gel structures—the suspension begins to flow. The limit value of the shearing stress, that is, the smallest shear stress above which a plastic material behaves rheologically like a fluid, is defined, according to DIN 1342-1 “Viscosity-Rheological Terms,” as yield point As the individual lamellas have neither a standard size, form, or electrical load, it is understandable that after each gel-sol-transformation there is never an identical but only a statistical sum of comparable “house-of-cards” structures which come into existence to form the gel. The absolute sum of the measured yield point (Pa) is thus in its sum a function of the: content of the montmorillonite, the particle (lamella) sizes and forms which are predetermined from the deposit origin, the degree of delamination (exfoliation) of the lamella packages achieved through the alkaline activation and subsequent preparation of the suspension, and surface and edge charges. The complexity and dependence of the gel structure must nevertheless permit the assumption that the bonding forces in the sum of its interactions and adequate to the thixotropic condition must be characteristic for each bentonite deposit—however, it was generated and resulting from the genetic-morphological properties as well as the efficiency of the alkaline activation. The following definition has been set up in order to make it possible to compare the measured data generated to find the activation optimum. The complete exchange of the primarily Ca The process-technical problem, to bring the proper dosage of Na The standards of a clay mineralogical research laboratory cannot be expected in a processing plant. Thus, it is understood that the TAG=100% is the point of realization of the CAG under pit-wet industrial processing conditions where an increase of the cation exchange cannot be achieved either through changes of the intensity of the mixing equipment or the process time. The requirement for the determination of both degrees of activation led to a new form of yield point measurement of bentonite suspensions for the bentonite industry whereby at first the hypothesis was: Also in full-scale industrial conditions of the transformation of calcium bentonites, there must be a characteristic point for each deposit which corresponds to a technical homoionic Na Equally, a rise in the pH value and thus a polarity reversal in the edge charges (from positive to negative) caused by an over-dosage of soda ash must lead to a weakening of the bonding forces in the structure formed by the montmorillonite lamellas which will be measurable through a negative deviation of the yield point maximum. Decisive is that the processing technology must be suited, by the continuous creation of new surfaces, to transport the Na The critical analysis of the current activation processes which are industrially carried out has shown that the equipment now used for disintegration and mixing is not able to destroy the natural sediment structures of the bentonites in such a way that the dissociating sodium carbonate is able to reach all the exchangeable counter ions. The necessary degree of homogeneity of the reactants, which is necessary for this exchange process, cannot be reached by continuously operating machines. However, the completeness of the ion exchange is a function of the surface and of the reaction time and is a prerequisite for both a sufficiently organophile modification and a high delamination of the layer packages which are necessary for the maximization of the aspect ratio. If the swelling volume is used for the general quality criteria to test this statement, then the negative deviances which originate from the incomplete destruction of the sediment structures are proof of this, as shown in In a technically modified intensive mixing machine, the mixing time and intensity are determined for a predetermined amount of raw bentonite and a certain amount of soda ash which has been calculated using the cation exchangeability from the methylene blue adsorption. These time and intensity parameters are those at which the corresponding yield point, according to the requirement TAG=100%, cannot be increased ( The materials in the mixer are forced to flow so that a nearly completely autogenous destruction of the natural sediment structures is achieved ( With the TAG=100% calculated from this, it was attempted to determine the optimal soda ash dosage for each deposit by the stepwise changes in the dosage of soda ash to find the maximum value of the yield point, essentially the same as the The activation humidity is set at average values known from mining for each deposit. That is, 30±3 The determination of the critical value of the theoretically necessary amount of water Raw bentonite humidity: 31 The measurements were made on suspensions with 5 A Rheometer, “RheoStress 600” ( The most important part of the RS 600 is a detector head driven by a drag cup motor, whose extremely low moment of inertia of 10 The RS 600 has a highly sensitive temperature control system and allows measurements with about±0.2°C tolerance. The control and analysis software can be combined with a number of possibilities for evaluation up to and including graphic illustrations of the diagrams. The torque is determined via the motor current and the deformation and the rpm are determined by the angle transducer. The start of the flow is shown by the turning motion of the rotor, whereby its deflection is recorded by sensors. The RS 600 has opened up a new method for the determination of the yield point by prescribing a ramp with a linearly rising shear stress In pretrials there was a good agreement for a cone–plate combination with a conical angle of 2°. That does not mean, however, that other combinations could not also lead to similar findings. The RS 600 was operated in CS modus (“controlled stress”). A shear stress ramp of 0.1–300 The suspension concentration chosen from those common in industry, 5 Thanks to the high shearing, and considering a possible application in plant laboratories, it was found that after a stirring time of 5 The space between the plate and the cone (diameter 60 At the same time it is also possible to recognize from this figure a good reproducibility. The first curve branch, which often looks like a very long extended sinus curve, which usually turns into a short second curve branch before there is a sudden break, is typical for suspensions of alkaline-activated bentonites, that is, the target condition has been reached. The greater the bonding forces, the longer is the solid condition and with that the length of the straight, first curve branch. At the same time the flow is shortened up to the curve break so that only a few measurement points are available for the determination of the second tangent. It is helpful to adjust the concentration with pretests so that the suspension is still easily stirable and the measuring time is within the tolerance of 3±1 The evaluation of the flow curves with “RheoWin” software was done manually because of the typical curve shape since the starting and ending points for the shearing stress For the determination of the tangent of the second curve branch, it can be helpful to consider the progression of the deformation values The protective wet screening of the suspensions at 0.075  The industrial alkaline activation in a semidry process with the I.B.O. technique achieves a degree of effectiveness that approaches the homoionic Na Today it can be said that the following criteria for the selection and process technology of suitable calcium bentonites are as follows: The methylene blue absorption according to VDG P69 and measured on raw bentonite should be>400 The Ca The specific yield point for a CAG=100% and TAG=100% should be>15 The alkaline activation must definitely be carried out at a CAG=100% and TAG=100%. With this it is unimportant which of the reagents is selected for the organophile modification, and in dependence on the polymer and its application. The lamellas of Even if it is neither possible to measure the thickness of the lamellas nor technically possible to achieve a complete delamination, an aspect ratio of 200–2000 can be estimated, assuming a thickness of 1–3 Achieving a smaller range of grain sizes does not seem technically possible at this time. It has not been possible to prove in any of these deposits the existence of a montmorillonite with a diameter of<0.2 Since the effectiveness of the nanoclays—among others—depends especially on their distribution in the composite material, further processing of the suspension of the organophile modified montmorillonite by drying and grinding, also in the finest range, has to be rejected. The montmorillonite agglomerates which are created by thermal or freeze drying cannot be delaminated in the quantity demanded, at least using the most common melt compounding process. They remain at least partly as layer packages in the micrometer range and far below the limit values of the aspect ratio which have been mentioned and are achievable. With a general level of filling of up to 7 The homogenous distribution in a compound requires that lamellas which are hydrophobic are in a condition in which low level shearing forces are sufficient to push them against each other and dissolve them. This mobility of the lamellas depends on their morphology, the type of organophile modification, and the remaining water content. The limits that must be observed can be determined case by case. Although the use of phyllosilicates in powder form offers advantages which should not be underestimated, it might be necessary to reconsider this under the aspect of the ability to be delaminated. The use of pasty products with lamellas that can easily be slid against each other no longer presents a problem in the dosing. Thanks to the higher remaining water content, an extension of the exhalation phase will be necessary. The obvious advantage, however, would be in the lesser shearing force necessary for the exfoliation. The investigations at hand have demonstrated that an advanced processing technique is able to make nanoscale fillers for plastics from a selection of European bentonite deposits. This technique is distinguished by the fact that both the mechanical and chemical process stages can be tuned exactly to the deposit-specific properties of the bentonites. Surprisingly, in comparison to figures from some publications on natural sodium bentonite, this technique can yield a higher aspect ratio if applied to particularly well crystallized calcium montmorillonite with large lamella diameter. In general, the bentonites made by alkaline activation from such suitable deposits feature high swelling volume and markedly good rheological properties. This perception contradicts statements to be found mainly in older publications. Upscaling the technique into a pilot plant is the next step in order to produce sufficient amounts of organophile modified montmorillonites for the plastics industry to use them in industrial scale.