In this paper, a new bio-cleaning procedure based on the glucose oxidase (GOx) has been applied on the travertine and peperino substrata to remove the biological patina (i.e., biofilm). Glucose oxidase, used as a model enzyme system, is able to produce in situ H2O2 (the cleaning agent having oxidizing properties) by the enzymatic reaction at room temperature. The travertine and peperino samples came from the Villa Torlonia in Rome (Italy), and an analytical diagnosis on them was performed applying several analytical techniques, such as the differential interference contrast microscopy (DIC), the optical microscope (OM), the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and the X-ray fluorescence (XRF) that evidence the presence of biofilms on the substrata. Better results were obtained on the travertine samples in terms of the cleaning efficiency and the absence of the etching effect on the surface, eventually induced by the peroxide molecule. These results could be explained in terms of the different porosities of the two kinds of stone materials, according to the BET data. A comparative study was also performed to validate the new bio-cleaning procedure, using both traditional approaches based on saturated (NH4)2CO3 solution and EDTA in buffer solution and the enzyme lipase treatments. Among all, the cleaning procedure via GOx shows the best result, probably because the enzyme controls the concentration of the H2O2 in situ and also retains the H2O2 preferentially on the surface (where the biological patina is present) depending on the porosity of the substrata. A synergistic effect, with other enzymes such as lipase and protease, combined with the biocompatibility of the enzymatic treatments, could represent a new way for a higher cleaning efficiency to apply on different stone substrata.Recently, the biotechnology and applied microbiology The novelty of this paper concerns the application of a new bio-cleaning procedure based on the glucose oxidase enzymes (i.e., GOx) to remove the biofilm present on the travertine and peperino substrata, highly stable toward the heavy metal inhibition effect The possibility to control the peroxide concentration on these surfaces, removing the biofilm. The possibility to realise small amount of the oxidizing agent, avoiding the etching of these stone materials. The possibility to obtain better performances in terms of the cleaning efficiency depending on the porosity of these stone materials The cleaning performances of GOx have also been compared with those obtained using the traditional chemical treatments based on the EDTA or (NH The new cleaning method based on GOx enzymatic reaction has also been compared with the traditional enzymatic treatment, performed with lipase. Also in this last case, the new bio-cleaning method results comparable to some others, such as the lipase treatment (but this last needs a higher temperature, for both samples, travertine and peperino) as confirmed by the SEM investigation. (NH All the samples were collected in outdoor historic buildings from The optical microscope (Olympus BX41 model) and the stereomicroscope (Wild M3) have been used for the morphological characterization of all the stone samples. The differential interference contrast (DIC) microscope (Zeiss Axioscope) and the stereomicroscope (Zeiss MC 634) have been used for the investigation of the biofilms. The structural characterization has been performed by a Unisantis XMF-104 X-Ray Microanalyser instrument, equipped with a 120 For the optical microscopy investigation, few micrograms of solid samples was deposited on the glass slides for observation. The stereomicroscope investigation was performed using a Petri dish, covered with a wet ultra-pure paper filter, containing the biological samples, previously collected on the tape. The DIC measurement was carried out on the same fresh biological samples, deposited on the glass slides. In the first analysis, the stone fragment samples were measured directly without any pre-treatment procedure. In the second analysis, 200 Nitrogen adsorption was measured at 77 The stone samples were treated with 5  Applying a higher positive potential ( The sepiolite clay was added to 10 To a solution containing EDTA (2.5%, w/v) in buffer of NaHCO Each stone sample was dipped in 5 In this section the optical analysis of the travertine surface ( SEM images on the travertine surface confirmed the presence of the biopatinas detected by the optical microscope. In particular In both lithotype samples, the XRF analysis clearly evidences the natural components of these substrata  Comparing travertine and peperino samples (see The stability study, concerning the effect of the GOx treatment on these substrata, confirmed the blenching effect and the antimicrobial properties typical of the H In addition, the SEM study confirms the results observed with the optical microscope ( The effects of new bio-cleaning treatment on both lithotype ( For the peperino substrate ( The comparative study has also been performed applying the (NH Finally, the standard procedure, based on the EDTA agent, prepared in buffer solution (i.e., NaHCO For a complete study another conventional biological treatment was performed using lipase, as biocatalyst. In this paper, the lipase approach appeared also innovative because, for the first time, it was applied on these lithotype samples, generally it is only applied on canvas, paper and polychrome artefact substrata In this paper a new cleaning strategy based on GOx biocatalyst has been proposed and optimized for the removal of biological patina on travertine and peperino substrata, where the role of the H The qualitative results show that the best performances in terms of the cleaning efficiency strongly depend on the physical properties of the stone materials, such as the porosity and the surface area. These last determine the level of growth and incorporation of biofilms on the substrate. Finally, the results can be summarized in this way: The maximum cleaning efficiency on travertine sample has been obtained for short contact times (30 and 60 The low cleaning efficiency on peperino sample for all the contact times because of a lower porosity that is responsible for a higher and stable incorporation of the biopatina. The stability study (during 3 years) demonstrates the typical blenching and biocide properties of H In addition, the GOx/H In addition, several traditional procedures have also been applied on the sample surfaces to validate the cleaning efficiency of the new GOx treatment, and the results show that: For the (NH For the EDTA agent, prepared in buffer solution (i.e., NaHCO Further investigations will be carried out using a combination of enzymes, such as lipase, protease (having a selective and specific mechanism) and GOx (as strong un-selective biocide and oxidizing agent) acting in three different steps, according to the corresponding kinetic constants, that are: 3.03, 0.04, and 45 The authors wish to thank the “Istituto di Struttura della Materia del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Roma” (Dr. Elvira Maria Bauer), for the FT-IR investigations and useful discussion. The authors also thank Prof. P. Albertano and Dr. S. Bellezza for the optical microscopy characterization concerning the biofilms, Dr. E. Tamburri for the optical microscopy study and finally, Dr. Alberto Busnarda for having kindly provided the samples, for this study.