As-cast bulk metallic glasses are isotropic, but anisotropy can be induced by thermomechanical treatments. For example, the diffraction halo in the structure function S(Q) observed in transmission becomes elliptical (rather than circular) after creep in uniaxial tension or compression. Published studies associate this with frozen-in anelastic strain and bond-orientational anisotropy. Results so far are inconsistent on whether viscoplastic flow of metallic glasses can induce anisotropy. Preliminary diffraction data suggest that the anisotropy, if any, is very low, while measurements of the elastic properties suggest that there is induced anisotropy, opposite in sign to that due to anelastic strain. We study three bulk metallic glasses, Ce65Al10Cu20Co5, La55Ni10Al35, and Pd40Ni30Cu10P20. By using resonant ultrasound spectroscopy to determine the full elasticity tensor, the effects of relaxation and rejuvenation can be reliably separated from uniaxial anisotropy (of either sign). The effects of viscoplastic flow in tension are reported for the first time. We find that viscoplastic flow of bulk metallic glasses, particularly in tension, can induce significant anisotropy that is distinct from that associated with frozen-in anelastic strain. The conditions for inducing such anisotropy are explored in terms of the Weissenberg number (ratio of relaxation times for primary relaxation and for shear strain rate). There is a clear need for further work to characterize the structural origins of flow-induced anisotropy and to explore the prospects for improved mechanical and other properties through induced anisotropy.A glass is commonly expected to be isotropic, but can be anisotropic, even when formed from a liquid composed of atoms or of molecules that are not orientable. Early studies of metallic glasses were on ribbons produced by melt-spinning, a directional process that involves strong shearing of the liquid cooling into the glassy state Melt-spun ribbons and thin films show that metallic glasses can be significantly anisotropic. The present work explores whether similar or even greater degrees of anisotropy can be induced in BMGs. This may be of practical interest in optimizing properties (within the general field of thermomechanical processing to access new glassy states In the present work, in contrast, our focus is on structural changes in On loading a metallic glass below the macroscopic yield stress, there are three contributions to the strain Anelasticity can be associated with the activation of shear transformation zones (STZs) under load. Directional operation of the STZs (in tension, this involves bond-breaking parallel to the tensile axis and bond-forming perpendicular to the axis The soft-magnetic properties of metallic glasses are the basis of their principal applications. From the many studies of magnetic properties, we consider magnetic anisotropy induced by creep. Nielsen et al. have shown that in (Co,Fe)-based metallic-glass ribbons subjected to tensile creep, there are two opposing contributions to induced anisotropy. One is recoverable and associated with That work, on Pd Metallic glasses with compositions (at.%) Pd Uniaxial mechanical tests (H25K-S UTM, Tinius Olsen) were conducted at room temperature (RT) and at elevated temperature. Two type-K thermocouples were spot-welded to the upper and lower silicon-nitride anvils. The lower-anvil thermocouple provided the input to a Eurotherm temperature-controller. Heating was by an infrared emitter (Omega, Heraeus) 79 mm in diameter with 180° gold reflector, allowing rapid contact-free heating of the sample to the test temperature. The position of the infrared emitter was adjusted to ensure that both anvils reached the same temperature. The set temperature was reached in few minutes, but it took longer to establish full stability: 10–15 min in the smaller chamber used for compression tests and 40 min for the larger chamber used for tensile tests. The applied load was maintained at zero to avoid any creep during pre-test stabilization. For compression tests, cylindrical samples with a height-to-diameter ratio of 1.7 (Pd-based) or 2.0 (La- & Ce-based) were cut from the cast rods. The end-faces were polished to make sure they are parallel to each other and perpendicular to the rod axis. The samples were placed on the bottom anvil, surrounded by the infrared emitter and then contacted by the upper anvil. Lubricant (copper paste) was used on the end surfaces to reduce barrelling of the sample in compression. After a steady, uniform temperature was attained, each test was conducted up to a given strain; the heating was then stopped and the load removed. The sample was removed from the mechanical testing machine, and quenched in water (for Pd-based) or liquid nitrogen (for La- and Ce-based). The thin oxide layer that developed on the samples was easily removed by further polishing. For tension tests, 3-mm-diameter rods of the Ce-based BMG were machined into a dog-bone shape with a gauge section 2 mm in diameter and 14 mm long. After the test, the sample was removed and quenched into liquid nitrogen. Two types of loading were used. The results of tests under Measurements of the elasticity tensor were carried out with resonant ultrasound spectroscopy (RUS), using the apparatus and methods as in McKnight et al. For each RUS sample, a resonance spectrum was collected, typically in the range 0.25–2.0 MHz with 6.5 × 10 Thermomechanical treatments of metallic glasses cause changes in density. The largest change observed in the present work is a 0.22% increase on annealing the La-based BMG annealed at 380 K for 6 days. In principle, it would be desirable to determine the density independently for each sample after treatment. Given the error in density measurement, however, it is preferable to use the original cylinder density in the calculations of elastic properties. Density changes are associated with dimension changes, each affecting the measured resonance frequencies. An error in density of Given the density and dimensions, the values of Values of The La The as-cast sample is slightly anisotropic ( Next, the sample was subjected to creep at RT, loading in uniaxial compression at 200 MPa (0.3 Lastly, this sample was subjected to creep under the same stress, but at 380 K (0.8 Overall, Anelastic recovery of BMG samples has been characterized directly in real time through strain measurements. For example, for a Zr-based BMG for which RT is 0.48 This first resonance peak shifts relatively rapidly over the first 300 s of measurement, and appears to saturate after a total time of about 50 min ( The data in For comparison with earlier work Similar compression tests on samples of the same BMG were stopped at different final strains. After quenching, a cuboid was cut from each deformed sample. RUS was then used to determine the stiffness coefficients in the transverse-isotropic elasticity tensor. Values of the anisotropy At higher temperature, the flow of BMG systems is Newtonian; there is no drop in flow stress, and the steady-state viscosity is independent of strain rate In our previous work We note that anisotropy induced by flow in compression has the same sign in both the Ce-based and Pd-based BMGs ( As has been noted above, structural studies of induced anisotropy in MGs have focused on the effects of frozen-in anelastic strain For polymers, it is well known that viscoplastic elongation leads to alignment of the chains; this leads to elastic anisotropy In simulations of shear flow in a metallic glass, Egami et al. Even if the mechanisms for inducing anisotropy rather than isotropic change are unknown, it is clear that structural change occurs during non-Newtonian flow, and that there must be the possibility of freezing-in this change by quenching to a lower temperature (usually RT) after flow. The extent of structural change under flow has been extensively studied in polymer rheology As seen in Also shown are published values of The extent of induced anisotropy is shown quantitatively in At optimized values of Wi, viscoplastic flow can induce significant elastic anisotropy that can be substantially preserved on quenching after flow. The anisotropic samples thus produced must reveal something of the structures and mechanisms under flow. That the existing structural studies show little anisotropy in this regime suggests that ellipticity in the first diffraction halo is not a good measure of all types of anisotropy. The ellipticity shows the strain due to local anelastic deformation, but a different analysis of the diffraction data (perhaps based in real space) is needed to characterize the structural changes induced by viscoplastic flow. This study has focused on the effects of thermomechanical treatments (constant-load, or constant-strain-rate, tests in uniaxial compression or tension) on three bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), Ce-based, La-based and Pd-based. Measurements of the full elasticity tensor using resonant ultrasound spectroscopy (RUS) provide a quantitative measure of the induced changes, and distinguish between relaxation/rejuvenation, on the one hand, and anisotropy on the other. The deformed BMGs are transverse-isotropic, and their anisotropy (which can be positive or negative) is characterized by This research was supported by the Engineering and the All data accompanying this publication are directly available within the publication.