We present a patient with bilateral Rorabeck II/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fractures treated successfully with bilateral single stage flexible intramedullary fixation. Flexible intramedullary fixation of Rorabeck II/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fractures provides the benefits of shorter operative time, lower blood loss, and preservation of bone stock compared to plate fixation and distal femur replacement. We suggest that for patients with similar injuries flexible intramedullary fixation can be a viable treatment option.Supracondylar distal femur fractures are one of the most common and difficult fractures to manage following total knee arthroplasty (TKA) with rates of 0.3%-2.5% after primary and 1.6%-38% after revision TKA There are multiple classification systems for periprosthetic distal femur fractures to help guide treatment including the Rorabeck and Su classifications ( Despite the benefits of flexible intramedullary fixation with Rush rods, this treatment option has become less common over the years due to the increased risks for shortening and rotational malalignment due to vulnerability to compression and rotational forces A 65-year-old recently retired nurse with past surgical history of left TKA in 2002 and right TKA in 2003 at an outside facility presented to our hospital after being involved in a motor vehicle collision resulting in open left and closed right periprosthetic distal femur fractures ( The patient was taken to the operating room within 24 hours for irrigation and debridement of her open fracture with placement of bilateral knee-spanning external fixators to provide stability during resuscitation and optimization for definitive surgery. Postoperatively the patient was optimized by our geriatric trauma service. Preoperative computed tomography scans were obtained demonstrating well-fixed implants with minimal distal bone bilaterally. Due to the minimal amount of bone remaining in contact with the implants and the goal to preserve bone stock, we recommended fixation with bilateral single stage Rush rod placement. The patient was taken to the operating room on the third day post injury for the aforementioned procedure without complications ( The technique is as follows: the patient is placed supine on a radiolucent table. The entire lower extremity is prepped and draped. A 2-3 cm longitudinal incision is made through the skin and quadriceps tendon just proximal to the patella using the previous total knee incision. An elevator (Crego elevator works well) is then placed through the quadriceps tendon and under the anterior flange of the femoral component. The elevator then levers against the anterior femoral cortex and anteriorly translates the distal femur correcting the extension deformity. This elevator, held by an assistant, maintains the reduction on the lateral fluoroscopic view as the rods are placed. Two longitudinal 2-3 cm incisions are made, one medial and one lateral, in line with the shaft of the femur on a lateral view approximately 2-3 cm distal to the joint line. A pointed awl is placed through these incisions and used to make 2 perforations in the femoral cortex, one medial and one lateral, as close as possible to the femoral prosthesis (the metal of the femoral component is felt with the awl). Using image intensification on a lateral view the awl is parallel with the posterior femoral cortex of the distal fragment, and on the anteroposterior view the awl is angled approximately 45° to the femoral shaft. Rod lengths are determined fluoroscopically by laying the rod on the thigh, so that the rods will end roughly at the level of the lesser trochanter. Two Rush rods of the largest diameter are then bent 30°-40° using a table-top plate bender about 5-8 cm from the curved end, the same distance from the end of each Rush rod. Staggered length Rush rods are used to avoid a stress riser that would occur with rods of the same length. The rods have a beveled pointed tip that contacts the endosteal cortex as they are gently tapped up the femoral canal. Either the medial or lateral rod is placed through the distal femur and then into the canal under fluoroscopic guidance. Then the second rod is placed on the other side in the same manner. The rods are tapped sequentially advancing one rod a few centimeters before tapping the other rod a few centimeters until they are fully seated against the distal femoral cortex and roughly at the level of the lesser trochanter proximally. The fracture translates medially and laterally as the rods are sequentially advanced until the rods are fully seated. The rods themselves reduce the fracture in regards to varus/valgus and medial/lateral translation. After the fracture has healed, the distal curved part of the rod seems to be mildly tender in some patients but not enough to require removal. Postoperatively the patient was made non-weightbearing to the bilateral lower extremities and placed in knee immobilizers to be worn full time for 8 weeks. She was continued on calcium, vitamin D, and Fosamax. A prescription for teriparatide was provided to improve bone stock and accelerate healing; however, her insurance would not pay for this. She was seen by her primary care provider for endocrine workup and had vitamin D and thyroid stimulating hormone values within normal limits. She was followed in clinic with serial radiographs and was made partial weight bearing to the right lower extremity at 2.5 months and full weight bearing at 4 months postoperatively. Based on persistent gaps at the fracture sites, she had delayed healing of the left femur fracture and was allowed to begin partial weight bearing at 4 months and weight bearing as tolerated at 8 months postoperatively after achieving radiographic and clinical union of both fractures ( Although Rush rods were used previously in the treatment of periprosthetic distal femur fractures, it has become uncommon with treatments such as locked plates, intramedullary nails, and distal femur replacement taking its place Cain et al Osteoporosis is a key risk factor predisposing to periprosthetic distal femur fractures as the majority (94%) of these injuries are low energy Rush rod fixation of these fractures has multiple advantages and is particularly useful in patients with osteoporosis when more rigid constructs may “cut out” and fractures may occur at the proximal extent of the fixation. Additionally, very minimal remaining bone on the femoral prosthesis is necessary to obtain fixation. Both posterior cruciate ligament retaining and posterior cruciate ligament sacrificing femoral prostheses allow fixation. In general, this technique is more of a consideration in fractures that are length stable, because in comminuted fractures shortening may occur. No bracing is necessary and 20-30 pounds weight bearing is allowed immediately after surgery. Weight bearing is progressed to 50% at 6 weeks and 100% at 8 weeks as comfort allows. Limitations of this study are the relatively short follow-up of 18 months; however, the patient has achieved clinical and radiographic union and has returned to preinjury functional status. As with all case reports, the outcome of 1 patient cannot be generalized to all populations and situations; however, it does support that flexible intramedullary fixation can be an effective treatment option in appropriately selected patients. Flexible intramedullary fixation can be a suitable treatment option for bilateral Rorabeck II/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fractures with minimal distal bone stock. We present a patient with open left and closed right Rorabeck II/Su III periprosthetic distal femur fractures treated with single stage flexible intramedullary fixation with satisfactory outcome. We suggest that in patients with similar injuries, flexible intramedullary fixation can effectively preserve bone and provide adequate fixation while minimizing blood loss in patients with a secure prosthesis and minimal distal bone stock. This work was supported by funding from John Peter Smith Hospital. 