Sulfidizationfollowed byxanthateflotation is an effective technique to recover copper oxide minerals. However, the sulfidization mechanism of malachite has not been determined. In this work, the sulfidization mechanism was investigated by microflotation, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), electron probe X-ray microanalysis (EPMA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The flotation results showed that sulfide ions at an appropriate concentration could activate malachite flotation while excess sulfide ions could depress this. The depression of malachite flotation by excess sulfide ions was attributed to the residual sulfide species in the liquid. FESEM–EDS showed that sulfidization product grown on the malachite surface was heterogeneously distributed, which was consistent with the EPMA results. The XRD results for the sulfidized malachite samples showed that the amount of sulfidization product was insufficient for detection under flotation-related conditions. By the selective solvent action of sulfuric acid, the sulfidization product was extracted from the sulfidized malachite. The XRD results for the extracts indicated that the sulfidization product comprised djurleite (Cu31S16) and anilite (Cu7S4), which both were compounds of the chalcocite group (Cu2−xS), suggesting transformation of solid Cu2(OH)2CO3 to Cu2−xS on the malachite surfaces during sulfidization. Moreover, the XPS results were consistent with the XRD results. These results demonstrated that sulfidization of malachite is a phase-transition process driven by the solubility difference between Cu2(OH)2CO3 and Cu2−xS. In this case, Cu2−xS phases formation on malachite involves heterogeneous nucleation and growth, and sulfide ions act as a reductant and sulfidizing agent in malachite sulfidization. The copper sulfide grown on malachite radically changed the surface properties of malachite particles, rendering malachite amenable to xanthate flotation. Based on these findings, we present a new formula for malachite sulfidization and a schematic diagram of the sulfidized malachite particle.Copper, a vital non-ferrous metal, has significantly influenced the history of civilization, especially in the bronze age. This metal is now enmeshed in every aspect of present-day life because of its remarkable malleability, good resistance to corrosion and excellent electrical and thermal conductivity. In nature, copper usually occurs as copper sulfide minerals. Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Sulfidization converts oxide mineral surfaces to more hydrophobic sulfide compounds, which renders the mineral particles amenable to xanthate flotation. Sulfidization can be achieved by directly adding sulfidizing agents into pulp, or with the aid of mechanochemical, hydrothermal or roasting methods ( The origin of sulfidization–flotation can be traced back to the early parts of the last century, but detailed studies of sulfidization in the flotation of copper oxide minerals were performed until the 1970s. Castro et al. (1974) suggested that sulfidization of tenorite is a complex multiple reaction involving three major steps: Surprisingly, data gaps still exist concerning the properties of sulfidization product of malachite under flotation-related conditions, including the morphology, chemical composition, crystal phase and distribution on the mineral surface. Because the sulfidization product is unknown, the reaction path remains unclear. That is, the sulfidization mechanism in the flotation of malachite has not yet been determined. Thus, previous studies on sulfidization flotation of malachite were also limited by the lack of information on the sulfidization reaction, e.g., the role and mechanism of ammonium and ethylenediamine in the malachite sulfidization remain poorly understood. This work attempted to further elucidate the sulfidization mechanism of malachite and lay a foundation for future research. Microflotation tests, electron probe X-ray microanalysis (EPMA), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), XRD and XPS were performed. These results provide a deeper understanding of the sulfidization mechanism of malachite. A pure malachite sample obtained from Kunming, China was crushed in a laboratory double-roll crusher and dry ground in an agate mortar. The ground products were then sieved to obtain particles with sizes of 37–74 μm for use in this work. After treatment, the purity of the powder sample was 98.1% based on chemical analysis. NaOH and HCl were selected as pH regulators, and Na To investigate the sulfidization–flotation behavior of malachite, batch flotation experiments were conducted in a 50 mL Hallimond tube using 5 mL/L nitrogen gas as flotation gas. In a flotation test, a 0.5 g powder sample and deionized water were placed in a beaker, which then was stirred for 1 min with a mechanical stirrer. Subsequently, the flotation regents reagents were added to the pulp according to the respective experiment designs shown in Sulfidization of the samples for all characterizations methods was the same: First, 0.5 g of malachite sample was stirred with deionized water for 1 min. Na The morphologies of unsulfidized and sulfidized malachite samples were characterized by FESEM (Nova NanoSEM 450). EDS (Oxford X-Max) was used to analyze the chemical composition. Prior to analysis, the FESEM samples were coated with platinum. To analyze the location of O and S, EPMA was undertaken using EPMA-1720 Series (Shimadzu corporation) equipped with four wavelength dispersive spectrometer (WDS) detectors. Besides two powder samples that were labeled as a and b, we prepared a cross-sectional specimen of sulfidized malachite particles (sample c) as follows: the sulfidized malachite particles were mixed with epoxies. After curing, the sample was polished with emery paper and cleaned with deionized water. Before measurement, the samples were coated with carbon. XRD studies were performed using an X'Pert3 Powder XRD system with CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å; scanning speed: 0.2°/s). To determine the crystal phase of the sulfidization product under flotation-related conditions, the sulfidization product was extracted from the sulfidized malachite powders as follows: First, 5 g of sulfidized malachite sample (sulfidized ten times as described in The sulfidized and unsulfidized malachite samples were studied using a PHI5000 VersaProbe II instrument (ULVAC-PHI, Japan) with an Al Kα X-ray source. The operating parameters were as follows: operating voltage = 15 kV, power = 50 W, and pass energy = 46.95 eV. The recorded spectra were calibrated on the basis of the C1s peak at 284.80 eV.  It is well known that the Na  FESEM–EDS analyses were performed to observe the sulfidization product. As shown in With a high Na These FESEM images clearly showed the heterogeneous EPMA mapping was used to further confirm the heterogeneous distribution of the sulfidization product. Predictably, at higher Na The sulfidization product is an important part of a study on the sulfidization mechanism of malachite. Determination of the sulfidization product is required to determine the sulfidization mechanism. Thus, there were limitations to understanding the sulfidization flotation of malachite. To determine the crystal phase of sulfidization product, XRD studies were performed. As malachite was dissolved in sulfuric acid while the sulfide was not, we extracted the sulfidization product from the sulfidized malachite. The color of the extracted sulfidization product ( To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study that determines the crystal phase of sulfidization product of malachite under flotation-related conditions. Both djurleite (Cu The XRD results indicated a transformation of solid Cu As shown in The malachite lattice contains two types of O atoms derived from hydroxyl and carbonate. Moreover, O in the contaminants could also contribute to the O1s spectra. However, only one spectral peak was fitted for all the O1s spectra (  The S2p spectra of the unsulfidized and sulfidized malachite samples are shown in  Based on the above characterizations and analyses, it can be concluded that sulfidization of malachite is a heterogeneous solid–liquid reaction in which the solid product attaches to the unreacted malachite. Sulfidization is a phase transition from Cu From another viewpoint, sulfidization is a crystallization process that involves heterogeneous nucleation followed by growth of the nuclei ( What is striking about our findings is that the solid products, djurleite and anilite, were the copper-deficient compounds, suggesting that some Cu(II) was reduced to Cu(I) during sulfidization. Because only divalent sulfide ions exhibited reducibility in the reaction system, these were the most likely reductant for reduction of Cu(II). In fact, this reduction of Cu(II) to Cu(I) by sulfide was observed by Sulfidization of malachite is a heterogeneous solid–liquid reaction in which the solid sulfidization product attaches to the unreacted malachite. It is a phase-transition process driven by the magnitude solubility difference between Cu The formation of Cu The copper sulfide grown on malachite radically changed the surface properties of the mineral particles, which rendered malachite amenable to the xanthate flotation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors sincerely thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51264019), National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, Grant No. 2014CB643404) for financial support. We also thank to Chengyu Yang from shiyanjia lab (www.shiyanjia.com) for the FESEM measurements. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: