The electromagnetic characteristics of low-permittivity ceramics, including silica, willemite, forsterite and alumina, as substrates for a mushroom-like high impedance surface (HIS) for enhancing microstrip patch antenna (MPA) performance from 1 to 6GHz have been explored based on a parametric study evaluating the effects of ceramic substrate thickness and permittivity on resonance frequency and bandwidth of the HIS using the derived equations. To inhibit surface waves, the maximum thicknesses allowed for silica, willemite, forsterite and alumina substrates were determined for the first time when the resonance frequency of HIS matched with the operating frequency of MPA. For silica, willemite, forsterite and alumina, the thicknesses are 7.25, 5.57, 5.49 and 4.53mm at 1GHz, respectively, and decrease with increasing frequency in the range of 1 to 6GHz. High impedance surfaces supported by silica, willemite, forsterite and alumina substrates exhibit bandwidths of 15.19%, 11.68%, 11.50% and 9.49%, respectively, independent of frequency. Silica, willemite and forsterite are good substrates for HISs with sufficient bandwidths. An alumina-supported HIS possesses a slightly smaller bandwidth but a more compact configuration which is favorable for antenna miniaturization. The use of low-permittivity ceramic substrates for the HIS can provide desirable electromagnetic properties while maintaining the proper dimensions to prevent surface waves.In wireless communication, microstrip patch antennas (MPAs) are extensively used because of their low profile, low cost, lightweight and easy integration with microwave integrated circuits A common type of HIS is mushroom-like high impedance surface because it is planar, compact and can be manufactured at low cost The purpose of the present study is to investigate the electromagnetic characteristics of low-permittivity dielectric ceramics, including silica, willemite, forsterite and alumina, as substrates for a mushroom-like HIS based on a parametric study evaluating the impact of ceramic thickness and permittivity on the HIS resonance frequency and bandwidth with consideration of surface wave suppression. The findings of this study are expected to offer a useful guide for designing HISs using low-permittivity ceramic substrates for antenna applications.  When the HIS lattice dimensions are small compared with the operating wavelength of incident waves, the surface can be modelled as a parallel resonant inductor–capacitor (LC) circuit. The HIS presents a high surface impedance over the bandgap. The impedance ( The HIS supports propagation of TM surface waves at low frequencies because of its inductive surface impedance. Conversely, at high frequencies, the surface only allows propagation of TE waves because surface impedance becomes capacitive As seen from Eqs. To characterize the electromagnetic properties of HIS supported by silica, forsterite, willemite and alumina substrates, a preliminary parametric study showing effects of permittivity and thickness on the HIS resonance frequency and bandwidth should be carried out. Consider a mushroom-like HIS structure having a widely used metallic patch width of 10  It can be inferred from above results that the thickness of ceramic substrate is important for HIS resonance frequency and bandwidth when the substrate has a constant permittivity. Since ceramic substrate thickness determines the inductance [Eq.   Once the maximum substrate thickness is established, the corresponding metallic patch width of the HIS with a specified gap width can be determined by Eqs.  From the above results, it can be concluded that the low-permittivity ceramics including silica, willemite and forsterite are good substrates for HISs with desirable electromagnetic properties for MPA applications when these substrates are designed with the maximum thicknesses allowed to inhibit surface waves. Compared with silica, willemite and forsterite substrates, the alumina substrate has a relatively higher relative dielectric constant resulting in miniaturization but an insufficient bandwidth for the HIS. Overall, a compromise has to be made between performance and miniaturization in the design of HISs for antenna applications. The electromagnetic properties of low-permittivity ceramics as substrates for the mushroom-like HIS for improving MPA performance have been investigated with consideration of suppressing surface waves. The analysis is based on a parametric study evaluating the effects of ceramic substrate thickness and permittivity on the HIS resonance frequency and bandwidth using the derived equations. Four common low-permittivity dielectric ceramics, including silica, willemite, forsterite and alumina, were examined in the frequency range from 1 to 6 This work was supported by the