The focus of the present study is the reduction of the residual unburnt carbon contained in fly ash from PC-fired boilers by reburning and/or beneficiation. More specifically, the study addresses the potential of enhancing oxyreactivity of the residual carbon contained in fly ash by mechanochemical activation in order to improve the effectiveness of ash reburning.
                  The concept is tested with reference to a high-carbon (nearly 50% by mass) fly ash sampled at the last field of the electrostatic precipitator of a utility boiler. The raw fly ash displayed moderate-to-low combustion reactivity and extensive development of anisotropic order possibly associated with extended molecular-ordered carbon domains.
                  Mechanochemical activation was performed by ball milling in a lab-scale apparatus at 500rpm and durations variable between 5 and 30min. Both raw and mechanochemically activated samples have been characterized from the standpoint of particle granulometry and morphology, proximate and elemental analysis, ash constitution. Moreover, the influence of mechanochemical activation on the ability of ash samples to build up surface oxides has been characterized by temperature-programmed-desorption experiments.
                  The assessment of the effectiveness of mechanochemical activation was based on the characterization of the intrinsic combustion kinetics of residual carbon by non-isothermal and isothermal thermogravimetric analysis. Experimental results indicate that a noticeable modification of DTG profiles, indicative of enhanced reactivity, is observed as a result of mechanochemical activation.Current outlooks indicate that coal will keep playing a key role as a world primary energy source for decades, due to its availability, security of supplies and relative inexpensiveness The issue of ash disposal has recently risen to a renewed interest Industrial use of fly ash in the cement and concrete manufacture offers the largest and more feasible opportunity for extensive ash utilization as an alternative to disposal. Approximately 40% of the fly ash produced in 2004 in the US (71 million tons) was used, of which nearly 60% was utilized in the cement and concrete industry The validity of the LOI as an indicator of the “quality” of fly ash has often been questioned Reduction of carbon-in-ash might be accomplished by primary measures aiming at improving coal combustion. It has been demonstrated that the loss of carbon combustion reactivity induced by exposure of char to high temperatures, or thermal annealing, may be relevant to poor late carbon burn-off If primary measures alone are inadequate, as is often the case, secondary or post-combustion measures may come into play. These include ash beneficiation or reburning, possibly associated with fractionation methods to separate ash by size and/or carbon content. Ash beneficiation may be accomplished in a specifically designed separate converter Afterburning of fly ash may be seriously affected by the poor combustion reactivity of residual carbon In the present study mechanochemical activation of fly ash is considered as a tool to enhance the oxyreactivity of a high-carbon fly ash from a utility boiler. This is a first step toward a more comprehensive assessment of the effectiveness and feasibility of mechanochemical preconditioning of fly ash for improved ash reburning. The effectiveness of mechanochemical activation was assessed by comparing the properties of raw and mechanochemically activated (MCA) fly ash. Properties of the samples are reported in Mechanochemical activation of raw fly ash was performed by controlled ball milling. A lab-scale planetary centrifugal ball mill (RETSCH PM 100) was used for this purpose. Both balls and drum lining used in the experiments were made of agate. A fixed amount of raw ash sample, nearly 60 Raw and mechanochemically activated (MCA) ash samples were characterized by a variety of physico-chemical methods. Proximate and ultimate analyses were performed using a LECO CHN 2000 and a LECO SC-144 DR apparati. ICP analysis of the inorganic components of the fly ash was accomplished by means of an Agilent 7500 CE ICP-MS apparatus. XRD analysis of the inorganic constituents was performed with a Bruker D2 Phaser diffractometer. Granulometric analysis was performed with a Mastersizer 2000 granulometer of Malvern Instruments. Fly ash samples, either raw or activated, were observed under a SEM Philips EL30 LaB6 microscope to characterize their morphologies. The microscope was equipped with an EDAX DX4 microanalysis system that was used to perform pointwise elemental characterization at selected locations of the samples to assess the spatial distribution of key elements. A thermogravimetric analyzer was used to perform temperature-programmed desorption analysis and combustion reactivity tests of the raw and mechanochemically activated ash samples. Experiments were performed using a NETSCH STA 409C/CD equipped with an on-line skimmer and quadrupole detector. Analysis of CO and CO Samples of raw and mechanochemically activated (MCA) ash were soaked in air at 300 Sample loading and drying in the TG analyzer were accomplished similarly to TPD experiments in a flow of air. Eventually the sample was heated up to 850 After drying, the sample was brought at the pre-set combustion temperature in the range 500–700  Type-A particles: spherical particles of inorganic nature whose size is of the order of 1–10 Type-B particles: irregular particles rich in carbon, of size as large as 300 Occasionally, agglomerates of several type-A particles are found. Type-B particles usually host several type-A particles which are either attached on the external surface or embedded into macropores and cavities (see  The mechanochemical treatment affects the particle size distribution by shifting it toward finer sizes. Combined analysis of micrographs in Comparison of XRD analyses of raw and mechanically activated ash samples in On the contrary, TPD results, reported in   A simple kinetic model has been developed to reproduce the main features of the DTG plots in The bimodal character of the DTG plots of the mechanochemically activated sample suggested an approach based on a two-component kinetic model. Accordingly: DTG profiles computed according to the above reported kinetic models are shown for comparison in It is worth underlying that the observed enhancement of the combustion rate due to mechanochemical activation cannot be simply explained in terms of the increased particle external surface area induced by milling. The following arguments support this view: Ash carbon particles are porous: this can already be appreciated from SEM micrographs ( The very nature of the observed changes of DTG curves brought about by MCA, namely the appearance of bimodal pattern with a pronounced peak at temperatures around 500 Mechanochemical activation affects the ability of carbon to uptake oxygen and build up surface oxides, as demonstrated by Temperature Programmed Desorption (TPD) experiments reported in Results obtained within the present study are in general agreement with those reported by Hermann et al A preliminary assessment of the effectiveness of mechanochemical activation of a high-carbon fly ash as a tool to enhance oxyreactivity of the residual carbon has been reported in the present study. The proof-of-concept is given with reference to samples of a carbon-rich (≅ 50% by mass) fly ash collected at the last field of the ESP of a utility boiler. Mechanochemical activation was accomplished by ball milling in air in a lab-scale apparatus equipped with agate balls and drum for times ranging from 5 to 30 Both the raw and the mechanochemically activated ash displayed a considerable degree of heterogeneity, consisting of carbon-rich coarse and irregular particles mixed with finer spherically-shaped inorganic particles, sometimes agglomerated to form clusters. Mechanochemical activation pronouncedly affected the particle size distribution of the fly ash by extensive comminution of the coarse carbon-rich particles. The fine inorganic particles were instead relatively unaffected by milling. The intrinsic combustion reactivity of the fly ash, assessed by non-isothermal thermogravimetric analysis, is enhanced by mechanochemical activation. DTG profiles of mechanochemically activated ash samples are characterized by a remarkable bimodal pattern, displaying a first peak of the rate of mass loss at temperatures of about 500 The authors acknowledge support from MAGALDI Ricerche and Brevetti, Italy. The study has been carried out in the frame of a grant from Ministero dello Sviluppo Economico and Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Italy: “Tecnologie innovative per migliorare le prestazioni ambientali delle centrali a polverino di carbone”. The authors are indebted with Mr. Sabato Russo and Mr. Vitale Stanzione for the support given in SEM-EDAX and ICP analysis of ash samples, respectively.