The degradation of 130 mL of mixtures of food azo dyes E122, E124 and E129 has been studied by electro-Fenton (EF) and UVA photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) using a stirred tank reactor with either a boron-doped diamond (BDD) or Pt anode and an air-diffusion cathode. The main oxidant was hydroxyl radical formed at the anode from water oxidation and in the bulk from Fenton's reaction between added Fe2+ and H2O2 generated at the cathode. In sulfate medium, fast decolorization was found for all systems, but the almost total mineralization was more rapidly achieved by PEF with BDD. The performance with a real water matrix was slightly worse, although the removal of total organic load was still as high as 95%. The solar PEF (i.e., SPEF) treatment of dye mixtures using a 2.5 L flow plant with a BDD/air-diffusion cell coupled to a planar solar photoreactor is also reported. Fast decolorization and almost total mineralization was found in the presence of either sulfate, perchlorate, nitrate or a mixture of sulfate + chloride ions. In chloride medium, however, the formation of recalcitrant chloroderivatives decelerated the degradation process. Greater current efficiency and lower specific energy consumption were attained in sulfate medium at lower current density and higher azo dye content. A plausible reaction sequence based on 18 aromatic intermediates identified by GC–MS and 6 short-linear carboxylic acids detected by ion-exclusion HPLC has been proposed. The SPEF process promoted the photodegradation of Fe(III)-oxalate complexes and other undetected products. Sulfate and nitrate ions were always released to the medium.The environmental issues arising from discharge of large volumes of dyeing industrial effluents into water bodies represent a growing concern ( Over the last fifteen years, several electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) have been tested for the remediation of waters contaminated with organic pollutants ( When active anodes such as Pt, IrO The supporting electrolyte may modulate the effectiveness of EO. In Cl EAOPs based on electrogenerated H The EO process with electrogenerated H Many authors have reported the electrochemical destruction of single azo dyes in synthetic and real wastewater by EAOPs ( Additives E122 (80% content), E124 (100% content) and E129 (80% content) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and Acros Organics and used as received. Anhydrous sodium sulfate, sodium chloride, lithium perchlorate and sodium nitrate, used as supporting electrolytes, and iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate, used as catalyst, were of analytical grade from Fluka and Sigma–Aldrich. Sulfuric, nitric, perchloric and hydrochloric acids, used to regulate the solution pH, were of analytic grade from Merck, Acros Organics and Panreac. Organic solvents and other chemicals were of HPLC or analytical grade from Sigma–Aldrich, Merck and Panreac. Solutions in 130-mL cells were prepared with ultrapure water from a Millipore Milli-Q system with resistivity >18 MΩ cm or with a real water matrix. Solutions to be treated in the 2.5 L flow plant were prepared with deionized water. The raw wastewater to be spiked with synthetic food azo dyes was a secondary effluent obtained from a WWTP located in Gavá-Viladecans (Barcelona, Spain), which collects urban and selected industrial wastewater and treats 25,000–50,000 m The EF and PEF treatments at lab-scale were conducted in an open, undivided, cylindrical two-electrode glass cell containing 130 mL of solution vigorously stirred with a magnetic bar at 800 rpm. The cell had a double jacket for recirculation of thermostated water at 35 °C, which was chosen because it is the maximum working temperature prior to significant water evaporation from solution. The anode was either a 3 cm A scheme of the 2.5-L flow plant used to degrade the mixtures of food azo dyes has been reported elsewhere ( The solution pH was determined with a Crison 2000 pH-meter. Samples withdrawn at regular time intervals from the treated solutions were microfiltered with 0.45 μm PTFE filters from Whatman before immediate analysis. The decolorization of solutions was monitored from the absorbance decay at the maximum visible wavelength of the azo dye mixture ( The mineralization of solutions was monitored from their DOC decay determined on a Shimadzu VCSN total organic carbon analyzer. Reproducible DOC values with an accuracy of ±1% were found by injecting 50 μL aliquots. The specific energy consumption per unit DOC mass (EC Short-linear carboxylic acids were detected by ion-exclusion HPLC using a Waters 600 LC fitted with a Bio-Rad Aminex HPX 87H, 300 mm × 7.8 mm, column at 35 °C and coupled to a Waters 996 photodiode detector selected at λ = 210 nm. A 4 mM H To identify the aromatic intermediates formed in SPEF-BDD, various samples were withdrawn during short-time electrolyses of an azo dye mixture in the flow plant, and the organic components were extracted with CH A first study was made with the 130 mL stirred tank reactor to clarify the oxidation ability of hydroxyl radicals formed during the EF-Pt, EF-BDD, PEF-Pt and PEF-BDD treatments. These assays were performed with a mixture of 33.3 mg L As shown in These findings indicate that PEF-BDD is the best EAOP to decolorize and mineralize the mixtures of food azo dyes at lab-scale. This process was then chosen to assess their degradation in simulated and real water matrices, as described in section below. Based on the characterization of inorganic components of a real wastewater (see section The loss of oxidation power in PEF-BDD using the simulated water was also found when the mineralization rate was assessed. As can be seen in The oxidation power of PEF-BDD was further assessed for different food azo dye solutions mixed at equal DOC content in a real water matrix by adding 0.50 mM Fe Our findings allow concluding that PEF-BDD is able to effectively decolorize and mineralize mixtures of food azo dyes in a real water matrix, yielding almost total mineralization (95% DOC removal) even after spiking 100 mg L The degradation of the mixture of 100 mg L  The effect of the electrolyte nature on the SPEF-BDD performance was firstly studied by electrolyzing mixtures with 100 mg L The influence of other key parameters such as  The EC Ion-exclusion chromatograms recorded for the treated solutions of Inorganic ions formed during the above treatments were quantified by ion chromatography. The S atoms of food azo dyes (0.99 mM) were detected as GC–MS analysis of the mixture with 100 mg L Lab-scale experiments have demonstrated the superiority of PEF-BDD among all EAOPs since it yields fast decolorization and almost total mineralization of mixtures of food azo dyes in sulfate medium. Application to simulated and real water matrices confirmed its excellent oxidation ability over such pollutants, which depended on the oxidants generated from their inorganic components. PEF-BDD was also able to significantly degrade the residual DOC of a real water matrix. Scale-up to a 2.5 L flow plant confirmed the viability of SPEF-BDD for future industrial implementation. This process decolorized rapidly and at similar rate dye mixtures in The authors thank