The presented work investigates particle-induced nanobubble generation in order to extend the applicability of material-selective pressure flotation towards nanoscale materials. During a gas treatment procedure, filtered compressed air in the range of 0 bar–2 bar overpressure was introduced into colloidal suspensions in ultra-purified water until saturation was obtained. Nanobubble formation in the suspension occurred after slow depressurization with a gas vent. Suspensions of platinum nanoparticles and polystyrene beads were used to examine the effects of particle hydrophobicity and roughness. Using nanoparticle-tracking-analysis (NTA), the evaluation of particle size and scattered light intensity showed the occurrence of nanobubbles, both, as a separate phase (bulk nanobubbles) and attached to the particles’ surface. The sharply separated nanobubble peak was observed in number density NTA plots of gas treated platinum nanoparticles. The size of the hydrophilic platinum particles remained unchanged. In contrast, for hydrophobic polystyrene particles, the hydrodynamic diameter increased during a gas treatment procedure. The experimental results are understood, on the one hand, as the nucleation of bulk nanobubbles in the cavities of hydrophilic platinum particles and, on the other, as surface-growth of nanobubbles attached to the hydrophobic polymer particles.Number concentration (# ml Number concentration in class i within a PSD (# ml Diffusion coefficient (m s Hydrodynamic particle diameter (m) Hydrodynamic particle diameter of class i within a PSD (m) Inner diameter (mm) Outer diameter (mm) Class within a PSD (-) Boltzmann constant (J K Total number of classes i within a PSD (-) Number of replications (-) Pressure (bar) Cumulated particle concentration (# ml Cumulated particle volume (nm Temperature (K) Time (s) Volume of particles in class i within a PSD (nm Coordinates (-) Dynamic viscosity (Pa s) Wavelength (m) Half-life of exponential pressure drop (s) During the last years, liquids containing gas bubbles in micro- and nanoscale range (microbubbles MBs and nanobubbles NBs) have been intensively investigated because of their special properties and wide range of applications. Next to investigations regarding the existence as well as the generation of bulk NBs created by different methods and gases [ In contrast to collision-based flotation, this work focusses on pressure (release) flotation, i.e. on particle surface-generated NBs rather than NBs re-attached to a surface. Bubble generation due to pressure reduction also occurs in ultrasonic and cavitation flotation mentioned above, but in both cases, there is a strong mechanical agitation. In our apparatus, however, there is no input of mechanical energy beyond a gentle bubble flow, which will be explained in detail. The growing NBs can remain on the particles’ surface or detach from it, which then contributes to the production of bulk NBs. The mechanism assumed to be relevant for NB formation and growth is related to heterogeneous nucleation with nanoparticles’ surface as nuclei for dissolved gas molecules [ For an investigation of suspended nanoparticles, bulk NBs and surface-attached NBs, several measurement techniques like dynamic light scattering (DLS) and resonant mass measurement method (RMM) are commonly applied [ A self-constructed small-scale pressurization system (SSPS) for approximately 50 ml of suspension was used as an NB generator ( After reaching the intended pressure in the SSPS-cell, the pressure was kept constant with a relief valve (SRV30 Hansun Engineering Co. LTD.) at a constant gas flow rate. In each batch, 50 ml of suspension were gas treated for 10 min at 0 bar, 1 bar and 2 bar overpressure. A gas pressure of 0 bar means in this context that saturation of the suspension with filtered air occurred at ambient pressure with the relief valve in wide-open position. There was no need for a depressurization step. This operation was carried out for pressure levels of 1 bar or 2 bar by opening a needle valve to a predefined position. Thus, in all experiments discussed in the following the pressure in the cell decayed in an exponential manner. This pressure release rate avoided any dynamic effects in the sample such as cavitation caused by ultrasonic or depressurization of a liquid sample through a valve. Uprising bubbles (e.g. MBs) did not induce any relevant shear stresses in the sample while cell depressurization, hence, dynamic effects are neglected for the conducted experiments. For an analysis of gas treated suspension, 5 ml of sample were taken for an offline measurement by NTA at ambient pressure after a gas treatment procedure. Thereby, an evaluation of NB-formation kinetics was not intended here. Investigations regarding the hydrodynamic diameter of both, particles and NBs were performed using a nanoparticle tracking analyzer (ZetaView® BASIC PMX-120 Particle Metrix GmbH). An NTA-device consists of a laser illuminating particles of a colloidal suspension within a flow-through measurement cell and a video camera system equipped with a microscopic lens. With ZetaView®, particles in a range from 10 nm up to 1000 nm can be detected depending on sample material and the used laser system [ NTA also determines particle concentration (number based) of a sample from the total number of illuminated particles detected in the laser cross-section divided by the radiated volume (∼3 nl) [ Within the analyzed particle size range and the wavelength of the used NTA-laser ( In this work, particle size distributions (PSDs) are presented as particle number concentration ( Ultra-purified water (UPW) at room temperature with constant electrical conductivity of 0.055 μS cm The suspensions used in the experiments were prepared from commercially available particle size standards. Platinum particles (30 nm Platinum Nanoparticles Citrate NanoXact™ nanoComposix Inc.) with a raspberry-like shape were used to provide a hydrophilic metallic particle surface. The undiluted standard was stabilized in 2 mmol l Hydrophobic particle suspensions were prepared from a 70 nm mean diameter NIST-traceable polystyrene size standard (PS70 3070A Nanosphere™ Thermo Scientific Inc.). These polystyrene (PS) nanoparticles showed a smooth particle surface (see TEM micrographs In contrast to Pt30, PS70 particles were stabilized with an anionic surfactant, chemically similar to sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), to inhibit agglomeration in the undiluted suspension [ For gas treatment experiments of particle-free stabilizer solutions (named “citrate” and “SDS”), tri-sodium citrate dihydrate (p.a., Merck KGaA) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (70 % GC, Fluka Chemie AG) were used. The NTA measurement of gas treated UPW showed a low concentration of background particles or bubbles, whereas blank UPW appeared background-free. In the following, analyzed particles in gas treated UPW will be called NBs since other sources of contamination were carefully excluded. NBs in a size range from 50 nm to 300 nm were found with a peak concentration of 2.3 × 10 In order to preclude stabilizer molecules like SDS for PS70 nanoparticles and sodium citrate for Pt30 nanoparticles respectively, from being responsible for NB formation, particle-free stabilizer solutions were gas treated and analyzed by NTA at a dilution typical for the conducted experiments. The results in In contrast to the previous experiments (gas treatment of UPW As summarized in This conclusion is underlined by taking the scatterplots into consideration for the discussion (see inserts to Combining these results, it is concluded that the rough hydrophilic surface of Pt30 generated bulk NBs in the conducted pressure release experiments. The variations of the peak concentration of Pt30 particles in PSD ( Regarding the Pt30 suspensions, which contained a small amount of ionic stabilizer (citrate), it was observed that a mixture of UPW with an equal concentration of citrate displayed the same behavior of NB formation as gas treated UPW. Thus, the citrate ions were not linked to the generation of NBs, as can be shown by NTA measurements (see As shown for rough platinum particles, dissolved gas molecules nucleated at grooves and cavities on particles’ surface forming unattached bulk NBs. Assuming only the hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity to be relevant for bulk NB production, a smooth hydrophilic particle material is supposed to show a similar NB production effect. In order to prove the surface morphology to be relevant, smooth gold nanoparticles with 30 nm in diameter (Au30) were gas treated under the same conditions like Pt30 particles. The surface of those Au30 particles is shown in a TEM micrograph as an insert in Obviously, the gas treatment step neither affected the particle size of the gold particles nor the amount of bulk NBs. Only a few bulk NBs were measured for ambient gas treatment since the gas treated citrate showed some background effects. Belova et al. [ The experiments discussed above were repeated using particles with substantially different surface properties. PS70 particles showed a hydrophobic, compact, and smooth surface with a spherical shape. As can be seen in The scatterplots of gassed PS70 (inserts in Assuming that surfactant molecules are being adsorbed with their hydrophobic tail pointing towards the particles’ surface, the PS particles might appear to be hydrophilic when looked at from a macroscopic point of view. In this case, the behavior of PS70 particles should be similar to those of hydrophilic Pt30 particles. A simple estimate based on SDS surface density experiments carried out by Pisárčik et al. [ As a comparison to NTA size measurements of gas treated PS70 suspensions, a rough calculation of particle size based on geometrical assumptions should give a note to the validity of the sketch depicted in The described experimental work aimed at the development of a flotation process of the separation of nanomaterials. With respect to this, the observed differences in the behavior of Pt30 and PS70 particles were encouraging. The hydrophilic particles would remain unchanged in size in a gas treated suspension while hydrophobic particles would acquire a lower overall density due to surface-attached NBs allowing for future separation in a centrifuge. It remained to be shown that the observed favorable results persist in gas treated binary mixtures of the materials. The blank suspension of Pt30 and PS70 as a mixture appeared stable without any separation or agglomeration. Restrictively, this process assumes the NB-generation by platinum and an attachment mechanism of bulk NBs to PS surfaces. The interaction of bulk NBs with nanoparticles was discussed by Zhang et al. [ Nevertheless, the gas treatment experiments of binary mixtures of Pt30 and PS70 particles provided good results which are in line with previous hypotheses. As shown in For these experiments, the peak concentration of Pt30 particles in the binary mixture seemed to decrease with increasing pressure. A non-negligible standard deviation for Pt30 concentration in binary mixtures (error bars in However, two essential findings might be concluded from these gas treatment experiments: On the one hand, the shift in particle size for PS70 in binary mixture is in the same range as for purely gas treated PS70. So, the arithmetic average in peak particle size for gas treated pure PS70 (0 bar–2 bar) was 84.3 nm, 84.5 nm for PS70 in binary mixtures, respectively. The PS particles can be assumed to be flooded to a maximum in pure and binary mixture experiments. Nevertheless, in more complex particle systems, i.e. under unsaturated conditions, the identified bulk NBs in binary mixtures could enhance a re-nucleation of gas onto particles without surface attached NBs as considered by Zhang et al. [ Based on gas treatment experiments of water-based suspensions containing hydrophilic and hydrophobic nanoparticles, it is concluded that the presence of particles extremely enhanced the formation of NBs. Rough hydrophilic platinum particles came up with a bimodal PSD after treatment, thus confirming particle surface-induced generation of free bulk NBs. In contrast, smooth hydrophobic polystyrene particles were found with NBs attached to their surface. Moreover, a shift in the particle size distribution was observed. Our first results on a gas treatment of a binary mixture of these particles showed that the size distribution obtained was, as might be expected as a first approximation, the linear combination of the individual results. Thus, in this model system, the key step towards a material-selective separation process of nanostructured materials by NBs has been demonstrated. These results will help to supplement NB- and MB-flotation experiments already carried out for micro-range particles [  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the