An investigation was undertaken to determine the properties of high ash coal–chars derived from South African discards rich in inertinites, for the development of suitable overall reaction rate models at low temperatures (<900°C). Detailed characterisation results of the parent coal and chars prepared at 700°C and 900°C obtained from standard coal analytical methods, petrographic techniques, CCSEM image analysis and a surface adsorption method are presented. The parent coal consisted of 32% by volume of inertite (“pure” inertinite), 7% of vitrite (pure “vitrinite”), and 13% of bi- and tri-macerite, 30% of maceral/mineral mixtures (carbominerite) with 18% of mineral-rich material. Reflectances obtained from measurements taken on vitrinites and total maceral reflectance scans increased dramatically on charring at 900°C and were accompanied by an extension of vitrinite reflectance class distributions indicating higher molecular ordering. Volatiles were liberated essentially from the original parent vitrinites, creating fine gas pores. Inertinites increased in reflectance but not in porosity and were characterised as dense char fractions in the final charred product, according to a coal form analysis. Structural change due to low temperature thermal stress fracturing (passive deflagration) occurred early on in the temperature regimes, creating increased surface areas and porosity. The chars consist of a high proportion (52%) of extraneous rock fragments together with minerals mainly as fine inclusions in carbon rich particles (13%). The chars had very low porosities and surface areas. These were created by the devolatisation of reactive maceral associations and deflagration. Such materials could introduce intra-particle diffusional effects during gasification and combustion of millimetre size particles at low temperatures.With increasing pressures on the environmental aspects of coal as a primary energy source, many researchers are currently embarking on detailed research concerning the suitability of fluidised bed combustion and gasification for power generation and synthesis of chemicals In coal combustion and gasification, the initial fast pyrolysis period followed by the slow char–gas reaction can be considered separately for modeling purposes with the properties of the intermediate char which include structure (porosity, surface area), morphology and reflectance being the most important properties affecting the reactivity Studies in connection with the effect of minerals (type and content) in coal on char combustion and gasification have covered both catalytic and cracking/fragmentation effects. Calcium, iron, potassium and sodium in minerals have been shown to catalyse gasification reactions Char morphological classification systems have been reported by a large number of investigators This paper presents results concerning the detailed characterisation of a high ash, inertinite-rich discard and chars prepared at different temperatures in order to identify and quantify the important properties of the coal and corresponding chars, which can be used to develop an advanced reaction rate model. It is well known that the overall reaction model can consist of different reaction regimes The coal samples were heated in an atmosphere of flowing nitrogen at the charring temperature (700 Proximate and ultimate analyses, calorific values and total sulphur determinations were carried out by the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS) Coal Laboratory, according to methods shown in The petrographic analysis was carried out by Coal and Mineral Technologies (Pty) Ltd., a subsidiary of the South African Bureau of Standards Laboratories, (SABS) The identity, composition (mass%) proportion, size, and association characteristics of mineral matter in the coal–char (prepared at 900 Nitrogen adsorption measurements (BET) at 77 Results consisting of proximate and ultimate analyses together with calorific value and total sulphur contents for the parent coal and the chars are shown in The following results are reported: (1) Reflectance properties, which include both vitrinite and total maceral reflectance scans for the parent coal and chars (2) Maceral and microlithotype analysis of the parent coal (3) Carbominerite and minerite analysis of the parent coal (4) Petrographic composition of the chars, and (5) General condition analysis of the coal and chars. A summary of the results is shown in Results from the vitrinite reflectance measurements are shown in A total maceral reflectance scan analysis was conducted on each of the samples, coal and chars, involving readings being taken on all organic components, vitrinites, liptinites and inertinites. The corresponding total maceral reflectance histograms are given in It should be noted that for the maceral scans involving the chars, the reflectances of the vitrinites and inertinites overlapped, falling within the same ranges, which made it difficult to distinguish between these macerals based on reflectance distribution as achieved with the coal sample. A maceral and visible minerals analysis (percent by volume, determined by point count) of the parent coal is shown in The carbominerite and minerite analysis of the coal is shown in The classification system used for the characterisation is outlined in the Appendix In terms of char development it is clear that for Char700 more than half of the pure vitrinite material and all the inertinite material, remained the same in structure and form as the parent coal thereby indicating that, with the exception of some incipient vitrinite-sourced “heated coal”, no true chars developed and very little change took place. For Char900 however, the bulk of the vitrinitic and related semi-reactive material had been transformed from normal raw coal forms into isotropic cokes and char networks and all the inertinitic coally materials had increased in reflectance (but not in porosity) thus producing a product comprised predominantly of [mineral-free] dense and thick-walled chars (52%) and minerals (31%). The results are shown in The mineralogical composition of Char900 was determined and results are shown in From an electron image analysis of the carbon-mineral interactions a backscattered electron image of Char 900 shown in The association of mineral matter and carbon can be described by classifying particles based on the relative proportions of mineral and carbon in each particle. The total area proportion of the particles and the area proportions of the individual mineral species and carbon in a specific particle can be calculated from CCSEM measurements. An acceptable standard is to classify particles into 12 area groups consisting of intervals of 10 area-% with the first interval starting at 0 area-% carbon and the last 100 area-% carbon (mineral free). An association characteristic result for Char900 is shown in Adsorption and desorption isotherms obtained from the BET measurements with nitrogen for Char700 and Char900 are shown in The coal discard examined is a high ash coal with a high inertinite and low vitrinite content very different to coal feedstocks currently used for power generation. The intermediate microlithotypes (di- and tri-macerals) are relatively low whereas the proportion of combined mineral/maceral particles is high and even greater than the mineral-rich fraction. Also a high proportion of all the minerals occur in the extraneous particles. For a char prepared at 700 The chars experienced thermal cracking during charring irrespective of the charring temperature (70–900 The microscopic constituents of the samples were assessed by virtue of their colour, reflectance, and degree of anisotropy, size, morphology and extent of devolatilisation. The relative proportions of the carbon-rich constituents/inorganic materials in each case were established on the basis of a 500 point-count according to the method set out in the ISO Standard 7404-3, 1994. The following system of main groups and categories was used: GROUP A: The components included in this group all showed relatively very high reflectances in normal white light. Oxidation effects were minimal or absent. Dense char – mainly originating from inert inertinites; low porosity. Networks – mainly formed from bi- and tri-macerite, the reactive macerals having devolatilised and “plastified” leaving a network of very highly reflecting material. Fine walled networks – high porosity; thick walled networks – medium porosity GROUP B: These components could be classified as “coke”, i.e. continuous carbon matrices formed from vitrinites and reactive inertinites. The particles were highly reflecting. Oxidation features were minimal or absent. Isotropic “coke” – derived from vitrinite in the original coal; no developed texture. GROUP C: Oxidized components – these constituents all exhibited relatively lower reflectances and marked oxidation features, in most cases very distinct oxidation rims. GROUP D: Original coal macerals, which have been little affected by the process Original coal – unaffected. Original coal – partially affected. GROUP E: Inorganic matter – apparently derived from the minerals in the parent coal.