A preliminary molecular dynamics simulation (MDS) study regarding interfacial phenomena at talc surfaces is reported. The use of computer methodology in the development of mineral processing technology has long been of interest to Professor R. P. King and, in this regard, it is appropriate that such a computer study of flotation chemistry be included in this special IJMP volume.
                  Simulation results show that due to the absence of hydrogen bonding sites, the hydrophobic talc basal plane is not in close contact with water molecules, thus leaving a 3 Å void space at the basal plane. As expected from the previous laboratory studies the hydrophobic chains of the cationic surfactant dodecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (DTAB) preferentially adsorb at the talc basal plane surface through hydrophobic interactions. On the other hand, the breakage of Si–O and Mg–O bonds provides the talc edge surface with many hydrogen bonding sites which facilitates the formation of strong hydrogen bonds with water dipoles. Thus, water wets the hydrophilic edges, and, in contrast to the face surface, simulation results reveal that the DTAB cationic surfactant adsorbs at the talc edge surface through electrostatic interactions.
                  Finally, when a model dextrin molecule is considered, the simulation results suggest that the hydrophobic interaction between the talc basal plane surface and the hydrophobic moieties in the dextrin molecule plays a significant role in dextrin adsorption at talc surfaces. Whereas, at the talc edge surface the dextrin molecule is not able to displace water molecules at the edge surface.In view of Professor R. P. King's interest in the development and utilization of computer methods for the advancement of mineral processing technology, it is appropriate that a paper on the use of molecular dynamics simulation (MDS) for the study of flotation chemistry be included. In this regard initial MDS studies of talc surfaces are reported to demonstrate the utility of such analysis in general and to provide an additional perspective on talc surface chemistry in particular. Phyllosilicate minerals, the sheet silicates, are important industrial minerals and include aluminum silicate minerals such as kaolinite, pyrophyllite and muscovite, as well as the corresponding magnesium silicate minerals, antigorite, talc, and phlogopite. The most significant of the magnesium silicate minerals is talc, both as a valuable material in the paper, polymer, paint, lubricant, plastic, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical industries, as well as an important gangue mineral in the flotation of various metal-bearing ores. In this regard the talc surface chemistry/physics is of particular interest to mineral processing engineers. Talc, having a chemical formula Mg Flotation of talc has been of interest to many researchers and substantial research has been reported ( Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a useful tool that can be used to explore water/water and water/mineral interactions, and to elucidate the structure of water at mineral surfaces, providing detailed information and fundamental understanding on issues such as mineral surface potential, surfactant/macromolecule adsorption, and mineral floatability. In the past decade, much research based on MD simulation has been reported on the study of water structures, as well as the dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics for water/mineral systems ( In this paper, the interaction between water molecules and talc mineral surfaces as well as the adsorption of the cationic surfactant dodecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (DTAB) and dextrin has been studied using MD simulation to reveal the interfacial water structure and the configuration of adsorbed molecules at the basal plane surface and the edge surface of talc. A MD simulation program DL_POLY_214 ( Initially, following the procedure reported in previous studies ( For simulations involving the surfactant dodecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (DTAB), the interaction of nine DTAB molecules with the talc mineral surfaces was studied. A generic force field DREIDING ( Snapshots of water molecules near the basal plane and the edge surfaces of the talc crystal are presented in The water density distribution functions along the talc surface normal are plotted in The water dipole distribution function provides more detailed information regarding the molecular interaction between the water molecules and atoms at the crystal surfaces. As seen in Snapshots of DTAB surfactants at the basal plane surface are presented in At talc edge surfaces, other interesting phenomena are observed. It has been proposed that the adsorption of cationic surfactants at talc edge surfaces is due to the electrostatic attraction between the negatively charged edges and the positively charged surfactant head group, and the adsorption is strongly influenced by solution pH ( The model dextrin molecule studied is presented in Snapshots showing the interaction between “dextrin” and the talc edge surface are presented in In this study, each water molecule has been treated as a unique identity, and the hydrolysis of water molecules is not considered, therefore, the solution pH, which influences a number of important variables such as talc surface charge and collector charge, etc., is not defined. Also, the talc crystal is defined in such a way that, the electric double layer has not been considered. Further research effort is required to elucidate these effects. MD simulation of water structures at the basal plane surface and the edge surface of talc provides detailed information regarding interfacial water structure and surface states. The substrate crystal structure plays an important role in defining the distribution of water normal to selected surfaces. Due to the absence of electron donor/acceptor sites at the talc basal plane surface, water molecules interact weakly with the surface atoms, and arrange themselves randomly some distance (∼ It is concluded from MD simulation that the hydrophobic characteristic of the talc basal plane surface favors the hydrophobic interaction with the nonpolar tail of cationic surfactants such as DTAB, and renders the basal plane surface hydrophilic, in agreement with the previously reported decrease in contact angle when a cationic surfactant is present ( MD simulation provides further understanding regarding the adsorption of dextrin at talc surfaces. The “dextrin” molecule is attracted to and stabilized at the talc basal plane surface, revealing a strong affinity. Due to the absence of surface metallic sites and the absence of surface hydrogen bonding sites, it seems that the adsorption involves hydrophobic attraction between the talc basal plane surface and the hydrophobic moieties of the dextrin molecule. On the other hand, due to the strong interaction between the talc edge surface and water molecules, as well as the hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl groups of the “dextrin” molecule with surrounding water molecules, “dextrin” does not adsorb directly at the talc edge surface. The authors are grateful to Professor Jayendran C. Rasaiah for valuable discussions, and grateful for the collaboration with Professor Anh V. Nguyen for helping to initiate the MD simulation research. The financial support provided by the Department of Energy, Basic Science Division Grant No. DE-FG-03–93ER14315 is gratefully acknowledged. In addition, this study was prompted to some extent by collaborative research supported by NSF under grant Nos. INT-0227583 and INT-0352807.