Reductive leaching of metal sulphides is an interesting novelty in the pre-treatment of refractory ores for base and precious metals recovery. Although it remains of limited industrial applicability, it provides an additional basis for the understanding of the reaction kinetics and mechanisms involved in heterogeneous leach systems. It also presents an alternative route to metal recovery from otherwise intractable mineral ore bodies. In this work, the kinetics of reductively leaching stibnite using metallic iron in a hydrochloric acid medium at varying pH, iron-to-concentrate ratio and temperature, have been investigated. The leaching data was then analysed using the initial rate theory and the unreacted shrinking core model in order to explain the leaching mechanisms as well as establish apparent optimum conditions. Leaching rates, over the entire leaching time of 360 min had a strong dependency on pH, increasing significantly as pH decreased in the absence of iron. The leaching rates decreased in conditions of low pH and high iron to concentrate ratios as well as in the conditions of high pH and high iron to concentrate ratios. The initial rate theory analysis confirmed the strong effect of pH but also revealed the interactive nature of the acid and iron in the leach system with reaction orders ranging from 0.4 to 0.8 with respect to acid concentration. Application of the unreacted shrinking core model to the leaching data — time results, at a confidence limit of R
                     2
                     >0.98, confirmed mixed control, at iron to concentrate ratio of 0.7 and lower (pH<0.55) pH range. The apparent optimum conditions of pH and iron-to-concentrate ratio were determined from surface plots of the diffusion rate to be around pH 0.44 and iron-to-concentrate ratio 0.7. The leaching rate–temperature analysis defined two distinct regions of diffusion (E
                     a
                     =22.8 kJ/mol) at temperatures below 90 °C and chemical control (E
                     a
                     =136.2 kJ/mol) at temperatures above 90 °C. The seemingly contradictory nature of chemical reaction from mixed control at 105 °C, confirms the presence of the acid direct leach reaction which has a very strong dependence on temperature and acid concentration. It is clearly evident therefore, that stibnite reductive leaching defines a complex system that necessitates precise control to maintain galvanic contact between stibnite and iron particles for effective leaching. Thus pH and iron-to-concentrate ratio should be closely controlled so as to minimise the hydrogen evolution side reaction and improve overall leach efficiency.Reductive leaching of metal sulphides is an interesting novelty in the pre-treatment of refractory ores for base and precious metals recovery. Although it remains of limited industrial applicability, it provides an additional basis for the understanding of the reaction kinetics and mechanisms involved in heterogeneous leach systems. It also presents an alternative route to metal recovery from otherwise intractable mineral ore bodies. The reductive leach process can be an important pre-treatment stage for base and precious metals recovery from the refractory sulphide concentrates where pyrometallurgy is an alternative but generates noxious gases. Stibnite dissolution has been mostly studied in alkaline leach systems ( (a) an exponential function of the form Eq. (b) a logarithmic function of the form Eq. The experimental results of Balaz and co-workers (  The diffusion control in the case of tetrahedrite dissolution could possibly be due to the diffusion of reactants and products through the porous ash layer of chalcocite (Cu  They also presented the rate controlling steps and their characteristic rate equations as originally derived by Correlating the heterogeneous system of mineral stibnite particles, elemental iron and acidified aqueous solutions The preceding discussion, although having concentrated on alkaline dissolution instead of reductive decomposition of stibnite, confirms the complex nature of heterogeneous processes. These processes do not neatly fit any one particular model and various models would give differing conclusions despite the similarity of the chemistry involved. The various mechanisms involved in heterogeneous leaching systems seem to be strongly interdependent. It can be concluded that none is operational alone at any one particular time. This paper discusses the results obtained in the studies of the kinetics of the reductive leaching of a stibnite flotation concentrate using powdered iron in a hydrochloric medium. The initial rate theory and shrinking core model have been used in the analysis of the leaching time data to elucidate the mechanisms involved and derive apparent optimum leach conditions of initial acid concentration and iron addition. The stibnite flotation concentrate sample from Tiger Reef Mine, Zimbabwe, contained about 70% Sb The flotation concentrate was pulped in 500 ml water together with the predetermined mass of iron shavings and purged with a steady stream of nitrogen gas for a period of 45–60 min. Nitrogen gas purging was for the removal of oxygen prior to the addition of hydrochloric acid. The pH was monitored by periodic withdrawal of 10 ml samples from the reactor, cooling, recording of pH and then replacing the sample back into the reactor. Effluent hydrogen sulphide was scrubbed through a 1.8 l hydrostatic column of hydrochloric acidified potassium dichromate solution Sodium diphenylamine was used as an indicator with the colour changing from light green to purple on reaching the end point. Solid residue samples were digested with aqua regia and analysed for Fe, Sb using the atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AA). Gravimetric analysis was used in the analysis for sulphur while gold and silver were determined by fire assay on selected residue samples. All liquid filtrate samples from reductive leaching were analysed by AA for Fe, As, Sb and Au, Ag, respectively.  In order to clearly explain the effect of these parameters on the leaching rate, the leaching rates were calculated as conversion per unit time from the leaching-time data by fitting the data on Eq. The leaching rates at time zero represent the initial rates as determined from Eq. In fact, Plotting the leaching rates as functions of pH, The cause of this phenomenon is the hydrogen evolution side reaction driven by the high acid concentration that is not necessarily balanced by the low iron content in the system. In The leaching rates were also plotted as a function of iron-to-concentrate ratio for all the pH values studied. These results are shown in The leaching rate–pH results in The rate constant,  The Arrhenius The activation energy ( The leaching rates have been studied in terms of initial pH, iron-to-concentrate ratio and temperature. Rates, over the entire leaching time of 360 min had a strong dependency on pH, increasing significantly as pH decreased. The rates decreased in conditions of low pH and high iron to concentrate ratios. The same phenomenon also occurred when the inverse conditions of high pH and high iron to concentrate ratios prevailed. Correlations between leaching rates and iron-to-concentrate ratios had no clearly defined patterns suggesting that pH rather than iron-to-concentrate ratio is more critical. Initial rate theory analysis confirmed the strong effect of pH but also revealed the interactive nature of the reactants in the leach system. Where interactions are non-existent or minimal, the reaction order with respect to the hydrogen ions concentration is unit, but in the results obtained it ranged from 0.40 to 0.70 with the data strongly deviating from the initial rate theory at the lower and upper ends of the iron-to-concentrate ratio. Application of the unreacted shrinking core model to the leaching data-time results, at a confidence limit of The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support from GTZ, Rio Tinto Zimbabwe (Pvt) Ltd and the University of Zimbabwe's Research Board. The generous contribution of flotation concentrates samples by the Roasting Plant, Redwing Mine and Tiger Reef Mine is greatly appreciated.