Cone crushers are used in the aggregate and mining industries to crush blasted rock. In order to design the latest cone crushers, using equations of motion and population balance models, new designs of cone crusher chamber geometry are introduced to achieve chamber optimization. Several models are investigated by analyzing the internal relationships between the main machine parameters (including speed of eccentric shaft, eccentricity, length of parallel strip, base angle of cone) and the chamber, output and size reduction. Multi-objective models of the crushing chamber, output and size reduction based on new output calculation methods, population balance models and interparticle breakage is accomplished, which provide the theoretical basis for developing the latest cone crusher models. Optimization results are also applied to improve the existing PYB1750 cone crusher, and the validity and reliability of these models are verified by the manufacturer’s full-scale prototype test.The cone crusher is widely used in industry. The fundamental working principle of the cone crusher is shown in In order to describe the coal breakage process, The models of chamber geometry, output calculation, size reduction and the cone crusher main machine parameters (including speed of eccentric main shaft, eccentricity, length of parallel strip, base angle of cone, stroke of discharge gate, etc.) intimately interact, the crusher output and size reduction being dependent on these main machine parameters. The aim of the present work is to establish a multi-objective planning model of the cone crusher chamber geometry, output and size reduction based on previous work ( The chamber is designed mainly to adopt the relevant optimum structure parameters. Cone crusher structural parameters are shown in Previous cone crusher output and size reduction analyses were based on single particle breakage, and cone crusher chamber geometry was artificially divided into several crushing zones. Such artificial divisions can lead to many inaccuracies. In order to improve the reliability of chamber geometry analysis, using existing work ( In order to improve product quality and size reduction, material in the chamber should be crushed by interparticle breakage and the rock in the chamber should flow through the chamber via free fall for improved crusher output. According to the kinematics of free fall, the chamber was studied by dividing it into several crushing zones. The crushing zones are shown in Based on the population balance model of Cone crusher output is one of the main performance indices in evaluation of crusher performance. With the impoverishment of global ore content and the increasing production of raw ore, increased cone crusher output becomes more and more important. Generally speaking, under the premise of guaranteeing size reduction, crusher output should be increased as much as possible. Previous output calculations were based on empirical formulae and did not take the kinematical character of the rock and machine parameters (speed of eccentric main shaft, eccentricity, base angle of cone, length of parallel strip and so on) into consideration, so creating great discrepancies. In order to improve output calculation accuracy, As shown in Based on the laws of mechanics and mantle motion, the cone crusher output calculation model is achieved by integrating  A perfect chamber, high output and good product shape are the principal characteristics required by modern cone crushers. In order to improve performance, the design should be based on relevant optimization and interparticle breakage. In the present work, a multi-objective planning model based on interparticle breakage, laws of mechanics and the population balance model has been developed. Coupling relationships between the cone crusher chamber, output and product size distribution exist, as shown in Structural parameters and machine parameters are the main factors affecting cone crusher performance. Structural parameters consist of chamber geometry dimensions, mantle and concave dimensions. Chamber geometry physical dimensions are composed of the nip angles In order to optimize the crusher performance, chamber, output and product size distribution, together with their relative models, have been taken into consideration in our present work. According to the above, there are three objective functions in our multi-objective planning model. Based on the population balance model and the known machine parameters of the cone crusher, the idealized curve chamber geometry can be achieved. However, due to limitations in crusher height and weight, only the approximate idealized curve chamber can be obtained. According to the above mentioned, the standard deviation of all the throughputs of the crushing zones is selected as the first objective function, as shown in Cone crusher output is one of the most important performance indices denoting cone crusher performance. Generally speaking, under the premise of guaranteeing product size distribution, we should improve cone crusher output as much as possible, so crusher output is selected as the second objective function shown in Product size distribution is the other important factor representing cone crusher performance. Improving size distribution and product shape are the most important aspects of designing the cone crusher. Therefore, Design constraints of In this work, cone crusher performance optimization involves the same multi-objective planning problem as shown in ( However, frequently not every objective can be minimized at the same time and only the suboptimum solutions can be achieved. There are principal objective methods and unit objective methods, coupled with curve methods, etc. to solve the multi-objective planning problem. In the present work, the principal objective method is adopted as the solver In order to verify the validity and reliability of the multi-objective planning models of the cone crusher in this work, PYB1750, a Chinese cone crusher, was selected as an example and the relevant multi-objective planning optimization models produced, as shown in Eqs. Moreover, cone crusher output is greatly improved with increase of base angle of cone. As shown in When physical dimensions and eccentricity of the crusher are known, the corresponding eccentric distance and stroke of discharge gate are determined. Increasing the eccentric distance and stroke will improve crusher output and size reduction, but produces more dynamic impingements. The speed of the eccentric main shaft is an important factor affecting cone crusher chamber geometry, output and size reduction. Lower speeds allow the rock to slide in the chamber (as shown in In order to verify the validity and reliability of the multi-objective planning model, we cooperated with Shanghai Jianshe Luqiao Machinery Co. Ltd., and the fifth optimization results shown in  A new chamber geometry design model, based on the population balance model and the kinematic character of the rock in the chamber has been introduced. Using this, the chamber geometry has been optimized. A cone crusher output optimization model based on equations of motion has been investigated. A size reduction optimization model based on the population balance model has also been developed. Based on the laws of mechanics and the population balance model, multi-objective planning models of chamber, output and size reduction have been developed, which provide the basis for developing modern higher reduction cone crushers. In cooperation with the crusher manufacturer, Shanghai Jianshe Luqiao Machinery Co. Ltd., a physical prototype of an improved PYB1750 cone crusher was used to verify the validity and reliability of the models, and the full-scale test results meet the multi-objective planning model very well. The author wants to thank the following persons for their support, advice and valuable discussions. General engineer Du Songshou, Senior Economist Zhou Li Zhong at Shanghai Jianshe Luqiao Machinery Co. Ltd. Further, the authors are also grateful to the cone crusher manufacturer, Shanghai Jianshe Luqiao Machinery Co. Ltd., which provided us with financial support and the related physical prototype and helped us complete the relevant full-scale test.