Proper sampling of tectonic deposits of minerals is essential to assess its economic viability of extraction. The sampling techniques used to attain this objective are described in this chapter for varying conditions such as incremental and continuous analysis for particles of different sizes, shapes, densities and for precious metals. Statistical approaches of analytical data are given to interpret results as accurately as possible.A processing plant costs many millions of dollars to build and operate. The success of this expenditure relies on the assays of a few small samples. Decisions affecting millions of dollars are made on the basis of a small fraction of the bulk of the ore body. It is therefore very important that this small fraction is as representative as possible of the bulk material. Special care needs to be taken in any sampling regime, and a considerable effort in statistical analysis The final sampling regime adopted is, however, a compromise between what theory tells us should be done and the cost and difficulty in achieving this in practice. A measurement is considered to be accurate if the difference between the measured value and the true value falls within an acceptable margin. In most cases, however, the true value of the assay is unknown, so the confidence we have in the accuracy of the measured value is also unknown. We have to rely on statistical theory to minimise the Checks can be put in place to differentiate between random variations and The A series of measurements can be precise but may not adequately represent the true value. Calibration procedures and check programs determine accuracy and repeat or replicate/duplicate measurements determine precision. If there is no Random variations are an intrinsic characteristic of a random process, whereas a The most important parameter for a population is its average value. In sampling and weighing the For a binomial sampling unit of mixed particles, the average percentage of mineral A is calculated by adding up all measurements and by dividing their sum by the number of measurements in each series.    The weighted percentage is calculated, either from the total number of particles in each series, or by multiplying each incremental percentage with the mass in each corresponding increment, and by dividing the sum of all products by the total mass for each series. However, the small error that is introduced by calculating the Δ  Due to random variations in the mass of each primary increment the weighted average is a better estimate of The The term Consider a binary mixture of quartz and hematite particles with approximately 10% hematite. Samples are taken and the number of hematite particles is counted to obtain the percentage of hematite in the sample. If each series of measurements is placed in ascending order, then the For two samples, the The classical formula for the calculation of the   The Variance values from a sampling procedure with a binary mixture of mineral particles are given in The physical appearance of a sample that consists of 50 primary increments of 5 kg each is similar to that of a sample containing five increments of 50 kg, or to that of 250 kg of a bulk solid. However, the difference in intrinsic precision (as indicated by the In practical applications of sampling bulk solids we compromise by collecting and measuring unknown parameters on gross samples, and by reporting Other convenient measures for precision are That is, if we repeat a particular experiment 100 times, then 95 times out of 100 the results would fall within a certain bound about the mean In the draft Australian Standard, DR00223, for estimating the sampling precision in sampling of particulate materials, a Fortunately, we do not need to repeat a measurement 100 times if we want to determine its 95% The most reliable estimate of The 95% Representing large bodies of minerals truly and accurately by a small sample that can be handled in a laboratory is a difficult task. The difficulties arise chiefly in ascertaining a proper sample size and in determining the degree of accuracy with which the sample represents the bulk sample. In each case, the accuracy of the final sample would depend on the mathematical probability with which the sample represents the bulk material. The probability of true representation increases when incremental samples are taken while collecting from a stream, like a conveyor belt for solids and off pipes for liquids or slurries. Several methods have been put forward to increase the probability of adequately representing the bulk minerals    In mineralogical sampling the dimension of the largest piece (     The   The When a large amount of sample has been collected, it has to be split by a suitable method such as riffling. At each stage of subdivision, samples have to be collected, assayed and When the sample is almost an infinite lot and where the proportion of mineral particles has been mixed with gangue and the particles are large enough to be counted, it may be easier to adopt the following procedure for determining Let    Then, the The The Regular samples of the feed were required at a copper-processing plant, having a copper content of about 9%. The confidence level of estimation was required to be 0.1% Cu at 2 From the data, Since the Again from the data As the ore contains chalcocite (Cu That is, the copper content of Cu The chalcocite content of the ore is then given by The mineralogical composition factor, Thus, the minimum sample size should be 131 kg. Note the importance of not rounding off the numbers until the final result. If A composite sample of galena and quartz was to be sampled such that the assay would be within 0.20% of the true assay, of say 5.5%, with a probability of 0.99, i.e. the sample assay would be 5.5% ± 0.20%, 99 times out of 100. Given that the densities of galena and quartz were 7400 kg/m Determine To determine To determine the value of From the table, corresponding to a probability of 0.99, the value of the deviation from the standard unit is 2.576. i.e. Substituting into Equation Hence, the mass of sample necessary to give an assay within the range 5.5 ± 0.20%, 99 times out of 100 would be = 228,201.9 × 3.07 = 700,579 g ≈ 701 kg. Where variations in density of individual particles and their composition occur, the following considerations may be adopted to provide the sample size Divide the material into Consider the mass percent of the Consider For sampling a mixture of two components (mineral and gangue) the proportion of particles in the And the assay of the mixture,   For a multi-component system the principles developed in Equations A nickel sulphide ore mineral (pentlandite) has an average particle size of 1 mm. It is separated into three fractions and the properties of each fraction are as follows: The lot has to be sampled so that it would assay ±0.15% of the true assay having 5% with a probability of 99%. As the stipulated probability is 0.99, Here Estimate With known Now follow Theoretically, unbiased gross samples can be obtained by collecting a sufficiently large number of single particles from a sampling unit. If each particle has a finite chance of being selected for a gross sample, and if this probability is only a function of its size, then this collection of particles will constitute an unbiased probability sample. In the practice of sampling bulk solids, such a sample collection scheme is highly impractical. Therefore, we collect groups of particles for Sampling experiments that are based on the collection of a series of small and large increments from a large set of particles demonstrates that the precision of a single-increment sampling regime is a function of the number of particles in a primary increment. As a matter of fact, the formula for the The binomial sampling experiment in which Since these ranges are based on properties of the binomial distribution, their values are obviously independent of particle size. For a bulk solid with a certain density, its top size determines the mass of a The mass of an increment must be such that it is large enough to include the large particles, and particles present in the sample should be in the same proportions as in the lot being sampled. The minimum mass of the increment is, therefore, dependent on the size of the particles being sampled. The top size of a bulk solid is a measure of length. The mass of a particle is a function of its volume and specific gravity and ultimately a function of its mean Δ Δ Experience and theory are embodied in a number of national and international standards on sampling of particulate materials where the sampling regimes are defined in terms of the total number of increments, and the average mass of a It is generally accepted that a In the standard on sampling of iron ore (ISO TC102), the minimum mass for The minimum mass for a Once the mass for a Most standards for bulk solids contain simple formulae to calculate the required number of increments for a consignment from a given number for the unit quantity (usually 1000 t), or   For consignments larger than this unit mass of 1000 t, ASTM D 2234 and ISO 1988 use the same formula to calculate the required number of  Σ  The overall   In a well-balanced sampling regime, the variance of sampling and the variance of preparation should be of the same order of magnitude. Dividing a consignment of bulk solids into lots, collecting, preparing and assaying samples from each lot, and reporting composite assays for the consignment, affects significantly the precision of the final result. The variance of preparation and analysis may easily become a limiting factor for the precision of a sampling regime. If we solve var(c) = composition var(d) = distribution var(pa) = preparation and analysis var(t) = total The denominator of this formula may easily become a limiting factor for the total precision of sampling regimes since it shows that Logically, the total Suppose that we have a consignment of 1000 t of iron ore with an assay of 65.0% Fe, and that we want to determine the assay with a precision of ±10%. A precision of ±10% of 65.0% Fe is equivalent to ±6.5% of this iron content, and results in a standard deviation of 6.5/2 = 3.25 for a total variance In this case, a sampling regime of one For a precision of ±1.0% instead of ±6.5%, how many increments must we collect to attain this precision? For an iron assay precision of ±1.0% the standard deviation becomes 1/2 = 0.5 for a total variance If a greater iron assay precision of ±0.25 % is required, then the denominator in the above equation becomes negative and it is not possible to obtain that degree of precision sampling from a single lot. The consignment must be divided into sub-lots in order to determine the assay with this precision. These results show that the assay of this particular type of ore cannot be determined with a precision of ±0.25% at affordable costs because the variance In terms of When it is impossible to achieve the desired precision by testing a single gross sample from a lot (e.g. the number of increments is impossibly large), then it is necessary to divide the lot into a number of sub-lots, The total number of Calculate the number of increments required in the sampling of silica in iron ore for a desired overall precision of 0.1, if the increment If the lot is divided into, say, eight sub-lots, then Therefore, 32 primary increments are required per sub-lot for a total of 8 × 32 = 256 primary increments in total. When small amounts of sample are removed from a lot at random and combined to form a composite sample, the problem is to ascertain the incremental amounts and number of increments which would represent the bulk within specified limits. Each individual sample will have an assay equal to, more or less than, the true value. Assuming that a normal Gaussian distribution will be obtained if the assays were plotted against frequency, the probability that the assay will be within permissible limits will be given by Now if The Substituting the values of The application of this method of estimating Ten samples were taken from a heap of copper ore each weighing 2 kg. The assays for copper show the following distribution: The final sample should assay within ±5% of the true value with a confidence of 99%. Estimate the number of increments. Average assay = ( Standard deviation For the probability  Calculate the value of i.e.  Hence, 61 increments have to be taken whose weight would be 61 × 2 = 122 kg When mechanical samplers are employed, the samplers are designed to cut into and withdraw from a stream of travelling material at a predetermined frequency and speed. Cutters could operate linearly or rotate within the stream to be sampled. A schematic design of a linear cutter is illustrated in Its operation depends on Cutter opening Stroke length Cutter speed The rule of thumb for cutter openings is It is expected that the opening sizes indicated here would prevent the formation of bridges across the openings in samplers. Also, the wider the cutter opening the greater could be the speed of traversing the cutter. The stroke length is adjusted to cover the width of the conveyer belt where the stream consists of dry solids, or the width of the stream where liquids or slurries have to be sampled. The amount of sample ( For a feed rate expressed as kg/s, a cutter speed in m/s and a cutter opening in m, the mass The rotary type of cutters ( If When the leading edge of the cutter reaches the centreline of the discharging conveyor or stream, cos To determine the quantity of sample taken by the arc cutters, it is necessary to know the cutter angle, The mass of sample of solids,  The volume,  Note: Usually Dolomite was carried to the bunkers of a blast furnace at the rate of 200 t/h using a 75 cm wide rubber conveyor belt. The rate of travel of the belt was 61 m/min. The size analysis of dolomite indicated 95% smaller than 7 cm. The dolomite was sampled as it entered the bunkers using a linear traversing sampler capable of traversing at the rate of 60 cm/s and making 20 cuts per hour. Estimate the mass of sample collected in 10 min. Using rule of thumb, the normal cutter opening = 3 × 0.07 = 0.21 m Using Equation Mass of sample cut in 10 min = 0.194 × 20/6 = 0.647 kg Precious metal deposits sometimes contain very low concentrations of discrete metallic particles as in the case of gold deposits. Extra care is, therefore, needed to collect a representative sample. If it is assumed that the ore comprises free particles of uniform size, then   The number of particles per gram,  The mass of sample,  Based on Gy In developing the table, a 90% Note: A usual practice is to crush 3.5 kg ore to 95% passing 75 μm sieve size and then taking a 200 g sample for assay. When sampling to determine the grade of a large body of material, the sample of 94 kg (for example) must be reduced to a few grams for chemical analysis. To do this and still maintain the sampling accuracy, Equation A nomograph Taking the logs of both sides of Equation The use of the figure is illustrated in the following example. A sample of 94 kg (94,000 g) is crushed to minus 5 mm and a 30 g sub-sample is split out for gold assay, using a riffle. The line in To stay within the specified sampling accuracy, a sampling regime similar to The 94 kg of minus 5 mm material is sub-divided into a sub-sample mass of 1000 g in the first stage. This 1 kg of sample is then pulverised to minus 0.5 mm and divided again to the required sample mass of 30 g. Following this sampling regime will maintain the sampling procedure below the required sampling error. To derive a An alternative graphical method is to plot sample mass ( This can be achieved in the following manner: From Gy Thus for a given value of To the left of this line, the sample mass is greater than the minimum required, To the right of the line, the sample mass is less than the minimum and the sampling A family of lines of equal  Iron ore was sampled before stock piling with a stacker. One hundred samples taken from the stacker–conveyor showed a standard deviation in the iron assay of ±0.5%. The ore assayed, on average, 59% Fe. Sieve analysis of the samples showed that the Run-of-Mine iron ore was conveyed on a conveyor belt and sampled at regular intervals. The sieve analyses and Fe distribution obtained at different sampling frequencies gave the following results: The specific gravity of the ore was 5.5 and that of the gangue material was 2.55. Determine the minimum mass of sample required to represent the Run-of-Mine ore. A pile of gold tailings was augured to sample the dump. A 5 cm diameter drill bit was used and samples recovered from different depths. The recovered samples were collected and after mixing thoroughly, the composite was crushed, screened between 125 μm and 75 μm and analysed for gold. The average of 10 gold analyses indicated a value of 200 ± 10 ppm gold. The liberation size of the gold was determined as −43 μm. The specific gravity of the gold bearing minerals was 4.5 and the associated gangue minerals were 2.68. Estimate the minimum size of the sample. In a metallurgical test, the quality of feed was monitored. Four operators and three similar test equipment were employed. Material lost in the feed after each operation in each test was: Estimate the variance A mechanical sampler was used to sample a stream of iron ore conveyed on a 1.5 m wide travelling conveyor at a rate of 90 m/min. and loaded to carry 12 mt/h of ore. The sample cutter opening was 20 cm square and was operated at a frequency of 5 cuts per minute. The recovered sample was first crushed to –10 mm and then to –2.5 mm and analysed for Fe content. The liberation size of Fe was –65 μm and the standard deviation of the Fe content was ±0.15 after the first crushing and the same after the second crushing. If the average analysis was 59% Fe, estimate The mass of sample cut per minute, The minimum mass of sample required to represent the Fe level of the ore. The average assay of a gold sample was 200 ppm Au that varied within 0.5% of the true assay. 95% of the assays had a probability of 0.99 of the true assay. Specific gravity of the gold ore was 5.6 and the gangue was 2.54. Determine the size of a crushed gold ore sample that was taken. The mass fractions and distributions of a mixture of sphalerite, chert and middle fractions were determined and the results tabulated below. Compute the size of sample that should be taken such that its assay may be within 0.2% of the true assay, say 5% with a probability of 0.99. A gold ore was crushed in a jaw crusher down to 3 mm and to 1 mm in a cone crusher and finally in a rod mill to minus 75 μm and sampled at each stage. The standard deviation at the first stage was ±10 ppm, ±1 ppm at the second stage and ±0.1 at the third stage. The confidence level in assaying was 3.0 ± 0.1%. Estimate the minimum mass of sample to be taken at each stage. Three stages of crushing and one stage of riffling were required to get a bauxite ore to the laboratory for testing. The first stage of crushing produced 100% minus 5 mm, all products from the second stage passed 2 mm and the product from the third stage of grinding passed 125 μm. After each stage, the products were sampled and analysed for alumina. The standard deviations of the alumina determinations were 0.2, 0.1 and 0.05 in the three stages, respectively. The ore assayed 2.1 ± 0.2% of Al Estimate the minimum mass of the sample that should be taken to represent the ore after each stage. Ten samples were randomly taken from a 5000 lot of pyrolusite (MnO  The total standard variance A rotary arc cutter sampler was used to cut samples of a mineral conveyed by a conveyor belt. The sample cutter was placed 75 cm below the conveyor, which travelled at a speed of 90 m/min and carried 50 t of the mineral per minute. The maximum cutter opening was 7 cm. Estimate: The cutter angle required The quantity of sample taken per cut