This paper reports long-term hydrogen storage experiments on MgH2 and on the Mg alloy ZK60 following prior Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD). Although SPD processing leads to significant enhancements of hydrogen absorption and desorption rates in both materials, these are not necessarily stable with respect to repeated loading/unloading cycles. Cold rolled (CR) MgH2 shows a reduction of capacity by 30% after 100 cycles. In contrast, in ZK60 (Mg-5Zn-0.8Zr) processed by High Pressure Torsion (HPT), both kinetics and storage capacity are stable for at least 200 absorption/desorption cycles. Analysis by means of Johnson-Mehl-Avrami theory clearly suggests that in the case of CR MgH2 nucleation is followed by growth of extended MgH2 domains leading to a gradual deterioration of hydrogen diffusion and storage/release characteristics. In the case of HPT ZK60, however, no further growth occurs subsequent to nucleation thus allowing for permanently enhanced hydrogen diffusion and stable storage/release properties. These results can be understood in terms of the different density and stability of SPD-induced lattice defects acting as nucleation sites in both materials studied.Recent research on materials capable of reversibly absorbing hydrogen has shown that Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD) generally leads to enhanced kinetics and easier activation The large plastic strain applied to materials during SPD processing leads to a strong decrease of grain size in combination with enhanced dislocation density and higher vacancy concentration. The smaller grain size raises the volume fraction of grain boundaries and is associated with an increase of intrinsic surface entailing accelerated grain boundary diffusion Concerning long-term stability, Krystian et al. Leiva et al. It is the aim of this work to investigate the evolution of capacity and kinetics of cold rolled MgH MgH MgH ZK60 was deformed by HPT in air at RT. The disks with 8 mm in diameter and 0.8 mm thickness were deformed by 2 rotations at a pressure of 4 GPa and a rotational speed of 0.2 rotations/min giving a maximum shear strain Long-term measurements were done using sample masses up to 0.3 g in a Sieverts type apparatus designed and constructed at our faculty MgH Two samples of ZK60 (HPT) were investigated. The material showed slow kinetics in the beginning but improved considerably after about 40 cycles. Times for both charging and discharging during the later cycles, therefore, were shortened and adjusted accordingly. The first sample was studied over 114 cycles, absorption times varied from 120 to 16 min and desorption times from 30 min to 8 min. For the second sample 220 cycles were performed. Absorption times varied from 115 min to 25 min while desorption times decreased from 165 min in the beginning to 3 min at later stages of the experiment. Selected absorption and desorption curves are shown in The slow-down of the kinetics is clearly visible: While in the 10th cycle the material is able to desorb 80% of the hydrogen within 20 min, this time increases to 40 min already during the first 40 cycles. After 100 cycles 80% of the initial storage capacity on absorption are not reached anymore within 60 min and also the desorption is fully completed only after 60 min. The maximum storage capacity was reached during the first 10 cycles attaining 6 wt.% after a charging time of 60 min. As can be seen in the figure the capacity reached within 60 min decreases progressively with cycle number resulting in a total drop by about 30% during the first 100 cycles. The decline is clearly observable in both the absorption and the desorption curves. In addition, it is obvious that not only the total loading capacity is strongly reduced with increasing cycle number but also the kinetics of absorption and desorption decrease significantly. Generally, desorption is considerably faster than absorption. The full loading capacity is never reached within 60 min while desorption always appears to be fairly complete as suggested by the fact that the desorption curves become almost level well before the end of the cycle time. This would imply that all the hydrogen absorbed during loading will be removed during desorption so that no hydrogen is left in the sample and absorption always restarts at zero level. Accordingly, the diminishing performance with cycle number could be explained by a progressively severe impairment of the charging mechanism in cold rolled MgH However, closer inspection of the data indicates that the situation is more complex and reveals a characteristic difficulty generally inherent to practically all long-term performance studies involving large numbers of loading cycles. Discharging is not fully complete particularly at higher cycle numbers and small amounts of hydrogen may be left in the sample after desorption. Such small differences are difficult to control and may accumulate in the course of 100 cycles. For this reason X-ray measurements of the sample were performed before and after the experiment in order to assess the amount of residual hydride. X-ray powder patterns were taken before and after cycling with a HUBER-Guinier image plate recording system using Cu The cycling kinetics in ZK60 is markedly different from MgH There is a long-term evolution of both kinetics and capacity with cycle number. The initial slow rise becomes more noticeable only after approximately 40 cycles. From cycle 40 to cycle 100 both kinetics and capacity increase to finally reach their maximum (close to 4 wt.%) between cycle 100 and 110. The increase of kinetics and capacity during these cycles is due to the activation process creating cracks in the oxide layer and increasing the overall surface area. This activation, which is not subject of this work, enhances diffusion of hydrogen to the Mg matrix. It was shown in Ref. The capacity appears to be somewhat larger for desorption than for absorption. This is misleading, however, since only the initial part of the loading curve is plotted so that the final hydrogen concentration reached is somewhat higher in accordance with the desorption curves. The results for the second sample were similar and both capacity and kinetics remained stable up to cycle 220. These findings are in good agreement with observations during the long-term cycling test of ZK60 processed by ECAP described in Ref. The desorption curves for cycles 80 and 100 become horizontal at a level corresponding to a lower capacity than for cycles 40 and 60 which appears to be at variance with the finding that the capacity increases steadily up to cycle 100. However, this simply reflects the fact that the loading times for lower cycle numbers were considerably longer (see X-ray powder patterns of ZK60 before and after High Pressure Torsion were recorded using Cu TEM investigations were performed on ZK60 after HPT and show a grain size of about 250 nm (see   Our results show that, compared to cold-rolled MgH In particular, we note that the kinetics of ZK60 (HPT) is similar to the behavior observed for ZK60 (ECAP), see In order to gain better insight into the underlying mechanisms of nucleation and growth controlling the absorption and desorption behavior, data of selected characteristic cycles have been evaluated in terms of the Johnson-Mehl-Avrami (JMA) representation and plotted In this equation The data of Avrami plots as seen in Strictly speaking, the application of the JMA approach is based on several assumptions such as isothermal conditions, a constant thermodynamic driving force and the presence of a rate-controlling process governing the kinetics. In the present context, these conditions are not exactly fulfilled, however, can be considered to be valid to a reasonable approximation. The cycling experiments were performed at nominally constant temperature and variations due to the latent heat involved in the hydride formation remained below 10 K. Also, the pressures occurring during absorption/desorption were chosen in such a way as to maintain sufficient distance from equilibrium in order to avoid significant variations of the driving force. Finally, the absorption/desorption rates are influenced by several factors including dissociation, diffusion, nucleation and growth. However, at least during certain stages of the transformation, particular processes will become dominant in controlling the reaction rate. Accordingly, it is not expected that the experimentally determined Avrami exponents are exact integers extending over the entire course of the absorption/desorption process. Rather, the evaluation is done on the assumption that the exponents will approach integer values closely enough in order to allow identification of the leading processes corresponding to particular stages of the transformation. Mathematically more elaborate concepts have been developed, in particular, for modeling the desorption from magnesium hydride (see the work by Evard et al. The ZK60 material used was a Mg alloy containing about 5 wt.% (1.9 at.%) Zn and 0.8 wt.% (0.2 at.%) Zr. The phase diagram of the binary system Mg–Zn shows that only very low concentrations of Zn can be dissolved in the Mg matrix forming a solid solution while most of the alloyed Zn is contained in precipitates of MgZn However, the size of the precipitates in the commercial alloy used in this work may well be larger depending on unknown details of its preparation. In spite of its strong temperature dependence, the concentration of the Zn atoms dissolved in the Mg matrix always remains well below one percent but in any case amounts to at least 0.2 at.%. This corresponds to an average distance of about 8 lattice sites between two nearest Zn atoms (1/8 × 1/8 × 1/8 ≈ 0.002). Very importantly, the SPD treatment produces a high concentration of lattice defects such as vacancy agglomerates and dislocations with atomic concentration of typically 10 Absorption starts by dissociation of H As absorption proceeds, therefore, a very large concentration of small nuclei of approximately equal size is created mutually blocking their further growth. Such an arrangement gives rise to an Avrami exponent of n = 1, which is actually observed for ZK60 in this experiment, and which corresponds to nucleation without growth of nuclei (see also On desorption, to first approximation, each MgH Considering the absorption process one has to bear in mind that, in contrast to ZK60, the concentration of impurity atoms in both Mg and MgH As a consequence of this considerable distance between nucleation sites hydride nuclei undergo independent and undisturbed growth for a much longer time before they will encounter hydride domains having developed from neighboring nuclei. This is indeed reflected by the initial slope in the JMA absorption plots ( The decrease of capacity and slowing down of the kinetics observed in MgH In the case of desorption ( This paper presents hydrogen absorption and desorption experiments in pure Mg and the Mg alloy ZK60 being processed by SPD. Emphasis was put on the investigation of the reversibility and long-term stability of storage and release of hydrogen. The results can be summarized and interpreted as follows: In Cold Rolled MgH In High Pressure Torsion processed ZK60 both kinetics and storage capacity are superior compared to pure Mg; in addition, they remain stable until the highest cycle numbers studied. In parallel, the JMA analyses show n = 1 for both absorption and desorption and for all cycles investigated indicating that only nucleation governs the formation of both the hydride and the ZK60 solid solution phase, respectively. This behavior can be attributed to the high density of hydride nuclei hindering each other to grow; in turn, this high density of nuclei is a consequence of the high density of SPD induced lattice defects which again act as nucleation sites, yet are stabilized by the alloy atoms and precipitates being present in the ZK60 alloy but not in pure Mg. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the “