Most of the research works done for alternative energy sources have shown that, in general, coprocessing of coal with biomass-type wastes has a positive effect on the liquefaction yields and these materials are increasingly studied as coliquefaction agents for the conversion of coal to liquid fuels. Addition of biomass waste materials to coal is known to be synergetic in that it improves the yields and quality of liquid products produced from coal under relatively mild conditions of temperature and pressure. This paper reports the coprocessing of a Turkish lignite with sawdust in the category of biomass-type waste material. The experiments have been conducted in a stainless-steel reactor, and temperature and tetralin/(lignite+sawdust) ratio were kept constant at 350 °C and 3:1 (vol/wt), respectively. This is the first time that the influence of reaction pressures on coliquefaction yields was investigated. In addition, the influence of the sawdust/lignite ratios on coprocessing conversion and product distribution was also investigated under the same reaction conditions. The runs were carried out at 10, 25, 40, 55, and 70 atm initial cold hydrogen pressure values and at 0.5:1, 0.75:1, 1:1, 1.25:1, and 1.5:1 sawdust/lignite (wt/wt) ratio values.After the crude oil crisis in the 1970s, investigations of new energy sources and studies done in order to benefit from them in the best way have became more intense. Nowadays, search studies of alternative energy sources are accelerated. In order to preserve valuable fossil fuels such as crude oil and natural gas, approaches for new technologies and profitable use of present energy sources such as solid wastes are developed. It is anticipated that due to uncertain supplies of crude oil, more markets will develop for low-cost energy substitutes such as lignocellulosic and other biomass resources that take advantage of wide distribution and renewability The high price of hydrogen gas and the high-operation pressure needed to achieve high conversions make liquefaction processes not competitive compared to petroleum-derived products The aim of coliquefaction of coal with waste materials is to obtain products with aromatic structure at higher ratios than liquid products obtained from coal. Coprocessing of waste materials with coal can also provide some technical and environmental advantages such as reduction in the number of landfills, continuous operation in the case of uneven collection of waste, removal of hazardous heavy metals that may be presented in wastes by incorporation in coal liquefaction residues, and possible synergism in the coprocessing reaction Biomass-type waste materials can be well used as coliquefaction agents for conversion of coal to liquid fuels. The waste material may improve the overall economics of coal liquefaction by fulfilling one or more of the roles of an expensive solvent. An ideal coliquefaction agent to allow for a significant economic effect on coal liquefaction process should be available in an unlimited supply and it should be too expensive to dispose off. Also, to ensure good processing properties, it should contain components that can function as hydrogen-transfer agents for free radicals In this present work, results of separate liquefaction of sawdust and lignite and of the coprocessing of these materials under similar reaction conditions, but at different reaction pressures and sawdust/lignite ratios, were reported. In this work, Soma lignite was liquefied with tetralin (Merck grade) under pressurized hydrogen atmosphere. Sawdust obtained as a SEKA (Dalaman, Turkey) paper industry waste was used as a coliquefaction agent. The lignite samples were ground to −60 mesh size and the sawdust samples were ground and sifted to a particle size between 0.1 and 0.5 mm. The samples were dried under vacuum at 105 °C for 2 h. The proximate and ultimate analysis data for lignite and sawdust samples were presented in a previous paper Liquefaction experiments were carried out in a 250-ml-magnetically stirred and electrically heated stainless-steel Ernst Haage 1220 Type autoclave. The wall temperature of the autoclave was measured by a digital thermometer with a NiCr–Ni thermocouple, and it was controlled to within ±3 °C. The experiments discussed in this report were carried out at a reaction temperature of 350 °C, tetralin/(lignite+sawdust) ratio of 3:1 (vol/wt). Experiments were performed at five different pressure values such as 10, 25, 40, 55, and 70 atm initial cold pressure and at five different sawdust/lignite-ratio values such as 0.5:1, 0.75:1, 1:1, 1.25:1, and 1.5:1 (wt/wt). The amount of lignite in coprocessing runs were kept as 10 g. The required amounts of sawdust were mixed with lignite and tetralin was added to the mixture. The autoclave was pressurized with hydrogen, heated to the desired reaction temperature for about 30 min, and held at this temperature by mixing for 1 h. After the reaction, the autoclave was cooled overnight to room temperature. Upon cooling, the final pressure value was recorded. The gas products were collected for analysis and the remaining slurry was washed with toluene and fractionated by Soxhlet extraction into oils (hexane solubles), asphaltenes (hexane insolubles, toluene solubles), preasphaltenes, (toluene insolubles, tetrahydrofuran solubles) and residues (tetrahydrofuran insolubles). The complete experimental details and the calculation of yields have been reported previously In this paper, the liquefaction behaviour of Soma lignite with sawdust was investigated with respect to variation of pressure and sawdust/lignite ratio. The results are given in In the first part of this study, the effect of coprocessing at 40 atm was investigated In the second part of this work, the influence of hydrogen pressure on coprocessing yields was investigated. Gas yield decreased from 12.52% to 10.41% as pressure was changed from 10 to 25 atm Increasing the pressure from 10 to 25 atm increased the coprocessing oil yields from 29.54% to 33.77%. Then, oil yield decreased to 31.35% at 40 atm. However, maximum oil yield was obtained at 55 atm as 34.17%, then decreased slightly to 33.58% at 70 atm. In these experiments, oil+gas total yield increased from 42.06% to 44.18%, respectively, when pressure was increased from 10 to 25 atm and decreased to 43.61% at 40 atm. However, the highest oil+gas yield was observed at 55 atm as 45.35% and it decreased to 43.14% at 70 atm. It can be thought that the increase in oil yield and oil+gas total yield of lignite+sawdust coprocessing may be caused by conversion of sawdust since sawdust was previously found to be very reactive Increasing the pressure from 10 to 40 atm increased the coprocessing asphaltene yields from 13.85% to 14.50%. The asphaltene yields decreased to 12.31% at 55 atm and slightly increased to 12.97% at 70 atm. The asphaltene yield at this pressure was lower than expected. However, the maximum asphaltene yield in lignite–sawdust mixture was reached at 40 atm initial hydrogen pressure. This is in contrast to the hydrogenation process where the higher the initial hydrogen pressure was, the higher asphaltene yields were obtained According to the results obtained in this work, the effect of increasing the initial hydrogen pressure does not seem to be highly effective on the yields and total conversion. Based on these results, it can be said that a lower initial hydrogen pressure in coprocessing of lignite with sawdust, such as 40 atm, may give better results. Also, if we take into consideration the technical and economical difficulties that may arrive at high pressures, this fact gives an advantage. In the third part of this work, the influence of the sawdust/lignite ratio on coprocessing conversion products was investigated under the same reaction conditions. The results obtained are given in It has been reported that under similar conditions, 94.28% of sawdust and 47.95% of lignite were converted. It can be said that sawdust almost completely converted to liquids and gases at these respective conditions In the coprocessing of 0.5:1 sawdust/lignite mixture, the gas yield was obtained as 16.31% under the same conditions. Likewise, asphaltene and preasphaltene yields were observed as 14.36% and 9.09%, respectively. Synergism effects were observed for gas yield as higher but for asphaltene and preasphaltene yields as lower. On the other hand, no synergism effects were observed for oil and oil+gas yields and total conversion. In the coprocessing work done at 0.75:1 sawdust/lignite ratio value, the gas, oil, and oil+gas yields were calculated as 14.07%, 27.78%, and 41.85% and asphaltene and preasphaltene yields were found as 13.78% and 8.08%, respectively. Total conversion was 61.92%. Synergism effect was observed only for gas yield In the experiments carried out at 1:1 sawdust/lignite ratio values, the gas, oil, oil+gas, asphaltene, and preasphaltene yields were observed as 12.26%, 31.35%, 43.61%, 14.50%, and 7.68%, respectively. Total conversion was found as 64.04%. Synergism effects for coprocessing gas and asphaltene yields were only slightly observed By coprocessing at 1.25:1 sawdust/lignite ratio value, gas, oil, oil+gas, asphaltene, and preasphaltene yields were obtained as 10.14%, 38.68%, 48.82%, 13.02%, and 7.05%, respectively. Total conversion was observed as 67.65% at this condition. The value obtained for oil yield was almost equal to the arithmetical mean value of the individual lignite and sawdust oil yield values According to the results obtained at 1.5:1 sawdust/lignite ratio value, the gas, preasphaltene, and asphaltene yields observed were as low as 9.68%, 5.60%, and 17.80%. However, the oil, oil+gas yields, and total conversion were observed as 42.35%, 52.03%, and 74.32%, respectively. At this sawdust/lignite ratio value, synergism effects were clearly observed for oil, oil+gas, and asphaltene yields and total conversion The yields and total conversions obtained from coliquefaction at each sawdust/lignite ratios were also compared It is very difficult to compare the yields reported here with the results of other studies because of the problems arising from the lack of complete correspondence in the reaction conditions in the lignite and sawdust properties as well as from the difference in the way of defining liquid yields. However, as a result, it can be said here that increasing the sawdust ratio in the lignite liquefaction medium increases reaction rate of lignite depolymerization under the conditions investigated. We appreciate the support of YÜAF (Project No. 95-B-07-01-02) for the accomplishment of this work.