As part of a continuing effort, the separation of cadmium, nickel and zinc from ZnO–CdO–NiO mixture has been addressed to simulate the conditions encountered in Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residues. For this purpose, mixtures of ZnO, CdO, and NiO were baked at fairly low temperatures (200–400°C) in the presence of ammonium chloride. As a result of baking, almost complete conversion of metals to their corresponding chlorides was achieved. While baking process provided no selectivity of metals, the subsequent water leaching process was successfully employed for the selective separation of metals based on leaching at different pH values. A factorial design of experiments was used to examine the main effects of the experimental parameters on the response. The proposed model fitted well to the experimental data according to R2 and R2
                     adj correlation coefficients of response values. This procedure enabled the selective separation and concentration of zinc from the mixture. Ammonium chloride baking and leaching of a Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residue sample under similar conditions resulted in 88.1% Ni, 96.7% Cd, and less than 1% Zn extractions, showing a good agreement with the experimental results obtained from pure oxide mixtures. The findings of this research appear to be useful for the treatment of Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residues.Zinc plant residues (ZPRs) have been traditionally the primary resource for the production of cadmium metal. The hydrometallurgy of cadmium has been discussed in length elsewhere ( The high nickel content associated with some of the zinc concentrates represents a metallurgical challenge related to the downstream processing of purification filtercakes since nickel is precipitated with cadmium and copper during zinc powder cementation process used to purify the zinc electrolyte prior to the electrowinning. This poses potential difficulty in subsequent processing of Cd–Ni purification residue. This has given rise to several process strategies such as selective cementation, selective leaching, and selective electrowinning, which have been examined for the separation of cadmium from nickel, all with less success ( Selective sulfation of zinc plant leach and purification residues with such sulfating reagents as sulfuric acid and elemental sulfur has been extensively reported and used in zinc industry ( In this study, factorial design was used to investigate the baking conditions of zinc, nickel and cadmium from oxide materials with ammonium chloride. This design method does not require a large number of runs and exposes the main effects of parameters on the response. Also, to confirm the results from the mixture of pure oxides, two experiments were performed under the similar conditions with real Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residue. It is expected that the following reaction (Reaction To better understand the behavior of zinc, cadmium and nickel in aqueous media, the E According to  It should be noted that only dominant metal-chloride complexes are shown in E It can be observed from Contrary to zinc, cadmium forms CdCl The collected thermodynamic data appeared to be extremely useful in predicting the behavior of the chlorinated mixture in aqueous media. Analytical grade oxides of cadmium, zinc, nickel, and ammonium chloride (NH A small muffle furnace was used for the purpose of baking. The baking experiments were performed in a porcelain crucible. In each experiment, 5 Deionized (DI) water was used for leaching experiments. The leaching experiments were performed in a 1 The leach residues were rinsed with DI water and dried in a furnace at 70 Two experiments were performed under the preferred conditions obtained from the abovementioned experiments with the Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residues and the results reported. Based on thermodynamic analysis, it can be concluded that selective chlorination of cadmium from the mixture can take place in the temperature range 200–250 However, it was decided to seek a separation strategy through subsequent aqueous processing. Based on E This strategy proved to be successful as examined on zinc, cadmium, and nickel chloride mixture. While cadmium chloride was completely leached at a pH of 8.2, no zinc or nickel chlorides were leached. Accordingly, nickel chloride was leached at a pH of 7.2, while zinc chloride remained in solid leach residues. Result of this experiment further approved the accuracy of the above mentioned thermodynamic analysis. Based on the scoping experiments, optimization criterion was defined as the maximum cadmium and nickel leaching and minimum zinc leaching. Therefore this strategy was taken into account in the design of baking experiments. The results of the experiments for each experimental condition are shown in As it is evident from In designed experiments, R The model checking is an important part of the data analysis procedure. In general, it is always necessary to examine the fitted model to ensure that it provides an adequate approximation to the real system. In metal extraction model, the adequate precision ratio for three metals indicates an adequate signal-to-noise ratio (S/N); where values greater than 4 are desirable. The experimental results were evaluated according to factorial design and approximating function of extraction percent of metals obtained as shown in Eqs. In the above equations The residual plots were examined for the model adequacy for each metal extraction values. In The response surface graphs for metal extractions under the optimum condition are shown in Also it is evident from  The optimum baking conditions were determined for selective separation of zinc from cadmium and nickel, using the data obtained from full factorial designed experiments. The optimization criterion was defined to maximize cadmium and nickel extraction, while keeping the zinc extraction minimum. Two of the optimum points were selected, and experiments were run at these two points and the responses were determined ( It is noted that under the optimum working conditions, the extraction of cadmium and nickel does not exceed 92% whereas during the experiments ( Ammonium chloride baking of the Cd–Ni zinc plant residue sample with two times of stoichiometric amount of NH The findings of this research may be used for the separation of nickel from Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residues, which is the subject of ongoing research. The present study was aimed to explore the separation of cadmium, nickel and zinc from ZnO–CdO–NiO mixture through a process comprising baking with ammonium chloride and water leaching. Thermodynamic data appeared to be extremely useful in predicting the behavior of the chlorinated mixture in aqueous media. Experimental runs were carried out according to two level full factorial design and three parameters including ammonium chloride amount, temperature and baking time were defined as independent factors. Under the optimized conditions (1.34 times of stoichiometric amount of NH The application of ammonium chloride baking and selective leaching of the Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residue sample with two times of stoichiometric amount of NH More research is warranted to study the effect of impurities (copper, iron, manganese, etc.) on the ammonium chloride baking and leaching of Cd–Ni zinc plant purification residues. The authors appreciate the assistance of the metallurgical processing laboratory staff of the Fırat University. MSS is thankful to Professor H. Huang, Montana Tech, for the training of STABCAL software.