In this work, a stimulation then heat production optimization strategy is presented for prototypical EGS geothermal reservoirs by comparing conventional stimulation-then-production scenarios against revised stimulation schedules. A generic reservoir is selected with an initial permeability in the range of 10−17–10−16
                     m2, fracture density of ∼0.09m−1 and fractures oriented such that either none, one, or both sets of fractures are critically stressed. For a given reservoir with a pre-existing fracture network, two parallel manifolds are stimulated that are analogous to horizontal wells that allow a uniform sweep of fluids between the zones. The enhanced connectivity that develops between the injection zone and the production zone significantly enhances the heat sweep efficiency, while simultaneously increasing the fluid flux rate at the production well. For a 10m deep section of reservoir the resulting electric power production reaches a maximum of 14.5MWe and is maintained over 10 years yielding cumulative energy recoveries that are a factor of 1.9 higher than for standard stimulation. Sensitivity analyses for varied fracture orientations and stimulation directions reveal that the direction of such manifolds used in the stimulation should be aligned closely with the orientation of the major principal stress, in order to create the maximum connectivity. When the fractures are less prone to fail, the output electric power is reduced by a decrease in the fluid flux rate to the production well.Enhanced geothermal reservoirs (EGS) have been shown to be a viable resource for the recovery of thermal energy. However, due to their intrinsic characteristics of low permeability and porosity they have been proved intractable in developing sufficient fluid throughput by stimulation. The principal challenge has been in developing adequate permeability in the reservoir that also retains sufficient heat transfer area ( Numerical simulation is an essential approach to investigate coupled multi-physics processes (Thermal-Hydraulic-Mechanical) and to better understand the fundamental mechanisms and feedbacks that occur in geothermal reservoirs. This is particularly important due to the intense pressure-sensitivity of fractures in the coupling of permeability and heat transfer area ( Strategies for optimizing production (high flowrate, high temperature and long duration) in geothermal reservoirs have been explored ( Dimensionless solutions are useful in defining the rate limiting processes and dependent properties for energy recovery. These simplified models capture the essence of the conductive heat supply to the convecting heat transfer fluid and define this process as the rate limiting step ( Circulating fluids at low rate per unit volume of the reservoir but to access small spacing between fractures is the principal requirement of a successful EGS system. The optimal scenario in production is to establish a uniform fluid-, and thereby thermal-sweep, of the reservoir. The divergent flow field close to the point-source injectors in doublet systems is not effective in providing a uniform sweep, but flow from parallel wells or from stimulated parallel wells offers a better prospect of establishing a uniform flow field. In the oil and gas industry, the drilling and stimulation of parallel, and typically horizontal, wells has been developed to considerable success for unconventional reservoirs, over the past decade. In this work, a new stimulation strategy is explored that comprises the development of two parallel and high permeability manifolds each as a separate injection zone and production zone. It is anticipated that this stimulation schedule will generate analogous results to the drilling of two horizontal wells and therefore in increasing the flow sweep efficiency from the injection zone towards the production zone. The influence of different stimulation strategy and slip potential in the heat transportation and followed heat generation are evaluated in this work. To implement an equivalent continuum model accommodating the fractured mass, the key constitutive relations require to be incorporated. These are the formulations for a crack tensor, a permeability tensor, and a model for stress-dependent fracture aperture. To represent the heterogeneous distribution of components of fractured rock in the simulation, the mechanical properties of fractures are characterized in tensor form based on the crack tensor theory proposed by The compliance tensor Combining Eqs. Given the assumption that the properties of modulus are anisotropic, the equivalent bulk modulus Considering that the randomly distributed fractures may be intersected by multiple elements in the reservoir gridding, the directional fracture permeability is defined as a permeability tensor The effect of stress has a direct impact in changing the evolution of the fracture aperture, which will in turn change the compliance tensor in the simulation loop. Prior models for stress permeability coupling include hyperbolic models of aperture evolution ( A simplified Barton-Bandis hyperbolic model ( and the normal stiffness is determined by the normal stress as, Fracture shear slip and related dilation are included in the simulator by lumping the influence into the response of the matrix rock being sheared. When the Coulomb failure criterion is reached, the shear displacement When the fluid pressure in the fracture exceeds the normal stress across the fracture, the two walls of the fracture are separated and the effective normal stress is zero (  To summarize, Eqs. We explore various stimulation strategies to determine the influence of stimulation direction relative to the fracture orientations on both the magnitude and longevity of thermal recovery rates, for a given reservoir with a defined pre-existing fracture network. For these reservoirs, the fracture permeability of the network evolves subject to the influence of the change in stress state, including normal closure, shear dilation, and the potential for fracture walls to lose contact. Thermal effect exerts a strong effect in changing the fracture normal stress with a concomitant influence on both fracture-normal dilation and on shear-slip-induced dilation and ultimately modifying permeability. This work investigates the influence of an initial stimulation followed by a production phase − throughout which permeability evolves in response to the evolving effective stress regime. In particular, we explore the potential that the stimulation may develop hydraulically-interconnected manifolds along the axis of a supposed horizontal well (E-W direction) that in turn may be used to develop a uniform flow field across the reservoir (in the N-S direction)—to a second parallel manifold also aligned in the E-W direction ( A reservoir containing two sets of fractures is created using the equivalent continuum simulator TF_FLAC The length of fractures follows a lognormal distribution with a mean length of 80 The fracture density The influence of stimulation strategy is investigated by stimulating the reservoir in multiple different modalities.  The magnitude of permeability evolution and the resulting influence on heat energy extraction are the primary variables in this study. The potential optimization strategy is explored by investigating the relationship between the permeability enhancement due to stimulation and the resulting efficiency of heat recovery.  The fracture permeability distribution following the initial E-W stimulation for the fractures oriented at 045–120° is presented in The dashed black circle in The corresponding cases for the generation of power from the various stimulations are presented in The results indicate that Case 4 (fractures oriented at 045–120°) returns the highest power output, sustaining the highest power generation within 10 years. The peak magnitude of generated power from the two production wells is maintained around 14 MWe. The evolution of the flow rate and corresponding water temperature from Case 4 suggests that the horizontal E-W stimulation is the most effective in maintaining both a high production flow rate and elevated temperature of outflow water at the highest level ( The predefined high friction angle of 75° for the second fracture network in Case 5 is intended to lock this fracture set as resistant to failure. The corresponding results for power generation indicate the reduced potential of shear failure that impairs the magnitude of power generation by decreasing the fracture permeability. The lowest intensity of power generation ( The distributions of rock temperature are presented in The previous case studies focus on examining the impact of fracture orientation, stimulation strategy, and the fracture density in enhancing the permeability and heat energy extraction from geothermal reservoirs. The best production optimization strategy is obtained from a series of simulations aimed to enhance both the magnitude and longevity of thermal recovery rates. Reservoir stimulation is demonstrated to be efficient in significantly enhancing the generated power, compared against the results without stimulation. In this study, the eventual production schedule is designed to generate a fluid sweep path in the direction of the minor principal stress (N-S direction). The best optimization that results in the highest power generation is to create two parallel permeable manifolds along the major principal stress direction—in the example here, in the E-W direction. The parallel manifolds become hydraulically interconnected along the axis of the horizontal injection wells in the E-W direction, which are analogous to horizontal wells that allow a uniform sweep of fluids between the zones. The long term production results verify that the manifolds return an improved heat sweep efficiency. Furthermore, the fracture orientation is either very important in influencing the stimulation result. Fractures oriented at 045–120° result in the greatest fracture permeability enhancement along the stimulation direction. Therefore, the developed manifolds with fractures oriented at 045–120° are more permeable and conductive, compared to the case with fractures oriented at 020–135°. This work is a partial result of support from the