In this study, the bainitic microstructure of a furnace-cooled electro-slag-refined 5% Cr steel was studied by the electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) technique. The pole figures suggest a strong orientation relationship close to the Nishiyama–Wassermann type, i.e. there are 12 variants of the bainite sheaf that emerge from the three Bain correspondences. The microstructure consists of the bainite variants arranged in four sheaf colonies or morphological groups. Each sheaf colony, in turn, is made of one crystallographic group composed of 3 variants of bainite – one from each of the three Bain correspondences. Computations based on the phenomenological theory of martensitic crystallography (PTMC) show that the observed morphology is a product of stress-coupled autocatalytic nucleation. The 〈111〉Austenite 3-variant tension-coupled sheaf group predicted by the computations is the one that is experimentally observed.Although high-strength bainitic steels are increasingly being used in place of the existing martensitic grades, particularly for oil/gas pipeline and rails The recent past has seen the extensive use of electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) to study the microstructure of bainitic steels Chemically and microstructurally homogenous 5% Cr steel, For the present study, samples of approximately 20 The EBSD measurements were carried out on a FEI Quanta 200 HV scanning electron microscope with TSL–OIM system. The measurements were made at an operating voltage of 20  Microtexture measurements obtained from An interactive session, between the EBSD map and corresponding pole figures, is useful in bringing out the spatial arrangements and the interrelationships between the different bainite orientation variants. For example, In the grain shown in In samples used in the present study, the size of the prior austenite grains was in the range of 10–1000 The orientation relationship and the nature of interfaces between the bainite sheaves were also analyzed. The results of one such analysis are given in In order to establish strain-coupling or self-accommodation between specific variants of bainite sheaves, it is necessary to know the crystallography of the bainitic transformation in these alloys. Following Bhadeshia Bainite occurs as a sheaf-like structure, Sub-plates within a sheaf share a common crystallographic orientation close to the classic K–S or N–W ORs, though it may be closer to N–W than K–S. Adjacent sub-plates of a sheaf possess a {1 Also acknowledged is the fact that the bainitic transformation is broadly consistent with the phenomenological theory of martensite crystallography (PTMC) Subsequent calculations (Sections According to the Bain model, the fcc (F) crystal structure is transformed into the bcc (B) structure by carving out a body-centered tetragonal (bct) unit cell out of two contiguous fcc unit cells and straining it along the 〈1  In general, it is difficult to clearly distinguish between the K–S and N–W ORs, which are misoriented by only 5.26° Another interesting observation on the orientation of the sub-plates is obtained from the {1 There have been a few suggestions regarding mutual accommodation of shape strain of bainite sheaves by stress assisted autocatalysis. Sandvik It has been argued by Madangopal The first condition is derived from the analogous situation of stress-induced nucleation of self-accommodating variant clusters, wherein the variants necessarily have the same magnitude of shape strain along the common straining axis. Considering the crystal symmetry of the parent phase, it is evident there are only three types of stress-induced or autocatalytically nucleated variant groups (the applied stress or common shape strain being either tensile or compressive), viz. the 〈1 The second crystallographic restriction merely enforces the requirement that the shear components of the variant group be symmetrically disposed so as to achieve effective mechanical coupling. If we consider the situation of an autocatalytically nucleated pair of variants A and B, the work done by variant A to induce variant B could be expressed as Extending crystallographic restriction (ii) to the autocatalytic nucleation of bainite sheaf groups, the best mechanical coupling ensues when an “average” habit plane of one bainite sheaf is nearly parallel to an “average” habit plane of the other, and, the corresponding “average” shape strain shear directions are symmetrically disposed. An assessment of the sheaf groups given in A qualitative indication of the self-accommodation in a bainite sheaf group is obtained from its average shape strain matrix Using the above expressions, the magnitude of DSA for the 4–5–11 tension-coupled 〈1 The possible orientation relationships within the tension and compression-coupled sheaf groups,  Morris et al. From the (1 The (1 The main conclusions drawn from the analysis of the EBSD investigations on the bainitic microstructure of furnace-cooled ESR processed high-strength 5% Cr steel are: The orientation relationship of bainite sheaves with the prior austenite phase is the N–W type. The spread in orientation seen in the pole figures reflects the OR of the sub-plates, which is close to N–W. The bainitic microstructure consists of sheaves clustered into four distinct elongated colonies. Each sheaf colony is composed of three orientation variants of bainite – one from each of the three Bain correspondences. Computations based on PTMC show that the observed sheaf colonies are composed of autocatalytically nucleated 〈1 A consideration of the misorientations across the bainite variants of a sheaf group indicates that, in comparison to randomly nucleated bainite microstructure, autocatalytically nucleated self-accommodating microstructures are likely to provide an enhanced resistance to both plastic deformation and cleavage fracture. The authors acknowledge the support of the Board of Research in Nuclear Sciences, India. The use of the National Facility of Texture and OIM, a Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, supported facility at IIT-Bombay, Mumbai, India, is also appreciated. Support of DST through individual research projects is also acknowledged. One of the authors, MK, acknowledges the support and encouragement received from colleagues at the Materials Science Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, India, during the course of this work.