The automated spatial estimation of the hillslope runoff dynamics is used as a valuable tool for the estimation of the travel time distribution (flow time), a major factor for the hydrologic prediction in ungauged basins. In fact, while the flow time function is usually obtained by rescaling the flow paths with constant channel and hillslope velocities, in this work a spatially distributed kinematic component, as a function of terrain features and in particular slope and land use, is implemented and its influence on the hydrologic response is tested by means of the Width Function Instantaneous Unit Hydrograph (WFIUH) framework. Hillslope surface flow velocities are evaluated by applying different uniform flow formulas within an automated DEM-based (terrain analysis) algorithm. A comparison test of the performances of the Manning, Darcy, Maidment and Soil Conservation Service uniform flow equations is performed for several case studies in Italy pertaining to different climatic and geomorphic conditions. Results provide new insights for a better understanding of the flow time function also introducing a more parsimonious and physically-based calibration scheme of the WFIUH.Recent advances of remote sensing technologies in measuring terrestrial surface parameters at global scale are paving the way for significant improvements of large scale hydrologic models. Last generation earth observation platforms capture spatially distributed information of surface elevations, land use, soil, vegetation and water bodies gathering crucial data for river basin managers and modellers at resolution from medium (tens of meters) to very fine (less than 1 The Width Function Instantaneous Unit Hydrograph (WFIUH) model (e.g. In early works on WFIUH (e.g. In this work the implications of estimating the WF by imposing a physically spatially distributed flow velocity field are investigated in the following two cases: i) constant, in space and in time, flow velocity along the river network consistent with Leopold and Maddock's findings This manuscript is organized as follows: after a brief description of the study areas and available datasets (Section Eleven river basins are selected within the Italian territory. Their main properties are summarized in Recent works by authors have investigated the performances of standard versus advanced terrain analysis tools for the DEM-based hydrologic and geomorphic parameter extraction (e.g. Application of PEM4PIT Estimation of the flow directions using the D8-LTD algorithm Stream network automatic extraction using the curvature-based scheme Estimation of the FL by measuring the path using the single flow direction model (D8-LTD) for stream network links and by using the D∞ dispersive flow path model FL rescaling for FT definition by using the following four flow velocity equations: Where Velocity (m/s) Acceleration of gravity (m/s Slope (unitless) Overland flow depth (m) Kinematic viscosity (m Coefficient related to land use and rainfall intensity (unitless) Manning's roughness coefficient (m Land use or flow type coefficient (m/s) The mean velocity in the whole basin (accounting for both hillslope and channels) (m/s) Upstream drainage area (m Calibration coefficients (unitless). Eq. Eq. Eq. Eq. In order to clarify the role of spatially variable hillslope flow velocities on the basin IUH in this paper two comparative analyses are performed: Analysis 1: to highlight differences in FT when using spatially variable hillslope flow velocity field rather than to the standard approach which considers constant both hillslope and channel flow velocities; Analysis 2: to evaluate the most useful formula among the four selected ones for DEM-based automated flow velocity estimation where performances are measured in terms of parameter parsimony in WFIUH modeling. The FTs are rescaled using two schemes: a) spatially variable hillslope flow velocity; b) spatially invariant hillslope flow velocity estimated as the average of the heterogeneous velocity values defined in the case a). To compute the spatially variable hillslope flow velocity map, Eq. Derived FTs are compared by estimating statistical indices and in particular the first normalized moment (mean, M1), the second normalized moment (variance, M2) and the third normalized moment (skewness, M3) respectively defined as: Where Channel velocity Mean of travel distances (FLs) in the basin Mean of travel times (FTs) in the basin Basin cells are processed for estimating the corresponding flow velocity using Eqs. Different parameter combinations are tested as here below schematically described and summarized in In Eqs. A simple comparative analysis is developed by estimating for the resulting 4 cases and subcases the following two properties: (1) the number of cell velocity outliers (i.e. flow velocity values falling outside the literature interval 0.02–2 Comparison of different FTs estimated using both spatially constant and variable hillslope velocity fields ( It is shown that the assumption of spatially heterogeneous flow conditions always leads to a IUH characterized by lower peaks and higher base time (i.e. larger FT  A comparison of differences in FTs obtained using Eqs. The rescaled FTs are estimated assuming a constant velocity for the channel network cells equal to 2   In absence of “true” observations the travel time distribution (derived from Eq.   Both figures confirm the outcomes of the Rigo case. As a result, the following considerations can be extrapolated: Eqs. Eq. The SCS Eq. Using the SCS or Maidment et al. methods only one parameter is necessary to calibrate a geomorphologic rainfall–runoff model. In this work an improved version of the WFIUH based on travel time function is proposed and tested toward its use as a valuable tool for rainfall–runoff modeling in ungauged basins. The travel time function is here estimated by implementing a spatially distributed characterization of hillslope flow velocities, while it was usually obtained using both constant channel and hillslope velocities. Two sets of analysis were performed for eleven case studies. The first set, aimed to evaluate the impact of assuming a spatially variable velocity as compared to constant values at the basins scale, confirms the need to use a more detailed kinematic scheme and highlights a common pattern: highest velocities usually characterize low contributing area cells and vice versa the low velocities are distributed in high contributing areas. As a result, it seems that valley bottoms play a major role for the travel time estimation impacting the receding limb of the hydrologic response (e.g. hydrograph, WF). The second set investigates the performances of the different flow velocity schemes and the corresponding flow time maps: four approaches are considered and applied on 11 case studies using different parameterization schemes. Results are evaluated in terms of how realistic are the estimated velocity values and also comparing the basin travel time estimated both from the velocity and from classical empirical formulas. The main conclusion is that using SCS or Maidment et al. scheme it is possible to define the basin Flow Time, and so the WFIUH model, using just one parameter. Funds for this research were provided by The authors thank Dr. Monia Santini, DISAFRI Department, Tuscia University, for her precious help and her constructive comments that significantly improved this manuscript.