The performances of circular sawing with diamond impregnated tools were evaluated in stone processing plants located in some areas of Turkey. Samples were collected from these factories for the laboratory tests. Uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, Schmidt hammer value, point load strength, impact strength, Los Angeles abrasion loss and P-wave velocity were determined in the laboratory. Performance measurements and stone properties were evaluated by using the multifactorial fuzzy approach which is a special case of multiple objective multifactorial decision making for the sawability classification of building stones. Using three different decision functions, the sawing performances of diamond saws were classified into three categories: excellent, good and poor. It is possible to evaluate the sawability and select a suitable diamond saw for a new building stone by only some stone properties testing using the developed fuzzy classification system.Circular sawing with large-diameter diamond tools have been extensively used in stone processing plants to produce slabs. Selecting the suitable saw and proper sawing rate for each stone type is very important to reduce the production cost. On the other hand, a stone producer wants to know the sawability degree of the stone being cut for the cost estimation and the planning of the plants. Sawability of building stone (carbonate rock) depends on machine characteristics, type and diameter of saw, depth of cut, rate of sawing and tool wear, and stone properties. The relations between sawability and stone parameters have been investigated by some researchers. One of these studies, Hausberger In addition to all these papers, several researches have been carried out on sawability ranking and classification. These investigators have generally focused on obtaining a correlation between the sawability and a single stone parameter, such as quartz content, quartz grain size, Shore hardness and compressive strength. Recently, a paper to grade sawability of rock materials is presented by Zhang and Lu In this paper, it was aimed to classify the sawability of building stones using a novel fuzzy technique, which is multiobjective fuzzy evaluation approach, a special case of multiple objective decision making. By this fuzzy approach, marbles used by factories were ranked three linguistic qualitative categories: excellent, good and poor. This classification approach can be used for cost analysis and project planning as a decision making index. This paper is organized as follows. Sections Marble factories in Kayseri, Konya and Antalya areas of Turkey were visited and the sawing performances of large-diameter circular saws were measured on eight different building stones. Performance studies were carried out on the machines operating approximately same conditions. Stone blocks were collected from the factories for laboratory tests. An attempt was made to collect stone samples that were large enough to obtain all of the test specimens of a given stone type from the same piece. Each block sample was inspected for macroscopic defects so that it would provide test specimens free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. Then, standard test samples according to ISRM The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) is the maximum compressive stress that a sample withstands before failure. Uniaxial compressive strength tests have been carried out according to the ISRM suggested methods Brazilian tensile strength tests have been conducted on core samples having a diameter of 38 The Schmidt hammer test method is routinely employed to test the strength and the quality of rock The point load strength test is an index test to determine the strength of intact rocks For the impact strength test, the device designed by Evans and Pomeroy There are four aggregate sizes grading to choose in the standard method. Grading D was used in the tests. Eight steel spheres were placed in a steel drum along with approximately 5000 Sound velocity test is designed for measuring dynamic properties of stones and concrete. Fuzzy sets were introduced by Zadeh Let The membership states all information contained in a fuzzy set. Membership functions of fuzzy sets must be precisely defined in respect of function type and function parameters. Both the parameters and shape of the membership functions strongly influence the accuracy The well-known membership functions are namely triangular, trapezoidal, and Gaussian type. In this study, trapezoidal membership was preferred. This function is very often used in practice for its simplicity. A small amount of data is needed to define the membership function While ranking the sawability of building stones using performance measurements, we considered marble fields as the decision alternatives and marble sawability parameters as the criteria/goals. For this purpose, the multifactorial evaluation approach is used to develop a quality system. Let If quality classes are used by index interval, objective function A family of factors, A set of verbal grades, For every object Note that the number of verbal grades in the same for all With the preceding three elements, for a given In this step, selection of the aggregation operators is very important. Many transformation functions has been proposed in the literature such as max (min) and min (max). Nowadays, however, it is widely accepted that any suitable aggregation of fuzzy sets may be used in multifactorial fuzzy analyses. Aggregation operators are used for evaluating different types of decision behavior and which require different transformations for the judgments. Thus, the decision maker may choose a decision function that best reflects the goals of the decision. The following three types of aggregation are used most commonly in multifactorial evaluation Conjunctive aggregation of criteria. Disjunctive aggregation of criteria. Compensatory aggregation of criteria. The simultaneous satisfaction of all decision criteria is implied by using the conjunctive aggregation. On the other hand, the disjunctive aggregation implies full compensation amongst the criteria. The compensatory aggregation is more favorable for dealing with conflicting criteria or with human aggregation behavior. In this problem, we are interested in simultaneous satisfaction of all the decision factors. This aggregation behavior can be modeled by using One of the well-known decision functions was proposed by Yager In this paper, we used each of three methods as a relation function and as a conclusion, three quality classes which can be evaluated to the classification of building stones has been defined. In this section, firstly, the building stone parameters affecting the sawing performances of large-diameter circular saws were classified into three categories: excellent, good and poor ( In the present study, the specific weight vector Defining the evaluation mapping In the last stage of the evaluation, we find the evaluation vector summarized by using the Dubois–Prade decision operator as follows: The results obtained from the different decision functions for all stones are shown in Uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, Schmidt hammer value, point load strength, impact strength, Los Angeles abrasion loss and With the developed fuzzy classification system, the sawability of building stones can be evaluated and a suitable diamond saw can be selected for a new building stone by only some stone properties testing. By using this decision making based classification approach, information can reasonably be obtained by data processing and different decision functions. As a consequence, this sawability classification method by means of fuzzy approach is reasonable and acceptable. Classification of stone sawability is very useful in the cost estimation and planning of the plants. It can also be evaluated in equipment selection and project scheduling as a decision parameter. Multifactorial fuzzy approach is an appropriate tool for translating such multi-objective system into a form that can be used in marble industry effectively. Authors are deeply grateful to Nigde University Research Fund for the financial support. This work was partly conducted when the first author was a visiting research fellow at Erasmus University Rotterdam Department of Computer Science, supported by the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (Tubitak).