Flotation is one of the plausible methods for recovering borax fines discharged as fine waste to the tailings dam in the Kirka borax processing plant. A literature review dealing with the flotation behavior of boron minerals reveals that clay minerals in the boron ores coat boron minerals and thus deteriorate the quality of boron concentrates produced by direct flotation. The main objective of this study is therefore to recover borax fines from the tailings of the concentrator by reverse flotation. A three-level-factor experimental design was used to determine the main and interaction effects of variables selected on the metallurgical performance of reverse flotation. An analysis of variance for experimental results indicates that interaction effects of the variables for concentrate quality and recovery of B2O3 is nonsignificant and the most important variable for grade of concentrate and recovery is the collector dosage. It is shown that a concentrate assaying 11.25% B2O3 with 89.90% B2O3 recovery could be produced by means of single-stage (rougher) reverse flotation. Additionally, in order to produce a sufficient-quality concentrate, a multistage reverse flotation scheme involving rougher, scavenger, and two cleaners was devised. A final concentrate containing 23.47% B2O3 with 81.78% B2O3 recovery was obtained from these tests. The reverse flotation method can be thus considered as an important option for the beneficiation of borax fines.Similarly to the processing of other boron minerals of commercial importance, borax is concentrated through scrubbing followed by classification to remove undesirable clay minerals in the Kirka borax processing plant in Turkey. Since borax is a soluble boron mineral, the saturated boron brine is used as a liquid phase in the boron derivatives plant. However, not only the process flowsheet used to produce the borax concentrate in the plant but also the nature of gangue minerals within the ore tends to discharge large amounts of clay minerals together with unrecoverable borax fines in the tailings dam. Recovery of borax from the tailings dam in this plant is very important because disposal of this fine-sized material causes environmental pollution as well as economic loss. Additionally, recovery of borax from this waste material has great economic and operational advantage because industrial application of a suitable process can proceed easily without additional mining operations Considerable literature exists on the electrokinetic behavior and flotation responses of salt-type minerals such as trona, sylvite, and borax The effect of montmorillonite-type clay minerals on flotation of boron minerals has been investigated comprehensively by Celik and co-workers In order to design an experimental program, numerous direct flotation tests were carried out. Results of these tests are not given here, because they were not significant from the metallurgical performance point of view. However, it must be noted that even if the floatability of borax fines in this material is sufficient using one of the collector types (anionic and cationic), borax fines could not be successfully separated from the gangue minerals using direct flotation. In the light of the previous investigations and the results of the preliminary tests, the use of a reverse flotation method to recover borax fines was found to be plausible. The main objective of this present study is therefore to investigate the possibility of using reverse flotation to recover borax fines from the tailings of the Kirka borax processing plant. A statistical experimental design was used to elucidate and characterize the relationship between metallurgical performance of reverse flotation and some important variables. A representative pulp sample was taken from the hydrocyclone overflow discharged to the fine waste tailings dam. Solid content of the pulp sample was 8.5% by weight, which was determined by means of dewatering and drying at 25 °C. Particle size of the solid phase in the pulp sample containing 3.4% B In the preliminary study, several direct flotation tests using different collector types were conducted to determine the floatability of borax fines prior to the designed experiments. As mentioned previously, the results of direct flotation tests were unimportant from the metallurgical performance point of view. In addition to these, a few collectorless flotation tests were performed. The most important point that must be noted from the collectorless flotation tests is that concentrate (float fraction) containing 2.56% B All flotation tests were performed using a Denver laboratory flotation cell with a 1.5-L cell volume. After 5 min of pH conditioning, the required amount of sodium silicate (Na Several reverse flotation tests were carried out to determine levels of variables such as collector (sodium oleate) dosage and the pulp pH. In the case of reverse flotation, it is expected that the main gangue minerals must be transported into the froth by true flotation (dolomite and calcite) and mechanical entrainment (clay minerals). On the other hand, the adverse effect of these components by means of coagulation and slime coating must be prevented or minimized. Therefore, sodium silicate (ratio of SiO The gangue minerals, which can be classified into two groups from the flotation point of view, must be transported into the froth in reverse flotation of borax. Results of the collectorless flotation have shown that montmorillonite-type clay minerals can be transported sufficiently into the froth by mechanical entrainment. However, carbonate minerals can be transported into the froth under flotation conditions where these minerals are rendered hydrophobic by use of a carboxylate (e.g., sodium oleate) in an alkaline medium. Results of reverse flotation tests randomly conducted under the conditions described in the previous section are illustrated in As mentioned above, the negligible interaction effect for each response was determined from the experimental results illustrated in It must be noted that all flotation tests were conducted as a single stage (or rougher flotation) and flotation time was 2 min in these experiments. However, flotation time is a very critical variable of the process. In order to obtain the desired final grade of concentrate, the rougher flotation is completed at optimum flotation time and the tailing (the froth product in this case) is fed into the scavenger bank. Therefore, optimum flotation time must carefully be determined from flotation kinetic tests However, above this time, the borax particles instead of the gangue minerals are transported into the froth product. Therefore, the optimum flotation time for the rougher flotation was determined to be 5 min. In order to produce a high-grade borax concentrate, the rougher concentrate was cleaned twice and the rougher tailing was also scavenged as shown in Traditionally, the grade of concentrate is inversely proportional to recovery in the normal flotation operation. In the case of the reverse flotation, however, the grade of concentrate is directly proportional to recovery, as shown in Because the middlings products (i.e., tailings of the cleaner stages and concentrate of the scavenger stage) did not recirculate in the multistage reverse flotation tests, the recovery according to initial feed was low (67.07%). However, these products are normally recirculated in continuous flotation systems such as the locked cycle flotation tests, the pilot scale tests, or a plant scale operation. Therefore, it can be safely assumed from Flotation is one of the plausible methods for recovering borax fines from the hydrocyclone overflow discharged to the tailings dam in the Kirka borax processing plant. The previous studies, published by several authors cited above, have shown that a common problem encountered in all types of boron minerals is the presence of significant amounts of clay-type minerals, which adversely affect flotation recoveries due to slime coatings. The main objective of this study is therefore to recover borax fines from the tailing of the Kirka borax processing plant by reverse flotation method. In the reverse flotation case, recovery of borax fines can be achieved by transferring of dolomite and calcite into the froth by true flotation, whereas clay minerals are transported by mechanical entrainment. As far as can be evaluated from the experimental results and their statistical treatments, amount of collector (sodium oleate) and amount of dispersant (Na The authors are grateful to Eti Boron Co. for providing access to the Kirka borax processing plant and valuable assistance in the sampling campaign and the anonymous referees for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.