This paper describes the results obtained during an investigation into the recovery of nickel from flue dust fines generated on a stainless steel plant. It is shown that the nickel present in this dust is mainly in the metallic form. Accordingly, gravity separation and magnetic separation techniques can be used to recover the nickel from these fines. Nickel recoveries of up to 40% were obtained by gravity separation and up to 50% by magnetic separation, at an acceptable grade. Much potential exists in applying this technique on a commercial scale, although a more extensive pilot scale test program should be performed prior to commercialisation. Variations in the nickel content of the slurry feed during large scale pilot plant tests should be counteracted by a proper sample taking program to ensure that reliable mass balances are obtained.Processing routes for the production of stainless steel differ from plant to plant. However, stainless steel production plants usually contain a smelting furnace (typically an electric arc furnace for smelting of stainless steel scrap and ferrochrome), as well as a converter where carbon is removed (e.g. argon oxygen degasser – AOD). Both these types of smelting units are equipped with off gas systems containing bag houses for dust removal. In some instances, the same off gas system would be utilised for both types of smelting units. The dust generated during the production of a stainless steel heat is typically divided into a coarse fraction and a fine fraction. The particle size of the coarse fraction is typically greater than Another way of treating these fines is to discard the fines on hazardous waste sites. In these cases, the nickel contained in these fines is discarded together with the dust. In this investigation the use of a mineral-processing route for the treatment of fines is studied. Mineral-processing routes have been developed by During a preliminary microscopic investigation of the flue dust fines, it was found that the dust consisting of mainly oxides also contained metallic particles. These metallic particles were mainly pure nickel particles and metal droplets consisting of iron, chromium and nickel (composition correlates well with austenic stainless steel grades). Since the densities of pure nickel and metal droplets are approximately 8.9 and Tests were performed on a shaking table, without any riffles. The flue dust (981 g) and water were fed simultaneously to the shaking table in a ratio of approximately 100 l water to 1 kg flue dust. The angle of the shaking table was set at approximately 5° in both directions to the horizontal plane. Four streams were captured and dewatered, namely Concentrate 1, Concentrate 2, Middlings and Tailings. Representative samples of these streams and the feed stream were analysed by means of X-ray fluorescence (XRF) technique. A 500 g dust sample was fed to a pilot scale wet low intensity magnetic separator (LIMS) drum supplied by GFT products. The dust and water were simultaneously fed to the magnetic separator drum in a ratio (dust to water) of approximately 5 l water:1 kg fines. The field strength was set to 480 G, and the magnetic and non-magnetic streams were captured separately, dewatered, the mass of each fraction measured and samples of both the magnetic and non-magnetic fractions were subjected to chemical analysis (XRF technique). This procedure was repeated, but with the difference that the field strength was adjusted to 600 G in the second test, 750 G in the third test and 950 G in the final test. The results obtained during the gravity separation and magnetic separation tests are discussed separately. It should be noted that the d The masses and chemical analysis of the four streams obtained from the shaking table are summarised in A representative sample of the dry feed materials was taken, while all the materials of each product stream were captured and dewatered, before a composite sample of each stream was subjected to XRF analysis. It should be noted that the elemental analysis (not oxides) is given for each stream, and consequently the sum of the percentages is less than 100. From the results presented in A sample of the Concentrate 1 stream particles was put into a sample holder. It was filled with epoxy material, left to dry and polished. The sample was then subjected to point counts (microscope) and to chemical analysis, obtained with a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). The possibility of segregation of particles during the sample preparation process, where metallic particles separate from the oxide particles during the epoxy solidifying process, was investigated. This was done by cutting the sample in the transverse direction, and again doing a point count analysis under the microscope. No segregation could be detected in this way. A micrograph of the Concentrate 1 stream is shown in From According to the point count analysis performed on these samples, 12% of the area contains metallic particles, while the remainder is oxide particles. By assuming that the average relative density of the oxide particles is Two different types of oxide phases are present. The “round”oxides (should have been in the molten form prior to solidification), and the “composite oxides” have different chemical analyses. The main difference is that the round oxides contain approximately 3% NiO, while the composite oxides do not contain any nickel oxide. Furthermore, the FeO content is lower and the CaO and MgO contents of the round oxides are higher compared to those of the composite oxides. More than 80% of the oxides are composite oxides. Accordingly, approximately 10–15% of the nickel contained in the Concentrate 1 stream is in the oxide form, while the remainder is either in the pure metallic form or contained in the metal droplets. A preliminary investigation of the sizes of the different phases present in the feed indicates that a portion of the oxide particles are smaller than the metallic particles. This aspect should be confirmed after which the feed material could be deslimed before the gravity separation tests are repeated, which could increase both grade and recovery of nickel. The results of the EDX analysis performed on the different phases contained in the Concentrate 1 sample are summarised in These tests were extended to a Mozely multiple gravity separator (MGS), where different operating conditions were tested on batches of 50 kg dust. Preliminary results indicate that recoveries of up to 60% of the nickel are possible at an acceptable grade. Samples of the feed and product streams were taken frequently. However, these results could not be confirmed, since the nickel in the feed slurry to the MGS varied considerably, both as a result of inhomogeneous dust obtained from the stainless steel plant and as a result of segregation occurring in the slurry tank. Accordingly, a mass balance could not be performed successfully. One way of overcoming this problem is to capture each product stream in total, let it be dried and then to take composite samples thereof. A representative sample of the feed dust should be taken prior to the experiments, in order to obtain reliable results. The masses and chemical analysis of the feed and product streams are summarised in The nickel grade and recoveries, obtained as a function of field strength, are summarised in  Nickel is present in stainless steel flue dust fines mainly in the form of pure nickel or nickel droplets. The difference in magnetic properties and density between oxide and metallic particles can be utilised to separate these phases. Recoveries of up to 50% of the nickel can be obtained with magnetic and gravity separation. Further work should be performed by investigating the effect of slimes on the grade and recovery of nickel by desliming the feed slurry prior to the separation process. A more extensive pilot scale testing program should be performed before implementation on a full scale plant. Variations of nickel in the slurry feed should be counteracted by capturing each product stream in total to ensure that representative samples are taken to perform a reliable mass balance.