Fractures of the talus are challenging to manage, with historically poor outcomes and a high rate of complications. The rare nature of this injury limits the number of studies available to guide treatment. Fortunately, a number of advancements have been made in the last decade. There is increased recognition regarding the importance of anatomic reconstruction of the osseous injury. Advanced imaging is used to assess the subtalar joint, where even slight displacement may predispose to arthritis. Increasing use of dual anteromedial and anterolateral approaches, along with plate fixation, has improved our ability to accurately restore the anatomy of the talus. Modification of the original Hawkins classification can both guide treatment and allow us to better predict which patients will develop avascular necrosis. Lastly, improved reconstructive techniques help address the most common complications after talus fracture, including arthritis, avascular necrosis, and malunion.Fractures of the talus are uncommon, and typically occur after high-energy mechanisms such as a fall from height or motor vehicle crash. While previous studies cite an incidence ranging from 0.1 to 2.5% of all fractures, the true incidence is not known Fortunately, a number of advancements in our understanding of the treatment of talus fractures has improved outcomes and reduced complication rates. In the past decade, there have been improvements in the surgical techniques, timing, and instrumentation of talus fractures. These fractures are classified based on their primary fracture line into head, neck, body, or lateral/posterior process fractures. These fractures types have unique anatomy, presentation, and treatment, and will therefore be discussed separately. The talus is unique in that over one half of its surface is covered by articular cartilage, and it has no muscular attachments ( The neck of the talus is angled medially at a mean of 24° (range, 10–44°) and plantarly between 5 and 50° The talus has a rich network of extra- and intraosseous anastomoses that is vulnerable to disruption from trauma ( Early anatomical studies demonstrated that the main blood supply to the talar body is through an anastomotic sling located inferior to the talar neck in the tarsal canal. This sling is composed of the artery of the tarsal canal, which is a branch of the posterior tibial artery, and the artery of the tarsal sinus, which is a branch of the perforating peroneal artery Fractures of the neck of the talus are the most common, accounting for 50% of all talus fractures The most commonly used classification system for talar neck fractures was originally described by Hawkins and later modified by Canale and Kelly Hawkins type II fractures refer to a talar neck fracture with either subluxation or dislocation of the subtalar joint. ( The Hawkins type III fracture is characterized by a fracture of the neck with a dislocation of the tibiotalar joint in addition to the subtalar joint. ( Canale and Kelly added the type IV talar neck fracture to indicate an associated subluxation or dislocation of the talonavicular joint Patients with talar neck fractures typically present after a high-energy injury such as a motor vehicle crash or fall from height, and present with foot swelling, pain, or deformity. For high-energy injuries, the patient should undergo a thorough physical examination to identify associated injuries Initial radiographic views should include anteroposterior, lateral, and mortise views of the foot and ankle. While these views will allow assessment of the talar body, talar neck, and associated processes, they are often inadequate to assess the alignment and degree of comminution of the talar neck. Canale and Kelly described a view of the talar neck which is obtained by maximal plantarflexion at the ankle, 15° of eversion, and angling the beam 75° from the horizontal The goals of treatment for talar neck fractures are anatomic reduction, restoration of articular and axial alignment, preservation of motion, and minimization of complications including AVN, post-traumatic arthritis, malunion, nonunion, and infection. Non-operative treatment is reserved for truly nondisplaced Hawkins Type I fractures. Biomechanical studies have demonstrated that as little as 2 The current standard of care for all displaced talar neck fractures is operative reduction and internal fixation. Closed reduction may be difficult, and when possible it is preferable to proceed directly to operative fixation to avoid multiple unsuccessful reduction attempts. There are various surgical approaches to the talar neck. Regardless of approach, it is imperative that full-thickness flaps are created with no undermining to avoid soft tissue necrosis. The anteromedial approach to the talus involves making an incision medial to the anterior tibial tendon The anterolateral approach is performed with an incision between the tibia and fibula and in line with the fourth ray, just lateral to the extensor digitorum longus. ( The posterolateral approach involves making an incision just lateral to the Achilles tendon, and developing the interval between the flexor hallucis longus and peroneal muscles. This approach can be used to facilitate lag screw fixation, as the screw trajectory if perpendicular to the fracture line. Care should be taken to avoid injury to the peroneal artery and saphenous nerve. Talar neck fractures were long thought to be orthopaedic emergencies, in which immediate reduction of the talar neck would minimize the incidence of osteonecrosis Percutaneous fixation should be reserved for truly nondisplaced fractures, in which fixation allows for early range of motion. In displaced fractures, percutaneous fixation is indicated in the rare case in which an anatomic reduction can be performed and there is no significant comminution. Although low rates of osteonecrosis and malunion have previously been reported using closed reduction with Schanz pins followed by percutaneous fixation in Hawkins grades II–IV, it is not recommended Dual anteromedial and anterolateral surgical approaches allow for full visualization of the talar neck. A medial malleolar osteotomy may be required to allow access to the talar body Screw fixation alone was the predominant method of fixation of displaced talar neck fractures in most early series as well as several recent ones Posterior-to-anterior lag screw fixation has been shown to have superior biomechanical strength compared to anterior-to-posterior fixation Plate fixation of talar neck fractures has become more popular in the last decade, and is the recommended method of fixation by many authors With stable fixation, early range of motion is encouraged once all wounds are healed. If there is concern regarding the integrity of the fixation, or in cases of significant ankle, subtalar, or talonavicular instability, casting for 6 weeks is recommended. The patient should remain non-weight-bearing until there is evidence of sufficient healing on radiographs, typically 3 months after injury. Fractures of the talar body involve both the tibiotalar and subtalar joints, and have the highest incidence of arthritis among all talus fractures The treatment of talar body fractures adheres to many of the same principles as talar neck fixation; any displacement requires surgical management with open reduction and internal fixation. The surgical approaches for talar neck fractures may be used for open reduction and internal fixation of the talar body with minifragment or headless screws Fractures of the lateral process are frequently missed on initial plain radiographs, as they may be subtle and difficult to visualize. This fracture is classically associated with a snowboarding injury Posterior process fractures are best seen on lateral foot radiographs. It may be difficult to differentiate between a posterior process fracture of the talus and an os trigonum, which is an ossicle located behind the talus in up to 25% of the population Talar head fractures are rare, accounting for 2.6–10% of all talus fractures Talus fractures in children are extremely rare. Compared to adult fractures, relatively little is known about the natural history of talus fractures in children, as there are only a small number of published case series The incidence of osteonecrosis after talar neck fracture increases with greater initial fracture displacement The diagnosis of osteonecrosis is commonly made on plain radiographs at anywhere from 4 weeks to 6 months after surgery Nearly half of all patients with osteonecrosis will undergo revascularization without collapse of the talar body, which may take up to 2 years following initial injury Subtalar joint arthritis is the most common complication after talar neck fracture, developing in an average of 49% of patients in a recent meta-analysis of 16 included studies The rate of malunion after talar neck fracture is frequently reported in the range of 20–30%, but is likely underestimated given the difficulty of identifying malignment by plain radiography alone Nonunion is rare after talar neck fracture, typically occurring in the 3–5% range Soft tissue complications such as skin necrosis and deep infection are among the most disastrous complications after talar fracture. There are a number of principles aimed at minimizing the risk of these complications, including urgent reduction of dislocations, administration of antibiotics and surgical debridement for open fractures, and meticulous soft tissue handling during surgery. As stated previously, definitive surgical intervention should be delayed until adequate resolution of swelling has occurred, which may take up to 3 weeks after injury The role for non-operative treatment of talar neck or body fractures is limited to nondisplaced or anatomically reduced fractures confirmed by CT scan. Any displacement requires meticulous anatomic reduction and fixation. The use of dual anteromedial and anterolateral approaches, plating, and bone grafting are paramount to a successful reduction. As a result of these surgical tactics, the reported rate of osteonecrosis following talar neck fracture has decreased over time, although it remains high. The current gold standard treatment for end stage tibiotalar or subtalar arthritis following talus fracture is arthrodesis of the involved joints. Lateral process fractures are easily missed, but prompt diagnosis and appropriate treatment are important to ensure a good outcome. Talar head fractures are rare, and depending on the percentage of talonavicular joint involved, may be either excised or anatomically fixed. There are no conflicts of interest to report. None. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.