 T Ohkubo et al. (Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Japan.) J Jpn Soc Powder/Powder Metall, Vol 52, No 1, 2005, 3-9. In Japanese. It is reported that TiB  P Valery et al. (Tohuku University, Sendai, Japan.) J Jpn Soc Powder/Powder Metall, Vol 52, No 1, 2005, 10-13. In Japanese It is noted that use of TaCl  C Edtmaier. (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.) Production of Cu powders by precipitation from aqueous solutions of Cu ions was described. Effects of concentration of Cu precursors and temperature were investigated. Reducing agents used were hydrazine-hydrate or formaldehyde. Precipitated powders were characterised for shape and size. Sub-μm particles could be produced by control of Cu ion concentration, temperature and pH.  S Pleier et al (ALD Vacuum Technologies AG, Hanau, Germany.) It was noted that metals, such as Ti and Zr may react with the ceramic crucible in which they are melted and the metal is contaminated with non-metallic inclusions. This can avoided by use of Electrode Induction-melting Gas Atomisation process (EIGA). In which metals are melted without contact with any ceramic. Results for a range of metals and alloys were presented.  Z Sparchez. (Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.) Studies aimed at maximising productivity of ball mills were described. Factors considered included ball size, quantity of balls in the mill, weight of powder, duration of milling, properties of the materials being milled, input and output particle size, specific surface and extent of mechanical alloying. The method used was shown to have a high degree of generality and can be applied to various function of ball milling in addition to comminution.  D Federov et al. (Gas Inst of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine.) Production of Fe powders from Fe ore concentrates was reported with an account of laboratory and pilot plant investigations. Processes considered were carbothermal reduction/decarburisation, direct reduction by cracked NH  O Hitoshi et al. (Kumamoto University, Japan.) Magnesium alloys were discussed with reference to low weight, recycling and abundance of ore reserves. Difficulties in manufacture of Mg powder, due to risk of explosion, were noted. It was reported that a safe method of making rapidly solidified Mg alloy powders, using single roller melt spinning, had been developed. Powders were 40μm thick and a few mm long and wide. Cooling rate was shown to be higher than attained by He gas atomisation. Results for Mg-Zn-Re were presented.  C T Schade, J Sachaberl. (Hoeganaes Corporation Inc, Cinnaminson, USA.) A method of making stainless steel powder, by electric arc melting, Ar-O decarburisation, high performance gas atomisation and annealing in H, was described. The process route was reviewed in the light of possible improvements in properties of products.  W Pieper et al. (NARA Machinery Co Ltd, Frechen, Germany.) The relationship between particle design and certain properties of powder materials was discussed. It was shown that hybridisation allows optimisation of properties such as spheroidisation, agglomeration and change of composition by coating. A device for hybridisation of powders was described. The effects of changes in powder characteristics were reviewed, notably agglomeration of fine metallic powders.  F Benitez et al. (Ames SA, San Vicene dels Horts, Spain.) Powder Metall, Vol 48, No 1, 2005, 85-92. A numerical model for powder transfer in cold compaction and a material characterisation procedure are proposed. The bases for these are described. The starting point is a model formulated in terms of large plastic deformation theory involving parameters which control the yield surface and had been applied to medium to high densities. Experiments involved direct observation of powder motion in the die cavity. The methodology is shown to be simple and industrially viable. The study was for one specific model but application to others is shown to be possible.  V Arhnold et al. (GKN Sinter Metals, Radevormwald, Germany.) Procedure which facilitate production of high density parts, lubrication, alloy composition and warm compaction, were outlined with reference to products with density in excess of 7.2gm.cm  A Istúriz et al. (Polytechnic University of Catalunya, Manresa, Spain.) Powder transfer in the compaction die was discussed. It was shown that defects may be generated by the presence of shear bands in the uncompressed powder. The size and extent of the shear bands was investigated in terms of size and shape of punches and powder particles. An experimental set-up involving transparent dies and a video system were used in the study.  D T Gethin et al. (University of Wales Swansea, Swansea, Wales, UK.) Use of an instrumented die and a rigid die to study ejection in powder compaction was described. In both cases it is shown that ejection stress is about 10 per cent of average axial stress at the end of compaction. Results from the instrumented die show that friction coefficient during compression and ejection are similar. Results from the rigid die showed that the effect of lubricant addition and lubricant type have little influence on ejection. At low compaction pressures lubricant addition has little effects as admixed lubricant is not extruded on to the die/compact interface.  G Veltl et al. (Fraunhofer Inst IFAM, Bremen, Germany.) Use of microwave sintering of ceramics and hardmetals and potential for use with steel was discussed. Experimental studies of microwave sintering of metal powders were described. Steel bearing balls were used as a model material to examine and separate transport mechanisms induced by microwave fields. Scanning electron microscopy and high resolution thermography were used to study treated samples.  Y N Gafo et al. (Welding Research Inst., Minsk, Belarus.) Centrifugal induction sintering to apply metal powder coating to the internal surfaces of hollow cylinders was investigated. It was shown that effective control could be attained by monitoring the high frequency current applied to the part to be coated while in rotation. Factors considered included geometrical, thermo-physical and electro-physical parameters, convective and radiant heat transfer. Reasonable agreement was found between experiment and calculation.  R Tap, M Willert-Porada. (University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany.) It was suggested that coating of ultrafine WC particles all over, with Co, would be beneficial to sintering and properties of WC-Co and that conventional methods of attaining this were unsatisfactory. In order to achieve total coverage prior to microwave sintering heat treatment conventional WC-Co agglomerates were treated in a circulating fluidised bed reactor incorporated into a microwave plasma chamber. At a temperature of 300γC homogeneous distribution of Co in agglomerated WC-Co powders was attained.  P A P Wendhausen, et al. (UFSC, University Campus, Florianópolis, Brazil.) Development of plasma based equipment for processing injection moulded parts was outlined. The system allows debinding and sintering to be carried out in a single equipment. The plasma unit allows operation in atmospheres saturated with long chain hydrocarbon molecules. It was reported that injection moulded Fe-Ni alloys and stainless steels had been processed in the industrial scale plasma reactor.  M Willert-Porada. (University of Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany.) Recent improvements in PM technology were reviewed, including, new powder grades, new methods of compaction, use of green machining and improved furnace technology. New means of heating, plasma and microwave were considered to mass transport during sintering but are not widely used industrially. Introduction of new technology for sintering was discussed in terms of benefits, equipment required and fundamental knowledge. Based on recent results for microwave sintering of materials on laboratory and pilot plant scales, the potential and risks of industrial microwave sintering were outlined.  O Coube et al. (Plansee AG, Reutte, Austria.) Simulation of compaction of a two-level ferrous part was described. It was confirmed that finite element mesh density has only small effects on predicted density distribution and punch force levels. Different codes were shown to agree, indicating the suitability of different simulation systems. The work described formed part of the European Dienet Project.  V Arnhold et al. (GKN Sinter Metals, Radevormwald, Germany.) Development of ready-to-press Al alloy powder mixtures was discussed. it was noted that many PM Al alloys are based on cast or wrought compositions. Taking residual porosity into account sintered alloys have similar physical properties to ordinary alloys. The state-of-the-art was reviewed. Development of new alloys, with special properties, high wear resistance and load bearing capacity, was indicated  L E G Cambronero et al. (School of Mines – UPM, Madrid, Spain.) Foaming of a PM Al-Si precursor was carried out using non-conventional heating system, a solar energy furnace, under various conditions of heating rate, time etc and in a preheated furnace. Samples were characterised for density, pore size, shape and distribution to establish optimum process conditions.  J Cintas et al. (University of Seville, Seville, Spain.) Development of an alternative process route for consolidation of Al powder, from double cold pressing and vacuum sintering, to reduce the number of process stages from five to three, was reported. This involved high temperature annealing of mechanically alloyed powder. Properties of five-step and three-step materials were compared.  Y D Kim et al. (Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea.) Sintering of AL 7xxx alloys, with/without traces of Mg, was investigated. At low concentrations of Mg sintering was enhanced due to the disrupting effect of Mg on the oxide film on the Al particles, which formed a spinel type of compound. This lowered the mechanical properties. A transient liquid phase formed during sintering. The transient liquid phase and spinel were examined microscopically.  E V Homenko, R V Minakova, A V Laptev. (No address available – contact European Powder Metallurgy Association.) Application of Cu-Cr alloys in electrical contacts was described. Samples of Cu-50%Cr were prepared from two types of electrolytic Cu powder and four Cr powders, reduced by CaH  M L Marucci et al (Hoeganaes Corporation Inc, Cinnaminson, USA.) Sinter hardening was discussed. Recent developments in materials and processes were outlined. Topics considered included alloy selection, mechanical and fatigue properties, microstructural development, optimisation of cooling rates and good tempering practice.  M A Grande et al. (Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy.) Wear properties of sintered Mn-Mo and Cr-Mn-Mo alloy steels were investigated with regard to sintering system, one being a new sinter hardening method based on vacuum sintering at 1240γC with integrated rapid cooling. The other was conventional industrial at 1180γC.  H Karlsson et al. (Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg, Sweden.) Samples of pressed and sintered, to densities of 7.0 or 7.4gm.cm  S Strobl et al. (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.) Elastic properties of layered PM materials were investigated experimentally and theoretically on bar samples. Samples included sandwich structures made up of cellular materials and materials with gradient distributions of porosity. Testing was by a dynamic resonant method. Experimental data was compared with values calculated from models of real samples and good agreement was reported.  H Danninger et al. (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.) The dependence of Young's modulus on load bearing area of high density PM alloy steels was investigated. Static and dynamic values were determined at samples with densities of 7.1 to 7.6gm.cm  P Beiss et al. (RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.) Failure of plain strain fracture toughness specimens of sintered steels was reviewed. It was pointed out that valid K  H Danninger et al. (Vienna University of Technology, Vienna, Austria.) It was noted that high performance sintered steel may be made from low alloyed powders, to retain compressibility, with additions of enough C to form bainite after sintering and aid densification. Effects of green density and sintering temperature on tensile and impact properties of low alloy Mo-Ni-0.6%C steels were investigated. Properties were shown to meet specifications for medium/high strength parts.  L Alzati, A Bergmark. (Höganás AB, Höganás, Sweden.) The need to further improve fatigue and mechanical properties of steel parts, and consistency and robustness, for automotive use, was discussed with regard to use of diffusion bonded alloy steel powders. Relationship between fatigue properties, microstructure and fractography of some diffusion bonded powders, sintered at 1120γC and cooled at 0.8degC.sec  H Pohl et al. (Fraunhofer Inst. IFAM, Bremen, Germany.) Microscopy was used to investigate the role of material and process parameters in densification and properties of laser sintered steel powders, including Fe, C-steels, low alloy steels and high speed steels made from elemental powders, prealloyed powders and precursor material powders. Laser sintering results in rapid solidification and the development of special microstructure features. Evolutions of pore morphology and phase formation were studied. Microstructures were found to be heterogeneous and consisted of fine phases with cellular and dendritic morphologies.  H Oginuma, E Yuasa. (Musashi Inst of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.) J Jpn Soc Powder/Powder Metall, Vol 52, No 1, 2005, 35-40. In Japanese. AZ91 Mg alloy chips were mixed with 12 or 40 ar% atomised Al powder and mechanically alloyed. The milled powders were hot roll bonded to AZ31 or AM50 Mg alloy strip. Precipitates of Mg  J A Picas et al. (Polytechnic University of Catalunya, Vilanova I la Geltru, Spain.) Powder Technol, Vol 148, No 1, 2004, 20-23. Ni-22wt%Cr-10%Al-1%Y powders of mean particle size 28 m were high energy mechanically milled at 180rpm for 12 hours in liquid N. Particles were spherical before milling. After cryo-milling particles were agglomerated and irregular in shape, with an average agglomerate size of 106m and a crystallite size less than 50nm.  G Aggarwal, I Smid. (Pennsylvania State University, USA.) Nb and Nb alloys were discussed with regard to properties, notably rhe lowest specific weight of the refractory metals. Injection moulding of Nb powder was investigated with regard to the efficiency of the process. Sintering was at up to 2000γC in vacuum or in an atmosphere with a low O partial pressure. Effects of sintering time, temperature and atmosphere on processing of pure Nb were studied.  V V Savich et al. (Powder Metallurgy Inst. of National Academy of Sciences, Minsk, Belarus.) Samples of porous Ti, made from sponge powders by mould pressing, isostatic pressing and hydrodynamic compaction, were characterised for porosity, pore sizes and permeability. Isostatic pressing gave the best property results. Hydrodynamic compaction gave lower properties. The materials were for aerators for water and effluent treatment.  V K Sheleg et al. (State Research and PM Co., Minsk, Belarus.) Difficulties in the use of surgical implants were discussed, notably separation of prostheses from tissue due to inadequate design, properties or applied stress It was shown that parts made from spherical Ti powders, with controlled particle size and high specific surface, have good compatibility with living tissue. This reduces the tendency for separation of implant and tissue.  M A H Fenollosa et al. (Polytechnic University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.) Powder Technol, Vol 148, No 1, 2004, 15-19. ZnO powders were mechanically milled. Structural and optical characteristics are described. Milling is shown to be effective in producing nano-crystalline ZnO powder.  G Mascolo et al. (Ambiente e Territoio-Laborarorio Materali, Cassino, Italy.) Powder Technol, Vol 148, No 1, 2004, 7-10. Production of precursors for a ZrO  S Wongkasemjit et al (Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.) Powder Technol, Vol 148, No 1, 2004, 11-14. Production of ZrO  S-Y Chen et al. (National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.) Powder Technol, Vol 148, No 1, 2004, 28-31. Production of nano-sized p[articles, by laser ablation, from a ZrO  K Kitagawa et al. (Industrial Research Inst of Ishikawa, Kanazawa, Japan.) J Jpn Soc Powder/Powder Metall, Vol 52, No 1, 2005, 16-21. In English Two types of Pb-Zr titanate were investigated. One of these is used in signal devices and the other in piezo-electric transformers and ultrasonic motors, described and low Qm and high Qm respectively. Qm is a mechanical factor. The high Qm material had higher bend strength, Young's modulus and Vicker's hardness. Fatigue test results and fractographic studies are described.  S Someya et al. (Marine Bio Co Ltd, Tokyo Japan.) J Jpn Soc Powder/Powder Metall, Vol 52, No 1, 2005, 28-34. In Japanese. Production of synthetic marble by sintering of CaCO  L-M Berger. (Fraunhofer Inst. Materials/Beam Technology, Dresden, Germany.) Production of wear resistant coatings by thermal spraying was discussed, the preferred technique being the high velocity oxy-fuel technique as this combines a moderate process temperature and high particle velocity. Examples of coating materials, which have been studied, were given. Differences between sprayed and sintered materials were becoming smaller, opening opportunities for coatings with characteristics which are not matched by sintered materials.  A V Sosnovsky et al. (National Academy of Sciences, Minsk, Belarus.) A model of a process for application of a wear resistant coating to a substrate was described. An electrically heated rod is immersed in a powder, which melts on to the surface. A generalised Fourier analysis of the process was presented. Use of the model allows calculation of the parameters required to attain surface coverage and temperature profiles at different stages of the process.  N Miyano et al. (Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.) It was reported that mechanical alloying and spark plasma sintering had been used to fabricate Ti-20wt%SiC composite materials. Mechanical properties were investigated, A low flow stress was detected and was attributed to pseudo-superplastic behaviour. Application to parts production was discussed.  E Akoral et al. (Gazi University, Besevier-Ankara, Turkey) Mechanical properties and machinability of Al-(10 to 30)wt%SiC particle composites were investigated. Sample preparation was described, ball milling, pressing and sintering. Machinability was evaluated by cutting forces and surface finish. Increase in %SiC decreased transverse rupture strength, increased hardness, reduced cutting forces in turning and improved surface quality.  M Viviani et al. (National Research Council, Genoa, Italy.) Powder Technol, Vol 148, No 1, 2004, 24-27. Dense nano-crystalline BaTiO  R M German et al. (Pennsylvania State University, USA.) It was reported that injection moulding had been used to make Ni-Zn ferrite materials with wax-polypropylene binder. Effects of stearic acid were investigated. Feedstock rheology was investigated by capillary rheometer at 160° C, 170° C and 180° C and shear rates of 100 to 3000 sec * The Abstracts marked * are of papers presented at the 2004 Powder Metallurgy World Congress, which was held in Vienna, Austria and was organised by the European Powder Metallurgy Association, Talbot House, Market Street, Shrewsbury, SY1 1LG, UK.