We report the case of a 32-year-old male patient involved in a road traffic accident in which he sustained a grade II open supra- and intercondylar fracture of the left distal femur with substantial bone loss of the lateral femoral condyle and trochlea (AO classification type 33 C3). Normal knee function was no longer possible, as the patella was trapped within the bony defect. Existing reconstructive options such as unicondylar osteoarticular allograft, arthrodesis, and arthroplasty were considered. However, as all these techniques present significant disadvantages, particularly in young and active patients, a custom-made lateral hemiarthroplasty was designed and implanted as an alternative treatment. Follow-up at 24months revealed an excellent, pain-free level of function and radiographs showed no signs of implant loosening or migration. This technique offers the most anatomical means of reconstruction with maximal preservation of the bone stock, thereby better facilitating any revisions that may be necessary in the future. This is an experimental technique reserved for rare indications, and currently has no long-term follow-up results associated with its use. Additional research is therefore needed before widespread adoption of this technique can take place.Type-C distal femoral fractures should be treated surgically in order to reconstruct the articular surface and restore the mechanical axis Reconstruction with an osteochondral allograft preserves the bone and has been reported to produce encouraging mid-term results, but these allografts are difficult to acquire and attaining perfect matches is unlikely, which will make the affected joint less congruent, possibly leading to secondary arthritis In this article, a case presenting with an AO classification type 33 C3 fracture A 32-year-old male patient was involved in a high-energy road traffic accident, hitting a parked van with his left knee while riding a motorbike. At the emergency department of our hospital, a grade II open supra- and intercondylar fracture of the left distal femur was diagnosed ( A custom-made implant was created using radiographs and Computed tomography (CT) scans (Mobelife N.V., Leuven, Belgium) in a manner that has been previously described in the literature The second step consisted of the anatomical reconstruction of the distal femur. In order to get this reconstruction as anatomically correct as possible and to define precisely the geometry of the articular cartilage, the original thickness and shape of the femoral cartilage of the intact, contralateral knee was taken into account. Based on arthro-CT data information, a surface mesh of the femoral cartilage was calculated, which was then mirrored and registered on the reconstructed condyles. The lateral condyle was reconstructed to conform to the width of the intact tibial plateau and meniscus. In the third step, a custom titanium implant was designed starting from the reconstruction, using the computer-aided design (CAD) tools in 3-Matic software (Materialise). The 3-Matic software combines CAD tools with meshing capabilities and is consequently well suited for applying CAD operations on anatomical 3D data. The custom-designed titanium implant consisted of three parts. First, the reconstructed lateral condyle and trochlea were designed, paying special attention to the smooth transition to, and fit with, the remaining medial condyle. The trochlear groove was anatomically reconstructed to optimize the interaction with the intact patella. Second, a plate on the lateral side of the femur shaft was created, enabling thorough and stable initial fixation. Third, a metal porous patient-specific bone filler was used in the defect cavity to allow bone ingrowth ( As a last step in the design process, finite element analysis was performed using dedicated engineering software (Abaqus, Dassault Systèmes, Paris, France) to evaluate the mechanical integrity of the implant and bone in a patient-specific manner. Additive manufacturing techniques were used to produce the implant and patient-specific instruments, with selective laser melting Five months after the initial trauma, following approval by the competent authorities, the custom-made hemiarthroplasty was implanted. The previous midline incision and lateral parapatellar arthrotomy were reused. Because of the delay before the final operation, the patella was trapped in the bone defect and a fibrous union was established between the patella and lateral femoral condyle. A tibial tuberosity osteotomy, lateral retinacular release and massive arthrolysis had to be performed to open the joint. The plate and screws were removed in a first stage. A non-union between the medial femoral condyle and the femoral shaft was observed. Custom-made cutting guides were used to make the bone cuts necessary for an optimal fit of the hemiarthroplasty. The implant was fixed against the bone with five cancellous screws distally and seven cortical screws proximally. Perfect congruency of the tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints was obtained. Stable fixation of the custom-made implant was obtained, with a smooth transition between the surface of the implant and the remaining articular surface ( For correct positioning of the patella and optimal patellar tracking, the tibial tuberosity was proximalized for one centimeter and an extensive lateral retinacular release had to be performed. At the end of the operation, there was a full extension and flexion to 100° and good mediolateral and anteroposterior stability. At final follow-up 24 Some intra-articular fractures of the distal femur are not suitable for reconstruction. Conventional reconstruction with plates and screws is not always possible in the presence of severe comminution or bone loss. In these cases, alternative reconstructive options include massive osteochondral allografting, total knee arthroplasty (TKA), and arthrodesis. All these techniques present significant disadvantages, especially in young and active patients. In massive osteochondral allografting, the main concerns are the difficulties in graft acquisition and perfect sizing of the graft, although published data indicate acceptable survival rates with this surgery In another paper, Bianchi et al. Because of the disadvantages associated with other existing reconstructive techniques, a new strategy that allowed for maximal preservation of bone stock and undamaged soft tissues was developed. To our knowledge, there is only one similar case published by Rose et al. Hemiarthroplasty prostheses have an associated risk of erosion of native cartilage and bone, which is frequently seen following hip hemiarthroplasty in elderly patients with intracapsular hip fractures Should the patient develop secondary post-traumatic arthrosis in the future, the decision to perform a revision procedure would depend on the extent and location of the cartilage wear. If it is limited to the lateral tibial plateau, simple additional resurfacing of the lateral tibial plateau with a fixed-bearing type unicompartmental implant may suffice. If there is progression to the medial compartment, alongside loosening of the hemiarthroplasty, reconversion to a TKA is indicated, with the degree of constraint depending on the status of the ligaments at the time of revision. The femoral component will need to be custom-made again, with an extension on the lateral side to compensate for the bone loss and a stem to bypass the screwholes. If a subsequent revision is required, a tumor-type prosthesis will have to be considered. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first case where the complete lateral femoral condyle, most of the trochlear groove, and the lateral metaphyseal bone were replaced by a custom-made lateral femoral hemiarthroplasty. Although such a technique is experimental, it offers theoretical advantages over the existing reconstructive options, such as an anatomical reconstruction with minimal additional bone loss and a maximal preservation of the intact ligaments and soft tissues. It is highly likely that this implant will require revision in the future given the patient's young age and activity level. The maximal preservation of the intact ligaments, soft tissues and bone will minimize the potential difficulties of such a procedure. Although we report excellent patient satisfaction and function after 24 None. The authors would like to highlight the excellent support of Mobelife in the design of the implant.