Interfering effects of NO and SO2 gases on CO2 sensing performance of the solid state galvanic cell, Pt, O2, CO2, Na2CO3–BaCO3ǀǀNa+ǀǀNa2Ti6O13–TiO2, O2, Pt were investigated at 673K and 773K. In the interfering gases concentration ranges of 50–150ppm NO and 5–15ppm SO2, exposure to NO gas guaranteed a recovery of electromotive force (EMF) from the relatively small EMF deviation. However, SO2 gas remarkably degraded the performance of the sensor arising from the formation of sulfate on the sensing electrode. Na2CO3–SnO2, Na2CO3–SnO2–Cu, and Na2CO3–SnO2–CuO were heat-treated and adopted as filter materials adjacent to the sensing electrode. The EMF response of the CO2 sensors with filters was compared in terms of filter efficiency. Among them, Na2CO3–SnO2–CuO filter showed the most promising characteristics in suppressing NO and SO2 gas interference.Low-cost and compact electrochemical CO There have been abundant works on potentiometric CO To expand their application range of the potentiometric CO Na-β-alumina solid electrolytes were synthesized by mixing Na Thoroughly ball-milled Na All the measurements were made in a 754 As many other research groups reported Following chemical reactions Therefore, the The overall cell reaction As shown in  At the sensing electrode, following reactions can be considered when NO gas and SO Therefore, it is probable that NO or SO However, the above explanation is not enough to interpret the relative degree of cross-sensitivity as a function of interfering gas concentration and temperature shown in Using thermodynamic data Phase analysis for three batches of filters (#1 to #3) after heat-treatment was performed using XRD. As shown in The filter efficiency (F.E.) can be defined as follows. Whereas NO gas (50∼150 As mentioned above, all the filters investigated here did function as a chemical filter rather than a physical barrier to interfering gases since any differences in CO If the injected interfering gases adsorb on and react with the filter materials before they reach the sensing electrode, the net concentration of the interfering gases which can directly disturb the sensor can be expected to decrease. It is well known that the catalytic filter in semiconducting oxide sensor takes advantage of the phenomena explained above On the exposure to NO, following reactions can be considered on the surfaces of SnO In 0.21 In this case, only 7.6 For SO To check the evidence for sacrificial reaction of filters with SO In the interfering gases concentration ranges of 50–150 This research was funded by Center for Ultramicrochemical Process Systems sponsored by KOSEF.