The effect of tertiary alkanolamines including triethanolamine (TEA) and triisopropanolamine (TIPA) on clinker processing and cement hydration reactions is well documented in literature. Yet, the results obtained cannot be directly transposed to real-scale industrial grinding, given that additive degradation due to attrition and heat are substantially different from those experienced under laboratory conditions. This paper is part of a research project undertaken to bridge the gap between laboratory and industrial grinding. It mainly seeks at quantifying the effect of specific energy consumption (Ec) and elevated temperature on degradation (i.e., loss in performance) of alkanolamine-based additive used at 350 and 460g/ton of cement. A series of grinding tests was performed using 50-l laboratory mill at various Ec values and materials temperature. Tested properties included water demand, setting time, heat of hydration, and strength development. Laboratory results are validated using data collected from real-scale closed-circuit tube mill operating at 90ton/h.The incorporation of small amounts of tertiary alkanolamines such as triethanolamine (TEA), triisopropanolamine (TIPA), diethanol-isopropanolamine (DEIPA), methyl-diethanolamine (MDEA) is common in the cement clinker processing industry. In addition to energy savings due to reduced agglomeration of cement grains, the practical consequences of such organic compounds include an increase in early/late age compressive strength and reduction of clinker factor while maintaining similar mechanical performance ( Scientific literature is abundant with laboratory studies assessing the effect of TEA and TIPA on cement hydration processes and altered properties such as heat release, rheology, setting time, and compressive strength. For instance, Although such studies contributed largely to better understanding of altered cement properties due to alkanolamine additions, major discrepancies have been reported when transposing the results obtained under laboratory conditions to real-scale industrial mills ( In earlier study, Limited information exits in literature regarding TEA and TIPA degradation during clinker processing, and most importantly the extent to which this could alter cement hydration processes and properties following real-scale grinding. In 1998, It is important to note that no attempts were made by Generally, the boiling points and decomposition temperatures of majority of organic compounds used in commercial additives are substantially higher than the cement grinding temperature; for example, the boiling points for TEA and TIPA are 325 and 355 This paper is the continuation of a research project undertaken to bridge the gap between laboratory and real-scale grinding of cement clinker. It is divided into two main phases; the first compares the data collected during real-scale clinker grinding in closed-circuit tube mill operating at around 90 Industrial clinker used for the production of ASTM Commercially available alkanolamine-based additive was used; it is referred to as strength enhancer and pack-set reducer in the cement industry. Its active chemicals determined by Karl Fisher method and specific gravity were 60% and 1.09, respectively. The Thin-Layer Chromatography analysis revealed the presence of TIPA (C Industrial grinding was realized using 90-ton/h design capacity tube mill. The 3.6-m diameter mill consists of two chambers; the first has a length of 3.6 The industrial clinker processing is continuing process ( A 50-l laboratory-grinding mill having a drum diameter and length of 400 The locked-cycle grinding approach was used in this project ( The Blaine fineness of cement was evaluated using the air-permeability apparatus as per ASTM The water demand required to achieve normal consistency was determined by mixing 650 The heat of hydration was determined according to ASTM The first stage of industrial testing consisted on ensuring uniformity of grinding parameters and sampling cement at regular time intervals for use as control mixtures (the mill was operating without any additive). This stage was pursued over 3 Then, sprinkling of alkanolamine additive over the fresh feed introduced in the mill started at a rate of 350 Industrial testing stopped over-night and resumed the second day. After assuring stable mill conditions, the additive dispensing started at a rate of 460  Although the Blaine values are quite close to each other, the alkanolamine additions narrowed the PSD curves and shifted their diameters towards smaller values, reflecting improved dispersion and flowability of cement grains. Hence, n increased from 0.946 for control cement to 1.022 and 1.041 when the additive was incorporated at 350 and 460 Initially, the control mix was prepared by grinding 7 After the control mix, two series of grinding tests were performed in presence of additive. The procedure consisted of sprinkling the pre-selected dosage at either 350 or 460  Compared to control mix, the incorporation of additives led to relatively reduced water demand (i.e., from 29.1% to 28.4% and 28%), which could be associated to steric hindrance effect of molecules adsorbed onto cement particles ( The variations in mill performance (i.e., Δ(Ec)) and cement properties (i.e., Δ(Property)) due to alkanolamine additions following industrial or laboratory clinker grinding are plotted in Also, the differences within each Δ(Ec) and Δ(Property) values determined at given additive dosage rate are reported in Due to a scale effect ( Generally, the water demand appears to be least influenced by the scale effect. Hence, the difference between Δ(Water) values was as low as 0.31% for cement ground with 350 Compared to industrial tests, the absolute 7-days heat of hydration values are substantially higher during laboratory grinding ( Five control mixtures ground for different time intervals to achieve relatively low to high Blaine fineness of 2500–4500 As summarized in The effect of alkanolamine on cement properties was evaluated by post-addition ( The variations in cement properties (i.e., Δ(Property)) due to post-added alkanolamine at 460 Regardless of Blaine, the incorporation of organic compounds led to reduced water demand, reflecting improved matrix dispersion. For instance, such decrease was from 25.9% for control cement having 2505 The setting times decreased with alkanolamine additions, particularly at lower cement Blaine fineness. For example, at 460 The relationships between Δ(Water) and Δ(Setting) values are plotted in As shown in The Δ(7-d Heat) and Δ(28-d Comp.) values were the lowest for the coarser cement, and then increased gradually with increased Blaine fineness. For example, the Δ(28-d Comp.) increased from 5.1% to 12.6% and 21.8% for cement having Blaine of 2500, 3500, and 4500 The grinding in presence of additive was realized using feed materials stored at ambient temperature ( In case grinding was performed at elevated temperature, the clinker, pozzolan, and gypsum materials were placed in a pre-heated oven for about 30 Cement series #2 and #5 possessing 3000 or 4500 Generally speaking, the variations in cement properties due to clinker grinding in presence of alkanolamine additions with respect to corresponding control mixture having equivalent Blaine fineness (i.e., Δ(Property from Nevertheless, the absolute values of At maximum applied Ec of around 33 The variations in Δ(Ec) values for cement mixtures ground at ambient or elevated temperature with respect to corresponding control cement are plotted in In general, the variations in cement properties due to clinker grinding in presence of alkanolamine additions at elevated temperature with respect to control mixture (i.e., Δ(Property from A series of charts are proposed in The proposed charts are validated with data obtained from Phase I during industrial grinding; hence, the cross-marks shown are those reported in This research project was initiated following an industrial grinding test realized to evaluate the effect of alkanolamine additions on mill performance and cement properties. It mainly seeks at determining whether or not additive degradation took place due to industrial grinding including the extent to which this altered cement hydration reactions and properties, as compared to laboratory testing. Test results have shown that water demand of cement is least influenced by industrial vs. laboratory grinding. In contrast, the setting times lengthened and 1-day compressive strength remarkably decreased during industrial grinding; the resulting differences compared to laboratory grinding reached 11.2% and 13.2%, respectively. For similar cement fineness and PSD, this implies that the alkanolamine compounds have degraded during industrial grinding due to attrition and heat, leading to reduced effect on cement hydration processes and properties. The resulting differences in 7-days heat of hydration and 28-days compressive strength reached 9.6% (i.e., from 9.2% to 18.8%) and 6.9% (i.e., from 9% to 15.9%), respectively. To predict the loss in additive performance due to Ec and/or elevated temperature, a series of locked-cycle laboratory grinding tests were realized. When Ec was set less than around 20 The author wishes to acknowledge the fund and technical support provided by