Herein, we report a new and simple method for the preparation of metallic copper nanospheres-decorated cellulose nanofiber composite (CuNSs/CNFs). Initially, the cellulose acetate nanofibers (CANFs) were electrospun followed by deacetylation and anionization to produce functional anionic cellulose nanofibers (f-CNFs). The CuCl2 precursor was deposited on the f-CNFs (CuCl2/CNFs) by a simple dipping method. Then the CuCl2/CNFs were reduced under vacuum by using aluminum foil to produce the CuNSs/CNFs. The resultant CuNSs/CNFs composite was characterized by various microscopic and spectroscopic methods. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) confirmed the successful functionalization of anionic groups with the CNFs. The field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) results confirmed the formation of CuNSs on the surface of CNFs. From the scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) analysis, the weight percentage of Cu was found to be 23.5 wt%. The successful reduction of CuO to metallic Cu was confirmed by X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses. Mechanism has been proposed for the formation of metallic Cu sphere on CNFs.Metal nanoarchitectures such as nanospheres Recently, the development of various electrospun nanofibers (NFs), including cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) and their composites, has significantly attracted much attention because of their unique properties, such as large surface area to volume ratio, biocompatibility, flexibility in surface functionalities, easy-handling and outstanding mechanical properties Cellulose acetate (CA, 39.8% acetyl content having average The CANFs were prepared according to our previously reported procedure In a typical deacetylation test, 100 mg of the above prepared CANFs were dipped into a 100 mL of 0.05 mol/L NaOH solution for 48 h at 25 °C. After that, the CANF samples were thoroughly washed with distilled water to remove excess NaOH and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 4 h. The deacetylated samples (CNFs) were further used for the anionization process. Initially, the CNFs were dipped in 1.5 mol/L NaOH aqueous solution for 30 s to produce soda cellulose (Na-CNFs) and subsequently washed with 0.05 mol/L NaOH solution and dried in air. Then the Na–CNFs were dipped into a 1.0 mol/L ClCH At first, the CuCl Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-5000, Hitachi Co., Japan) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL model 2010 FasTEM) were used to characterize the morphology of the nanofibers. Prior to the FE-SEM analysis, the nanofibers were sputtered with Pd–Pt. To quantify the weight percentage of Cu and Cl in CuCl The FE-SEM images in To further confirm the successful deacetylation and anionization processes, FT-IR spectra were taken for CANFs, CNFs and The anionic group functionalized After the successful deposition of CuCl To investigate the chemical state of CuNSs, Cu 2 Based on the results obtained, a mechanism has been proposed for the formation of metallic CuNSs (CuNSs/CNFs) from CuCl We successfully prepared the CuNSs-decorated CNFs by a simple reduction method. FT-IR results confirmed the successful chemical functionalization of CNFs. FE-SEM and TEM images demonstrated the formation of CuNSs on the CNFs. Higher loading of Cu (23.5 wt%) on CNFs was confirmed by the SEM-EDS analysis. The successful reduction of CuCl This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: