Response surface methodology was used to determine the optimum salt level (1.3–2.1%) and pectin level (0.25–1.0%) when olive oil replaced pork backfat (0–100%) for the production of highly acceptable low-fat frankfurters (9% fat, 13% protein). The test ingredients significantly affected (P<0.05) jelly separation of the batter, skin strength, hardness, saltiness, odour and taste and the overall acceptability of the low-fat frankfurters. Batters with high pectin levels recorded the highest (P<0.05) jelly separation. Low-fat frankfurters with high salt levels tended to have very hard skins and increased (P<0.05) saltiness while those with a high pectin level were very soft, tasted like cream and had the lowest (P<0.05) score for odour and taste. The low-fat frankfurters with 1.8–2.1% salt, 0–35% olive oil and 0.25–0.45% pectin had the highest overall acceptability. However, low-fat frankfurters produced with 1.3% salt, 0.25–0.30% pectin and 80–100% olive oil were also acceptable. Such low-fat frankfurters, compared to commercial products, have a 48% lower salt content (from 2.5 to 1.3%) and 66.6% lower fat content (from 30 to 10%), in which 80–100% of the added fat is olive oil. Further research is needed to improve the acceptability of these frankfurters.Health organizations all over the world have promoted lowering the intake of total dietary fat, saturated fatty acids and cholesterol as a means to minimize health risks ( Frankfurters are widely consumed meat products. Commercial frankfurters usually contain up to 30% fat ( Olive oil is the most monounsaturated vegetable oil ( Common salt added to the meat products affects flavor, preservation, safety, texture characteristics and consumer acceptability. In emulsion type products, such as frankfurters, the salt contributes to the formation of a stable emulsion which, upon heating, results in a product of acceptable quality characteristics ( Pectin is a hydrocolloid consisting mainly of polygalacturonic acid and its methyl esters. When pectin is used as a fat replacer in meat products, a gel is sheared into small particles which mimic the physical and organoleptic characteristics of the fat globules in emulsified fats ( Response surface methodology (RSM) is a statistical technique used to investigate a complex process ( The object of this research was (a) to study the effect of olive oil, salt and pectin level on the processing and quality characteristics of low-fat frankfurters, and (b) to employ RSM to determine the optimum levels of selected ingredients in order to produce highly acceptable low-fat frankfurters. The three-level-three-factor experimental design ( Commercial frozen, boneless beef cuts from the shoulder, shank and brisket; fresh boneless pork hams; and fresh pork backfat were obtained from a local meat market. Partially thawed beef and fresh pork meat were trimmed of visible fat to provide very lean meats. The lean meat and the pork backfat were separately ground through a 12 mm plate, and then through a 3 mm plate. The ground meats and pork backfat were vacuum packaged and frozen at −20 Pork backfat and commercial olive oil (Minerva Oil Processing Company, Athens, Greece) were pre-emulsified the day before use. For both emulsions eight parts hot water were mixed for 2 min with one part of sodium caseinate. The mixture was emulsified for 3 min with 13.5 parts of pork backfat and 10 parts of olive oil, respectively, and the emulsions were stored at 4°C until use. The sodium caseinate used (Scerma, Coudeville, France) had a protein content 95.8%. The pectin Slendid type 110 (Hercules, Copenhagen, Pectin A/S, Lille Skensved, Denmark) was used to prepare a pourable pectin gel the day before use. It was dissolved in hot water at a ratio of 6.3 g/100 ml and then mixed with a calcium chloride solution prepared by dissolving 0.63 g in 3.57 ml cold water. The prepared pectin gel in the appropriate amounts was stored at 4°C until use. Fifteen treatments of low-fat frankfurters (9% fat, 13% protein) were produced under typical processing conditions. All treatments, about 5 kg each, were performed in a random order and replicated three times from separate meat sources at three different times. The batter composition for each treatment is given in Partially thawed lean meat was chopped for 2–3 s in a Kilia 30L cutter (Kilia Fleischereimaschinenfabrick, Kiel, Germany) at low speed and mixed with salt, the other curing ingredients and seasonings. The mixed meat was dry chopped for 20–30 s at high speed. After dry chopping the pre-emulsified pork backfat and/or olive oil, the pectin gel and part of the ice/water were added and the batter was chopped at high speed to 8°C. At that point the cup of the cutter was cleaned, the remaining ice/water was added and the batter was chopped at high speed to 14°C. Immediately after chopping, the batter was stuffed by a Risco Breveti, model RS 3000 Baby, vacuum stuffer (Risco Breveti, Zane-vi, Italy), in 24 mm diameter Nojax cellulose casings (Viscase S.A., Bagnold Cedex, France). Frankfurters were handlinked at 15 cm intervals, weighed, heat processed and smoked in a single truck smokehouse according to the following processing cycle: reddening for 40 min at 55°C and 70% relative humidity (RH); drying for 20 min at 55°C and 60% RH; smoking for 20 min at 60°C and 70% RH; and steam cooking to an internal temperature of 72°C. The frankfurters were then showered for 15 min, removed from the smokehouse and chilled at 2°C overnight. After chilling the frankfurters were weighed, then peeled and vacuum packed (−1 bar vacuum level) with a Weromatic, model Star, vacuum packaging machine (Werner Bonk, Bochum, Germany) in film pouches of polyethylene/polyamide (20/80 μm thickness) with a reported oxygen permeability rate of 116 cm Moisture, fat (ether-extractable), protein and ash were determined in representative samples of raw materials, according to standard pH measurements were determined by blending 20 g of frankfurters with 80 ml distilled water for 30 s. Readings were taken with a WTW, model pH 521, digital pH meter and a WTW type E56, combination electrode (WTW-Wissenschaftlich-Technische Werkstaten GmbH, Weillheim, Germany). Processing yield was determined by weighing frankfurters before heat processing and smoking and after chilling at 2°C overnight. The processing yield (%) was calculated on the basis of the weight of the frankfurters before heat processing. For purge accumulation three vacuum packages (about 250–300 g each) per treatment were used. Before packaging and after removing the sausages from the package at the end of the refrigerated (4 Colour measurements were performed with a HunterLab, model Labscan 5000, spectrocolourimeter (Hunter Associates Laboratory Inc, Reston, VA, USA) using a 10 mm port size, illuminant D Skin strength of the frankfurters was measured with a Sur-Berlin penetrometer, model PNR 6 (Sur-Berlin, Berlin, Germany), equipped with a half-scale aluminium cone (45 g) and 20 g load weight. Measurements were made on five surface areas of each of two links of cooked frankfurters. The samples were prepared by steeping frankfurters in boiling water for 2 min and cooling to ambient temperature for 2 min. The point of the cone was placed on the surface of the frankfurter and the instrument was turned on for 10 s to produce a puncture. The depth of puncture was measured in millimeters with greater depth in the surface indicating lower skin strength. Data reported are means of ten measurements. An Instron Universal Testing Machine, Model 1122 (Instron Ltd, Buckinghamshire, UK), was used to conduct texture profile analysis in the first week of refrigerated (4 The jelly and fat separation was determined as described by An experienced seven-member panel was used to evaluate frankfurters in the first week of refrigerated (4°C) storage. Two training sessions (about 30 min per session) were held in which commercial frankfurters were used. Furthermore a preparatory session was held before each panel to thoroughly discuss and clarify each attribute to be evaluated. Testing was initiated after the panelists agreed on the specifications. Cooked samples were prepared by steeping frankfurters in boiling water in individual pans for 2 min. Warm 2.5 cm long pieces from each treatment were coded with random numbers and served to panelists in a random manner. Panelists were seated in private booths under incandescent/fluorescent light, with an intensity of about 350 Lux. Tap water was provided between samples to cleanse the palate. Panelists were instructed to evaluate the juiciness, saltiness and odour and taste using the following scales: for juiciness 1=extremely dry to 7=extremely juicy, for saltiness 1=extreme lack of salt to 5=extremely salty, and for odour and taste 5=excellent, 4=good, 3=acceptable, 2=fair, 1=unacceptable. A total of 105 untrained panelists (35 members×3 replications) evaluated cooked frankfurters in the first week of refrigerated storage for overall acceptability on a 5-point hedonic scale (5=like extremely, 1=dislike extremely). Panel members were selected from students, staff and faculty of the Department of Food Science and Technology on the basis of their experience in consuming commercial frankfurters. The samples were prepared for evaluation as described above for the trained panel evaluation. Panelists evaluated frankfurter from all 15 treatments in three separate sessions, evaluating five samples per session in random order, in private booths under incandescent-fluorescent light. They were instructed to express their evaluation for overall acceptability after considering the firmness, juiciness and odour and taste of the product. Tap water was provided between samples to cleanse the palate. Data for processing parameters, colour, skin strength, textural and sensory attributes were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance. Means were compared using the Duncan's new multiple range test. Data analysis were performed using the The effect of test ingredients on the processing parameters and the colour of low-fat frankfurters is given in The effect of test ingredients on textural and sensory attributes of low-fat frankfurters is given in The following second order polynomial equation was found to fit to the experimental results, shown in The test ingredients ( The main effects of the test ingredients on the overall acceptability of low-fat frankfurters are given in The salt level had a significant effect ( Both the replacement of olive oil for pork backfat and the pectin level significantly affected ( The interactions between two test ingredients, when the third one was kept constant, on overall acceptability of low-fat frankfurters were all significant ( The interaction of olive oil with low salt levels, when the pectin level remained constant, had little influence on overall acceptability of the low-fat frankfurters ( The interaction of high salt and pectin level, when the olive oil level remained constant greatly affected the overall acceptability of the low-fat frankfurters. For salt levels higher than 1.7%, the higher the pectin level the lower the overall acceptability ( The interaction between the pectin and olive oil levels, when the salt level remained constant, on overall acceptability of the low-fat frankfurters is given in The influences of the test ingredients on overall acceptability of the low-fat frankfurters were expressed as contour plots. These are two dimensional plots with two continuous variables on the It is concluded from The authors acknowledge the assistance of Professor J.D. Floros for helping with statistical analysis.