Olecranon fractures are estimated to represent 10% of all upper extremity fractures. Because these injuries are intra-articular and typically displace, most cases are surgically managed. Several methods of surgical fixation have been described and remain acceptable. Most reported studies demonstrate good clinical outcomes. Data regarding objective comparison of these various techniques are lacking, and this should be an area of ongoing clinical investigation. This chapter reviews the pertinent anatomy, fracture patterns, appropriate evaluation, methods of surgical fixation, options for nonsurgical management, and outcomes.Similar to most skeletal injuries, olecranon fractures involve a range of severity from simple, nondisplaced fractures to more complex injury patterns involving fracture-dislocations of the elbow. By definition, they are intra-articular injuries that require anatomic restoration of the articular surface. When surgical treatment is warranted, several methods of internal fixation may be utilized and include tension-band wiring, intramedullary screw fixation, plate fixation (locking and/or nonlocking constructs), intramedullary nailing, and (rarely) fragment excision with triceps advancement. The goal of surgical fixation is to permit early motion to combat stiffness of the elbow joint. In general, good results are achievable in most surgically treated cases. The anatomy of the elbow is inherently complex. The bony architecture of the elbow provides for a relatively high degree of constraint and stability. As a result, recurrent instability of the elbow in the absence of associated bony injury is relatively rare. However, understanding any bony injury pattern also requires a working knowledge of the associated ligamentous and periarticular soft-tissue anatomy. The olecranon articulates with the trochlea of the humerus and thereby prevents anterior translation of the ulna with respect to the distal humerus. The articular portions of the olecranon and coronoid process are covered by hyaline cartilage. There is often a bare area devoid of cartilage, midway between the olecranon and the coronoid process, termed the The primary tendinous anatomy of the olecranon is the triceps mechanism. The triceps tendon inserts into the posterior third of the olecranon and proximal ulna, blending through a broad expansion with the aponeurosis of the anconeus muscle and the common extensor origin. The periosteum of the olecranon is intimately associated with the triceps tendon. The brachialis muscle and tendon insert broadly on the midportion of the anterior coronoid and the proximal ulnar metaphysis. The ligamentous anatomy of the elbow is another important consideration. In addition to the radial head, the anterior band of the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) is a The ulnar nerve is situated on the posterior and medial aspect of the elbow. Along its distal course, it moves anteriorly to join the ulnar artery. The intimate association of this neurovascular bundle with the proximal ulna should be considered during surgical treatment because it is at risk with anterior cortical penetration by Kirschner wires (K-wires) used during tension-band wiring or with overpenetration during drilling with plate and/or intramedullary fixation. Application of the pertinent fracture anatomy of the olecranon has led to the development of several classification schemes. Although numerous systems have been described, there is not universal consensus regarding the optimal method. The main advantage of using a classification system is to consistently describe the pattern of injury. All of the described methods attempt to guide treatment and help in categorizing prognosis. Some systems have also incorporated associated injuries to the radial head and supracondylar humerus, once again reflecting a more significant injury pattern (which likely affects prognosis). A frequently cited method is the Mayo classification of olecranon fractures ( Schatzker also described a classification system focused on the mechanical considerations of an olecranon fracture, particularly as it relates to the type of surgical fixation required. Six types are described: Type A is a simple transverse fracture; Type B is a complex transverse fracture with impaction of the central portion of the articular surface; Type C is a simple oblique fracture; Type D is a comminuted fracture; Type E is an oblique fracture distal to the midpoint of the trochlear notch; and Type F is a fracture of the olecranon with associated radial head fracture, which is often associated with a rupture of the UCL. Finally, olecranon fractures are also included in the comprehensive Arbeitsgemeinschaft für osteosynthesfragen (AO) classification system of fractures ( None of the existing classification systems has gained complete or universal acceptance, and all have inherent pros and cons. However, it is important to develop a familiarity with the existing classification systems so as to best understand the given pattern of injury and to help guide treatment and discuss prognosis with the patient. When describing the injury and making treatment recommendations, the Mayo system is highly practical and straightforward, and it seems to have the most popularity. In adults, approximately 10% of all upper extremity fractures involve the olecranon. Simple displaced transverse fractures are the most common. In a review of 100 consecutive fractures at the Mayo Clinic, 12 were nondisplaced (Type I), 82 were displaced Olecranon fractures are typically isolated injuries. Coexisting injuries typically will involve other areas of the same upper extremity. As a result, a thorough evaluation of the entire affected extremity, from the shoulder girdle to the wrist, is indicated. When an olecranon fracture has occurred, the elbow will typically demonstrate soft-tissue swelling and an effusion. Because of the immediate subcutaneous position Standard anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the elbow are sufficient for evaluation of most isolated olecranon fractures. In the setting of an acute injury, assistance with limb positioning may be necessary to ensure that true orthogonal radiographs are obtained. In injuries with suspected areas of comminution that could affect surgical fixation or technique, such as articular impaction or associated radial head or coronoid injury, the use of computed tomography (CT) may be helpful. The advent of three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction techniques has become particularly valuable in surgical planning in these more challenging cases. The goals of olecranon fracture treatment are to anatomically realign the articular surface, preserve motor strength, restore stability of the joint (when necessary), and promote the ability to allow early range of motion (ROM) exercise. In most instances, this is achieved with operative techniques involving internal fixation. However, in certain selected situations, nonsurgical management may be considered. Nondisplaced fractures in which the elbow extensor mechanism is intact may be nonoperatively treated. Controversy exists about the amount of acceptable articular displacement. Although immobilization in full extension may improve fracture reduction, it may result in diminished flexion. Immobilization of the elbow in 45–90° of flexion for approximately 3 Alternatively, in patients who are elderly and relatively sedentary in their activity expectations, or who have medical comorbidities contraindicating surgical intervention, even displaced fractures may be nonsurgically managed. In such situations, a brief period of immobilization (either with bracing or splinting), followed by gentle active assisted ROM exercises, may be a reasonable form of treatment. A recent study demonstrated a 91% rate of patient satisfaction, 72% with good or excellent functional results, and reasonable objective outcome scores. No patients required treatment for symptomatic nonunion at a mean follow-up of 6 The biomechanics of olecranon fracture fixation has historically been an area of keen research interest. All types of currently considered surgical reconstruction, including tension-band wiring, intramedullary screw fixation, plate fixation (nonlocking and locking), and intramedullary nailing, have been studied in the laboratory. The optimal method of fixation continues to be debated. Tension-band wiring, as described in the AO manual, was designed to convert the tensile distraction force of the triceps (posterior ulna) into a compressive force at the articular surface. However, biomechanical studies have failed to confirm that this actually occurs. Initial descriptions of the technique centered on intramedullary K-wire placement with associated tension cables. Over time, most authors have recommended that placement of K-wires be bicortical and anterior to the long axis of the ulna on the basis of improved biomechanics and reduction of fracture gap formation in vitro. A significant point of interest has been determining which fracture types are amenable to tension-band wiring as opposed to plate fixation. In general, existing data suggest that simple transverse and relatively simple oblique fracture patterns are the best indication for tension-band techniques. These types of fractures are also a good application of intramedullary compression screw fixation, with or without associated tensioning cable(s). Cadaveric studies have indicated in more extensive fracture patterns, or those with higher levels of comminution (nonsimple patterns), that either plate fixation or intramedullary nailing provides a more rigid construct and should be favored. Many authors advocate supine patient positioning, with the arm draped across the chest or with use of an arm holder. In contrast, the authors’ preference has been a semilateral position of the patient with use of a beanbag and appropriate padding of potential pressure points. A padded bolster or simple pillows can typically be secured to support the operative arm during the procedure. Alternatively, a prone position could also provide similar adequate exposure. Either general or regional anesthesia (or some combination) may be utilized. Adequate fluoroscopic visualization is critical to obtaining adequate fracture reduction and sound fixation. The authors prefer using a large C-arm brought from the patient’s head, aligned parallel to the surgical table. The authors typically invert the C-arm so that it is above the patient and provides little interference to the surgical team. The lateral view is the most critical, and virtually all fracture patterns can be reduced and provisionally fixed using this view. Once adequate initial reduction and fixation is achieved, simple rotation of the arm allows for adequate AP assessment and visualization of fixation. A tourniquet is applied high on the upper arm. The authors prefer the use of a sterile tourniquet to allow for adequate exposure depending on body habitus. The olecranon is approached through a posterior, laterally favored curvilinear incision that attempts to reduce scarring directly over the olecranon tip and the underlying fixation. As mentioned previously, fixation options include tension-band wire fixation with K-wires or in combination with an intramedullary screw, intramedullary screw fixation alone, plate fixation, or intramedullary nailing. Separate interfragmentary compression screws may be required for certain fracture patterns. Rarely, excision of the fragments and advancement of the triceps may be indicated. After internal fixation is completed, the elbow should be taken through full ROM to confirm stability and guide postoperative rehabilitation. Pronation and supination should be examined to confirm that there is no blockage due to malpositioned hardware. In general, current evidence suggests a trend away from tension banding toward more rigid surgical constructs, such as plate and screw fixation. The perceived shift in treatment preference is primarily due to the lack of evidence that tension banding actually converts posterior tension forces to articular compression and the demonstration of similar rates of hardware removal. However, some surgeons still prefer this technique, and an awareness of it remains warranted. Several technical tips are helpful in achieving optimal results with the tension-band wire technique. K-wires (0.062) are utilized because their ends can be easily bent. Although some surgeons have historically preferred to place the K-wires in the intramedullary canal, most now prefer to place the wires bicortically, engaging the anterior cortex and thereby providing greater resistance to wire migration. The proximal end of the wire should be buried beneath the fibers of the triceps to prevent wire migration. If the anterior cortex is engaged, then care should be taken to avoid overpenetration of the wires because neurovascular damage, restriction of forearm rotation, and the development of heterotopic ossification (HO) have been reported. In general, wires should be placed with no more than 10 An intravenous catheter may assist in passing an 18-gauge wire beneath the fibers of the triceps. The needle and plastic cannula are inserted deep to the triceps tendon, adjacent to the bone, beneath the two K-wires. The insertion needle is removed, leaving the plastic cannula in place. The 18-gauge wire can then be inserted into the end of the plastic cannula, and both cannula and wire are pulled back, passing the wire deep to the triceps fibers. The wire is then passed through a transverse drill hole (typically 2–2.5 After fixation, the elbow should be examined to confirm full ROM, including pronation and supination, and to confirm fixation stability. If there is any question regarding the adequacy of fracture reduction or fixation using orthogonal fluoroscopy, then intraoperative plain radiography should be used. It is critical that the tension-band wire is properly looped proximally around the K-wires because the wire may occasionally be passed dorsal to one or both of the wires and therefore engage only the triceps tendon. Although it has been classically felt that tension banding may have a lower profile than plating, hardware removal rates of 65–80% are similar to those observed with plating. Excellent or good results have been demonstrated in a very high percentage of cases with appropriate indications. Most data suggest that simple transverse or short oblique fractures are the most acceptable for this fixation method. An interfragmentary lag screw may be useful when there is an oblique fracture plane. A study of 78 patients treated with tension banding demonstrated a union rate of 98.7% and a relatively low rate of complications. Clinical outcomes using this technique have been similar to other methods. In one series, the average ROM was 15–120°. The use of a single large-diameter intramedullary cancellous screw has also been advocated. As with tension-band fixation, relatively simple fracture patterns are most amenable to this method ( Current peer-reviewed data suggest this technique is highly successful with appropriate indications. As mentioned previously, relatively simple fracture patterns, such as those amenable to tension-band fixation, are also the best indication for intramedullary fixation. Potential complications have included inadequate reduction and/or loss of fixation. Plate fixation is most commonly recommended for comminuted fracture patterns that are not amenable to tension-band wire or intramedullary fixation. This typically includes oblique fractures distal to the midpoint of the trochlear notch, fractures that involve the coronoid process, and those associated with Monteggia fracture-dislocations of the elbow. Such fracture patterns are considered unstable. Oblique fractures may be treated with one or two interfragmentary compression screws in addition to plate fixation to resist torsional forces. However, plating is also becoming more popular for stable fracture patterns. The reason for this appears to be twofold: (1) increased awareness of the biomechanical limitations of tension banding and (2) clinical outcome studies that suggest the need for hardware removal to be no greater with internal plate fixation as opposed to tension-banding techniques. Various plate types, including one-third tubular, dynamic compression, and pelvic reconstruction, have historically been utilized for fixation of comminuted olecranon fractures. In more recent years, several different custom olecranon plates have been designed that optimize fixation and have lowered the risk of fixation failure ( An important technical note regarding plate fixation is that in severely comminuted or unstable fractures, care must be taken not to narrow the olecranon-to-coronoid An additional concern regarding plate fixation is when the proximal fragment is of particularly small size. Small fragments are at risk for splitting in the sagittal plane and can complicate initial fixation. In such situations, reinforcement with augmenting sutures through the triceps tendon may be helpful. Biomechanical investigation suggests such augmentation may increase the ultimate load to failure compared with plating alone. Plate fixation has been demonstrated to be superior to tension-band fixation in terms of anatomic articular restoration, regardless of fracture type. Additional studies have suggested high rates of success with plate fixation, even in the setting of more complex The initially described AO technique for plating unstable olecranon fractures utilized an intraoperatively contoured one-third tubular nonlocking plate applied to the proximal ulna. More recently, precontoured plates with varying locking screw configurations have become popular. It remains unclear whether locking screw technology leads to better clinical outcome. In cadaveric biomechanical studies, similar stiffness and load to failure have been demonstrated between nonlocking and locked plating. In addition, there appears to be little biomechanical difference among the various Several studies have shown similar results with plate fixation as compared with tension banding, although patient selection (fracture type) may be slightly different. In 19 patients with comminuted olecranon fractures, locked plating resulted in a 100% union rate at a mean time of 4 Relatively similar results have been demonstrated in patient groups with slightly higher injury severity. In 25 patients with either Mayo Type II or III fractures undergoing plate fixation, there were no cases of nonunion, 88% had good or excellent results, and patient satisfaction was high. Mean Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder, and Hand and 36-item Short Form (SF-36) scores were similar to normative general population data. Twenty percent of subjects elected plate removal. An investigation of comminuted and/or complex olecranon fractures treated with contoured plating demonstrated a 100% union rate, with an average time to union of 15 Intramedullary nails are a relatively recent technical option in the management of olecranon fractures. The main theoretical advantage of this technique is minimization of soft-tissue irritation (and need for subsequent hardware removal). In addition, there is evidence that intramedullary nailing may result in less gapping at the fracture site than tension banding when early ROM is instituted. Further clinical investigation is required to determine the optimal indication of this method of fixation. It is interesting to note that some authors have discussed this technique in a broadened indication of treating nondisplaced fractures, thereby allowing earlier ROM without concern for loss of fracture alignment. Future study will likely determine the efficacy in this clinical situation. Most intramedullary devices designed for proximal ulnar fractures are intended for simple, transverse injury patterns. However, one multiplanar, locked intramedullary nail (OlecraNail, Mylad Orthopedic Solutions, Doylestown, PA) is potentially suitable for unstable, comminuted fractures ( In a study of 18 patients with unstable proximal ulnar fractures treated with locked intramedullary nailing, subjects achieved ROM within 10° of the contralateral elbow, minimal pain, and a high level of return to function. No subsequent hardware removals were necessary at minimum follow-up of 1 Excision of the fracture fragment and reattachment of the triceps tendon may be indicated in a select group of elderly patients with osteoporotic bone. In general, consideration is given for this technique when the olecranon fracture fragments involve less than 50% of the joint surface and are too small or too comminuted for successful internal fixation. The integrity of the medial collateral ligament, the interosseous membrane, and the distal radioulnar joint must be established before consideration is given to excision; otherwise, instability will likely result. The triceps tendon is reattached with nonabsorbable sutures that are passed through drill holes in the proximal ulna, much like the technique utilized in primary triceps tendon repair. Some authors recommend that the triceps be reattached adjacent to the remaining articular surface, creating a sling for the trochlea. This technical measure results in a smooth, congruent transition from the triceps tendon to the articular cartilage of the olecranon. However, it also decreases the moment arm and may result in some measure of extensor weakness. As a result, others advocate that reattachment be performed at the posterior portion of the ulna to maximize its mechanical advantage. We are unaware of any clinical data comparing these two technical variables. Some debate has existed regarding the amount of the proximal ulna that can be safely excised without compromising stability of the elbow. Although some clinical studies suggest upward of 75–80% of the joint surface may be removed, in vitro biomechanical data suggest that no more than 50% of the trochlear notch be removed so as to avoid instability. As a result, most authors have proposed this amount be the cutoff for consideration of this technique. Although data exist suggesting that partial olecranon excision may result in a lower complication and reoperation rate when compared with internal fixation, most authors still consider this a technique of last resort. In general, excision is reserved for those unusual cases in which open reduction seems unlikely to be successful. Open reduction and internal fixation should still be attempted in most cases because it allows for bone-to-bone healing and anatomic restoration. If internal fixation fails, then excision and triceps advancement can still be performed as a salvage procedure. Overall, relatively low complication rates have been reported with this procedure. Most authors agree that appropriate postoperative rehabilitation is a crucial component of achieving a successful clinical outcome. However, virtually no data exist regarding the optimal protocol for maximizing clinical outcome. In general, a customized In the immediate postoperative period, the elbow is typically splinted at or near full extension to decrease tension across the fracture site. We prefer the use of a hinged elbow brace (Össur, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland; The timing of initiation of range of movement is the primary variable at the surgeon’s discretion. Once this decision is made, the types of movements allowed are similar for all methods of fracture fixation. However, the magnitude of ROM allowed will vary depending upon fracture pattern, associated injury (in particular concomitant instability considerations), and the quality of fixation. Gentle passive ROM in the early phases of healing results in less distraction at the fracture site; therefore, it is generally preferred. We recommend a protocol that focuses on early gravity-assisted (passive) elbow extension and active assisted elbow flexion to a predetermined limit. In most instances, elbow extension to full (0° or beyond) is allowed unless the intraoperative assessment of elbow stability dictates otherwise. Although limiting the amount of flexion theoretically decreases tension on the surgical repair, the timing or extent to which this can be tolerated for any given fracture is unknown. In general, the authors limit flexion to approximately 90–100° for the first 2–3 When tension banding has been performed, the initiation of ROM exercises may be delayed until 10–14 In the less common scenario in which stability of either the ulnohumeral joint and/or radiocapitellar joint must be maintained, as in the case of more complex fracture dislocation patterns, we recommend close radiographic surveillance during the period of time when rehabilitation is being gradually progressed. In particular, consideration should be given for radiographs at regular 2-week intervals during the first 6–8 The authors typically reserve functional strengthening until 6–8 Symptomatic hardware remains the most common complication after surgical treatment of olecranon fractures. A survey-based study suggests that treating surgeons are often unaware of the extent to which these implants affect patients. In fact, patients commonly undergo hardware removal with someone other than the initial treating surgeon. In this study, the rate of patient-reported implant removal was 65%. Although initially thought to be less bothersome, tension banding has not shown lower rates of implant removal than plate fixation. In both cases, removal rates between 20% and 100% have been reported. Intramedullary nailing has demonstrated the lowest rate of hardware removal after olecranon fracture treatment. The authors have also found the need for hardware removal to be relatively unusual after intramedullary screw placement for simple, transverse fractures. However, clinical data to support this are lacking. Appropriate counseling of patients suffering an olecranon fracture is an important element of treatment. Mild reduction in functional ROM is relatively common after treatment, whether surgical or nonsurgical. In particular, the potential for loss of terminal extension should be discussed. On average, a loss of 10–15% of ROM has been reported and occurs in up to 75% of cases. It should be noted that delayed improvement in ROM has been reported over the course of ongoing follow-up. As a result, continued efforts at ROM exercise seem warranted for up to 8–12 The incidence of post-traumatic arthrosis after treatment of an olecranon fracture may approach 20%. As expected, associated risk factors for the development of arthrosis appear to be higher initial injury severity (based on magnitude of displacement) and persistence of articular incongruity. At medium-term follow-up, most cases of subsequent arthrosis are relatively mild. Further long-term follow-up is required to determine the rate and/or magnitude of arthritic progression over time in these cases. Current data are lacking in this regard. Ulnar neuritis is relatively uncommon, having been reported in 2–12% of cases. Nonsurgical management is initially recommended, unless significant concerns exist that an iatrogenic event, such as laceration or penetration, may have occurred at the time of surgery. Consideration should be given for electrodiagnostic evaluation with electromyography and/or nerve conduction studies. These are not typically of value until 14–21 Although commonly a concern with surgical and nonsurgical management of elbow fractures, HO is an uncommon occurrence in the setting of an isolated olecranon fracture. In a large study of 786 fractures involving the elbow, only 1 of 221 olecranon fractures developed HO (<1%). As a result, the authors do not prescribe HO prophylaxis in these cases. However, the authors do consider prescribing indomethacin in situations in which surgical treatment is delayed, postoperative immobilization is more prolonged than usual, or there is a combined fracture instability pattern. This is mainly due to the evidence in the previously mentioned study that suggests these factors to be associated with a higher rate of HO. The authors avoid low-dose radiation therapy in acute elbow trauma in which fracture healing is required because of concerns for higher nonunion rates. The rate of nonunion of the proximal ulnar fractures is 1% after surgical treatment. Most nonunions occur after treatment of higher energy injury patterns. The etiology of a nonunion is likely multifactorial and includes host and surgeon variables. It most commonly occurs at the metadiaphyseal junction; the relatively tenuous blood supply at this location may be a contributing factor. Malunion after treatment of an isolated olecranon fracture has been infrequently reported in the literature. Most malunions of the proximal ulna occur during the treatment of more complex injury patterns or highly comminuted injuries. Malunions at the olecranon can result in loss of motion and degeneration because of joint incongruity. Although apparently rare, the implications for the long-term health of the elbow joint are tremendous because intra-articular malunion may result in rapid joint deterioration and the need for significant reconstructive procedures. In addition, the potential for extra-articular malunion should be recognized. These situations are often due to improper ulnar alignment in the setting of a combined injury pattern (e.g., a Monteggia variant). Infection rates after the surgical treatment of isolated olecranon fractures appears acceptably low, with rates of less than 1% in most series. However, it should be The diagnosis and initial evaluation of olecranon fractures have remained consistent over time given the relatively straightforward presentation and radiographic evaluation. The current trend toward more rigid types of initial fixation will likely stimulate continued research to determine the optimal indications for options such as tension banding or intramedullary screw fixation as opposed to plate constructs. In addition, intramedullary nailing devices are a relatively new option in the management of olecranon fractures and are deserving of further investigation to delineate their role in the management of these injuries. In particular, implant types that may alter or lower the need for subsequent implant removal surgery seem warranted based on current clinical evidence. Clinical trials investigating the effect of rehabilitation protocols on functional outcome seem warranted given evidence that some element of stiffness is commonplace after olecranon fracture treatment. Finally, study of biological augmentation of olecranon fracture site biology, similar to other anatomic areas, will likely continue or expand as this technology evolves throughout orthopedics. Outcomes have historically been good in the treatment of olecranon fractures. Although most commonly occurring in isolation, the recognition of associated patterns of injury involving either bone or soft tissue is important in rendering proper treatment. Numerous methods of surgical treatment exist and include tension-band wiring, intramedullary screw fixation, plate fixation (nonlocking or locking), intramedullary nailing, and partial excision and triceps advancement. There appears to be a trend toward more rigid methods of fixation, in particular plate fixation, given current biomechanical studies suggesting its benefit. Most surgically treated cases result in bony union. The time to bony union is typically 3–4