Most of the previous studies on vermicomposting have been conducted as lab trials at small-scale (SS) using small quantity of waste mixtures. Efforts were made in this study to stabilize the sewage sludge amended with sugarcane trash using pilot-scale (PS) vermicomposting operation. Results of PS vermireactors were compared with SS trials in terms of quality of ready vermicompost and earthworm production rates. Results thus suggest a clear-cut difference between SS and PS in terms of waste mineralization rate and earthworm production. The waste mineralization rate in PS was significantly lower than SS (P
                     <0.05). Total N and available P were higher in end product from SS, while exchangeable cations (Ca2+ and K+) showed reverse behavior during the process of waste stabilization. There was significant difference between PS and SS for metal remediation rate in end materials. The growth and reproduction pattern of Eisenia fetida was completely different in PS as compared to lab trials, i.e. SS. Probably, the distinct earthworm stocking density and microclimate conditions in SS and PS were responsible for observed differences in results of waste mineralization rate and earthworm growth. This study suggests that SS laboratory trials may differ in PS field operations due to distinct behavior of earthworm in field conditions. It is concluded that SS laboratory trials should be tested in field at large-scale in order to measure the feasibility of technology for large-scale waste decomposition operations in open conditions.In India, about 7300 million cubic meter of wastewater is generated per annum, but most part of it is being discharged directly into surface water resources. However, high cost and energy requirements for conventional treatment technologies are the major reasons for poor collection and treatment of wastewater in the developing countries. According to In recent years, the potential of some epigeic earthworms has been tested to stabilize the sewage sludge generated from urban and industrial localities. Vermicomposting involves the defragmentation and partial digestion of organic waste by earthworms, and further digestion by exogenous hydrolytic enzymes provided by earthworm gut-associated microflora. Recent studies indicated the potential of earthworms in stabilization of urban sewage sludge ( Although there are frequent reports on utilization of earthworms in sewage sludge stabilization, most were small-scale (SS) laboratory trials. The literature clearly suggested that most of the previous studies on sewage sludge stabilization were SS lab experiments, using small quantities of sludge in vermibeds. However, the behavior of earthworms in a large-scale waste stabilization practice is still unknown. Therefore, much work is still required to elaborate the earthworm potential in PS operations. Few earlier reports on PS vermicomposting trials are available in literature. This study is extension work of earlier SS sewage sludge vermicomposting trial (  The primary sewage sludge (contained 35% dry matter) was obtained after filtering the municipal black wastewater sludge through sand filtration unit. Sewage sludge and wastewater was collected in large-sized plastic buckets. Sewage water was brought to the laboratory and filtered through a sand filter unit (made from stones and pebbles layer (15 Fresh sewage sludge was mixed with chopped sugarcane trash in different ratios to produce four different combinations of sewage sludge and sugarcane trash ( For laboratory screening of different treatment combinations of sewage sludge, a PS experiment was designed using wooden frame of appropriate size (1 The vermicomposting was done up to 90 days. One week before the end of experiment, water sprinkling over the vermibeds was stopped, so that earthworms and cocoons could be removed easily from vermicomposted materials. At the end, vermicomposted bedding material was removed from vermireactors and earthworms and cocoons (un-hatched and empty both) were separated from vermibeds by sieving through a iron mess of 3–4 Homogenized samples of vermicomposed material were drawn from each experimental pilot-scale vermireactor for physico-chemical analysis. The samples were oven dried (48 The pH was measured using digital pH meter (Systronic made) in 1/10 (w/v) aqueous solution. Organic carbon was determined by the partial-oxidation method ( All the chemicals used for the analysis were analytical reagents (AR) grade. Alkali resistant borosilicate glass apparatus and double glass distilled water was used throughout the study for analytical work and calibration standards preparation. The samples were used at dry weight basis for analytical purposes. All the samples were analyzed in triplicate and final results were found reproducible within ±5% error limit. One-way ANOVA was used to analyze the significant difference between treatments. Duncan multiple-ranged test was also performed to identify the homogeneous type of the bedding material in respect to earthworm's growth parameters and chemical parameters of initial substrates. A paired-sample At the end of vermicomposting, the sewage sludge mixture was a stabilized, odor-free and nutrient rich material. The composting earthworm converted the sludge mixture into fine and brownish-black homogenized material of good agronomic potential. The physico-chemical characteristics of sludge mixture showed significant difference from experimental controls, at the end. The pH of the vermicomposted bedding material was lower in all vermibeds than their initial values ( Organic C was lower in vermicomposted material than fresh materials in all vermibeds ( Total N content was significantly higher in the vermicomposted beddings than initial levels ( Available P concentration in vermicomposted material was more than control treatments. The plant-available fraction of P in ready product ranged 11.7–47.7 The content of exchangeable K was higher in vermicomposts than initial levels. Vermicomposting caused considerable increase in the concentration of inorganic K than experimental controls. The maximum mineralization for K was in Available Ca was higher in vermicomposted material obtained from PS vermibeds than their initial levels. The increase in exchangeable Ca was in the ranges of 2.36% ( C:N ratios of bedding materials decreased sharply during vermicomposting periods in all vermibeds. C:N ratio plays an important role to detect the quality of ready product. The vermicomposts from different reactors showed a good range of C:N ratios, i.e. 7.31–9.66, at the end. As compared to the initial values, the maximum decrease in C:N level was in Heavy metal concentration was lower in vermicomposts than initial raw materials. The concentration of metals in initial waste mixture and vermicomposted material is given in Earthworm growth and reproduction patterns in PS and SS vermireactors are described in As illustrated in Vermitechnology has been promoted as an eco-biotechnological tool to manage organic wastes generated from different sources. Although several organic wastes have been tested for SS laboratory experiments, PS studies are still needed to establish the science of vermicomposting for large-scale waste management operations. In this work, efforts were made to compare the results of a earlier SS laboratory trial of sewage sludge vermicomposting with a PS vermicomposting operation using similar bedding materials in order to distinguish the difference between both SS and PS for quality of end products. Results, thus exhibited clear differences between SS and PS in terms of nutrient quality as well as earthworm production parameters. This study suggests that earthworm exhibits different potential in PS vermicomposting operations than SS lab trials due to microclimatic variability in bedding substances of vermireactor.