Three coagulants, polyaluminum chloride (PACl), aluminum sulfate (Alum) and cationic polyacrylamide (cPAM) are used in this investigation. A nephelometric turbidity monitoring system (NTMS), assembled from a nephelometric turbidimeter and a data acquisition unit, is used continuously to monitor online the turbidity data in a jar test. Both calculated standard deviation (SD) of the measured turbidity data and results of an analysis of a digital image are used to discuss the effect of coagulants on the floc strength. The experimental results reveal that the diameter of flocs is strongly correlated with the SD values calculated from the collected turbidity data during the coagulation process. Also, the floc strength factor that is calculated from the turbidity SD is linearly related to the theoretical strength (σ) that is obtained by analysis of a digital image. The strength factor, theoretical strength (σ), floc strength coefficient (C) and stable size exponent (γ) all follow the order cPAM>PACl
                     >
                     Alum in this study of kaolin coagulation. Additionally, the recovery factor that was determined from turbidity SD values is highest for the cPAM floc. Therefore, this study reveals that the NTMS provides a new and easy way to compare the floc strengths of flocs that form from different coagulants or different coagulation mechanisms, and can eliminate the need for complex image analyses.In a water treatment process, a coagulant can change the stability of the suspended solids in raw water. Unstable suspended solids may collide with each other and form a large floc, which can be removed by a physical separation process. In coagulation and flocculation processes in water and in the treatment of waste water, formed flocs have irregular but similar structures, with a fractal dimension. Many scholars have applied fractal dimension (D The application of a shear force in a coagulation process may break a newly formed floc, causing the problem of ineffective solid–liquid separation ( water density (kg/m energy consumed per unit mass (m kinematic viscosity (m floc diameter (m) mixing velocity gradient (s The theoretical floc strength (σ) is determined by several parameters. However, in 1987, Francois considered only three parameters to determine both the floc strength factor and the recovery factor, which are the two indices of floc characters. The parameters used by Francois were the diameter of a formed floc (d However, measuring the required floc diameters takes a long time. Accordingly, some of the literature comprehensively elucidates floc diameter, which is obtained using an online photometric dispersion analyzer (PDA), based on the “turbidity fluctuation” technique ( In this study, an nephelometric turbidity monitoring system (NTMS) is assembled from an nephelometric meter and a data acquisition unit. Turbidity data are collected 3 In this study, the following stock solutions of coagulants are prepared for use in the coagulation experiments; (1) aluminum sulfate (Alum 2700 Synthetic raw water was prepared in the laboratory for use in the experiments, by adding 1 The NTMS probe, based on a nephelometric type turbidity meter (WTW model MIQ/C184), was set 3 A CCD digital color camera was used to capture images of floc forming in the coagulation process. In a set of jar tests, water samples were simultaneously taken from each jar at times that corresponded to floc forming, breaking and re-forming stages. At each time, each 2 Three coagulants were used and their effects on coagulation compared. They were PACl, Alum and cPAM. Floc forming, breaking and re-forming experiments were performed. When PACl and Alum were used as coagulants, rapid mixing was conducted at 150 To elucidate the relationship between turbidity SD value and floc diameter, a CCD digital color camera was used to capture an image of flocs, which was analyzed by software to calculate the PACl, Alum and cPAM forming floc diameters. Usually, floc strength is dependent upon the bonds between the components of the aggregate. The floc structure and particle bond strength, as well as number of individual bonds, are interrelated with floc strength. Therefore, when the stress on floc surface is larger than the bonding strength, a floc will be broken (  The measured floc diameters in Generally, floc strengths obtained by different measuring methods are difficult to compare directly ( A fractal dimension parameter of the floc is considered to elucidate floc structure.  An NTMS and a digital image capture device were used to determine floc diameter (d) and fractal dimension (D The authors acknowledge the financial support of the