Soil solution is the phase which is best able to characterize current soil mechanisms. However, there is great variation in residence time and chemistry. Fixed solutions collected in situ by porous-cup lysimeters (TL) or extracted by centrifugation (C) and the mobile phase collected by zero-tension lysimeters (ZTL), were investigated simultaneously in a chronosequence of Douglas-fir stands in order to characterize current soil dynamics in relation to stand development. These results were used to characterize the solution for plant nutrition and to calculate input-output budgets of the ecosystem.
                  The results showed that the C-solution reflected the poles of nutrient production in soil both by mineralization of organic matter or by weathering of minerals: it is, therefore, the reference for investigating plant nutrition. The ZTL soil solution chemistry is the result of rainfall, tree crown interaction, mineralization in the forest floor and displacement of already existing products in the soil. It is the most interesting for characterizing drainage waters.
                  The TL-solution, which is very often used in soil science, seems the most difficult to interpret as its chemistry reflects the resultant effect of production and uptake by vegetation.
                  Stand development did not affect C-solution chemistry but strongly influenced the chemistry of ZTL-solution indicating the comparability of stands and the role of aerial processes in soil dynamics.Soil solutions represent the phase which is best able to characterize current soil dynamics and to quickly react to changes. Soil solution provides information on both current mechanisms and long-term soil processes ( Very different methods are used in soil science to collect in situ soil solutions e.g. zero tension closed lysimeters ( All these methods provide specific information which cannot be used indiscriminately for all purposes ( Potentially relevant information can be obtained by using several methods for simultaneously collecting soil solutions. This approach will help identify the connections between ‘the mobile’ (i.e. gravitational) and ‘fixed’ (i.e. capillary) soil water phases. This study is part of a general project aimed at identifying the impact of high production Douglas-fir stands on soil dynamics. It sets out to answer the following questions How can the main soil functions, i.e. nutrient production and transfer be described by investigating soil solutions? What is the impact of stand development on the mobile and fixed solutions? The site was situated in the Beaujolais mountains (‘Forêt des Aiguillettes’, Rhône, France). Three plantations of Douglas-fir ( The site is situated at an altitude of about 750 The bedrock is a Devono-Dinantian volcanic tuff with the following mean total chemical composition when unweathered: 67% SiO Soil type is a ‘Typic Dystrochrept’ ( In each of the three stands, collectors were distributed within an observation plot of about 40 Rainfall was collected outside the stands by a daily collector system; throughfall was collected by three double gutters (2.17 Gravitational solutions (ZTL-solutions) were collected at the forest floor level by a set of 27 thin tensionless lysimeters (40 In the 40-year-old stand, ‘capillary solutions’ (TL-solutions) were collected from ceramic cup lysimeters connected to a vacuum pump which maintained a constant suction of 700 Additionally, soil samples were collected every 3 months to extract the capillary solution (C-solutions) by centrifugation using a Jouan KR4 22 apparatus. Soils were collected on four pits per site and extractions were made on pooled samples. Centrifugation was conducted according to the method of The data discussed here are related to ZTL-solutions collected every four weeks between July 1992 and March 1996, TL-solutions also collected every four weeks between October 1993 and March 1996, and C-solutions collected every three months between September 1992 and March 1996. Samples from seven pits randomly distributed throughout the observation sites were air-dried and sieved (2 The solutions collected in situ every 4 weeks or extracted by centrifugation were filtered (0.45 Soil variability was investigated by analysis of variance (Scheffe The variability was investigated for the TL samplers which were always individually analyzed. A large variability occurred between collectors which was not constant with time. During the period of observation, NO The variability affected the collectors of all the soil horizons in the same way. No parameter other than local soil variation could explain these differences i.e. occurrence of root channels, decaying roots, stoniness. As variability between collectors was most intense during the warm period and strongly affected C and S dynamics, it was hypothesized that the distribution of organic matter was responsible for the variability observed. Unfortunately, only an a posteriori observation could elucidate the origin of the variability, after samplers were removed. Considerable variability between collectors has already been observed on other sites and for other types of collectors (Dambrine, unpublished data). The chemistry of the solution reaching the soil depends both on rainfall quality and on processes occurring during its transfer through the forest canopy (occult and dry deposition, canopy leaching, activity of the phyllosphere). The purpose here is to report the chemistry of water reaching the soil surface; the acquisition of the throughfall solution has been described elsewhere ( At this site, rainfall was a dilute solution dominated by nitrogen (40% NO Stand age affected throughfall composition by a higher concentration in Si, and K Three types of solutions were collected in the 40-year-old stand: ZTL, TL and C-solutions ( The ZTL solutions were characterized by a mean sum of anions and cations varying from 500 to 950 The most significant correlations between elements (data not shown) were between NO TL-solutions had a sum of anions and cations varying little around 900 Most of the elements varied little with soil depth e.g. NO The main significant correlations between elements (data not shown) were observed between NO C solutions had a sum of anions and cations varying from 1000 to 1600 NO Correlations between elements showed that the only significant relationships were between NO Variability over time appeared for the three solution types. Significant differences occurred between seasons, mainly differentiating the dormant from the growing season (data not shown). Seasonal variations were observed for several major elements such as N, S, K, Ca, Mg, Al or C. Seasonality was observed for the whole soil profile for ZTL and TL solutions, but was limited to the upper part of the soil profile (mainly 0–15 These are primarily solutions collected by ZTL samplers or extracted by centrifugation ( NO Statistical relationships between anions and cations were most significant between SO Stand age did not strongly affect these general trends. Nevertheless, significant differences occurred between stands: the solutions collected from the forest-floor of the young stand tended to be more concentrated in Si, NO the solutions collected from the organo-mineral horizons of the young stand tended also to be more concentrated particularly in NO statistical relationships between anions and cations followed the same trends as those described for the whole samples from the three stands. Time variation was large and significant for a majority of elements in the forest-floor layer (data not shown). These differences generally discriminated between the dormant (winter+spring) and the vegetation (summer+autumn) periods. These trends applied when looking individually at the three stands. The most commonly observed differences among the three stands on the whole soil profile were for NO In the three stands, the composition of solution extracted by high speed centrifugation was dominated by NO Statistical relationships between elements showed a simple situation with significant relationships between NO Stand age did not strongly affect the composition of the solution extracted by centrifugation during the 3.5 years of observation. The only significant differences concerned Ca and Mg for the 15–30 Time variation generally showed that the large variability observed in the upper part of the soil decreased with depth; the example of silicon was particularly demonstrative with no variation remaining in the 30–60 Seasonality was statistically most significant for the three stands in the 0–15 The results showed that strong seasonality occurred in the soil nitrate concentration with very low production during the cold period and maximum production during the warm season i.e. from July to September. A very similar pattern was observed in the three stands with no significant differences between them ( The nitrates extracted by KCl were expressed relative to soil moisture weight in order to compare with the data from centrifugation Comparing soil solutions collected by different methods was not simple, as the different methods did not refer to the same time sequences or to the same soil volumes. Soil solutions collected continuously in situ with the different types of lysimeter integrated all variations in solution chemistry with time. Of course differences occurred according to the collectors, since ZTL lysimeters collected solution reaching a precise level whereas TL lysimeters collected the solution from a soil volume which depended on the suction applied and the soil physical properties. On the other hand, soil solutions collected by centrifugation reflected a specific situation, as they were collected discontinuously. The observation was carried out on solutions collected by zero-tension lysimeters, porous-cup lysimeters and on solutions extracted from centrifugation. The results refer to correlations calculated between the mean-weighted concentrations for all the samples from a soil layer and the corresponding volume collected. No significant relationships were generally observed. Two exceptions concerned TOC from TL samplers ( In these cases, an apparent dilution effect existed in the larger fluxes. The same tendency occurred for certain other elements but was not statistically significant. No significant relationships were observed for centrifugation solutions, but the number of samples was too limited to be conclusive. There are two ways to interpret these data  a real dilution effect existed resulting from water flux variations during the year, only an apparent dilution effect existed: the occurrence of concentrated solutions during the intense mineralization period in summer, which was also the period of small water fluxes created this dilution effect; the reverse being observed in winter where large water fluxes occurred when concentrations were already small. An on-going study of rain and soil drainage events will be more conclusive. The concentration of elements in solutions resulted from opposite reactions i.e. production by mineralization and weathering, uptake by vegetation, immobilization by microorganisms, adsorption/desorption reactions between solid phase and solutions. Some were strongly seasonal i.e. all those depending on biological and/or on climatic rhythms. The most obvious interpretation of data is for elements least affected by several processes. This was the case of C and S intensively produced by mineralization during the warm period and not affected by vegetation uptake. NO For a given solution type, the total ionic charge depends on anion concentration and the nature of cations will depend on the cation initially associated with the anion whatever its origin (brought in from outside or produced in the soil). In the present case study, excess NO In these conditions, temporal variability in concentrations depends on the type of soil solution (i) as affected by source and sink functions in soils and (ii) according to the climatic parameters influencing the biological activity or the water flux. The results in Principal component analysis confirmed the general differences between the three types of solutions. Projection of data in the planes of the first three components of the PCA occurred in very distinct areas (data not shown). The main variables involved in the discrimination of solution chemistry were NO Correlations between the same elements in the three types of solutions, significant only in a few cases, underline the specific behaviour of each type of soil solution: 10 cases/45 for ZTL versus TL and for ZTL versus C with noticeable correlations for K and Ca; five cases/45 for TL versus C. From a hydrological point of view, it is well known that ZTL solutions are mobile, TL solutions are fixed to the solid phase with moderate energy and that C-solutions collected between pF 3 and 4 are energetically fixed to the soil solid phase ( A simple scheme can be developed to explain the chemistry observed in the three types of solutions. The concentration of elements in the C-solution depended mainly on production processes like mineral weathering and/or mineralization of organic matter, and particularly nitrification. The relationship observed between nitrates extracted by KCl and by centrifugation of fresh soil samples confirmed this hypothesis. In the upper soil horizons, seasonality of processes was largely related to biologically controlled processes i.e. nitrification and the related neutralization of protons in weathering reactions ( In total opposition to the C-solution was the ZTL solution composition which cannot be equilibrated at least in the upper soil layers, due to its short residence time (observations made in this site showed that ZTL solutions percolate during 2 days after rainfall as an average). Its composition resulted mainly from mobilization of already existing products i.e. elements from throughfall and forest-floor mineralization in the soil upper layers and, as solution migrated into the soil, elements of the fixed phase were displaced by a piston effect. ZTL solution cannot be strongly influenced by vegetation uptake because the root system and associated mycorrhiza did not develop in the soil macroporosity. Its chemistry indicated that displacement or exchange with a more equilibrated solution was noticeable as for example its Si content was rather high in the upper soil layer ( The chemical composition of TL solutions was intermediate between C and ZTL solutions (especially in this case study where TL were maintained at a fixed suction). This chemistry was affected by both production processes and plant uptake. As a result of these opposite processes, especially during the vegetation period and for collectors inserted in the rooting zone, TL solution mainly had a resultant composition which was difficult to discuss unless they were accompanied by other components of the liquid phase. The suction applied then became of paramount importance because it potentially changed the chemistry of the solution collected varying from ZTL-solutions (low suctions) to C-solutions (high suctions).  In this particular experiment, nitrification was the dominant mechanism controlling solution chemistry (particularly in the upper soil layers). Nitrification occurred in the soil microporosity and then nitrates easily migrated by diffusion towards the whole porosity. When vegetation uptake did not affect the nitrate pool, then the associated proton immediately reacted with the solid phase (ion exchange and/or weathering reactions) and liberated cations ( Input of elements from throughfall and forest-floor mineralization can become important components of the mobile soil solution chemistry (ZTL solution). The more obvious examples concerned Ca and secondarily K (significantly higher in ZTL than in TL with the whole set of data) in the upper soil layers. As in the 40-year-old stand, C-solutions were either as concentrated as the ZTL-solutions or more concentrated (there were no TL-solutions from the three stands); only one exception was observed which concerned K in the 20-year-old stand ( Stand age had little impact on C-solutions; no significant differences were calculated in 37 out of 45 cases. The impact of stand age was far greater on ZTL-solutions with 22 significant differences for 45 observations. The differences came mainly from the 20-year-old stand (20 out of 22 cases) and the variations were most often directly related to stand age variation i.e. 20-year-old stand>40-year-old stand>60-year-old stand. Two main conclusions can be drawn  stability of the concentration of C-solution with stand age underlined the great homogeneity of soils and processes in the three plots, variation of ZTL-solutions had to be partly related to the development of the stand. The direct uptake of atmospheric deposits, especially N in the young stand, partly satisfied stand requirements. Residual-N (N produced but not taken up by vegetation) leads to immediate neutralization of protons which explains the specific behaviour of the young stand for both ZTL and C-solutions ( The impact of stand age also appeared on the behaviour of organic matter. Significantly higher Corg content was observed in the ZTL-solutions of the young stand throughout the whole soil profile. It was hypothesized that the vegetation change (Douglas-fir was planted for the first time in the three stands) leads to a change in the equilibrium of the organic matter component ( As previously mentioned, it is impossible to identify the part of variability caused by imperfections of the chronosequence. One cannot exclude that some of the differences observed originated from inter-site heterogeneity. These observations again proved the interests but also the limits of in situ observations. Element ratios are very important in plant nutrition and can be used to characterize the nutritive solution where the plants take up their nutriments. The ratios of elements were different among the three types of solutions. The values of ratios such as Ca or Mg/Al were the smallest for TL solutions. These solutions are of greatest interest to plant nutrition as ZTL’s residence time is too limited and C-solutions are not available for plants during most of the vegetation period when only limited water stress occurs as is most often the case in the present situation ( It should be stressed that ratios calculated for TL-solutions do not have the same meaning as those calculated for ZTL and C-solutions. TL-solution chemistry depends most on selective uptake of nutrients by plants, therefore tending to reduce the Ca or Mg/Al ratios. Whatever the soil solutions collected, mobile or fixed, coming from one or other member of the chronosequence, they belong to the same geochemical domain. Nevertheless, large differences were found between the different solutions, due on the one hand to the total ion amount of the solution and on the other hand to the relative distribution of ions. Stand development induced changes easily detectable in the mobile part of the soil solution as they originated from interaction in the crown and in the forest-floor. The soil liquid phase can be divided into several components according to how long they reside in the soil profile. Their composition results from the relative intensity of three main processes: external deposits, production via mineralization or weathering reactions and vegetation uptake. Formalizing the acquisition of soil solution chemistry seems possible from such observations: the soil solution could be described by a two phase mixture model, a fixed and a mobile phase. It was once again demonstrated in this study that each soil solution compartment provided specific information  ZTL-solution is suitable for ecosystem input-output budgets C-solution is useful when the equilibrium between the solution and solid phase is considered, as well as plant nutrition. Tl solution is potentially the most useful for plant nutrition, but its chemistry is the most difficult to characterize as it is dependent on plant uptake. The soil solid phase has long been used as a diagnostic tool for soil fertility and plant nutrition. The C-solution is likely to be a better tool than traditional soil analysis method as it characterizes the solution in which the trees take up their nutriments. We thank Micheline Colin-Belgrand for providing data on nitrogen mineralization, Benoı̂t Pollier and Severine Bienaimé for laboratory assistance, the forest managers from the ‘Office National des Forêts’, and particularly Bernard Jobard for providing all facilities during sampling, the Ministère de l’Agriculture, Division de l’Espace Rural et de la Forêt, for providing financial support and Christine Young for revising the English.