To achieve the efficient flotation separation of barite from fluorite, citric acid (CA) was utilized as a depressant for fluorite in this study. Microflotation showed that both fluorite and barite had good floatability when using sodium oleate (NaOl) as the collector, while fluorite was selectively depressed when using CA as the depressant. Real ore flotation confirmed that CA could be used as a depressant to successfully separate barite from fluorite. Adsorption experiments and ICP-AES tests revealed that the addition of CA caused the dissolution of Ca2+ from the fluorite surface, but it had no significant effects on Ba2+ on the barite surface. SEM-EDS analysis further revealed a reduction in the Ca/F ratio on the fluorite surface with the addition of CA. Zeta potential measurements indicated that NaOl could be adsorbed onto the barite surface rather than the fluorite surface in the presence of CA. Solution chemistry calculations demonstrated that L3− more easily interacts with Ca2+ than Ba2+ at pH 8.5. These findings indicated that the selective inhibition of fluorite by CA could be attributed to the dissolution of Ca2+ from the mineral surface, which reduced the number of activated sites for the adsorption of NaOl.Barite (BaSO Some reagents have been proven to be effective depressants of barite, such as gelatinized starch ( Citric acid (CA) is a common anionic organic acid that is widely used in the food, chemical and textile industries ( Hence, in this work, CA was introduced as a potential depressant of fluorite in the flotation of barite. Microflotation and real ore flotation were used to describe the flotation behaviour and separation performance of these two minerals. Zeta potential measurements, adsorption experiments, ICP-AES tests, SEM-EDS analysis and solution chemistry calculations were conducted to understand the interaction mechanism between CA and mineral surfaces. Pure barite and fluorite samples were obtained from Jinhua city, China. The samples were crushed manually, dry ground and screened to obtain the size fraction of 37–74 µm for microflotation tests. X-ray diffraction analysis ( Analytical-grade NaOl and CA were used as the collector and depressant, respectively. NaOH and HCl were utilized as pH adjusters. Distilled water with a resistivity of 18.2 mΩ cm was used for all the experiments. Microflotation tests were conducted with a mechanically agitated flotation machine (XFG-1600) at a fixed impeller speed of 1900 rpm. Two grams of mineral samples and 40 mL of deionized water were mixed and placed in the plexiglass cell for each test. The pulp pH was adjusted with HCl or NaOH and conditioned for 1 min. The required concentration of CA and 1.5 × 10 In the bench-scale flotation tests, a feed containing 52.62% BaSO The adsorption amount of citric acid on the mineral surface was measured using the following steps. One gram of minerals with a size range of 37–74 μm was mixed with the required concentration of CA solution. The total volume of the pulp was fixed at 100 mL, and then the pulp was stirred overnight, ensuring the achievement of adsorption equilibrium. Afterwards, the suspension was filtered through a piece of Macherey-Nagel 616 filter paper with a 4 ~ 12 μm pore size to obtain the filtrate. An Elementar Liquid TOCII (Germany, Elementar Co.) was used to measure the total organic carbon (TOC) of the filtrate to determine the reduction in CA concentration, which can be used to calculate the adsorption amount of CA onto mineral surfaces using the following equation: The concentration of calcium (Ca Scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) were used to observe the morphology and the surface components of fluorite. Prior to the experiments, the fluorite was treated in the absence or presence of CA at a pH of 8.5 and a temperature of 298.15 K. After filtration, the fluorite was dried in a vacuum oven and then gold-coated under vacuum using a sputter coater. A Phenom ProX instrument was used to analyse the prepared samples under an accelerating voltage of 10 kV. Zeta potential measurements of barite and fluorite were conducted by a Malvern Instrument Nano-ZS90 analyser (   Real ore flotation tests were conducted to verify the selectivity of CA in the flotation separation performance between barite and fluorite. The open circuit flowsheet of barite flotation and the related reagent schemes are shown in As shown in Microflotation tests indicated that the surface components of minerals might be changed in the presence of CA, resulting in a difference in flotation behaviour. The dissolution of metal ions and the adsorption amount of CA on fluorite and barite surfaces were analysed, and the results are shown in  To further investigate the influence of CA on the fluorite surface, SEM-EDS analysis of fluorite surfaces with or without the addition of CA were conducted, and the results are shown in The zeta potentials of barite and fluorite with and without reagents as a function of pH are presented in  The speciation diagram for NaOl and CA as a function of pH is shown in  Based on the abovementioned results, Note that In the present study, CA (H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51904214, 51804238), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WUT: 203208004) and the Open Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Mineral Processing (BGRIMM-KJSKL-2019-02). The authors are also thankful for the reviewers due to their constructive suggestions. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: