The distribution of buoyant solid particles in agitated suspensions has been studied. The investigation was carried out in a baffled vessel characterised by an aspect ratio equal to four and stirred with four radial impellers. Dilute suspensions of single-sized spherical particles of expanded polystyrene (density equal to 90.7kg/m3) in water were used. Solid concentration was measured with a non-intrusive optical technique. Measurements were performed along the axis of the reactor to obtain steady-state vertical profiles (that increase from the vessel base to the top) as well as at fixed elevations to determine their transient after a pulse of solids injected at the bottom.
                  Both the steady-state profiles and the transient concentration curves were interpreted in terms of the axial dispersion model with sedimentation. By data treatment the rising velocity in the agitated system could be determined, which proved to be significantly smaller than the rising velocity in a still liquid. The ratio of these two velocities is in reasonable agreement with a correlation of the ratio of the settling velocities for heavy particles with the ratio of the Kolmogorov microscale to particle diameter established in the past.Gas–liquid and solid–liquid agitated vessels and reactors are widely used for a variety of operations in the chemical and process industries and it is broadly recognised that rational design and reliable operation of this equipment depend greatly on proper modelling of their fluid dynamic behaviour. The fluid dynamics of multiphase stirred equipment is very complex and is usually described in terms of single parameters and phenomena. The main aspects are the following: just off-bottom particle suspension, power consumption, liquid mixing time, solids distribution and efficiency of sample withdrawal for solid–liquid systems ( The effective particle settling velocity in agitated, dilute suspensions was shown to be smaller than that in a still liquid ( The purpose of this paper is to analyse the behaviour of a particulate system where the dispersed phase is made of solids lighter than the agitated liquid: apart from direct interest for some fermentation and biotechnological processes, food and mineral processing, waste water treatment and polymerisation reactors and polymer processing, with this model system it is possible to mimic some aspects of the behaviour of a gas–liquid system albeit without bubble formation, deformation, breakage and coalescence. The investigation is based on the measurement of vertical solid concentration profiles at steady-state conditions as well as of local concentration transients. By interpreting the data with a simple phenomenological model along the same lines followed in the past with settling solids ( The investigation was carried out in a vertical, cylindrical vessel (diameter The liquid used for the slurries was deionised water. As the solids, spherical particles of expanded polystyrene were used: expandable particles were sieved to get a narrow particle size distribution (≈0.65 The solids concentration in the vessel was measured by means of the non-intrusive optical technique described by Two kinds of experiments were performed, namely steady state and transient runs. With the former technique, the solids concentration was measured at either 60 or 32 elevations to obtain the vertical solids concentration profile. For the transient technique, a certain amount of solid particles was injected at the base of the vessel ( The steady-state vertical profiles exhibit singularities in correspondence with the impellers as well as midway between them ( The flow field in a stirred liquid is recognised to be highly complex in standard vessels and, even more so, in multiple impeller systems. Very complex is also the motion of heavy solid particles ( The solids distribution in baffled, stirred vessels is usually characterised by fairly limited radial concentration gradients ( The values of the parameters Since the injection time of the solids in transient experiments was short (about 2–4 It is worth mentioning that the errors in the estimates of parameters were not negligible. These are due to (i) residual polydispersity of the solid particles (in size and density) after sorting of the solid fraction to be used in the experiments, (ii) very low solids concentration in the transient experiments due to the limited syringe volume and (iii) relatively big particle size with respect to the light beam. A few of these error sources were reduced, but they could not be avoided. Some of these aspects will be addressed further in the Results section. Due to the lower density of the solid particles with respect to the liquid, the steady-state, vertical concentration profiles increase from the base to the top of the vessel and, thus, are symmetrical to those obtained in the case of The vertical profiles were fitted with Eq. The fit between a single experimental and theoretical transient curves is strongly affected by the experimental noise ( The dispersion coefficients for the solids were then compared with those of the liquid phase, The particle rising velocity in the stirred tank were calculated from The values of the ratio The result of data treatment for the buoyant particles is plotted in The goal of this investigation was to study the distribution of buoyant solid particles in stirred vessels as well as the features of the parameters that affect it. Experiments were conducted to determine both the vertical, steady-state solids concentration profiles and the transient concentration response at selected elevations to a pulse injection of solids at the vessel base. The vertical profiles and the response curves were interpreted with the sedimentation–dispersion model and the analysis was focused to determine the particle rising velocity. In spite of some experimental problems and intrinsic errors in the measurements, the following conclusions have been obtained: The experimental vertical solid concentration profiles are significantly affected by impeller speed but provide consistent The experimental transient curves are fitted fairly well with the theoretical ones calculated with the simple sedimentation–dispersion model. However, the axial dispersion coefficients of the solid phase determined at different elevations are different so that taking a single value for the whole system implies a relatively high error in the coefficient. The axial dispersion coefficient for the solid phase can be considered equal to that of the liquid phase only to a rough approximation (within ±50% error). Based on the dispersion coefficients for the solid phase, the particle rising velocities in the stirred systems were also evaluated. The ratio between the rising velocity in the stirred system and that in a quiescent liquid, A correlation of Though limited in number and affected by relatively high experimental error, the data of the buoyant particles fit in with this correlation.  This work was financially supported by the Italian Ministry of University and Research and the University of Bologna (PRIN 2005). The authors are grateful to Polimeri Europa SpA, Mantova, Italy for providing samples of expandable polystyrene.