Focused infrared radiation-based digestions, for the determination of gold and silver, can be achieved in a timeframe as short as 10–15min, making it an attractive candidate technology for the mining industry, where very large numbers of samples are analyzed on a daily basis. An investigation was carried out into gold and silver dissolution chemistry from geological samples using this novel digestion technique. This study investigated in-depth the issue of low recoveries of gold from aqua regia (AR) digestions, reported by a number of researchers. Conventional AR digestions consistently delivered gold recoveries in a range of 69–80% of the certified values for the four certified reference materials (CRM) employed (CCU-1d, SN26, OREAS 62c, and AMiS 0274), while silver recoveries were satisfactory. By gradually shifting the HCl:HNO3 ratio (v/v) from 3:1 to a reversed 1:3 ratio, recoveries of gold and silver exhibited inverse trends. At a HCl:HNO3 ratio of 1:3, complete recovery of gold was achieved with excellent reproducibility in all CRMs. Meanwhile, silver recoveries plunged significantly at this ratio in samples with higher silver concentrations. Silver values were recovered, however, when the silver was re-solubilized by adding a small volume of concentrated HCl to the cooled reverse aqua regia digests. Recoveries of base metals, such as Fe and Cu, were satisfactory throughout and were much less sensitive to changes in the digestion medium. Using four CRMs and five real-world gold/silver containing samples, the utility of the proposed reverse aqua regia was systematically studied. The uncomplicated nature of the digestion methods reported here, that are fast, effective and inexpensive, may be useful to analysts developing/optimizing their methods for the rapid determination of Au and Ag in a variety of mineral phases, particularly where rapid results are desirable, such as in prospecting and mine development.Accurate quantification of gold and silver in geological samples provides vital information to exploration geologists in the decision-making process of whether a mine should be developed, maintained, or closed. The analytical procedure demands near-total recovery of both elements for an accurate estimation of the economic potential of the mine. Laboratory determination of the two elements, however, largely depends on both the efficiency of extraction methods, and on the mineralogy of the rock samples. In current practice, both AR and a more aggressive acid attack, with the addition of hydrofluoric acid and perchloric acid, are routinely employed to serve general sample preparation purposes, with the latter being termed as “total digestion (TD)”, or a “four-acid” digestion. Amongst popular gold and silver extraction and determination methodologies for geological materials, AR competes primarily with fire assay (FA) The notion of encapsulation of silver, though rarely reported in the literature, may also be case-dependent, as is the case with silver in the Veladero mine, described below. Ore Research and Exploration (ORE) has released a series of silver-containing certified reference materials, representing a range of frequently encountered ores, and compared data from various extraction methods such as AR, TD, and fusion (FU). The certificates reported no statistically significant differences in silver values between these methods ( Although AR is clearly effective for silver extraction from geological materials It occurred to the authors that the ratio of HCl:HNO The current study uses the prototype of the ColdBlock digester described previously, to perform all sample digestions A PerkinElmer-SCIEX (Woodbridge, ON, Canada) ELAN® DRC® II ICP-MS was used for determining Au and Ag in all samples and standards. Base metals were determined with a PerkinElmer (Sheldon, CT, USA) OPTIMA® DV3300 ICP-OES, following the same analytical procedure described previously Analytical-grade (single distilled) nitric acid (68–70% m/v) and hydrochloric acid (36.5–38% m/v) were purchased from Caledon (Georgetown, ON, Canada). All elemental stock solutions (1000 Certified gold and silver reference materials of differing mineralogies were obtained for evaluation of the proposed study ( Reference materials were used as received from the supplier. No additional grinding was performed. Since different mineralogies may require differing energy treatment for digestion, the proposed heating profile for each sample was based on a complete recovery of base metals. The reference materials and acids were mixed in a quartz tube and the individual heating profile for the chosen CRM is presented in The total initial acid volume used was kept constant at 8 The strong memory effect of gold is a well-known phenomenon in silica-based sample introduction and nebulization systems, due to adsorption and desorption during wash-in and wash-out times and was described in a previous publication Since silver does not exhibit mid-term stability in an Attention should be paid for possible polyatomic interferences that can bias gold and silver signals in ICP-MS. Polyatomic interferences that could interfere with the gold signal include No internal standard was used for the determination of either gold or silver due in part to the fact that a suitable internal standard for these analytes is difficult to choose. To attenuate the risk of ICP-MS signal drift due to changes in the plasma conditions that could cause run-to-run variability, regular calibration and quality control procedures were performed. If the QC results did not fall within a controlled fluctuation range (±5%) the system was recalibrated and the samples were analyzed again, followed by another QC check. Regular AR (6 Although the ability of Some relatively large variances from triplicate analyses were observed, particularly in those digestions where sample volumes of the two acids used were close (e.g. 3:5, 4:4, and 5:3). The gold variance becomes small when the acid ratio reaches conventional and reverse AR ratios. This interesting improvement in the observed gold reproducibility suggests that, at intermediate ratios, the gold dissolution reactions may be more susceptible to subtle changes in reaction conditions. The theory that gold can be encapsulated within silicate lattices in significant amounts has been a topic of debate Liberation of volatile species could potentially be a reason for loss of gold during conventional AR digestion. Although the Peltier cooling block should condense some of the vapors as they are being emitted, since the vessel is semi-open, some volatile species may be lost Although it is assumed that these trends are inherent for all AR digestion methods, if evaporation plays a significant role in the loss of gold, then closed-vessel methods may yield different results, but if both reactions are likely at play, then lower recoveries would be anticipated. It should be noted, however, that, if Teflon® liners are used, there is the potential for volatile species to be trapped in the pores of that medium that are not readily released back into the digestion solutions. This phenomenon was observed in the pressurized closed vessel microwave digestions of geological materials for gold and mercury determinations  The purpose of monitoring base metal recoveries in this study was to provide a reference point to evaluate the degree that the mineral structure has been destroyed by the acid attack. Although iron was completely recovered for SN26, OREAS 62c and AMiS0274 at all acid ratios, CCU-1d shows a slightly increasing trend in recoveries of both copper and iron, similar to that of gold ( Based on the gold and silver trends summarized above, a fast and convenient remedy to reverse Method repeatability and accuracy in the current study were satisfactory following the procedures in “Assessment of Laboratory Performance” recommended by CANMET Aside from the interesting digestion chemistry that reverse In Encapsulation of Au and Ag in pulverized ore samples was also assessed using limited data. The effects of conventional AR and modified AR digestions on the determination of gold and silver in geological materials were carefully examined. Reverse AR and its derivatives, together with infrared-based ColdBlock digestion technology, provide fast, convenient, and inexpensive alternatives to the existing methods for accurate assessment of gold and silver concentrations in rocks and ores. Reverse AR significantly outperformed regular AR in recovering gold from geological materials, thanks to the formation of stable tetranitratoaurate ions in solution and attenuation of volatile gold chloride species. Full silver recovery, on the other hand, can be readily achieved by re-solubilizing precipitated silver halides by addition of sufficient chloride, except when the silver is encapsulated. Aside from the proper chemistry treatment of gold and silver containing ores, the overall quality of simultaneous gold and silver determination, however, is also linked to sample weight, particle size, sample homogeneity, and mineralogy. To minimize the ‘nugget effect’ of gold in particular, a minimum degree of sample comminution and pulverization (200-mesh) should be maintained. A reasonable number of replicates for gold analysis should also be studied should a one-gram sample size to be standardized in the method. An increasingly significant ‘nugget effect’, analytically manifested as higher relative standard deviations, was also observed in real-world gold samples due to the uneven particle sizes (typically, mining samples are reported as 80–85% <200 Financial support for this research project, provided by the