The water repellency influence of non-polar organosilanes (vinyl and methyl) and polycarboxylate superplasticizer were studied and compared on flow behavior, strength development, and microstructural properties of cemented paste backfill (CPB) composed of sulfidic and non-sulfidic tailings. The addition of water-repellent admixtures affects the water requirement and hence the total performance of cementitious materials. Based on the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) test and slump height measurements, the addition of vinyl silane to CPB provided a higher UCS value and reduced the required amount of water for a specific slump height. The addition of vinyl and methyl organosilanes, however, was less advantageous on CPBs composed of sulfidic tailings since reduced the early strength development. The achieved differential thermogravimetric (DTG), mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results implicated that the use of vinyl silane was more efficient to densify the CPB matrix due to the hydration improvement and the formation of additional C-S-H gel specifically in non-sulfidic CPBs.A wide range of organic, polymeric, and nano-sized admixtures (additives) such as water reducing agents are used to influence different properties of cementitious materials Organofunctional silanes are composed of a monomeric silicon-based molecule (nano-size) and four constituents including at least one organic attached group to the silicon molecule directly or through the organic bridges. The condensation and hydrolysis of silane coupling agents will polymerize large metal-containing molecules that may reinforce the cement-based materials Methyl and vinyl silanes consist of a non-hydrolysable/non-reactive/non-polar and covalently bonded organic group (R) to the silicon molecule. In the presence of water, the reactive groups of organosilanes (X) hydrolyze and form a high reactive silanol (SiOH) networks that later can be condensed and form siloxane covalent linkages similar to backbone polymer Superplasticizers are water reducer and dispersive agents that are often used in cementitious materials for workability and compressive strength improvement. They adsorb on the surface of hydrating cement grains and release the trapped water by van der Waals forces and electrostatic charges during the initial hydration process Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is an effective mine tailings management technique that can deliver a considerable amount of produced tailings from the mineral processing plant to the underground stopes and voids for secondary ground support and environmental concerns The novelty of the present study was to use two water repellent non-polar organosilanes (vinyl and methyl) plus polycarboxylate ether-based superplasticizer in CPB while the achieved results were compared to deepen our understanding regarding the use of such admixtures in cementitious materials and waste management. The aim was to legitimate the use of new water repellent agents in CPB that may be more beneficial over the regular water reducers. Two different types of tailings including a sulfidic (LaRonde, Quebec, Canada, specific gravity = 3.7) and a non-sulfidic (Goldex, Quebec, Canada, specific gravity = 2.6) were used in this study.  Three types of water reducing admixtures including Polycarboxylate ether-based superplasticizer (PCS-PS-1466, from BASF Chemicals), vinyl-trimethoxy silane (VTMS-XIAMETER®OFS-6300, from DOW Chemicals), and methyl-trimethoxy silane (MTMS-XIAMETER®OFS-6070, from DOW Chemicals) were used in this study ( Ordinary Portland cement for general use (GU) was used as the only binding agent type in this study. The CPB specimens were prepared with 3 and 4.5 wt% binder content (based on dry mass of tailings) and the amount of admixture was calculated based on the binder mass. The preparation procedure starts with the blending of dried tailings and binder while the tap water was slowly added until the mixture reached a solid concentration of 76% ( The influence of admixtures on the CPB’s flow behavior was estimated by slump height measurement using a small Abrams cone (having the half of the height of standard slump cone using ASTM The impact of used admixtures on the hydrated cement products including CH and C-S-H was investigated by thermogravimetric analysis (SDT Q600, TA Instruments, nitrogen gas, 20 °C/ min heating rate up to 1000 °C). Mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) tests were performed to understand the influence of water reducers on the microstructural specification of CPBs. Both pore size and total porosity were estimated by MIP analysis (Autopore III 9420 Micrometrics, 414 MPa maximum preassure, the theoretical pore diameter of 0.003 μm) while the morphology and phase separation of CPB specimens were evaluated using SEM analysis (Hitachi 3500-N microscope, accelerating voltage 25 keV, 110 μA emission). The measured slump heights of all the sulfidic and non-sulfidic CPB samples (with and without admixtures) are plotted in Between all the admixtures used (MTMS, VTMS, and PCS), vinyl-silane provided a higher water repellency influence on CPBs that can be assigned to the vinyl functional group ( Based on It is evident from To understand if VTMS as the most efficient admixture can partially be replaced with the binder, two new sets of samples containing 3% binder were prepared and compared with the specimens containing 4.5% binder ( By decreasing the binder content from 4.5% to 3%, the amount of tailings per unit of prepared CPB can be increased (theoretically ∼ 2%). Thus, per each cycle of backfilling, higher amounts of tailings can be delivered resulting in the budget and energy saving. However, to be financially legitimate, the cost of added VTMS should be compared with the saved budget from binder consumption and mine backfill operational costs reduction. Since this is not a feasibility study, a precise financial study in this regard is necessary to legitimate the use of such admixtures in CPB, but the general price of the used admixtures is approximately similar (∼4 $ per liter). It is clear from Since the addition of silanes did not negatively affect the UCS values of non-sulfidic CPBs, and since the type and the amount of used binder in both sulfidic and non-sulfidic CPBs were similar, the negative influence of silanes in sulfidic CPBs can be attributed to the chemical reactivity between the tailings and silanes, but more investigation in this regard is necessary. The thermal decomposition of C-S-H and CH occurs between 90 and 200 °C and 440 to 550 °C respectively The DTG curves of sulfidic CPBs (  MIP analysis is performed on sulfidic and non-sulfidic CPBs (control, VTMS, PCS) at 28 curing days only. As can be seen from The MIP results also indicated the essential role of tailings in the microstructure evolution of CPBs. Since the specific gravity of sulfidic tailings is approximately 30% higher than that of non-sulfidic tailings, it is supposed that the higher self-weight consolidation and dense structure should occur in sulfidic CPBs. However, the obtained MIP results display a controversy by increasing the total porosity of sulfidic CPBs over the non-sulfidic CPBs. This is of great importance due to the similar solid concentration, binder content, and binder type. The obtained results from thermal analysis also approved the higher precipitation of hydrated cement products and minerals reactivity in sulfidic CPBs. In this case, it can be concluded that the higher amount of expansive minerals (e.g., gypsum and ettringite) are formed in sulfidic CPB that consequently worsened the microstructural formation. However, the UCS values of sulfidic CPB are higher than that of non-sulfidic that can moderately emphasize the importance of density in strength development. The influence of formed expansive minerals during the hydration on the microstructure of sulfidic tailings and comparing with the microstructure of non-sulfidic tailings requires more in-depth investigation.  The water repellency influence of vinyl/methyl silanes and ether-based superplasticizer was investigated on total properties of cemented paste backfill. All the used admixtures improved the uniaxial compressive strength while reduced the water consumption more noticeably on non-sulfidic tailings. Vinyl silane showed a higher water repellency influence and higher UCS acquisition over the rest of admixtures, especially on non-sulfidic CPBs. The binder consumption reduction target was achieved during this experimental study, but a precise financial assessment is necessary to legitimate the use of such admixtures in CPB. Superplasticizer did not negatively affect the strength development of sulfidic CPBs, but the UCS development of PCS specimens was less developed over the silane samples at later curing ages (28 days). The chemical reactivity of the tailings minerals had a critical role in strength development, microstructure, and formation of secondary minerals in sulfidic CPBs while the addition of VTMS reduced this chemical reactivity. The formation of such secondary minerals, however, had a negative influence on the microstructural development of CPBs. It was shown in this study that the non-polar organosilanes can compete with superplasticizers, but the type of tailings may restrict the use of silanes in CPB. Finally, it is worthy to investigate the influence of other non-polar organosilanes with lengthy alkyl organic chain (octyl) on the water repellency and total performance of cementitious materials. None. This study was partially performed in UQAT and accomplished at Tarbiat Modares University. The authors of this article would like to appreciate the assistance of UQAT-IRME-URSTM technical and professional people and acknowledge the financial support of National Elites Foundation of Iran (No:316/5603) for the preparation of this article.