In order to clarify the symmetry of sintering parameters under compressive and tensile stresses, uniaxial viscosity measurements were performed for 0.1 mol% yttrium doped ceria under tension and compression, and without and with AC electric field. Major findings are: (i) the strain rate was confirmed to be linear under compressive/tensile loading and electrical fields; (ii) as a result, for a given relative density, the uniaxial viscosity is the same under tension and compression; (iii) the uniaxial viscosity decreases under moderate electrical fields, which implies the effect of electrical fields is not restricted to a specific doping level.High temperature and long holding time are needed for the conventional sintering processes to attain a high relative density suitable for industrial applications. Along with other emerging new techniques, field assisted sintering seems to be very promising Further investigation of the field assisted sintering behavior requires analytical models, and the similarity between sintering and creep processes allows the use of continuum mechanics. The continuum mechanics formalism has been used to predict the macroscopic geometrical changes of powder compacts during conventional sintering So far the sintering parameters have been obtained under compression due to a simpler experimental set-up required for the measurements. However, this contradicts to the real stress state in more common situations such as constrained sintering, where the material often undergoes tensile stresses, when shrinking on a rigid substrate. In this work, the symmetric sintering behavior of 0.1 mol% yttrium doped ceria (01YDC) was experimentally verified for the first time under both compressive and tensile loadings. This enables to examine the following two crucial issues: i) the confirmation of the assumption that the compressive response can be extrapolated to the tensile stress regime and ii) the investigation of the field effect on very low doping level of ceria and thus a deeper understanding of possible mechanisms during the field assisted sintering. In order to obtain sintering parameters, the continuum mechanical approach was used. It is assumed that the material is isotropic and the sintering mechanism is not changed by the applied stresses. This fits well with the low pressure experiments conducted in this work, where the applied stresses remain in the range similar to the sintering stress Where The increase of the uniaxial viscosity is caused by both grain growth and an increase of relative density. Experiments for the measurements of the uniaxial viscosity were carried out on alumina Two kinds of custom-made loading dilatometers were used in this work. Compressive tests were carried out with a instrumented sinter-forging device described in The specimens were prepared from a commercially available 01YDC nanocrystalline powder (CerPoTech, Tiller, Norway). Dog-bone shaped specimens were designed for the measurements under tensile stresses. The as-received powder was pressed using a die with 25 mm diameter under 15 kN for 1 min and then cold isostatically pressed at 300 MPa for 1 min. Subsequently, the disks were preheated with a heating rate of 20 K/min to 900 °C for 1 h, and then cooled down with a cooling rate of 10 K/min to increase the mechanical stability. The flat dog-bone shaped tensile specimens with a gauge length of 10 mm, width of 2.7 mm were machined from the pre-sintered disks by water jet cutting. Two small holes with a diameter of 1.5 mm were created by mechanical machining and the position of two small holes was defined by the distance from the center of each hole to the edge (3.3 mm). The obtained dog-bone shaped specimens of 01YDC were 2.68 mm±0.3 % in width, 3.41 mm±0.6 % in thickness and 10.01 mm±0.2 % in gauge length, yielding a relative green density of 70.0 %±0.4 %. Subsequently, Pt paint was applied to the surface of the two small holes three times, followed with an annealing time for 20 min using a hot plate after each painting. The discontinuous sinter-forging technique, as introduced elsewhere Cylindrical specimens were used for viscosity measurements under compression. The specimens were firstly uniaxially pressed using a die with 10 mm diameter under 5 kN for 1 min, and subsequently cold isostatically pressed at 300 MPa for 1 min. Subsequently, the specimens were preheated with a heating rate of 20 K/min to 900 °C for 1 h, and then cooled down with a cooling rate of 10 K/min. The obtained specimens were 14.87 mm±0.5% in height, 9.26 mm±0.2% in diameter, yielding a relative green density of 69.5%±0.6%. Discontinuous loading-dilatometry cycles were performed on specimens under a minimal load of 10 N (i.e. 0.15 MPa) to maintain the contact between the electrodes and the specimen with a heating rate of 13 K/min until 900 °C, and then 11 K/min until 1150 °C. The mechanical loads, 70 N and 137 N, yielding a pressure of 1.2 MPa and 2.4 MPa, were applied to the specimen when the relative density of the specimen reached a desired relative density of 80% for 5 min. After the discontinuous sinter-forging experiments, the final relative density was validated through Archimedes’ method using deionized water as liquid medium. Some specimens were ground and then polished to a 50 nm finish. Subsequently, the specimens were thermally etched at a temperature 50 K lower than the sintering parameter tests for 1 h. Finally, the specimens were investigated using a scanning electron microscope, Zeiss Ultra55 (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Oberkochen, Germany). The displacement vs. time curves obtained directly from the experiments under the tensile stresses include not only the shrinkage of the sample but also the thermal expansion of the testing system, as seen in Uniaxial viscosity is related to various parameters, such as temperature, relative density and microstructure The comparison of the current density is shown in To confirm the symmetric behavior under the tensile stress state, it is necessary to compare the microstructures of specimens before the load application to ensure that the uniaxial viscosities were measured for specimens of similar microstructure. As illustrated in  Furthermore, the experiments under tension also enable the evaluation of the uniaxial sintering stress directly from the zero strain rate condition, without extrapolating the results obtained from experiments under compressive stress. The uniaxial sintering stress is a mathematical concept and is the equivalent to externally compressive stress that causes the same effect during free sintering The absolute value of the sintering stress increases during the intermediate stage of sintering. As illustrated in The influence of moderate AC electrical fields and currents on the uniaxial viscosity for 01YDC was also investigated, by measuring the uniaxial viscosity under compression without electrical fields. The uniaxial viscosity increased from 43.2 GPa s at the relative density of 80.2% to 47.1 GPa s at the relative density of 80.9%. The comparison with the values measured under electrical fields ( To conclude, the discontinuous sinter-forging experiments were conducted for the first time under tensile loading. By carrying out discontinuous sinter-forging experiments under moderate AC electric fields under tension and compression, we could conclude that for 0.1 mol% yttrium-doped ceria compressive and tensile response is symmetric. This was confirmed from two experimental facts: i) the linear relationship of strain rates under the compressive and tensile loading and ii) the same uniaxial viscosity obtained at a given relative density. Furthermore, the positive effect of the electrical fields on the uniaxial viscosity of both 01YDC and 10YDC The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge funding from the German Science Foundation (DFG), under priority program “Fields Matter” SPP 1959 [GU 933/9-1] and the