A comprehensive study examining the potential of the Reflux Classifier to be applied to the beneficiation of coarser coal up to 8mm in size was undertaken. It was demonstrated that efficient combustible recovery and control of the separation density to target low ash products could be achieved. The major finding from the study was the critical importance of providing sufficient fluidization water, though beyond the critical level the process was largely insensitive to the fluidization rate. It was concluded the required fluidization velocity is nominally 10m/h per mm of top-size, hence for a nominal 4mm top size the required velocity is 40m/h. In an extended campaign the control of the process was investigated by varying the set point density from high to low levels and then returning the process to the original settings, and demonstrating a return to the original separation. Further analysis was conducted to determine the partition curves and the shift in the separation density with particle size. The variation in the D
                     50 with particle size approaches a level that is independent of the particle size. Previous data (Galvin et al., 2002, 2004) covering particles up to 2mm in size are consistent with the results from this study, involving feeds with top sizes of 4mm and 8mm. Beyond a particle size of 2mm the Ep is typically less than 0.05 and approaches about 0.03 as the particle size increases to 8mm.A common coal preparation plant configuration consists of large vibratory screen decks at the front end of the plant for classifying the feed at typically 1 Given the capacity of the screens increases at least linearly with the screen aperture size, there are significant benefits that arise from shifting the classification size towards, for example, 4 In order to introduce the larger screen aperture it is necessary to firstly identify or establish a technology for processing particles in the size range of about 0.5–4 A schematic representation of the Reflux Classifier is shown in  Eq. The segregation efficiency referred to above should not be confused with the term, separation efficiency, in gravity separation. In fact, when the segregation efficiency is low there is a strong tendency for upward hydraulic conveying of low density particles. Conversely, the segregation efficiency of the denser particles tends to remain high as these particles do not respond to the lift force that arises from the high shear rate in the inclined channels. Hence these denser particles “see” the large effective vessel area, slide down the inclined surfaces, and return to the lower zone before reporting to the underflow. This combination of conditions, involving a low segregation efficiency for low density particles and high segregation efficiency for high density particles, actually promotes improved separation efficiency.  Combining Eqs. The predictions of Eq. A comprehensive study examining the potential of the Reflux Classifier to be applied to coarser coal up to 8 Steady-state experiments were conducted on the laboratory and pilot scale Reflux Classifiers, with samples of the feed, product, and reject taken to assess the separation under a given set of conditions. Preliminary work and extended campaigns involved analysis of the ash% versus particle size for each of the flow streams. Once the quality of the mass balance was confirmed, the analysis was then extended to include full washability of the feed to assess performance, as well as further analysis conducted on the three streams to obtain the partition curves. These results, obtained over a range of conditions, were also compared to the feed washability data, allowing the separation performance to be further assessed. The laboratory scale component of this study was concerned with the steady-state separation of −8  A major challenge was to develop an arrangement for handling such a coarse feed, not only delivering it to the device, but also regulating its discharge from the vessel. Because of the small scale of the laboratory device, it was necessary to have a similarly small underflow exit point. A 25  At Site A the feed was supplied from a thickening cyclone underflow, and contained particles with a nominal size range −4 The RC600 was moved to Site B where it was possible to secure a much coarser feed. Initially the feed to the RC600 covered the nominal size range −4 The details of the laboratory scale experiments are summarized in The overall separations achieved are summarized in Additional washability analysis of the product and reject for Run 3 provided data for generating the partition curves. Given the high costs of the washability analysis, the partition curves were only produced for every second narrow size fraction. Hence size ranges of −8 A full washability analysis was conducted on the −4 The partition curves obtained from the washability analysis are shown in At Site B the feed supply system to the RC600 had to be purposely designed, implemented and commissioned. Once the feed system was fully commissioned it was possible to access feed slurry, nominally −4 Preliminary experiments at Site B involved a feed with a nominal top-size of 4 The top size of the feed was then increased to 8 Run 18, conducted at a set point of 1400 The variation in the fractional product ash% with the mean particle size, for Runs 17–21, is shown in The feed washability curve for Run 18 is shown in The partition curves for Run 18 are shown in The purpose of this section is to examine collectively the findings from this study, notably the variation in the separation density,  There is strong consistency in the variation of the separation density,    Based on the work in this study it was concluded that, as a rule of thumb, the fluidization rate should be approximately 10 At Site B, however, a feed with a genuine upper size of 4 In general, the operation of the RC600 using the coarser feed, with particles up to 8 Some clear conclusions can be drawn from this study. Firstly, the Reflux Classifier can be applied to separations involving relatively coarse particles up to 8 The separation density was found to approach a constant value as the particle size increased beyond 2 There is scope for alternative plant design through the introduction of separations close to 4 The University of Newcastle and Ludowici Australia have a Research and Development Agreement on applications involving the Reflux Classifier. The University of Newcastle owns relevant international patents, and the technology is licensed to Ludowici Australia. The first author of this paper, KP Galvin, is a beneficiary of the University of Newcastle’s policy on intellectual property. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Australian Research Council, Anglo Coal, and the Australian Coal Association Research Program, and the on-going support of Ludowici Australia in this work. The contributions of the Bloomfield Group in providing access to their plant and in developing the feed system were invaluable. Other contributions from Kelly Walton and Simon Iveson in conducting a number of experiments at Site B are also gratefully acknowledged. None of the above organizations were involved in the decision to produce this manuscript.