The re-treatment of gold tailing heaps is a potentially significant revenue stream for both larger and smaller scale gold companies. Limited access to capital and lack of skilled labour remain restrictive especially when dealing with a refractory ore and/or where limited amount of material are available. Alternative techniques such as low temperature pre-leaching options to unlock value are therefore in demand.
                  Several low temperature pre-leaching experiments in acidic and alkaline solutions, followed by cyanidation were performed which ultimately led to the further investigation of a caustic pre-leaching step. The Au recovery were found to be a balance between the Au being released for cyanidation through gangue mineral dissolution and the Au being leached/lost in the pre-leaching step. Depending on the NaOH concentration, the major elements (excluding Na) in the pre-leach solution were found to be Si (500–8500 mg/L), S (2400–1800 mg/L), Al (350–50 mg/L), Zn (10–100 mg/L), Fe (60–75 mg/L) and As (20–55 mg/L). Au recovery in the subsequent cyanide and elution step increased with pre-treatment temperature and NaOH concentration, reaching a peak before either stabilising or decreasing. Longer pre-leaching residence time and a lower solids percentage resulted in less Au being recovered.This project specifically relates to the development of a processing strategy for the recovery of gold from approximately 1.2 million tons of refractory type feed material, for which an economic processing strategy is to be found. Diagnostic leaching ( Due to the high capital cost of pressure leaching systems, and given that a process is to be developed to treat a rather limited amount of material, an investigation was launched to determine whether an alternative low temperature pre-leaching step exists that can result in a favourable economic return. Gold ores are catalogued as refractory if the extraction by direct cyanidation is less than 80% ( Four samples, taken diagonally across the tailings dump using an auger, were analysed individually and then composited for further experimentation. The particle size distribution for the composite sample can be seen in Elemental analyses (XRF) of the four samples are shown in A total of 42 QEMSCAN block surfaces (30 mm diameter each) were scanned with 30 gold bearing particles being located as illustrated in The experimental steps that were followed are shown in the flow diagram in A composite sample was made up from 4 boreholes ( The selected pre-leaching agent and conditions at which the experiments were conducted are presented in After the pre-leaching, the sample was filtered, the acid neutralised with NaOH and the pH adjusted to 10.5 where required before the cyanide leaching and carbon adsorption commenced. CIL conditions were replicated as the ore samples were found to be preg-robbing. All of the samples were leached with 2 g/ton of NaCN (≥95%), 1.5 g/L H The loaded carbon was separated from the ore and leach solution through screening. The activated carbon was eluted by first pre-soaking the carbon in a solution containing 3% NaCN and 1% NaOH in a glass beaker at room temperature without stirring. The carbon was separated from the pre-soak solution by filtering and then boiled for two hours in 100 ml RO (Reverse Osmosis) water. After two hours, the carbon was separated from the eluate before being sampled and the procedure repeated with 100 ml of new RO water introduced at boiling temperature. The boiling took place in a round bottomed flask with a heating mantle and a condenser. The volume of the eluate was verified after each boiling stage and were found to remain constant at 100 ml. The recovery of Au were determined by Eq.  X- Au/Ag content (mg/L) Y- Au/Ag content (mg/kg) M – Sample mass (kg) V V The eluate samples were analysed for Au and Ag with Atomic Adsorption Spectroscopy (AAS). The pre-leach solution were analysed with ICP-MS. The NaOH concentration were determined by titrating with HNO The activated carbon used was a commercial coconut-based granular activated carbon supplied by Marlyn Chemicals (Pty) Ltd-South Africa (with a BET surface area of 1200 m The Au and Ag recoveries for each of the different pre-leaching experiments are shown in Pre-leaching with HCl resulted in 31% Au recovery but the Ag recovery was poor at 11%. This is hypothesized to be due to the formation of solid AgCl (  Fine grinding ( The use of hydroxyl ions for the recovery of precious metals from refractory ores has been reported by a number of researchers.    The current test results for caustic pre-leaching are shown in Although far less pronounced, this effect is also seen in the Ag recovery at 80° for a pre-leaching time of both 24 h and 16 h. A general increase in recovery was seen with an increase in the temperature.  The Au recovery results for two individual samples (Sample 1 and 2 as per The major and minor species found in the pre-leach solution are shown in In addition to Eq.  A strong increase in the Si content in the leach solution is shown in The NaOH consumption are shown in The high cost and consumption of NaOH as well as the high amount of Si dissolved, likely points to a pre-concentration step before flotation. Considering, however, that flotation of a cyanide tailings dump is notoriously difficult and associated with very low recoveries, the decision for the inclusion of a flotation step can only be made by a fairly detailed flow sheet analysis and cost estimation which will require achievable recoveries and reagent consumptions for all flowsheets. Low temperature pre-leaching experiments in acidic and alkaline solutions were performed on an ore containing 31% liberated gold particles and 61% of the unliberated gold bearing particles being associated with sulphides. KOH and NaOH pre-leaching resulted in the highest Au recovery (63 and 62%) followed by H Further investigation into a caustic pre-leaching step indicated that a higher initial NaOH concentration results in higher Au and Ag recoveries except for a residence time of 24 h at 80 °C where the Au recovery was found to be reduced. In a similar fashion, the shorter residence time of 8 h resulted in a higher Au and Ag recovery than at 16 and 24 h when pre-leaching at 80 °C and 3 M NaOH. A higher solids concentration also resulted in higher Au recoveries. A higher amount of Au leaching at more severe conditions in the pre-leach step is considered to be the reason for the reduced Au recovery after cyanidation. Analysis of the pre-leach solution showed increased As, Fe, Si and Zn leaching with an increase in NaOH concentration. Aluminium in solution, on the other hand, decreased with higher NaOH concentrations which may be due to the formation of aluminosilicate precipitates. The formation of a gel precipitate (alumina silicates as well as iron hydroxides) is considered a possibility in large scale operations which could lead to solid/liquid separation difficulties but no filtering difficulties were encountered during the current lab scale experimentation. Caustic pre-leaching may potentially be an alternative technology for unlocking value in refractory Au ores, especially with smaller scale operations with limited amount of stock piles and where skills are limited. Pilot scale studies, and detailed cost and flowsheet analysis are, however, recommended.