Using a depth sensing indentation (DSI) technique, the Martens hardness HM, indentation modulus E
                     IT and deformation work W for Al matrix and Al4C3 particles have been measured on mechanically alloyed system Al–Al4C3. It has been shown that the hardness of Al4C3 particles (10–14 GPa) is 5–7 times higher than the hardness of matrix. Hard particles absorb 2 times more elastic deformation energy than the soft matrix. Indentation modulus E
                     IT, comparable with Young's modulus is 2.5–5 times higher for particles than that for matrix.The principle of the strength enhancement in the dispersion strengthened materials lies in introducing of high strength dispersed phase into the matrix. This phase can be introduced into the matrix from outside, or it can be formed “in-situ” during the milling, which is called the method of mechanical alloying Depth sensing indentation (DSI) is an experimental method of hardness measurement total deformation energy indentation modulus of elasticity creep and relaxation behaviour. It is also possible to determine the yield stress The aim of the present work is the experimental determination of hardness, deformation energy, and moduli of elasticity of both matrix and hard phase of mechanically alloyed composite Al–Al The experimental material has been prepared by mechanical alloying. The Al powder with the grain size of <50 μm was cold milled in an attritor during 90 min with addition of 1 wt.% of graphite KS 2.5 assuming that 4 vol.% Al The experiments were carried out using DUH 202 Shimadzu hardness tester, which allows measurements at loads The measurements have been done on the large particles of category A. The final indentation depths were 100–150 nm in the particles and 300–400 nm in the Al-matrix, respectively. The imprint diagonal lengths were <1 μm (particles) and ≈ 3 μm (matrix). The size of measured particles is very important. Hardness of large particles, i.e. hardness in the upper part of the scatter (→ 14.35 GPa) is closer to the real hardness of the particles. We compared indentation curves for particles of various sizes, all from the A category. In some cases the indentation curves exhibit discontinuity of loading force, as in The area below the loading part of the indentation curve The relative values In order to compare the total deformation energies for particles and matrix it is necessary to recalculate energies measured at the particles at For the loads That means that in order to obtain the total deformation energy for 5 mN load the values measured at 2 mN have to be multiplied by 3.95. The values were corrected in such a way to smoothly fit into the diagram for the matrix, as it is shown in The modulus of elasticity can be derived from the slope of unloading part of the indentation curve taking to account the contact area between the indenter and the tested material. The accuracy of the DSI technique is limited by errors resulting from non-ideal shape of the indenter tip which leads to errors in calculations of the contact area. The details of measurements are in work The DSI is an appropriate method to determine local mechanical properties of phases of a particle–matrix system. It is necessary to take in account the size of measured particles since it can influence results. Some mechanical properties of Al matrix and Al Part of this work was carried out with support of the Science Grant Agency of Slovakia under the projects VEGA No.1/0391/03 and No. 2/2114/22.