The grindability of a material is the only factor used to determine the required size of a grinding machine. Although, Bond's grindabilty test is widely used to the estimate power required of an industrial grinding mill. Recently, kinetic model has been mostly used to the design of grinding circuits.
                  In this study, the relationship between the Bond's grindability (G
                     bg) and breakage parameters (S
                     i, a
                     T, γ and β) were examined. The validity of the obtained relationship parameters of S
                     i, a
                     T, γ and β has been confirmed with correlation coefficients of 0.96, 0.92, 0.90 and 0.78, respectively, through a regression analysis of samples of limestone.Grindability data, based on various techniques to measure comminution characteristics, are used to evaluate the crushing and grinding efficiency in mineral processing operations. The importance of achieving improved comminution efficiency, in terms of energy consumption, has been emphasized increasing in the cost of electricity, recently Many expressions of grindability have been proposed over the years, but of these, two of them have come into prominence because they have become the recognized basis for design of certain types of mill. One of them is the Hardgrove index, associated mainly with vertical spindle mills and the other is Bond's grindability, associated with tumbling mills Bond's grindability can be empirically related to the energy required for comminution and thus is useful for the design and selection of crushing and grinding equipment In recent years, a matrix model and kinetic model, which are suggested by investigators, have been used in laboratory and industrial application. The kinetic model, which has more advantages than matrix model, can be used to determine the particle size distribution from lab-scale mill dates to full-scale mill dates The analysis of size reduction in tumbling ball mills using the concepts of specific rate of breakage and primary daughter fragment distributions have received considerable attention in years. Austin et al. This paper presents a comparison of the breakage parameters of six different limestones under standard conditions in a batch laboratory ball mill, and relationships between Bond's grindability values with breakage parameter values of samples of limestone are investigated. When breakage is occurring in an efficient manner, the breakage of a given size fraction of material usually follows a first-order law Assuming that On breakage, particles of given size produce a set of primary daughter fragments which are mixed into the bulk of the powder and then, in turn, have a probability of being refractured. The set of primary daughter fragments from breakage of size Six limestone samples taken from different regions of Turkey were used as the experimental materials. The chemical properties of the limestone samples are presented in The standard Bond grindability test is a closed-cycle dry grinding and screening process, which is carried out until steady state conditions are obtained. This test was described as follows The material is packed to 700 cm Firstly, Standard Bond's grindability tests were made for six limestone samples. Result of tests, Bond grindability values of limestone samples were 6.14 g/rev, 2.89 g/rev, 2.58 g/rev, 2.48 g/rev, 2.42 g/rev and 1.54 g/rev, respectively. The standard set of grinding conditions used is shown in The first-order plots for various feed sizes of limestone samples are illustrated in By definition, the values of B were determined from the size distributions at short grinding times. The parameters were determined according to the BII method For the same purposes, variation of specific rate of breakage ( The values reported in For the same purposes, variation of primary cumulative breakage constant ( The values reported in The dry grinding of size intervals of limestone samples showed that these samples followed the first-order breakage law with constant normalised primary breakage distribution function. The values of the primary daughter fragment distributions and the values of The As a result of these comparisons for four breakage parameters, a high correlation coefficient is obtained. These four variations may be used to provide an estimate of Bond's grindability.