The horizontal force and moment induced on a spudcan as it penetrates next to an existing seabed footprint have been identified as one of the key challenges in the offshore oil and gas industry. This paper assesses the potential of changing and then optimising the spudcan foundation shape to mitigate the spudcan-footprint interaction. Large-deformation finite-element (LDFE) analyses are performed using the Coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) approach with the simple elastic-perfectly plastic Tresca soil model modified to enable strain softening and to incorporate strain-rate dependency of the shear strength. The spudcan shape was optimised by parametric analyses varying the spudcan’s skirt length, underside profile, and number of holes through the spudcan periphery. A spudcan with a flatter (or even concave) underside profile and with holes was shown to significantly reduce the induced horizontal force and moment during reinstallation next to an existing footprint. However, use of skirts has an adverse influence. Based on the results, an optimised spudcan shape is proposed.net spudcan plan area at largest section total spudcan plan area at largest section spudcan diameter at largest section footprint diameter hole diameter penetration depth of spudcan base eccentricity between centres of spudcan and vertical reaction force eccentricity at maximum moment horizontal force at spudcan base level maximum horizontal force at spudcan base level shear strength gradient with depth leg length skirt length moment at spudcan base level additional moment at RP1 maximum moment at RP1 total moment at RP1 maximum total moment at RP1 number of hole reference point shifted reference point to leg top soil sensitivity undrained shear strength average undrained shear strength reference undrained shear strength reference undrained shear strength at the seabed vertical force spudcan penetration velocity depth below soil surface footprint depth interface friction ratio spudcan base angle offset distance remoulded strength ratio shear strain rate reference shear strain rate rate parameter for logarithmic expression Coulomb friction coefficient limiting shear strength at soil-spudcan interface cumulative plastic shear strain cumulative plastic shear strain required for 95% remoulding Mobile jack-up platforms often return to sites where previous jack-up installation, operation and extraction has left craters, commonly referred to as footprints, in the seabed. The reinstallation of jack-up rigs near an existing footprint has been identified as the second major geotechnical failure concern in jack-up industry [ This issue has received significant attention from researchers, with most measuring the induced loads on a generic shaped spudcan (or flat plate) and analysing the consequent effects on the jack-up legs [ The effect of a skirt around the footing periphery at mitigating the interaction was also evaluated through model tests [ This study aims at providing optimal spudcan shape at mitigating spudcan-footprint interaction issues during jack-up reinstallation by adjusting the spudcan shape. The investigation was carried out through 3D large deformation finite element (LDFE) analyses. To optimise the shape of the spudcan, an extensive parametric investigation was performed by varying the skirt length, underside profile of a spudcan and number of holes. 3D LDFE analyses were carried out using the coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) approach in the commercial FE package ABAQUS/Explicit [ Considering the symmetry of the problem, half spudcan and soil were modelled. As obtained from preliminary convergence studies [ In this study, a conical footprint (D The spudcan was simplified as a rigid body with the fixed head condition. As obtained from previous convergence studies on spudcan and cone penetrations [ Typically the reinstallation of spudcans in clay is completed under undrained conditions. Thus, the soil was modelled as an elasto-perfectly plastic material that obeys a Tresca yield criterion but extended to capture the strain rate and strain-softening effects following [ The first bracketed term augments the strength according to the maximum strain rate relative to a reference value, The LDFE results were validated against previously published centrifuge test data. Kong et al. [  A systematic parametric study of spudcan geometry was performed by varying the (a) skirt length (L The effect of the skirt length (L The maximum moment (M In the field, spudcan-footprint interactions generally result in buckling of the leg at just below the hull (see In summary, the skirt length has a negative effect at reducing the horizontal responses of spudcan, and hence mitigating spudcan-footprint interaction issues. As such, non-skirted spudcans have been selected for subsequent explorations. To investigate the effect of the underside profile, numerical analyses were performed varying the bottom surface slope angle: α In essence, flat-based (apart from the spigot) spudcans are better than the conventional one at mitigating spudcan-footprint interaction issues at the surface due to geometry in the conical footprint, which is considered for the following investigation. To examine the effect of the hole configuration, numerical analyses were performed for 4-hole (spudcan H From the parametric study results, the effectiveness of each shape factor is summarised in Based on all findings, the flat-based spudcan with minimum number of holes (spudcan H In an attempt to mitigate spudcan-footprint interaction issues, 3D large-deformation finite-element analyses have been performed with varying spudcan shapes. Systematic parametric analyses were performed: (i) first, varying the skirt length, which caused a worsening effect (i.e., increased induced horizontal force and moment) with increasing skirt length; (ii) second, varying the spudcan base slope angle, and a flat-based (apart from the spigot) spudcan provided positive effect for full penetration depths; and (iii) finally, varying the number and diameter of holes on the spudcan, which directed that a 4-hole flat-based spudcan is the optimal shape. In comparison with the performance of the generic spudcan shape, this optimal shape reduced the maximum horizontal force by 42% and the maximum total moment by up to 46%, which confirm the potential to ease spudcan-footprint interactions without any additional mechanical operations. In this study, the analyses were performed considering a fixed head boundary condition at the spudcan, a single strength profile of clay deposit, and a conical footprint geometry. Further analyses are being carried out considering a three-legged jack-up rig, and simulating the footprints with strength contour presented by Gan et al. [ The research presented here was undertaken with support from the