In this study, the combustion reactivity of different rank coals, such as peat, lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite samples, was investigated. Non-isothermal thermogravimetry has been used to determine the combustion reactivities of the samples. The differences observed in the burning profile of the samples were studied. The calculated activation energy values of the samples were investigated, regarding carbon content, volatile matter content and burning profile peak temperature. The relationship between ignition temperature and carbon content (dmf) of the coal samples was also studied. The weight loss percentages of the different rank coal samples were discussed, depending on temperature.How fast a coal burns depends upon the physical and chemical properties of the coal and on combustion conditions. Coal is a heterogeneous material which contains a variety of organic and inorganic compounds. The behavior of the inorganic compounds present in coal is of substantial concern in the combustion behavior of coal due to their catalytic effects In this study, the combustion reactivity of different rank coals, such as peat, lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite samples, was investigated. Non-isothermal thermogravimetry has been used to determine the reactivities of the samples. In the experiments, four coal samples were used, namely peat, lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite. The coals chosen were selected because of their wide variation in rank, type and location. Samples were ground and sieved into a powder with a particle size of 250 μm. The analyses of the samples were performed according to ASTM standards. The porosities of the coal samples were measured, using an Autoscan-33 mercury porosimeter. The surface areas of the coal samples were determined by the nitrogen adsorptive method (BET), using FlowSorb 2300 surface area meter. Thermogravimetric analysis was performed, using a Shimadzu TG 41 thermal analyser. 40 mg coal samples were spread uniformly on the bottom of the crucible, made of alumina. Dried air was selected as the oxidizing gas. The flow rate of air was fixed at 40 cc/min. The temperature was raised with a heating rate of 40 K/min to 1273 K and held for 30 min at this temperature. The main characteristics of the coal samples used in this work are listed in In this study, thermogravimetric data derived from the burning profiles of the coal samples were used to calculate the activation energy values of the selected coal samples by the method of Coats–Redfern With increasing rank, the whole burning profile of coal shifts to higher temperatures ( The point on the burning profile at which the rate of weight loss due to combustion is a maximum is called the “peak temperature”. The burning profile peak temperature is usually taken as a measure of the reactivity of coal: the lower the maximum peak temperature, the more reactive a coal may be considered The rate of weight loss at the burning profile peak temperature is called the “maximum combustion rate”. The maximum combustion rates of the peat, lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite samples were calculated as 4.3, 2.05, 1.90 and 1.20 mg/min, respectively. It is clear that the maximum combustion rate decreases rapidly as the rank of the coal increases. The weight loss percentages of the four different rank coals versus temperature are illustrated in The total surface areas of the peat, lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite samples, measured by the nitrogen adsorptive method, are 1.0, 1.6, 1.5 and 2.1 m The conclusions of this work are summarized as follows: It was observed that the decrease in volatile matter content (dmf) has a strong effect on the combustion activation energy. There is a strong correlation between the total carbon content (dmf) of the coal samples and the activation energy values. The higher is the burning profile peak temperature, the greater is the activation energy of the coal samples. The maximum combustion rates of the peat, lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite samples were calculated as 4.3, 2.05, 1.90 and 1.20 mg/min, respectively. It is clear that the maximum combustion rate decreases rapidly as the rank of the coal increases.