Non-anatomic reduction with either inferior offset or varus angulation was the strongest predictor of re-displacement of the fracture and poor outcome after fixation of intracapsular fracture of neck of femur. There are many techniques for closed reduction and can be broadly divided into non-invasive and invasive techniques. We describe a minimally invasive technique, which we believe is easy, reproducible and successful in achieving good anatomical reduction.Displaced intracapsular femoral neck fractures are associated with a high complication rate with the two most common being non-union and avascular necrosis. And these complications are main contributing factors for reoperation Fracture repair and joint preservation are priorities in operative treatment in the physiologically young patient. Quality of fracture reduction has been one of the most consistently shown predictors of treatment success There are many techniques for closed reduction and can be broadly divided into non-invasive and invasive techniques. We describe a minimally invasive technique, which we believe is easy, reproducible and successful in achieving good anatomical reduction. Patient is positioned on traction table. Antero-posterior and lateral images of the hip are obtained with image intensifier. The operating area is painted and draped. A stab incision is made two inches superior to the tip of greater trochanter in line with the femur. A threaded guide wire (transfixing guide wire) is inserted to pass through supero-lateral aspect of femoral head. The guide wire traverses through the femoral head from supero-lateral aspect towards infero-medial aspect. The guide wire enters the teardrop to transfix the head fragment. ( Once the acceptable reduction is achieved the fracture is fixed with a choice of implant. The transfixing guide wire is removed. The quality of reduction is thought to predict the end result irrespective of the operative method used and every effort should be made to achieve perfect reduction Non-anatomic reduction with either inferior offset or Varus angulation was the strongest predictor of re-displacement of the fracture after fixation in a study by Weinrobe et al. The quality of reduction can be assessed by the Garden alignment index Leadbetter’s technique involves a more forceful manoeuvre. The leg first is flexed 90 degree at the hip and knee. Traction then is applied to the femur in a vertical direction. The leg then is fully internally rotated and brought into extension and some abduction while maintaining traction. Finally, the foot also is fixed within the boot to the fracture table In Flynn’s technique, the patient supine upon the orthopaedic table, the leg was gently flexed at the hip to beyond 90° with about 10° of abduction and neutral rotation. An assistant steadied the foot while the manipulator applied traction in the line of the neck of the femur with one hand and steadied the knee with the other. Internal rotation was then applied to the hip as the leg was extended and secured in extension and internal rotation with a variable amount of ab/adduction (usually 10° of abduction is needed) In the method used by Whitman (1927) traction was applied to the leg in extension and internal rotation without the preliminary manoeuvres of the other two methods Invasive (percutaneous) technique by Su et al. requires palpating the femoral artery and inserting Kirschner wires or Steinman pins 1.5–3 Garden In our technique In our experience it has consistently shown near anatomical reduction being achieved. We have performed 15 cases in last three years with this technique; none of them required open reduction. There were no incidences of wire breakage. One patient had loss of reduction in early post op period probably due to significant posteromedial communition. The scope of this paper is limited to achieve reduction of the fracture; the results of healing, avascular necrosis etc are beyond the scope. We believe that achieving near anatomic reduction is likely to improve outcome of fracture as stated in literature previously. We have found this technique easy perform with very little learning curve. We believe that this technique allows near anatomical reduction with gentle manipulation. We believe that it is easy, safe and highly reproducible technique. None for any author.