Gas flotation is widely used for oily wastewater cleanup. The crux for flotation is the adhesion of the gas bubble to the oil drop. A spreading stage of oil onto the gas is vital for efficient bubble–oil rise. Thus spreading and non-spreading oils will present different fluid configurations and stabilities for bubble rise and a positive oil on a water–gas interface spreading coefficient is needed for spreading to occur. This paper provides photographic evidence of the spreading of the oil around the gas bubble. The importance of a positive spreading coefficient of the oil around the gas bubble for gas flotation is clear.Gas flotation is widely used for oily wastewater cleanup Optimised flotation can only be achieved if the surface science conditions are properly understood so that the proper field conditions are created and optimal amounts of chemicals may be more successfully established Flotation is a complicated set of processes dependent on hydrodynamic and thermodynamic forces with physicochemical interactions. Equipment and general applications, particularly for mineral processing, are abundant and described in the appropriate literature Even if the hydrodynamics of the system is perfect and the gas bubbles and oil droplets contact The interaction between gas bubble and oil droplets can be summarised as an entrapment of gas bubbles by single or a flocculated structure of oil drops so that the oil can rise more rapidly than without the gas, The essential stages in the oily-water flotation process are demulsification of oily wastewater and coalescence of oil droplets to increase their size, approach of oil and gas bubbles, drainage rate and rupture of interstitial film, attachment of gas bubbles to the oil with, and for successful flotation, spreading of oil drops onto gas bubbles, rise of the coalesced phases to the surface. The gas bubble–oil droplet attachment is paramount in the flotation of the oil in wastewater. The actual processes occurring in attachment are complicated, but spreading of the oil on the surface of the gas bubbles is essential. First there is the formation of a thick lamella as the drop and bubble approach, followed by the drainage (thinning) of this lamella to a thin film, which then ruptures The spreading coefficient of a fluid,  The photographs in A positive value of If We can calculate that in the flotation of oily wastewater an oil drop with a diameter of 20 μm will form a layer around the bubble of around 1 μm for a gas bubble of 50 μm diameter, and for an oil droplet of diameter 10 μm a film of 0.15 μm. Consequently, floating oil droplets less than 3 μm is not generally successful as only a very thin film would be formed around the bubble, which would probably be unstable. Thus the oil droplets need to grow by coalescence to around 20 μm before attempting to float them. The spreading of oil on gas is essential to oily water separation efficiency because: Upon attachment, the gas increases the density differential between the oil and water, allowing the oil to rise at a much faster rate. Spreading ensures that the oil and the gas bubble remain attached during the rise rising to the surface. We are grateful to The Campus Research and Publication Fund Committee, UWI, for financial assistance.