Often the most difficult step in establishing a control system is the development of a suitable dynamic process model. As such a model is not available elsewhere, a first principle dynamic mathematical model was developed for a coal dense medium separation circuit. Each unit operation was modelled individually and then integrated together to form a complete non-linear state–space model for the circuit. This model was used to simulate the process and it was validated using real process data derived from a plant experiment.
                  When developing models from first principles, it is necessary to estimate the model parameters. These parameters, specifically for non-linear state–space relationships, require a unique solution. A parameter identifiability method was used to show that the non-linear dynamic models developed have unique parameters for a specific set of input–output data.Raw coal that is mined contains a number of impurities and is typically processed to improve its overall quality. The mineral processing of this run-of-mine (ROM) coal involves a complicated and sophisticated operation including comminution, classification and separation. These separation processes normally make use of particle classification on the basis of density ( Coal beneficiation primarily makes use of gravity separation in coal washing ( Implementing a control system requires a high level of process understanding ( By applying the concepts of process control to DMS of coal, there is an opportunity to improve product yield and quality, e.g. reducing ash in the coal products. Process control could allow for an improvement in current coal beneficiation operations and it is for this reason that the dynamic DMS circuit model described here was developed. Mathematical models are generally used in process controller design to improve process performance and stability and ultimately ensure economic benefits ( Many static models have been developed for dense medium separation circuits. However, these models are typically not suitable for dynamic controller design for which models that describe the time evolution of variables are required.  A computer simulation by A number of hydrocyclone models have been developed and are described by Other DMC models have been developed that make use of more sophisticated techniques such as computational simulations using Eulerian models for the medium and Lagrangian models for the coal particles ( CFD models that incorporate Navier Stokes equations ( A model developed for dense medium baths or drums is referred to by Similar regression type models have also been developed for screens. It is indicated ( Section A DMS circuit example and motivation for process improvement is described below.  Most DMC circuits look similar to that represented in By analysing product yield and product quality data from an actual DMS plant, process improvement by making use of process control can be evaluated. If variations or oscillations in product yield and quality due to disturbances or changes in setpoints are found, control could eliminate or reduce such deviations. The yield from an actual DMS plant is shown in Using the yield curve in In order to examine some of these variations more closely, an hour of data sampled every 1  The FFT for the peas and duff ash content curves is computed and illustrated in By reducing the frequency scale of The relationship between yield and ash content at specific separation densities can be seen from the comparison of the frequency responses of the yield ( Disturbances or oscillations in the yield and product qualities indicate that there is an opportunity for process improvement in this DMS plant. Process control can be used to provide this improvement by ensuring the plant runs closer to steady state and ensure that setpoint changes are tracked properly. An improvement to the process, such as improvement in average yield or ash content, can have significant financial implications. The DMS circuit models described below were all developed from first principles. In developing a dynamic model for the single-deck screen, the conservation of overall mass was used. This was applied to each section of the screen to form an approximation of a distributed parameter system. The screen is a distributed parameter system, but can be approximated with The overflow and underflow mass feed rates ( The proportion of mass split ( Using these assumptions, the rate of change of mass of component Modelling each mass component Similar to the development of the single-deck screen dynamic model, the conservation of overall mass is also used here, and is applied to each section of each deck of the double-deck screen to form an approximation of a distributed parameter system. Each deck of the screen is a distributed parameter system, but can be approximated with The overflow and underflow mass feed rates ( The proportion of mass split ( Using these assumptions, the top and bottom rate of change of mass of component Modelling each mass component The conservation of overall mass was again used to develop the dynamic model for the addition of water to the medium. In-line mixing takes place between the added water ( The valve is linear with a constant pressure drop Δ The volumetric flow rates of the recovered ( By assuming a linear valve (where In developing a model for the mixing box, the conservation of overall mass was used in conjunction with The medium and ore is well-mixed within a constant volume The volumetric flow rates of the corrected medium and mix ( The rate of change of density of the mix is given by, In order to model the throughput of the DMC dynamically, it is necessary to make use of the conservation of overall mass, while the conservation of mass of components is used to model the quality (i.e. ash percentage) of the coal product. A representation of the DMC can be found in The following is a list of assumptions that were made: The volume of the mix in the cyclone ( The volumes of the overflow ( The volumetric flow rates of the feed ( The volumetric flow rates of the overflow ( Only ash, sulphur, moisture, volatile, medium and fixed carbon components will be considered for the conservation of mass of components in the feed (i.e. The rates of change in mass for the overflow The rates of change in percentages of components to the overflow ( In order to simplify the model, it is assumed that the volumetric flow is at steady state (i.e. The concept of the acceleration due to the centrifugal force within the cyclone can be used to model the effects of the dynamics of the density response for the cyclone. The centrifugal force indicates that the rates of change in mass for the overflow and underflow are proportional to their differences in densities to the medium density. The percentage of ash or carbon will also influence the dynamics of the cyclone and can yield the following relationship: Similarly, the conservation of mass of each component within the ore that is being beneficiated can be determined. The components that were used in this model include ash, sulphur, moisture, medium and carbon. This results in the following dynamic mass balances: To develop solutions for the rates of change in component percentages, some assumptions have to be made. The rates of change in component percentages for the overflow and underflow are assumed to be proportional to the difference in their component densities to the medium density. It is also assumed that the rates of change in component percentages are proportional to the difference in their component percentages to their corresponding feed percentages and their acceleration due to gravity. The rates of change in component percentages are also assumed to be inversely proportional to the average particle size of the ore. This will yield the following relationships: In the case of the percentage of magnetite in Eqs. By using the equations in this section, a non-linear model of the DMC can be derived.  The volumetric flow rates of the recovered medium ( The effective area of the corrected medium tank ( By using the conservation of overall mass, the following relationship for the tank can be determined: Performing an industrial experiment on a DMS plant makes it possible to illustrate the accuracy of the models that have been developed by comparing the output of the models to the actual measured output of the plant in response to actual measured plant manipulated variables ( It is possible for a non-linear DMC model that there may be different solutions for the same set of input–output data sets. Since the ash component equations (Eqs. The volume By only considering the parameters By defining System identification (   The norm, By applying Eq.  In order to verify the model simulations it was necessary to perform a specific setpoint change on the DMS plant while taking measurements of the relevant inputs and outputs. The manipulated variable in the DMS plant is the medium density for each DMC. Since it was difficult to take samples of the feed ore and product from the coarse and ultrafine cyclones, only the fine cyclone circuit was used. During the step test representative samples were collected by a South African Bureau of Standards-approved laboratory every 5 As input to the model, the manipulated variables of the process include the feed rate of ore into the plant and the density setpoint of the medium. These variables are measured and time trends are shown in By interconnecting and simulating the models described in Section Measurements of the product qualities during the industrial experiment (  The correlation between the simulated oversize material and actual oversize measurement is high. This high correlation means that the model predicts the oversize material accurately. The yield for the different sized products is also comparable to that of what the mine from which the experimental test was conducted typically obtains.  The correlation between the simulated response and actual density measurement is 1.00. The high correlation in the water-addition comparison means that the model predicts the output accurately.   The correlation for the ash comparison is 0.72. Similarly the moisture and volatile components are simulated and illustrated in If the samples for the DMC model were taken at faster intervals, the deviations shown in the error-bars for  The correlation for each simulation comparison (where applicable) is summarised in This work illustrates how dynamic models of a coal beneficiation DMS circuit can be developed from first principles. The models were developed from first principles as no such models could be found in the current published literature. Each equipment model in the DMS circuit was developed using the conservation of overall mass. The conservation of mass of components was used to model the ash, moisture and volatile percentages for the DMC. The equipment models were found to be non-linear, and the model parameters were identified and estimated to a reasonable degree of accuracy. The validation of the models was performed using an industrial experiment test case where plant data were collected and samples were taken from a fine cyclone product and analysed. During the test case, the medium density for fine cyclone circuit was adjusted by introducing a step change. The high correlation of 100% for the magnetite medium water addition, 72% for the ash and volatile in the DMC overflow, and 80% for the moisture in the DMC overflow indicate that the models simulate the DMS process reasonably well. By analysing the performance of an existing DMS plant, it was found that improvements could be made with better process control. The models developed in this work can be used for the design of a DMS plant controller in future. Our appreciation goes to Exxaro Resources for their support and approval for conducting an industrial experiment at one of their coal preparation sites to enable us to validate the models that have been developed. Acknowledgement also goes to the National Research Foundation of South Africa for providing additional funding for this research.