Using molecular dynamics and modified analytic embedded atom methods, the atomic self-diffusion dynamics behaviors relevant to 2D crystal growth on Ni(111) surface have been studied between 150 and 600K. On perfect Ni(111) surface, the activation energy and prefactor are 0.058±0.001eV and 4.2×10−4
                     cm2/s between 150 and 350K, and 0.082±0.003eV and 7.8×10−4
                     cm2/s from 400 to 600K. Ni adatom just hops along the directions of close-packed steps on stepped Ni(111) surface, the corresponding activation energies and prefactors are 0.188±0.002eV and (3.8–4.4)×10−3
                     cm2/s along the direction of A-type step, 0.140±0.001eV and (1.1–1.2)×10−3
                     cm2/s along the direction of B-type step, and both fitting lines of Arrhenius law intersect at T
                     c=420–440K. Our results show that the atomic growth dynamics under nonequilibrium conditions is gradually dominated by the prefactor with increasing temperature. In addition, the shape-change of the 2D nanometer-size island has been discussed on stepped Ni(111) surface in different temperature range.Surface diffusion, or atom and molecular dynamics on the surface, is an important subject in surface and nanoscience since many surface phenomena involve mass transport and dynamic fluctuations of atoms, clusters and molecules Nickel is a kind of 3d magnetic transition metals. Its alloys are widely used in catalysis, energy and information industry The empirical approach with many-body interatomic potentials and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is efficient to large systems with long timescale, which is a valid tool for the study of the non-equilibrium dynamic diffusion process. Some calculations about the dynamics diffusion behavior of Ni adatom have been done on Ni(111) surface. Liu et al. In this study, we have investigated the self-diffusion dynamics behaviors of Ni adatom on perfect Ni(111) surface and along the directions of two types of close-packed steps on stepped Ni(111) surface between 150 and 600 In fcc crystals, fcc (111) surface is stacked in an ABCABC… sequence. On the fcc (111) surface, two types of typical close-packed steps are the A-type and B-type steps, as shown in Simular to the measurements in FIM experiments, the diffusion coefficients of adatom can generally be obtained by measuring the mean square displacement (MSD). In our simulations, once the system is in thermodynamic equilibrium, the positions of the interstitial atom on surface for every 3 steps are recorded. In the scenario of two-dimensional random walk motion, the diffusion mobility coefficient In order to ascertain that the potential used describes well the system under study, the surface energies of Ni low-index surfaces have been calculated, and results obtained have been presented in The self-diffusion dynamics behavior of Ni adatom on perfect (111) surface is first considered. The MD simulations of Ni adatom have been performed with an interval of 50 The reason why only the self-diffusion dynamics behaviors of Ni adatom along two types of close-packed steps have been studied is based on two aspects. The first, on fcc (111) surface, the close-packed steps are the A-type and B-type steps, so both step energies are in the lower state. In 2D growth model, in the point view of the lowest energy, the outermost atoms always tend to form the A-type or B-type step at the range of nanometer-size islands, basically shown in In the low and medium temperature ranges, it is very difficult that the adatom moves away from the step because of requiring breaking more bonds with surrounding atoms. A Ni adatom is placed in an equilibrium position on the A-type step or B-type step, after that the MD simulations have been performed at several temperatures between 300 and 550 The next step is that the dynamic diffusion behaviors of Ni adatom along the directions of the close-packed steps have been analyzed under the non-equilibrium state. The Arrhenius laws of Ni adatom along the directions of A-type step from 300 to 550 Based on obtained results, we have further discussed the homogeneous 2D film growth on the Ni(111) surface. Compared with the Arrhenius law of Ni adatom on perfect Ni(111) surface and along the directions of close-packed steps, one can find that the diffusion mobility of Ni adatom on perfect Ni(111) surface is much quicker than that along the directions of close-packed steps, so Ni adatom would like to adhere at steps. As mentioned, in the fcc(111) surface, the outermost edges of most of the stable 2D nanometer-size islands are composed of the A-type step and B-type step. When the temperature In this work, the diffusion dynamics behaviors of Ni adatom on Ni(111) surface have been studied via the MD and MAEAM methods. Using the Arrhenius law, the activation energy and prefactor of Ni adatom on perfect Ni(111) surface have been gained, and the corresponding results are This work is financially supported by the