Talc and mica are major gangue minerals in many base metal ores including sulfide ores. Talc is a naturally hydrophobic mineral, and therefore it is easily floatable. There have been many studies to overcome this problem, and depress talc with various reagents. In this study the flotation of a copper ore in the presence of talc and muscovite was studied. It was found that talc can affect copper flotation mainly via froth phase. The copper grade and recovery were affected in the presence of only 7% talc. On the other hand, muscovite influenced the pulp phase via affecting the pulp rheology. The copper flotation grade was reduced in the presence of high amount (30%) of muscovite due to the entrainment, but its effect on the copper recovery was negligible.It is well known that clays have the potential to significantly affect mineral processing ( Clays are phyllosilicates made up of varying combinations of stacked tetrahedral (T) and octahedral (O) sheets. A tetrahedral sheet comprises silicon-oxygen (Si Talc (Mg Muscovite (KAl Talc causes processing problems due to its hydrophobicity which makes this mineral naturally floatable. In addition, as talc is a magnesium silicate mineral, large quantities of talc in flotation concentrates cause problems during smelting, often resulting in the imposition of smelter penalties for mineral processing companies ( The aim of this study is to understand the effects of talc and muscovite (as representative of Mg and Al containing clays, respectively) on the flotation of a copper ore through examination of the grade and recovery behaviour, pulp rheology, and froth characteristics. In particular, it investigates whether the pulp or froth phase are affected in the presence of these clay gangue minerals. The critical concentration at which such deleterious effects are occurred is also investigated. When these deleterious effects are fully understood then the ways to prevent these effect, and how to separate these type of clays from an ore would be the subject of future investigations. A high level summary of the approach used, outlining the materials, and measurements conducted is given in The copper ore sample was obtained from Northparkes Copper & Gold Mine, Australia. This ore was chosen due to its relatively unproblematic flotation characteristics. Such an ore provides a formidable baseline for the identification of the deleterious effects of clays. The chemical assays of the ore sample contains 0.5% Cu, 3.8% Fe, and 0.3% S. The mineralogical analysis of the ore determined using XRD is presented in Flotation tests were conducted using a bottom driven flotation cell (JKTech, Australia). The bottom driven cells allow the operator to remove froth from the entire surface of the flotation cell. This minimizes operator error and maximizes test reproducibility. The ore was ground to P During flotation, froth images were taken and analysed using VisioFroth software developed by Metso Minerals Cisa for bubble size distribution. A full description of the VisioFroth system is given by Froth stability is known to play an important role in determining mineral flotation recovery and selectivity ( The effect of talc and muscovite on the froth stability of copper ore slurry was investigated using a froth column ( The rheology of slurries comprising equivalent concentrations of the copper ore and talc/muscovite (as used in the flotation and froth stability measurements) was measured using an AR1500EX (Thermal Analysis, Germany), with a standard 4-panel vane rotor geometry. This geometry is more suitable for analysis of mineral suspensions. It is less susceptible to artefacts arising from large particle sizes, and results in less sample disturbance and thixotropic breakdown during the measurements ( The stress-strain tests were conducted in a shear rate controlling regime, with an upward and downward ramp within the range 0 s  To better understand the behaviour of talc and muscovite during the flotation, the flotation products were assayed for Al  Typical shear stress versus shear rate curves for the ore slurry, in the presence and absence of clays are presented in Clearly, muscovite affected the ore rheology while the effect of talc is negligible ( Muscovite has a larger effect on the suspension yield stress at the tested concentrations used in this study. With a critical solid wt% of ~20%, slurries containing muscovite with a higher concentration than this are likely to experience rheological related problems. The effect of talc and muscovite on the copper flotation was studied. It was found that talc particles move to the froth phase and therefore affect the froth stability and froth structure. Consequently, the flotation grade and recovery were affected although the pulp rheology remained unchanged. On the other hand, muscovite affected the pulp rheology and showed less effect on the froth behaviour. The copper flotation grade reduced in the presence of muscovite due to the entrainment, but its effect on the copper recovery was negligible. Furthermore, the findings of this study suggest that when one deals with ores containing talc, mitigation studies and formulations should be more focused on the froth phase. However, processing of ores containing high amount of muscovite can be controlled via the pulp rheological modification. The results of this could be beneficial towards ongoing studies to manage phyllosilicate containing ores in mineral processing. However, it needs to be validated for different ores and at different scales.