Background
                  The treatment of radial neck fractures is controversial and typically depends on displacement. Surgical procedures based on open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) may lead to several complications, such as avascular necrosis of the radial head, nonunion, malunion, and elbow stiffness. Closed reduction with intramedullary pinning of radial neck fractures, which is commonly used in children, is a viable option for these fractures in adults and may allow for a lower complication rate compared with ORIF. The aim of this study was to report the functional outcome of closed reduction and intramedullary stabilization in isolated radial neck fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Fourteen cases were retrospectively reviewed between January 2007 and December 2016. The inclusion criteria were isolated radial neck fractures of type I to III according to the Mason classification, absence of previous injuries of the elbow, and a minimum of 1 year of follow-up. The Mason classification was used to classify these injuries. At final follow-up, functional assessment was established based on functional scores: Morrey Elbow Score, Elbow Self-Assessment Score, and QuickDASH (short version of Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand questionnaire) score. Range of motion was evaluated similarly.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period was 86 months. The mean age was 44.2 years. Regarding the functional outcome, 78% of patients claimed satisfaction. Concerning the functional scoring, the mean visual analog scale score was 0.2 (range, 0-4) and the mean Morrey Elbow Score was 95.7 (range, 85-100). The mean QuickDASH score was 6.4 (range, 7-22). The complication rate was 35%. Malunion was observed in 7% of patients.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Intramedullary pinning of radial neck fractures represents a viable technique in adults because of its safety and simplicity. The complication rates are lower than those in other reports of ORIF.Management of isolated radial neck fractures is controversial because of the rarity of these injuries and absence of standard surgical options. We retrospectively reviewed 14 cases of isolated radial neck fractures treated with closed reduction and intramedullary pinning using K-wires between January 2007 and December 2016. The mean follow-up period was 86 months (range, 12-120 months). The inclusion criteria were isolated radial neck fractures of type I to III according to the Mason classification, All patients were treated with intramedullary pinning according to the surgical procedure as described in children by Métaizeau et al. The same physiotherapy recommendations were indicated for all cases, which consisted of early active mobilization of the elbow after removal of the plaster splint. Flexion and extension tasks were commenced after plaster splint removal, with a full arc of motion. Passive and active-assisted tasks were indicated after 2 weeks. Active elbow flexion-extension tasks and active-assisted arm pronation-supination tasks were recommended at the beginning of the third week postoperatively. Using the elbow for light functional tasks was encouraged. After removal of the K-wires, physiotherapy was performed and proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation was added. Heavy loading activities were not allowed for the first 3 months and were then gradually introduced based on performance during strength and endurance evaluation. Evaluation was established based on subjective and objective scoring: On one hand, subjective assessment was graduated using the Elbow Self-Assessment Score, Postoperative radiologic evaluation was established using both the anteroposterior and lateral views of the elbow: Time to union of the radial neck fracture, capsular ossification, alignment of the capitellar joint, and K-wire positions were found and presented as the mean of standard deviation values. Other complications, such as nonunion and malunion, were diagnosed and analyzed. Removal of the K-wire was indicated at the time of complete healing of the fracture confirmed using radiologic views of the elbow. At the time of follow-up, the mean age was 44.2 years (range, 28-67 years); the male-female ratio was 1.33. The mean delay until surgery was 2.14 days (minimum, 1 day; maximum, 4 days). The mean K-wire diameter was 2.04 mm (minimum, 1.8 mm; maximum, 3 mm). According to the Mason classification, 4 cases were type I (28%), 7 were type II (50%), and 3 were type III (22%). The mean operative time was 22.3 minutes (range, 16-37 minutes). Subjective assessment found that 78% of patients claimed satisfaction after this procedure (very good in 7 cases, good in 4, satisfied in 2, and sufficient in 1). Findings of the range-of-motion evaluation were normal compared with the contralateral elbow in 11 cases (78% of patients) ( The complication rate was 35%. We found 5 complications: 3 cases of elbow stiffness; 1 case of neurapraxia of the cutaneous branch of the radial nerve related to the surgical technique used, which resolved spontaneously at 3 months postoperatively; and 1 case of infected granuloma around the K-wire at the entry point of the distal radius, which was treated with excision and antibiotic therapy with a good outcome. The mean time to bone union was 6.9 weeks (range, 6-10 weeks). No cases of radial head necrosis were found. One case of malunion was reported, with 20° of angulation between the radial head axis and the radial axis. These results are summarized in Fractures of the radial neck in adults may have poor outcomes, especially when treated surgically with ORIF. There is a high rate of complications, such as avascular necrosis of the radial head, nonunion, heterotopic ossification, and elbow stiffness apart from the surgical procedure. It seems that outcomes may depend on the delay between the injury event and surgery: Some authors believe that early intramedullary pinning of the radial neck fracture is advocated immediately because delayed cases may lead to some difficulties (especially the K-wire advancement through the neck explained by the callus bone). A review of the literature indicated that some authors have reported the possibility of primary osteosynthesis of the comminuted radial head by a screw followed by intramedullary pinning of this fixed head: It seems that this option may lead to better outcomes than ORIF with a low rate of complications. This retrospective study has some positive aspects: First, it reported 14 cases of isolated radial neck fractures collected over a period of 10 years with a mean follow-up period of 86 months. Second, evaluation was based on both objective and subjective assessment of all cases according to conventional scores and scales of the elbow. Third, it includes the most important cases reported in the literature. Finally, it may help young surgeons to review this technique in radial neck fractures in both adults and children to learn the pearls and pitfalls. Intramedullary pinning of isolated radial neck fractures is an available technique as it is used in children. It can be used in adults while avoiding damage to the medial collateral ligament and in slightly or nondisplaced Mason type III fractures. It has a minor complication rate compared with ORIF. In our study, the complication rate was 35% and malunion was observed in 7% of patients. Despite a variety of osteosynthesis devices, the described simple technique leads to acceptable functional outcomes. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.