Physical and biological processes have been combined with a view to reduce the sulphur and ash content of finely ground coal. The coal used was a semianthracite from the North Spain Coal Field. A sample of several kg in a coal/water suspension with a w/w concentration of 15% was subjected to a physical treatment combining cyclone and flotation separation processes. Representative samples were taken from each of five size fractions: original feed and the physical separation products, which were screened through water into sub-samples classified by particle size. Each fraction from the physical separation and the screening was analysed for ash and sulphur. The elimination yield of the hydrocyclone was 22% of ash and 21% of sulphur. The figure for ash raised to 41% when the hydrocyclone and flotation equipment were both used, with no change in sulphur elimination. In turn, the biodesulphurization treatment applied in addition to the two processes raised the respective yields to 59 and 42%. The change in the calorific value of the coal was hardly significant, while sulphur emissions, expressed as gS/GJ were reduced by 51%. Additionally, an assessment was made of the thermal behaviour of the various samples from the physical and biological treatment by means of programmed temperature combustion analysis carried out by a thermogravimetric equipment.Today coal accounts for over 25% of the world's primary energy consumption (approximately 2200 million tonnes petroleum equivalent [Mtpe] in 1998) and 15% of that of the European Union (about 214 The demand for coal in Spain has remained constant at around 19 Coal burning in Spain's major power stations accounts for 90% of consumption and makes up 30% of electricity generation, this use of coal being the cause of nearly 70% of sulphur dioxide emissions into the atmosphere. This gas is the main cause of acid rain and so legislation is continually reducing the permitted levels of emission. The European Directive for Large Combustion Plants (88/609/EEC) proposes a 37% reduction of sulphur dioxide emissions for Spain by 2003 with regard to 1980 levels. Emission reduction can be tackled by means of physical, chemical and biological processes, which can be applied before or after the coal is burnt. The techniques used in the present study, based on a combination of physical and biological processes, are for implementing during the preparation of the coal, before it is burnt. The prime aim of this study is to assess the improvement brought about by the biological treatment of the samples in processes of physical separation with regard to the reduction of ash and sulphur content. We also seek to assess the possible changes that these physical and biological processes bring about in the behaviour of the coal during combustion. The coal used came from the washing plant of Hullera Vasco-Leonesa S.A. It is a semianthracite with a relatively high sulphur content (2.4%). The first treatment was in a hydrocyclone. The treatment of finely ground coal in hydrocyclones offers better separation possibilities than the use of dense-medium cyclones, as these pose problems of separation of products from the medium, with consequently higher separation costs The hydrocyclone light fraction exit stream was then subjected to bubble flotation, giving two exit streams from the flotation equipment. During the process, samples of coal pulp are taken simultaneously from all streams except tailings. The study of each of these streams was carried out by means of fractioning and screening through water into sub-samples of different particle sizes ( Both the initial coal and the four exit streams—from the hydrocyclone and the flotation unit ( The thermogravimetric analysis, carried out to determine the behaviour in combustion of the coal samples that have been treated, consisted of burning a small amount, about 25 The results obtained are expressed in three clearly differentiated groups: those concerning the yield obtained in physical separation, those of the biological process, and the behaviour of the coal in combustion. The results of analyses of the various samples involved in physical separation are shown in In the hydrocyclone, the separation yield of the light fraction is nearly 80% and is greater for the smaller particle sizes, as may be seen in Considering that for the flotation unit, the yield of the light fraction (floating particles) is nearly 90%, and although it is slightly higher for intermediate particle sizes, the degree of separation is very similar regardless of particle size (  The results for the biodesulphurization of coal in stirred bioreactors are shown in Given that the biodesulphurization process dissolves mineral matter, the coal becomes more concentrated, which results in a higher calorific value  When the light fraction from the hydrocyclone was treated biologically, the ash and sulphur contents and sulphur emissions were reduced, respectively, by 39, 35 and 41%, great improvements on the reductions of the physical process applied alone. Regarding the fraction from the flotation unit, the biological process enhanced the reduction of sulphur content and emissions. When the physical and biological process were both used, the yields reached 59% for ash content reduction, 42% for sulphur content reduction and 51% for the decrease in sulphur emissions. Thermogravimetry (TG) has often been used in recent years, especially programmed-temperature combustion curves, for the study of coal combustibility and its dependence on the coal's rank, mineral content and maceral composition Furthermore, this technique, in combination with mass spectrometry (TG–MS) has made it possible to identify both the intermediaries of combustion and its end products, together with their relationship to the coal rank The change in the combustibility of the different coal samples was determined by comparing their combustion profiles obtained by the thermobalance.  As for the change in the hydrocyclone, The sample of floating matter obtained in the flotation unit was compared with the biodesulphurized sample from the same source and with the feedstock of the flotation equipment, i.e. the light fraction from the hydrocyclone. The results concerning the change in combustibility of the samples are shown in On the other hand, the sample corresponding to the heavy fraction from the hydrocyclone undergoes a drop in combustibility in comparison with the feed sample, shown by the combustion profiles in The following conclusions may be drawn from the experiments and the foregoing discussion of the results: The two physical methods used together, hydrocyclone and flotation equipment, bring about a reduction of 20.8% in the sulphur content and 41.1% in the ash content. Combined with the biological treatment, they reduce the sulphur content by up to 41.7% and the ash content by up to 58.9%. An increase occurs in the calorific value of the samples treated in both the physical and biological processes. Its value expressed as a proportion of pure fuel shows that its variation in the treated coal samples is barely significant. Linked with this minimal change is the major reduction in sulphur emissions, expressed as g Regarding the combustibility of the coal, the samples submitted to the physical process are barely affected, while the biological treatment always leads to an improvement in combustibility, shown by the earlier reaching of the characteristic temperatures corresponding to combustion profiles (