The effect of an adapted dissimilatory iron reducing bacterial consortium (DIRB) towards bio-reduction of Sukinda chromite overburden (COB) with enhanced recovery of nickel and cobalt is being reported for the first time. The remarkable ability of DIRB to utilize Fe(III) as terminal electron acceptor reducing it to Fe(II) proved beneficial for treatment of COB as compared to previous reports for nickel leaching. XRD studies showed goethite as the major iron-bearing phase in COB. Under facultative anaerobic conditions, goethite was reduced to hematite and magnetite with the exposure of nickel oxide. FESEM studies showed DIRB to be associated with COB through biofilm formation with secondary mineral precipitates of magnetite deposited as tiny globular clusters on the extra polymeric substances. The morphological and mineralogical changes in COB, post DIRB application, yielded a maximum of 68.5% nickel and 80.98% cobalt in 10days using 8M H2SO4.Over the past few years, due to the depletion of high-grade nickel sulphide reserves at an alarming rate, particular concern has been raised for processing the low-grade ores. Millions of tonnes of chromite overburden (COB) await the advent of an eco-friendly and economic technology for the recovery of respective metals due to the drawbacks associated with the conventional strategies adopted for metal extraction ( Several group of microorganisms such as the heterotrophic fungi and/or chemo-acidophilic Iron Oxidizing Bacteria (IOB) ( Dissimilatory iron reducing bacteria (DIRB) plays a significant role in the global geochemical cycling of iron leading to biogenic mineralization and oxidation of organic matter in anoxic, sedimentary soils ( Therefore, the present study was motivated to put an insight into the capability of DIRB towards Fe(III) bio-reduction with nickel and cobalt dissolution from COB. In addition, the effect of DIRB towards changes in ore mineralogy and morphology on various leaching parameters was investigated. The changes in the original COB and DIRB treated COB were analyzed through X-ray diffraction (XRD), atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) and field emission spectroscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (FE-SEM–EDS). In the present study, the COB sample (chemically composing 0.58% Ni, 0.095% Co, 40.52% Fe, 0.61% Mn and 0.26% Cr) was obtained from the Sukinda Valley of Jajpur district in the state of Odisha, India. In the Indian subcontinent, about 97% of its total nickel reserves are confined to the Sukinda Valley wherein nickel has been reported to be well embedded within the goethite matrix of COB ( For the isolation of DIRB, soil samples were collected at a depth of 3–4 Prior to bio-reduction experiments, the fully active bacterial consortium was adapted to the ore sample. The rate of COB bio-reduction by the adapted and unadapted DIRB culture (1% The bio-reduced and original COB was leached with H Mineralogical phase analysis of the COB sample was carried out using synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) ( The phenomenon of adaptation by microorganisms such as those of IOB, fungi and DIRB to a range of sulphidic and oxidic ores have been reported to enhance recovery rates of various base metals ( The activity of a DIRB bacterial culture is best known by the decrease in pH ( XRD spectra indicated phase transformation in pre and post DIRB treated COB (see Supplementary file; Sup 1a). XRD spectrum of the original ore showed a pattern dominated by goethite peaks signifying it to be a major iron-bearing phase along with minor phases of hematite, magnetite and quartz (see Supplementary file; Sup 1a). It is very interesting to note that a characteristic mineralogical change occurred in the DIRB treated COB sample wherein the appearance of nickel oxide peak was prominent (see Supplementary file; Sup 1b). Goethite phase of the COB was found to be reduced to its dehydroxylated form of hematite or magnetite upon DIRB treatment. The approximate crystallite size of the phases was calculated using the standard Debye–Scherrer equation. Notable variations in the crystallite size of each peak were noticed (data not shown). A decrease in the crystallite size of goethite with increase in the sizes of hematite and magnetite were observed that further corroborated phase transformations as a result of bio-reduction. FESEM study provides a more sensitive analysis towards understanding the changes in morphological structures. Irregular needle-shaped acicular crystals, a characteristic morphology of goethite ( Further, some small globular precipitates were found to be clustered on the EPS of the bio-reduced ore (see Supplementary file; Sup 2b) which was also evident during bio-reduction studies of a Fe-containing ore using DIRB consortia ( Thermal treatment has been postulated to result in a phase change from goethite to hematite and magnetite that may expose the associated metals leading towards an improved metal recovery ( The method of bio-reduction using an adapted DIRB consortium followed by acid leaching used in the present study yielded better results in comparison to the previous works reported on nickel and cobalt recovery from COB ( Adapted DIRB consortium showed enhanced Fe(III) reduction compared to the unadapted DIRB in almost half the duration. XRD analysis revealed a phase change after bio-reduction with appearance of nickel oxide peak that confirmed the release of nickel from the goethite matrix. FESEM study showed that biofilm formation mediated the association of DIRB with COB along with a shroud of extracellular polymeric substances. Post bio-reduction leaching of COB with 8 The authors are thankful to Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 