The inhomogeneous mineral content and its topographical distribution on a microscopic scale are major determinants of the mechanical quality of trabecular bone. The kinetics of bone tissue deposition and resorption together with the kinetics of the mineralization process determine the distribution of mineral in the tissue. The heterogeneity of the mineral content is described by the well-established bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD), which is experimentally accessible, e.g., using quantitative electron backscattering imaging (qBEI). In the present work, we demonstrate that the shape of the BMDD histogram of trabecular bone reflects directly the mineralization kinetics. Based on the experimental BMDD data of trabecular bone from healthy human adults and using a mathematical model for the remodeling and the mineralization process, the following main results were obtained. The peaked BMDD reflects necessarily a two-phase mineralization process with a fast primary phase and a slow secondary phase where the corresponding time constants differ three orders of magnitude. The obtained mineralization law, which describes the increase in the mineral content in a bone packet as a function of time, provides information not only about the initial mineralization surge, but also about the slow increase afterwards on the time scale of years. In addition to the mineralization kinetics the turnover rate of the remodeling process has a strong influence on the peak position and the shape of the BMDD. The described theoretical framework opens new possibilities for an analysis of experimentally measured BMDDs with respect to changes caused by diseases or treatments. It allows addressing whether changes in the BMDD have to be attributed to a variation in the turnover rate which consequently affects the density distribution or to a primary disorder in the mineralization process most likely reflecting alterations of the organic matrix. This is of important clinical interest because it helps to find therapeutic approaches directly targeting the primary etiological defects to correct the patients' BMDD towards normal BMDD.The mean mineral content of the bone matrix and the heterogeneity of the mineralization, together with its spatial distribution are all fundamental factors for bone material quality since they affect the basic mechanical properties of bone tissue: the stiffness, the strength and the toughness The non-uniform distribution of the mineral content in trabecular bone can be measured by a variety of experimental techniques: quantitative microradiography (qMR) Measurements with qBEI showed that the BMDD of trabecular bone from healthy adults is almost constant independent of age, sex, ethnicity and skeletal site The main purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that the BMDD includes valuable information about the mineralization kinetics. To show this, we introduce a model that relates changes in the BMDD with the remodeling and the mineralization process. Based on the experimental evidence that the reference BMDD remains virtually unchanged with time the mineralization law for healthy trabecular bone, and how changes in the turnover rate are reflected in changes of the mineralization distribution. We present here a description of the model and a listing of all the model assumptions without using mathematical expressions. These ideas formulated in the language of mathematics can be found in the Trabecular bone at a certain point in time is composed of many bone packets, which were deposited at different times and therefore differ from each other in their age. A difference in age corresponds to a difference in the mineral content of the bone packet. The connection between age and mineral content is given by the mineralization law ( The decisive step is now to go beyond this static description of trabecular bone by including the dynamical processes of mineralization and remodeling. As time elapses, the age of each individual bone packet increases. The increase of the mineral content due to the mineralization process is again given by the mineralization law ( The effect of the remodeling process on the BMDD is easier to imagine. The removal of bone of a specific mineral content by the osteoclasts reduces the frequency of finding bone with this mineral content. Consequently, the resorption of bone lowers the BMDD curve (gray area in Summarizing, the changes of the BMDD due to the mineralization can be seen as a “flow” from low to high values of the mineral content with an unchanged area under the curve corresponding to a constant bone volume. The effect of remodeling on the BMDD is that while flowing to the right towards higher Ca values, some bone volume is lost due to some “leakage” to the flow (osteoclast action). Additionally the flow is fed from the very left (osteoblast action). Such “flow problems” are common in physics and can be mathematically described by a continuity equation To predict the time evolution of the BMDD, only three quantities have to be known. First the mineralization law, which may have a different form for healthy or diseased individuals. For instance, osteomalacia is characterized by both mineralization defects and hypomineralization, while osteogenesis imperfecta is connected to hypermineralization The computed BMDD is a function which depends on both independent variables, mineral content and time. The value of the mineral content can vary between 0 – corresponding to unmineralized bone (osteoid) – and a maximum value, which can be estimated based on the available volume to be about 56 vol% For healthy adult individuals, it was shown that the BMDD is almost independent of sex, ethnicity, skeletal site and in particular of age, therefore defining a reference BMDD The relationship between the mineralization law and the BMDD, which is mathematically summarized in Eqs. Due to experimental difficulties in determining the increase of the mineral content in a bone packet as a function of time, no mineralization law has been quantitatively proposed in the bone literature both for healthy humans and for patients with disorders in the mineralization process. To gain a better understanding of the effect of the mineralization law on the resulting shape of the BMDD, we chose simple, hypothetical mineralization laws and then calculated the corresponding BMDDs using Eq. Since mineralization is described as a continuing increase in the mineral content leveling off at a maximum value of Ca content, a simple but instructive choice for the mineralization law is an exponential function. The exponential growth law is then characterized completely by the maximum Ca content attainable and by a single time constant, In bone literature the mineralization kinetics is qualitatively described as a two-step process with a fast primary and a much slower secondary phase. As proposed in the literature Since a single exponential function with one time constant is insufficient in producing a peak-shaped BMDD, a natural refinement is to propose a mineralization law as a sum of two exponential functions with two different time constants. Assuming one time constant, A reasonable agreement with the reference BMDD is obtained using a mineralization law consisting of a sum of two hyperbolic growth functions as defined in Up to now we followed the more intuitive approach of choosing a mineralization law, calculating the resulting BMDD and then comparing the result with the measured reference BMDD ( The mineralization law obtained for healthy humans ( The bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD) is a standard quantity to describe the heterogeneous mineral content of bone as a result of the remodeling and the mineralization process. In the present work, we developed a mathematical model to extract from the BMDD information about the mineralization process in trabecular bone. Two main assumptions deserve a more detailed discussion. The accuracy of the theoretical result is limited by the experimental accuracy determining the BMDD. The effects of counting statistics inherent in the stochastic process of electron emission, backscattering and detection cause a broadening of the true distribution The relation between the mineralization law and the BMDD as described by Eqs. Under these assumptions, the three main results are as follows: (1) the peak-shaped BMDD reveals the biphasic nature of the mineralization law. With our example of a hypothetical exponential mineralization law, which includes only a single time constant, we showed that the resulting BMDD is in obvious contradiction to the measured BMDD ( (2) Prediction of a mineralization law for healthy humans based on an experimentally obtained reference BMDD. The mineralization law of healthy human adults that we obtained consists of a rapid primary phase that increases the mineral content up to about 18 wt% Ca and a much slower increase afterwards lasting years. This prediction agrees well with what was concluded by observations from standard tetracycline labeling technique combined with qBEI (3) Quantitative prediction of the influence of changes in the turnover on the BMDD. Beside a full prediction of the shape of the BMDD ( Considering the peak width in a low turnover situation, our model predicts a broadening. At a first glance, this is in contradiction to measurements made after bisphosphonate treatment, which show a narrowing of the BMDD. However, experimental measurements and simulation consider different situations. While the changes in BMDD were measured already after 2 and 3 years of bisphosphonate administration, our model calculations predict the shape of the BMDD for a reduced turnover of constant value (steady state condition). An agreement can therefore be expected only for late times after a change in the turnover. Recently, measurements of the effect of risedronate showed a narrowing after 3 years, followed by a broadening and a return to normal peak width to baseline level after 5 years In conclusion, the measured BMDD of human adult trabecular bone is approximately in a steady state condition and therefore reflects presumably an evolutionary optimum distribution with respect to material quality and bone strength. Hence, any deviations from this optimal distribution might deteriorate the mechanical performance of the bone. The described simulation of the BMDD gives us new insight in the mechanism how such a fingerprint of bone mineralization is generated and how changes can be induced by diseases and treatments. New possibilities of analysis of BMDDs measured on various bone biopsies are opened and predictions can be made on the BMDD shape after certain treatments. This is of important clinical interest, especially when a patients' BMDD should be corrected towards normal BMDD. Answering the question whether changes in BMDD have to be attributed to a change in the turnover rate or are due to a disordered mineralization process will help to tailor treatment regimes of higher efficiency. DR is supported by the EU Marie Curie EST Program on Biomimetic Systems, MEST-CT-2004-504465. The bone volume having a mineral content between (1) As bone mineralizes, a volume element of bone with a mineral content initially below (2) Similarly, the bone volume leaving our observation interval [ (3) The resorbed bone volume by the osteoclasts in the interval [ Therefore, the total change Δ (4) The deposition of unmineralized bone by the osteoblasts is modeled by the boundary condition at Under the steady state assumption all the time dependencies are removed, i.e.,