The plastic strain before failure in as-cast Ti-rich Ti–Zr–Be–Cu–Ni BMGs varies to a large degree depending on the alloy composition, i.e. when the first crystallization product is quasicrystalline phase, higher plastic strain is observed. A possible reason for the enhancement of plasticity is the existence of quenched-in icosahedral nuclei embedded in the amorphous matrix.Bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) have received a great deal of attention from researchers recently because they show many unique properties such as high yield strength, large elastic limit, corrosion resistance, wear resistance, and lower elastic modulus One way to provide global ductility for BMGs is to produce a composite microstructure, consisting of crystalline and amorphous phases. The second crystalline phase distributed in the amorphous matrix may act as an initiation site of shear bands, resulting in multiple shear band formation throughout the specimen and confining the propagation of the shear band In the present study, the room temperature compressive mechanical properties have been investigated in a wide composition range of as-cast Ti-rich Ti–Zr–Be–Cu–Ni BMGs. A possible reason for the enhancement of plasticity is discussed based on examination of as-cast microstructure and crystallization behavior. The alloys investigated in the present study are listed in The thermal properties associated with glass transition and crystallization of the amorphous phase were measured using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC; Perkin Elmer DSC7) at a constant heating rate of 40 The maximum diameter for glass formation ( The thermal stability of the amorphous phase was investigated using DSC. The resulting DSC traces exhibited two or three exothermic peaks due to crystallization; however, the crystallization behavior was very different depending on the alloy composition, as shown in the typical examples for Ti The compression test was performed using samples with 1 The present study shows that Ti-rich Ti–Zr–Be–Cu–Ni BMGs exhibit enhanced plastic strain to failure depending on alloy composition. Xing et al. To reveal the as-cast amorphous structure in more detail, isothermal heat treatment was performed in DSC selectively for Ti The isothermal annealing results indicate that the enhanced plasticity is due to the presence of quenched-in nuclei in the as-cast amorphous phase. To further investigate any structural inhomogeneity, the Ti The Ti-rich Ti–Zr–Be–Cu–Ni alloys with the composition range of Ti This work was funded by Creative Research Initiatives of the Korea Ministry of Science and Technology.