In this paper, Co–Al–CO3 layered double-metal hydroxides (CAC-LDHs) were prepared by co-precipitation method and characterized by XRD, FT-IR, TG-DSC, SEM. In addition, their frictional features were evaluated by four-ball friction tester, gear tester and air compressor. The results showed that optimized synthetic conditions of CAC-LDHs were water–ethanol solution media with Co/Al mol ratio of 3:1, crystallization temperature of 120°C and crystallization time of 5h. The LDHs have perfect crystals with hexagonal lamella structures. Most crystallites have disk diameter of 150–200nm and thickness of 20nm. The d-spcing and gallery height of CAC-LDHs were 0.77nm and 0.29nm, respectively. Total specific surface area of the sample is 97m2/g and pore volume is 0.14cm3/g. As a lubricant, CAC-LDHs can significantly reduce friction coefficient (49.1%) and wear of friction pairs. They can also reduce temperature of lubrication oil (7.4–7.7%) and energy consumption of driving motor (4.8–7.0%). Accordingly, CAC-LDHs may broadly be used as lubrication and anti-frictional materials.In recent years, many studies have been conducted with regard to basic principles and applications of layered silicate minerals, represented by serpentine, as anti-frictional and self-repairing materials. Experimental results indicate that serpentine may significantly reduce friction coefficient and wear of friction pairs( Layered double-metal hydroxides (LDHs) are known as hydrotalcite compounds (HTlcs) or hydrotalcites. They are layered compounds composed by metal hydroxide sheet with positive charge and interlayer space filled with anion with negative electric charge ( Raw materials used for synthesis of CAC-LDHs include Co(NO A series of CAC-LDHs samples was synthesized by co-precipitation methods ( Solution A was prepared by dissolving Mg and Al nitrate salts with different mol concentration such as [Co(NO Solution B has sodium carbonate [Na Three samples having Co:Al mol ratio (2:1, 3:1 and 4:1) were prepared under crystallization temperature of 120 Four samples having Co:Al mol ratio 3:1 were prepared under different temperatures(100 Six samples having Co:Al mol ratio 3:1 were prepared under different crystallization time (0.5 Two samples having Co:Al mol ratio 3:1 were prepared in water and mixture of water–ethanol (water/ethanol All samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Model D-2 diffractometer (CuKα radiation, λ A lubrication oil (CD15W-40, with viscosity of 15.02 Friction and wear experiments were carried out using a MR5-10A four-ball friction tester. Steel balls are Cr15 steel having hardness of 59–61 HRC. Operation parameters of the tester are rotation speed of 1200 The power consumption of driving motor was measured using Model 8705B power meter, whereas oil temperature was measured using Model JM222 thermometer during both the gear friction test and air compressor test. The XRD patterns and lattice parameters ( In the samples having higher Co/Al mol ratios (4:1), synthesized products contain both CAC-LDHs and Co(OH) It can be seen that only CAC-LDHs exist in products at crystallization temperatures of 100 XRD data( Following quantitative relation can be identified between crystallization time (h) and crystallinity (x) of products through matching: Test results show that CAC-LDHs crystals with perfect sheet shapes have been produced in both of water media and water–ethanol media, but the sample prepared in water media was found having larger disk diameter (200–300 On the basis of the above results on various synthetic parameters, water–ethanol solution with Co/Al mol ratio of 3:1, crystallization temperature of 120 The FT-IR spectra of CAC-LDHs prepared with optimized synthetic conditions are shown in  CAC-LDHs synthesized in this paper have a large pore volume (0.14   Above tests indicate that CAC-LDHs can significantly reduce friction coefficient, wear of friction pairs, temperature of lubrication oil and power consumption of driving motor; this is similar to that which is observed for Iayer structure minerals such as serpentine( Co-precipitation method has been employed to synthesize Co–Al–CO This project was sponsored by the