Introduction
                  Proper anatomic tuberosity reduction and restoration of humeral height during surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures leads to fewer complications and better outcomes. In the presence of significant displacement and comminution in proximal humerus fractures, the assessment of the correct tuberosity position and humeral height can be challenging. The goal of this cadaveric study was to provide new and useful measurements for intraoperative guidance of proper tuberosity position and humeral height when treating proximal humerus fractures with open reduction internal fixation, anatomic hemiarthroplasty, or reverse total shoulder arthroplasty.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 28 cadaveric shoulders were dissected with a deltopectoral approach. The distance between the insertion of the supraspinatus tendon and the superior aspect of the deltoid tendon was measured (cuff to deltoid distance [CDD]). Secondly, the distance between the superior aspects of the pectoralis major tendon to the medial aspect of the anatomic neck (PND) was measured. Further, we sought to determine if these measurements would correlate to patient height and differ between gender.
               
                  Results
                  The average age of the donors was 65.3 years (64% male). The CDD and PND were 87.6 ± 10.6 and 16.6 ± 6.9 mm, respectively (mean ± standard deviation). There were no differences between females and males for the CDD (86.9 ± 9.4 vs. 87.2 ± 15.2 mm, P = .96) and PND (16.3 ± 9.1 vs. 17.1 ± 5.9 mm, P = .76). There was no correlation between the cadaver height and CDD (R2 = 0.1) and PND (R2 = 0.3).
               
                  Discussion
                  In this study, we describe 2 new measurement tools that can readily be applied intraoperatively during surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures to aid in tuberosity reduction and humeral height assessment. These measurements were found to be independent of patient height and gender and can be used as a reference tool for most patients.Although surgical treatment of severe proximal humerus fractures can be treated with a variety of techniques that include open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF), hemiarthroplasty (HA), and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RSA), the literature supports that anatomic reduction and healing of the tuberosities can improve patient outcomes. In surgical treatment of proximal humerus factures with ORIF, anatomic reduction of the facture fragments can be difficult in the setting of displacement and comminution. The malunion of the tuberosities can occur from poor initial reduction, secondary fracture displacement from poor fixation, and/or poor protection/stability leading to secondary displacement. The difficulty of tuberosity reduction and humeral component height is also a challenge when using HA as the primary surgical treatment option in complex proximal humerus fractures. Prior studies have shown poor results with HA when the tuberosities are not satisfactorily restored. Reverse shoulder arthroplasty has grown as a popular treatment option for elderly patients with proximal humerus fractures. In both HA and RSA, humeral stem vertical positioning (height) is essential to allowing for anatomic restoration of the tuberosities because the tuberosity is attached to the implant. In addition, correct tuberosity positioning provides adequate soft tissue tension and prevents the complication of instability when using either HA or RSA for fracture treatment. Unfortunately, in the setting of proximal humerus fracture bone loss and comminution, it may be difficult to visually identify all the corresponding fracture fragments to achieve an anatomic reduction of the tuberosity. In such settings, usage and knowledge of important anatomic landmarks are helpful. Our cadaveric study set out to provide a consistent and reliable measurement that surgeons could use intraoperatively to assist in determining proper anatomic reduction of tuberosity fractures and achievement of native humeral height in the setting of operative fixation and/or arthroplasty. We hypothesized that the distance between the superior aspect of the deltoid insertion and the anterior portion of the supraspinatus footprint (superior edge of the greater tuberosity)—the cuff to deltoid distance (CDD)—can be a reliable marker for re-establishing the native anatomic relationship between tuberosity and humeral shaft. Further, we hypothesized that a similar relationship can be identified between the superior aspect of the pectoralis major tendon and the medial aspect of the humeral anatomic neck (PND) to appreciate the native humeral height. In the setting of severe proximal humerus fractures, knowledge of this anatomic relationship can be used by surgeons to achieve proper humeral height positioning, anatomic reduction of tuberosities, and native tensioning balance of the deltoid and rotator cuff muscles. We dissected 28 adult shoulders in 20 fresh cadavers. Of the cadavers, 18 were male and 9 were female, with 1 unknown gender. The mean age of morality was 65.3 years. The cadaver height was 169.1 cm inches and the weight was 79.6 kg on average. Causes of mortality included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (2), cancer (11), dementia (2), cerebrovascular disease (2), cardiovascular disease (4), and infection (2), with 4 deaths from unknown causes. None of the cadavers had prior shoulder surgery that would affect the measurements in this study ( The shoulder specimens were secured in an upright position to simulate a beach chair position. Dissection was performed using a standard deltopectoral incision. The pectoralis major tendon and deltoid insertion were identified and preserved. The clavipectoral fascia was divided, and the subscapularis tendon was exposed. A biceps tenotomy was performed along with a subscapularis peel to expose the glenohumeral joint. The subsequent anatomic measurements were made by 2 board certified orthopedic surgeons with advanced training in shoulder arthroplasty. The anterior aspect of the supraspinatus footprint was marked using a surgical marker. The highest point at which the deltoid tendon inserts in neutral rotation was identified and marked. The distance between these 2 points was designated the CDD. This distance was measured with a digital caliper while the shoulder was in neutral rotation ( With the shoulder in neutral position, the superior aspect of the pectoralis tendon was identified. The medial aspect of the anatomic neck at the margin of the articular surface (representing the medial aspect of a standard humeral head cut) was then identified. From this anatomic neck position, a horizontal line is drawn in a lateral direction that is parallel to the pectoralis tendon. The linear distance between both sites was measured using a digital caliper. This was designated the PND distance ( Statistical analysis was performed and the Anderson-Darling normality test was used to confirm that the distances measured in our sample had a normal distribution. The Student There were a total of 28 cadaveric specimens for analysis with 20 specimens being matched pairs from 10 donors. The mean distance from the rotator cuff insertion to the deltoid insertion (CDD) was 87.6 ± 10.6 mm. There was a low amount of correlation between the CDD and the cadaver height in both matched and unmatched analysis ( The mean distance from the pectoralis tendon to the medial border of the anatomic neck (PND) was 16.6 ± 6.9 mm. Again, there was little correlation between this distance and the specimen height ( This cadaveric study describes 2 unique measurements that may be used in the setting of surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures. We found that the CDD and PND were consistent measures that are not influenced by patient height or gender. This relative relationship between the anatomical sites can be clinically applied when performing ORIF, HA, or RSA for proximal humerus fractures ( Anatomic restoration of humeral height and the greater tuberosity is important in ORIF as inadequate reduction can lead to a symptomatic malunion. In the elderly population with proximal humerus fractures, the use of an arthroplasty option has grown with RSA surpassing HA between 2009 and 2016. Implant height and version are critically important for outcomes of both HA and RSA. The ability to restore ideal implant height during RSA can be challenging in the setting of complex proximal humerus fractures. Implant broaches can be used to estimate stem retroversion based on the epicondylar axis. However, ideal stem height is more difficult to determine. This same challenge is noted in the setting of HA for fracture. In an attempt to provide some guidance during HA for fracture, Murachovsky et al Common complications after RSA include instability, scapular notching, infection, glenoid loosening, and others. The rate of clinical and radiographic complication has been reported between 10% and 67%. This study is not without limitations. As with all cadaveric studies, the conditions may not perfectly simulate in vivo conditions. Surgical conditions and severe soft tissue injury and bone comminution may restrict the ability to make such measurements. The PND distance has also noted to have large amount of variability in its standard deviation in comparison to its mean value that may limit its application in clinical care. Although these measurements provide useful guides during shoulder arthroplasty for fracture, specific implant features may dictate alternative methods. In addition, other tools for estimation should be used in conjunction to verify position. Such tools include contralateral humeral measurements, intraoperative assessment of tensioning and tuberosity placement, intraoperative use of fluoroscopy, contact and positioning between the tuberosity and humeral shaft. The CDD and PND could be potentially measured on the contralateral shoulder for a greater degree of patient-specific precision. These contralateral measurements on computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging would be subject to the imaging modalities’ inherent side effects and magnificent errors (radiation for computed tomography and magnification errors for magnetic resonance imaging) but would be an area of interest for future study. In conclusion, we were able to determine a unique set of measurements between anatomic landmarks that are predictable and easy to identify at the time of surgery. We believe that using the CDD and PND can serve as an intraoperative guide in the setting of significant displacement and comminution of proximal humerus fracture fragments to help achieve improved anatomic reduction and/or placement of HA/RSA components. These measurements were found to be independent of patient height and gender and therefore may be applicable to the generalized population. In this study, we describe the CDD and PND as 2 new measurement tools that can readily be applied intraoperatively during ORIF, HA, or RSA for management of proximal humerus fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.