The present work compares the flotation recoveries of silica at different particle sizes with oscillatory air supply and conventional steady air supply. The flotation tests were carried out at continuous mode using a 50 mm diameter column equipped with a sparger. Bubble size and gas holdup were measured in the presence and absence of silica particles. The results showed that converting steady air supply to oscillatory air supply could lead to significant improvement of flotation recovery at all particle size fractions tested in the present work, including a 54% increase in flotation recovery for ultrafine particles (−10 μm) and an extension of the upper limit of particle size. The improvement of flotation recovery was linked to decreased bubble size and increased gas holdup. The present study has important implications for research on fine and coarse particle flotation.Froth flotation can effectively process mineral particles in a limited size range, typically 20–150 μm ( A recent research progress in bubble generation shows that microbubbles can be generated by passing oscillatory air flow through a sparger ( To date, no research has been performed to investigate the influence of OAS on mineral flotation at different particle sizes. A fundamental study by For the first time, the present work compares the flotation recoveries of pure silica at various particle size fractions under oscillatory and steady air supply modes and quantitatively reports the changes in bubble size caused by replacing SAS with OAS, under the flotation condition. The changes in flotation recoveries were compared to those of bubble size, and the implications of the present work on mineral flotation practice were discussed. Fine silica (>99.9% pure) was purchased from Sibelco Australia. The silica sample was screened into different size fractions to investigate the flotation performance as a function of particle size. An ether amine, 3-(2-Ethylhexyloxy) propylamine (>98.0% pure, TCI chemicals, Japan) was used as collector and frother, and acetic acid (>99% pure, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was used to neutralize the ether amine (at 20% w/w) in aqueous solution to increase its solubility (  A solenoid valve (Festo, Germany) was used to change the flow pattern of air supply from steady to oscillatory. The settings that can be adjusted included the switching frequency and the on/off time ratio within every switching cycle. More detailed information on this solenoid valve can be found elsewhere ( An Anglo Platinum Bubble Sizer (StoneThree, South Africa) was used to measure the mean Sauter diameter of air bubbles in the pulp phase. The bubble sizer was equipped with a sampling tube of outside diameter 2.54 cm and a viewing chamber. During measurement, the sampling tube’s lower end was placed 11 cm above the sparger. The tube directed bubbles to the chamber under non-isokinetic conditions and the bubbles would disperse in a monolayer manner inside the chamber to minimize the number of overlapping bubbles in the images. A camera placed vertically against the chamber was used to capture the images of the bubbles. The images were analyzed using the specialist StoneThree software installed on a laptop computer to derive the bubble size. Color and texture were used as the features to describe the surface froth in the StoneThree software. The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) principle was applied in the software to enhance the extraction of the features from the froth images and convert the signals to bubble size ( The flotation tests were carried out at continuous mode. For each test, 0.5 kg of silica with 9.5 kg of water was mixed and agitated in a 15-litre conditioning sump with the neutralized collector at a dosage of 500 g/t for 10 min prior to the start of flotation. Other preparation stages before starting the flotation were as follows: The column was pre-filled with water. The solenoid valve was turned on and run at a frequency of 40 Hz and an on/off time ratio of 0.5. The reason for selecting this valve setting can be found elsewhere ( The feed was pumped to the column at a flowrate of 0.94 l/min and the flowrate of the discharge at the bottom of the column was regulated to maintain the froth depth at 10 cm for all the tests. At steady state whose attainment would require a waiting period of up to twice particle residence time as confirmed by preliminary tests, sample collection for each of the concentrate and tailings streams was carried out for 2 min. The collected samples were dried and weighed. The sampling tube attached to the bubble sizer was inserted to the flotation column immediately after flotation samples were collected and the images of bubbles were then captured. For each run, at least 25 images were captured. The tube was removed before conducting the next flotation test. The pulp height with and without aeration was measured to determine the gas holdup (  The significant improvement of flotation recovery at each particle size fraction tested in the present work, with converting SAS to OAS, was confirmed by a  A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was taken for the entire data set of flotation recovery, and the results suggested that the flow pattern of air supply, the size of solid particles, and their interaction all had significant impact on flotation recovery (with the p-value being 0 for air supply pattern, 0 for particle size, and 0.04 for the interaction).  It appeared that there was no correlation between bubble size and particle size, and in both air supply modes the bubble sizes with particles were close to that without particles. Further analysis based on the one-way analysis of variance (for determining whether there are any statistically significant differences between the means of these four groups of data collected at a given air supply mode) suggested that the presence of particles and particle size had no impact on bubble size (with the A two-way ANOVA for the entire data set of bubble size confirmed that the particle size was not statistically significant (with the p-value being 0.74) whereas the flow pattern of air supply was significant (with the p-value being 0). The interaction was not significant (with the p-value being 0.84). The average of all bubble sizes measured with SAS was 1.7 mm while the counterpart with OAS was 1.2 mm; converting SAS to OAS led to a 44% decrease in bubble size.  Note that the bubble sizes with OAS were approximately 11 times the aperture size of sparger (i.e., 105 μm) whereas in the work of Reducing bubble size with decreased bubble rising velocity could also increase gas holdup in the flotation pulp phase, which can improve flotation recovery. Note, however, that a two-way analysis of variance for the entire data set of gas holdup suggested that the flow pattern of air supply had a significant effect on gas holdup (with the p-value being 0.0005). It also suggested that neither particle size nor the interaction was significant (with the p-values being 0.22 and 0.16, respectively). When only the data set of gas holdup collected with SAS was taken into consideration, a one-way ANOVA confirmed that the presence of solid particles and their size had no significant impact on gas holdup, with the p-value being 0.99. In contrast, The present work studied the effect of oscillatory air supply on flotation recovery of silica at six different particle size fractions. The results were compared with those obtained using steady air supply. It was found that at each particles size fraction under study, the flotation recovery was significantly increased by converting the flow pattern of air supply from steady to oscillatory. The improvement of flotation recovery was linked to decreased bubble size and increased gas holdup. The gas holdup and bubble size measured in the present work were indifferent to the presence of silica particles and their size. The authors gratefully thank