The processes of calcination and alkaline leaching were applied to treat a zinc oxide ore, smithsonite (ZnCO3). The phase evolution in the calcination was studied, as well as the effect factors on the leaching rate of Zn, such as calcination temperature, alkaline concentration, phase ratio of liquid to solid (L/S), leaching temperature and leaching time. It was found that the ZnCO3 had completely decomposed into ZnO when calcined for 2h at 400°C and the Zn leaching rate of ores calcined at 400°C could be over 92% with 20% (6.25mol/L) sodium hydroxide and a phase ratio of 80:1 for 4h at 100°C.Zinc sulfide ores which can be easily separated from gangue and upgraded by flotation are the most important source of zinc conventionally. As the secondary minerals, zinc oxide ores whose zinc-bearing minerals are mainly various carbonate and silicates minerals, such as smithsonite (ZnCO It is found that zinc oxide ore is hard to upgrade by flotation for its complex mineral phase of intergrowth, and it is effective by volatilization, but heavy pollution and high capital investment ( As an amphoteric oxide, ZnO dissolves in the aqueous alkali, while many other metal elements deposit. So the aqueous alkali has been considered as leaching reagent to treat the zinc oxide ores ( In this work, we carry out a new process to increase the leaching rate of Zn from smithsonite. Before the leaching processes, the ores were calcined and decomposed into ZnO. Its activity is higher in the alkaline solution than that of ZnCO The zinc oxide ores used in this study were obtained from Lanping town in Yunnan Province of China. The ore samples were ground to less than 150 The smithsonite ores were calcined before the leaching processes. The ores were ground to less than 150 Leaching experiments were conducted in a polypropylene (PP) beaker. A bigger glass beaker as water bath was placed on a thermostatically controlled magnetic stirrer. A series of sodium hydroxide solution with concentration from 5% to 20% were prepared as leaching agent and put into the PP beaker. Calcined ore was added into the sodium hydroxide solution according to the desired L/S, and the PP beaker was covered by plastic film to keep the volume of solution constant. The leaching temperature was kept from room temperature to 100 When the leaching experiment was over, the solid–liquid separation process was carried out by centrifugation. The residue was washed with deionized water. Zn content in the filtrate was analyzed with AAS. It is worth mentioning that the filtrate should be acidified and diluted properly before analyzing the Zn content. In the kinetic tests, the ore calcined at 400 The leaching rate of Zn was calculated according to the following formula: The smithsonite ores ground to less than 150 The effect of calcination temperature on the leaching rate of Zn was studied. The ores calcined at various temperatures were leached in the 20% sodium hydroxide solution with a liquid to solid ratio of 80:1 for 4 The alkaline concentration plays a very important role in the Zn leaching process. A series of experiments with various alkaline concentrations were carried out for 4 In this reaction, there is an equilibrium between Phase ratio of liquid to solid is another important factor to influence the contact chance of hydroxyl ions with zinc oxide. These experiments were carried out in 20% NaOH solution for 4 The ores calcined at 400 Based on the Arrhenius activation energy theory, the plot of ln The effect of leaching time on the Zn leaching rate was also examined in this work, and these experiments were carried out with a phase ratio of 80:1 in 20% NaOH solution at 100 It would be more efficient to leach Zn from ores in the alkaline solution, if the smithsonite could be calcined into ZnO before the leaching process. The key point is that the calcination temperature should be controlled strictly. When the temperature is 400 In the alkaline leaching, zinc oxide combines with hydroxyl ions to form coordination ions This work was financially supported by the