The role of slurry rheology in stirred media milling of quartzite has been investigated by varying important grinding parameters such as media bead density and size, addition of chemicals, solids concentration, stirrer rotational speed as well as the combined effect of these factors. Media bead density has an evident but complex effect on stirred milling performance, depending on stirrer rotational speed and solids concentration. The effect of media bead size on the ultra-fine grinding of quartzite is relevant to the feed size. Optimal ratio of media bead size to the median size of a feed is between 150 and 200. The combined effect of grinding bead size and stirrer speed or solids concentration is insignificant. The addition of Dispersant S40 or a lower solids concentration results in better grinding performance (i.e., a higher energy efficiency and a smaller median size) due to the maintenance of lower viscosities at shear rates investigated during grinding. Stirrer rotational speed interacts with solids concentration. For a given solids concentration, an optimal stirrer speed exists. The observed phenomena can be explained by the interaction of slurry rheology and the stress intensity of individual grinding bead.
                  In addition, an empirical particle size-energy model provides a good fit (R
                     2
                     >0.904) to the grinding results under the experimental conditions investigated. Furthermore, the wear of grinding media beads is involved. ZrO2 beads have a lowest wear rate whereas the wear of SiO2 beads is most serious. The wear rate of Al2O3 beads is related to bead size.Due to some advanced properties of ultra-fine powders, such as surface chemistry, packing characteristics, strength, optical properties and reaction kinetics, and an increasing demand for ultra-fine powders for industries, wet ultra-fine grinding has found increased use in many fields such as minerals, ceramic materials, pigments, chemical products, microorganisms, pharmaceutics, papermaking. Most of the mills used in wet ultra-fine grinding are stirred media mills due to their high unit throughput and energy efficiency ( From a diagnostic point of view, the rheological behaviour of a mineral slurry is indicative of the level of interparticle interaction or aggregation in the slurry. Therefore, it is a useful variable to be controlled in industrial processes such as transportation of slurries, dewatering and wet grinding ( Since the product fineness significantly increases with grinding time in wet ultra-fine grinding operation characterized by a very fine product size and a high solids concentration, the surface properties tend to predominate in the system ( However there is still little understanding of slurry rheology relevant to wet ultra-fine grinding characterized by the presence of excessive fineness and a high slurry concentration due to the complex slurry rheological behaviours in stirred media mills ( A quartzite material (94.52% SiO A quartzite-water slurry was prepared at a predetermined solids concentration by the addition of 40 to 50 kg of quartzite powder into a certain amount of water to make up about 35 l of the slurry. The slurry was stirred as the quartzite powder was added to the water, and the stirring continued for 15 min after the completion of adding the quartzite powder to make the slurry uniform. If a given dispersant was necessary, the slurry was stirred again for 15 min after its addition to make the chemical disperse uniformly in the slurry. About 200 ml slurry was taken for each sample, which was used to analyse the particle size and distribution and to measure the rheological behaviour of the slurry. The rest of the quartzite slurry was used for grinding experiments. A stirred media mill utilized for the grinding experiments is PMH 5 TEX Drais mill (Draiswerk GmbH, Germany). It consists of a Φ150 The energy consumed by the mill was measured by an electrical meter named Micro VIP (Elcontrol Co., Italy). In this study, only the active power (kW) was recorded and used by considering the power factor. An active power reading was recorded every minute during each grinding pass, and about 10 readings were done for each pass. The mean active power of each pass is regarded as its real one. The mean active power, The specific surface area of a sample was measured by Flow Sorb II 2300 (Micromeritics Co. Ltd., USA), which is an instrument designed to take the measurements on bone-dried powders by N Energy efficiency or energy utilization, An X-ray Sedimentometer Sedigraph 5100D (Micromeritics Co. Ltd., USA) was used to analyze the particle size and distribution of samples. Its measurement range of particle size ranges from 0.1 to 300 μm, which is suitable for the samples in the study. A rotational viscometer called a Bohlin Visco 88 BV (Bohlin Reologi UK Ltd., United Kingdom) was used for the determination of slurry viscosities and shear stress–shear rate curves. It employs a concentric cylinder geometry with a rotating inner cylinder and a stationary outer cylinder. In this study, all samples were measured by the use of C30 system (C30 DIN), which has a gap width of 1.5 mm between the inner and outer cylinders and can provide a viscosity range of 0.007 to 6.18 Pa s. The inner cylinder has 8 different rotation speeds, from 20 to 1000 rpm, corresponding to a shear-rate range of 4 to 1200 s Slurry samples were aged for 4 h and then were shaken at an intensity of 225 min The effect of media dead density on the median size of a product at 65 wt.% solids concentration at three stirrer rotational speeds is shown in Media bead size is claimed to be a crucial operating parameter for ultra-fine grinding in stirred media mills, and determines the probability that particles are captured and sufficiently stressed for a given feed size. The median size of a product is regarded as a characteristic size and is used to calculate the ratio of media bead to feed sizes. The optimal ratio of media bead size to the median size of a feed is between 150 and 200 for 65 wt.% solids concentration. This ratio is far larger than 12:1 suggested by Chemicals have an important effect on wet ultra-fine grinding in stirred media mills since the addition of chemicals can modify the slurry rheology of ground slurry ( A small addition of a suitable dispersant is indispensable for wet ultra-fine grinding ( Although a higher solids concentration (i.e. 70 wt.%) gives a smaller average interparticle distance, which leads to a larger average number of stress events of each particle, 70 wt.% of solids concentration with 0.04 wt.% Dispersant S40 exhibits a larger viscosity than 65 wt.% in the range of shear rates studied during grinding ( Stirrer rotational speed is believed to be one of the most important factors in ultra-fine grinding, which is directly related to the stress intensity of individual grinding bead. Three stirrer rotational speeds were selected in the study by changing the pulley with different diameters on the motor shaft or the mill shaft. The speed was varied at 1204 rpm, 1808 rpm and 2255 rpm, and the corresponding peripheral speeds of the stirrer disks were 7.56 m/s, 11.36 m/s and 14.17 m/s, respectively. The effect of stirrer speed on grinding results at two solids concentrations with various types of grinding beads are shown in In classical grinding theory, the particle size of a ground product reduces with increasing net specific energy input in the form of a power-law function. The differential form of the power-law relationship between an infinitesimal specific energy input and an infinitesimal increase in the overall fineness of the product can be described by the following equation (  During the grinding in stirred media mills, not only the product particles are comminuted but also the surface of grinding beads is stressed and abraded, causing the mass of grinding beads decreased. To evaluate the wear of grinding beads, the mass of grinding beads is weighed before and after each grinding test, respectively, and the mass difference, Δ The effect of slurry rheology on stirred media milling of quartzite has been studied by varying important grinding parameters such as media bead density and size, addition of chemicals, solids concentration, stirrer rotational speed as well as the combined effect of these factors. Media bead density has an evident but complex effect on stirred milling performance, depending on stirrer rotational speed and solids concentration. The effect of media bead size on the ultra-fine grinding of quartzite is relevant to the feed size. Optimal ratio of media bead size to the median size of a feed is between 150 and 200. Grinding bead size insignificantly interacts with stirrer speed and solids concentration. The addition of Dispersant S40 or a lower solids concentration results in better grinding performance (i.e., a higher energy efficiency and a smaller median size) due to the maintenance of lower viscosities at shear rates investigated during grinding. The combined effect of stirrer rotational speed and solids concentration is evident. For a given solids concentration, an optimal stirrer speed exists. In addition, an empirical particle size-energy model provides a good fit ( The financial support from LKAB and Agricola Research Center (ARC), Luleå University of Technology, Sweden is acknowledged. Mr Anders Hägglund at LKAB is thanked for providing quartzite samples and fruitful discussions. The authors are also grateful to Dr. Britt-Marie Antti at the paper mill in Piteå (Kappa Kraftliner Piteå, Sweden) for providing the Bohlin Visco 88 BV viscometer.