Thousands of years ago people had learned how to build furnaces and use fire to melt rocks and produce metals but the use of aqueous solutions for ore processing came much later, mainly at the time of the alchemists when acids and alkalies became known and used. Modern hydrometallurgy, however, can be traced back to the end of the 19th century when two major operations were discovered: the cyanidation process for gold and silver extraction and the Bayer process for bauxite treatment. Later, in the 1940s, a breakthrough came during the Manhattan Project in USA in connection with uranium extraction. Since then, it has been advancing progressively and even replacing some pyrometallurgical processes. Canadian contribution is significant particularly in the recovery of uranium, nickel, cobalt, and zinc.The roots of hydrometallurgy may be traced back to the period of alchemists when the transmutation of base metals into gold was their prime occupation ( In the Middle Ages, certain soils containing putrefied organic matter were leached to extract saltpeter (= In the 16th century, the extraction of copper by wet methods received some attention. Heap leaching was practiced in the Harz mountains area in Germany and in Río Tinto mines in Spain. In these operations, pyrite containing some copper sulfide minerals was piled in the open air and left for months to the action of rain and air whereby oxidation and dissolution of copper took place. A solution containing copper sulfate was drained from the heap and collected in a basin. Metallic copper was then precipitated from this solution by scrap iron, a process that became known as “cementation process”, which is apparently derived from the Spanish “cementación” meaning precipitation. This is the same process that was already known to the alchemists and is still in operation today to an appreciable extent. In the 18th century, one of the most important industries in Quebec was the production of potash for export to France to satisfy the needs of the soap and glass industries. Before the invention of the Leblanc Process for the manufacture of Na The birth of modern hydrometallurgy dates back to 1887 when two important processes were invented. The first, the cyanidation process for treating gold ores, and the second, the Bayer Process for the production of alumina. The dissolving action of cyanide solution on metallic gold was known as early as 1783 by the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele ( The cyanidation process had already been applied to each mining district in the world and still its chemistry was very obscure. Its impact on hydrometallurgy had been tremendous. Extremely large reactors known as Dorr agitators in which the finely ground ore was agitated with the cyanide leaching agent and equipped with compressed air injection in the pulp had been designed and built by the metallurgical engineer John Dorr. Huge filtration plants designed to obtain clear leach solutions for metal recovery were similarly constructed. The ancient process known as cementation which was applied only for precipitating copper from solution by scrap iron was applied to gold solutions, iron being replaced by zinc. In spite of all these advances in engineering and the wide application of the process, the theory still remained lagging behind. As a result of introducing the cyanidation process worldwide, gold production increased greatly during the period 1900–1910 ( The second major hydrometallurgical process of this era was the process invented by Karl Josef Bayer (1847–1904) ( The process was originally developed to satisfy the needs of the textile industry since aluminum hydroxide was used as a mordant in dyeing cotton. It was only after the invention of the electrolytic aluminum process in 1886 that the process gained importance in metallurgy. Bayer's first contribution was in 1887 when he discovered that Al(OH) A few years earlier to Bayer's invention, Louis Le Chatelier (1815–1873) in France described a method for making Al At the beginning of the 20th century numerous leaching and recovery processes were proposed, some of them were put into practice, others had to wait for about half a century until they were applied, while others never developed beyond a pilot plant. When examining the patent literature at the beginning of this century it is remarkable to see the large variety of leaching agents proposed. In 1903, M. Malzac in France proposed the use of ammonia solutions for leaching sulfides of copper, nickel, and cobalt. At that time NH Towards the beginning of the 20th century, hydrometallurgy of copper received a particular attention. Oxide ores were leached on large scale by dilute sulfuric acid in Chile. Copper sulfides were also solubilized due to the presence of ferric ion which acted as an oxidizing agent. Instead of precipitating copper from leach solution by scrap iron in the usual way, electrowinning was used in Chile in 1912 ( In the 1940s, the technology of uranium production was introduced in connection with the Manhattan Project—a US project aimed at producing an atomic bomb. Numerous new techniques became suddenly used on large scale. Some of these are, for example, the use of Na In the 1950s, pressure hydrometallurgy was introduced for leaching sulfide concentrates (Sherritt-Gordon process), for laterites (Moa process) ( In the late 1950s INCO built a semi-commercial plant for treating its low-grade pentlandite–pyrrhotite concentrate based on oxidation to eliminate the sulfur content as SO In the 1960s, the role of bacteria in leaching became known and the widespread use of heap and in situ leaching for extracting copper was practiced. The same technique was later adopted for leaching low-grade uranium and gold ores. In the same period, as a result of de-classifying reports by the US Atomic Energy Commission, the application of organic solvents, mainly oximes, for extracting copper from solution was realized. At present, about 20% of the copper is now produced by hydrometallurgical technique ( In the 1970s the pressure leaching of zinc sulfide concentrates was applied industrially in Canada. The new process, which is essentially the same as that shown in Hydrometallurgy is vigorously competing with old pyrometallurgical techniques, and in some cases it has displaced such processes. For example: The sodium carbonate sintering process for treating bauxite developed in 1855 was displaced by the pressure leaching process in 1892. The pyrometallurgical route for zinc was displaced in 1970s by pressure leaching of ZnS followed by electrowinning of zinc from the purified zinc sulfate solution. There is a good opportunity that nickel sulfides could be treated by hydrometallurgical route similar to the ZnS process—elemental sulfur being obtained instead of SO The treatment of chalcopyrite concentrate by pressure leaching has been recently piloted by Phelps Dodge in Arizona as a new method competing with smelting. 