The Al alloy containing 18%Si, 5F%e and 1.5%Cu was spray-deposited using convergent–divergent nozzle geometry. Nitrogen gas was used as atomization medium. Microstructure and phase constitution of over-sprayed powders as well as spray deposit were studied. Spray-deposited alloy revealed 3- to 10-μm size particulates of primary Si phase co-existing with rectangular shape intermetallic β-Al5SiFe and δ-Al4Si2Fe phases. This is in contrast to as cast alloy that exhibit 90- to 150-μm size particulates of primary Si phase and 120- to 500-μm size rods of Al–Fe–Si base intermetallic phases. X-ray diffraction results depicted presence of only δ-Al4Si2Fe phase in over-sprayed powders, whereas, spray-deposited alloy consisted both δ-Al4Si2Fe and β-Al5SiFe phases. Energy-dispersive X-ray analysis also corroborates the presence of the above intermetallic phases. These results have been discussed in light of the mechanisms involved in the spray deposition process.The stringent requirements of automotive and aerospace industries have prompted design of newer materials with high strength to weight ratio, low coefficient of thermal expansion and high wear and corrosion resistance. Aluminum–silicon alloys containing other transition metals, particularly in hypereutectic composition regime, have created considerable interest in the recent years due to their prerequisite properties In the present investigation, aluminium alloy with nominal composition of Al–18%Si–5%Fe–1.5%Cu (wt.%) has been spray deposited and its microstructural features have been studied. A detailed study of phase constitution has also been carried out. The results have been discussed in light of mechanism involved in the evolution of microstructure during spray deposition. The details of spray forming setup used in the present investigation has been described elsewhere The over-sprayed powder particles show The above microstructural features could be understood in light of the mechanisms involved during spray deposition. A wide size range of droplets created during spray atomization is propelled to the substrate under the effect of high velocity gas jet. Droplets lose their heat to the atomization gas by convective heat transfer. These droplets therefore experience a cooling rate in rapid solidification regime≈10 Spray atomization and deposition processing of Al–18%Si–5%Fe–1.5%Cu alloy gives rise to an order of magnitude refinement and modification in the microstructure compared to as cast alloys. Development of long rods of intermetallic phases is hampered during spray deposition. High cooling rate experienced by atomized droplets gives rise to non-equilibrium δ-Al