This paper presents an analysis on the dynamic adsorption of frothers and collectors onto air bubbles in flotation. The analysis was carried out using the theory on the surfactant transfer by diffusion and adsorption. The bubble size was considered when solving the diffusion equation for the dynamic surface excess. The adsorption kinetics was modelled employing the Langmuir adsorption isotherm and its extension with the inclusion of the lateral interaction of the adsorbed molecules (the Frumkin adsorption isotherm). The numerical computation was applied to solve the governing equations. The dynamic adsorption of the surfactants was measured in terms of the dynamic surface tension for sodium dodecylbenzene sulphonate (SDBS) and Dowfroth 250, using pendant bubble tensiometry. The results show that, for air bubbles with diameter of the order of 1 mm, the bubble size effect on the dynamic surface tension is small and the solution of the diffusion equation for a planar gas–liquid surface can be used to describe the dynamic adsorption onto the air bubbles. The experimental data obtained with SDBS were well described by the Frumkin adsorption isotherm and the molecular diffusion. The model description for the experimental data obtained with Dowfroth 250 required the kinetic equations. The paper is relevant for the analysis of the role of the adsorbed surfactants in the bubble–particle attachment.Numerous inorganic and organic reagents (surface active agents or surfactants) are employed in flotation to improve the selectivity and recovery of valuable minerals. The presence of these surfactants influences the properties of both the air–water and solid–water interfaces, and ultimately determines the interaction between particles and bubbles in the collection process. For this reason, it is important to understand how the surfactants adsorb onto the interfaces. When surfactants react with water, the water dipoles combine readily with the polar groups and hydrate them, but there is practically no reaction with the non-polar hydrocarbon group, the tendency being to force the latter into the air phase. Thus, the heteropolar structure of the surfactant molecule leads to its adsorption. Frother molecules concentrate at the surface layer with the non-polar groups oriented towards the air and the polar groups towards the water. Molecules of ionising collectors strongly adsorb at the water–mineral interface with the non-polar groups oriented towards the water and polar groups towards the mineral surface. Therefore, the major role of the collectors is to make the mineral surface less water wetted (hydrophobic). Alcohols and related compounds such as the glycol ethers are most widely used as frothers, largely because of their inability to adsorb at mineral particles. Ionic collectors are in many respects chemically similar to frothers and, indeed, many of the collectors, such as oleates, sulphates and sulphonates, are powerful frothers, being in fact too powerful to be used as efficient frothers, since the froths which they produce can be too stable to allow efficient transport to further processing. The adsorption of both the frothers and collectors at the gas–liquid interface leads to: Decrease in the bubble size, resulting in the increase in the specific area of the gas–liquid interface for the particle attachment. Adsorbed frother molecules prevent bubbles from coalescence. Decrease in the bubble rise velocity (decrease the interface mobility, the bubble size) and the bubble residence time. Increase in the stability of the froth phase for carrying hydrophobic particles to the concentrate. In addition, the adsorbed frother molecules at the gas–liquid interface can also increase the efficiency of the bubble–particle attachment as shown some time ago by The dynamic adsorption of surfactant onto the gas–liquid interface is determined by two steps, involving (1) the molecular diffusion of the surfactant molecules from the bulk solution to the subsurface layer at the interface and (2) the actual adsorption of the surfactant molecules from the subsurface layer onto the interface. The modelling will be developed based on these two characteristic steps. The molecular diffusion of surfactants is well described by the diffusion equation (Fick's law) For a planar gas–liquid interface, the partial differential Eq. The use of Eq. The bubble geometry and the boundary conditions used to solve Eq. The distribution of the surfactant concentration around the bubble surface now can be determined by taking the inverse Laplace transform of Eq. The dynamic surface excess, The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. The adsorption of surfactant molecules from the subsurface layer is usually described by the Langmuir adsorption isotherm ( There exist a number of extensions to the Langmuir adsorption theory. Firstly, the interaction among the adsorbed molecules can be included, and leads to the Frumkin adsorption isotherm ( Eqs. Both Eqs. In practice, the adsorption from the subsurface layer need not be instantaneous and may be controlled by the adsorption kinetics itself. For this case, the local equilibrium is no longer applied and the dynamic adsorption is known as kinetics-controlled adsorption. The generalized adsorption kinetics gives ( Numerical computation is required to solve the governing Eqs. For diffusion-controlled dynamic adsorption, Eq. For kinetics-controlled dynamic adsorption, Eq. Eqs. The surfactants used to study the dynamic adsorption included sodium dodecylbenzene sulphate (SDBS) (Aldrich, Germany), which is used as an anionic collector, and Dowfroth 250 (Dow Chemical, USA), which is a mixture of polyglycols used as a flotation frother. The surfactants were used without any further purification. A Millipore Milli-Q water purification system was used to rinse all components and to make all solutions. The Millipore system provides water with a surface tension of about 72 mN/m. All glassware and components used in the experiments were soaked for several hours in 6% (by volume) solutions of Deconex 15E (Borer, Switzerland), rinsed in the Milli-Q water and dried in a cabinet to protect them from dust. The needles were also cleaned using a dichromate mixture and then sonicated repeatedly in the Milli-Q water. All surfactant solutions were freshly prepared and used immediately. The dynamic adsorption was experimentally investigated by measuring the dynamic surface tension versus concentration using the pendant bubble method ( A Perspex cell was filled with the surfactant solution and placed in the path of a collimated light beam. A bubble was formed on an inverted needle immersed in the solution. The light beam cast a bubble shape onto a CCD camera. The image was recorded and stored in a computer for further image analysis. The bubble was rapidly formed using a gas-tight microsyringe, which was motorized and fully controlled by a computer. Typically, a droplet with volume of approximately 11 μL was formed within a time less than 0.5 s. The camera was set to strobe, thereby obtaining the bubble shape as a function of time. Images of the bubbles were taken at the frequency of 50 Hz. The bubble shapes were digitised and analysed off-line. The digitised bubble profiles were fitted numerically with the Young–Laplace equation to obtain the surface tension value. The surface tension corresponding to each bubble image was found. The system was calibrated using the outer diameter of the inverted needle. Checks on the calibration were performed at regular intervals by measuring the surface tension of purified Milli-Q water. The time difference between the first recorded image and the starting time ( Typical results for the dependence of dynamic surface tension on the bubble size are shown in  A previous investigation using the pendant drop method ( It can be seen from The effect of the bubble radius on the diffusion-kinetic-mixed mechanism for dynamic adsorption was also investigated by matching the models with the dynamic surface tension measured for Dowfroth 250. The results are shown in Both the theoretical analysis and the experimental data presented in this paper show that the dynamic surface tension and the dynamic adsorption onto micrometer size bubbles are not significantly influenced by the bubble size. Therefore, the dynamic adsorption of surfactants in flotation can be effectively analysed using the theories applied to the planar gas–liquid interface. In particular, the last term on the right hand side of Eq. The dynamic adsorption of collectors and frothers onto the air bubble surface was theoretically analysed using the molecular diffusion and the surfactant adsorption processes. The governing equations were solved for the dynamic surface excess of surfactants, which was described in terms of the experimentally measured dynamic surface tension. The adsorption kinetics was modelled using the Langmuir and Frumkin adsorption isotherms. The dynamic adsorption of the surfactants was measured for the dynamic surface tension of sodium dodecylbenzene sulphonate and Dowfroth 250 frother using pendant bubble tensiometry. The measurements of the dynamic surface tension were carried out using the pendant bubble method. The theoretical analysis using the bubble radius, The authors acknowledge the Australia Research Council for financial support.