Radial neck fractures account for 1% of elbow injuries in children. A 17-year-old right hand dominant female fell heavily onto her outstretched right arm. She developed a painful elbow and radiographs taken in the emergency department demonstrated a fracture of the right radial neck with 50° of angulation ( Five days after injury a closed reduction was attempted, but failed. An attempt was then made to reduce the radial head using a percutaneous Kirschner wire under fluoroscopic guidance. It was possible to improve the position, but the reduction could not be maintained once the wire was withdrawn. The radio-humeral joint was the explored via the lateral approach. A radial neck fracture with subchondral comminution was noted. There was an intact periosteal sleeve on the posterior, medial and anterior aspect of the fracture. A decision was made to reduce and fix the fracture using calcium phosphate cement (Norian SRS, Stratec, UK). A temporary subchondral K wire was introduced and the radial head fragment was held in the reduced position by an assistant. The defect between the head and shaft was then cleaned of debris and irrigated. Once the fracture void was clean the defect was the filled with 3 The postoperative radiographs indicated a satisfactory reduction had been achieved. The patient was maintained in a plaster backslab for comfort for a period of 10 days, and then referred for physiotherapy. Three months after the injury the reduction had been maintained ( A 25-year-old male right hand dominant call centre worker fell onto to his outstretched left hand whilst under the influence of alcohol. He presented to the emergency department the following day with pain and swelling around his elbow. On examination he kept his arm in 90° of flexion, and had was unable to pronate or supinate. Plain film radiographs revealed a fracture of the left radial neck with 60° of angulation ( A decision was made to internally fix the fracture and this was undertaken 3 days post injury. A direct lateral Kocher approach was made inferior to the lateral ligament. The annular ligament was lifted off the ulna, and the radial head was exposed, revealing a medial metaphyseal defect. The radial head was reduced and held with manual pressure and the defect was filled with calcium phosphate cement. A satisfactory reduction was achieved. The patient was discharged home in a plaster backslab, which was removed on the 10th postoperative day, after which he was referred to physiotherapy. At his final clinic appointment 7 months post operatively, he had a full, pain free range of elbow flexion-extension, and forearm pronation–supination. His final check radiographs demonstrated no loss of reduction ( A 52-year-old right female hand dominant sign language teacher, sustained a fall directly onto her elbow whilst out walking her dog. She presented to the emergency department the same day, complaining of lateral elbow pain and stiffness. On examination she had pain and tenderness over the proximal radius, and plain radiographs revealed a displaced radial neck fracture with 60° of angulation ( The decision was made to undergo internal fixation, which took place 2 days post injury. A lateral approach was used, the radial head exposed and reduced, and held in place with a single K-wire. The resultant defect in the radial neck was then filled with 2.5 The patient was discharged on the second postoperative day, and was kept in a plaster backslab for a further 10 days, at which point she was referred to physiotherapy. The patient made a steady recovery and 4 months later had a full and pain free range of elbow flexion–extension and forearm pronation–supination, and was back to her work with no problems. Radiographs at the time of discharge time showed maintenance of the reduction ( Calcium phosphate cements of various types have become popular in the management of metaphyseal fractures. Good clinical results have been reported in studies of distal radial fractures, The technique we describe has a number of advantages in treatment of displaced radial neck fractures. Only a limited exposure is required to insert the cement, minimising the risk of iatrogenic nerve injury. The surgery is technically straightforward since the subchondral defect was contained by a sleeve of periosteum on the anterior, medial and posterior aspects of the fracture which allowed the cement be injected into a contained space from the lateral aspect. A very stable reduction was achieved in each case, allowing for early mobilisation. All the material is confined to the subchondral defect and there is therefore no mechanical impingement to pronation and supination, which was rapidly regained postoperatively in all cases. Experimental work in a dog model The use of calcium phosphate cement has proved a safe implant with good results in other anatomic locations. This series demonstrates it may be very useful role in the treatment of angulated radial neck fractures. On the basis of our experience, it has proved to be both a simple and effective way of treating these fractures, with no adverse clinical outcomes noted. This is a potentially very useful addition to existing indications for use of this material. Further clinical experience is required to corroborate our observations.