This study demonstrates the use of silver nanoparticles coated resin beads in deactivating microbes in drinking water in a column filtration system. The coated resin beads are characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infra-red (FT-IR), scanning electron microscope (SEM), transmission electron microscope (TEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to confirm the functional groups, morphology and the presence of silver nanoparticles on the surface of the resin. The performance of the coated resin is evaluated as a function of bed mass, initial bacterial concentration and flow rate using Escherichia coli as model microbial contaminant in water. The survival curves of E. coli are expressed as breakthrough curves (BTCs), which are modeled using sigmoidal regression equations to obtain relevant rate parameters. The number of bed volumes processed at breakthrough point and capacity of the bed are used as performance indicators. Results show that performance increases with a decrease in initial bacterial concentration, an increase in flow rate and an increase in bed mass.Water-borne diseases are a direct indication of deterioration of water quality. The greatest water-borne risk to human health is microbial contamination of drinking water sources, leading to disease outbreaks To prevent or reduce the risk of waterborne diseases, many water utilities use disinfection processes. Chemical and physical processes such as chlorination Nanotechnology is considered as a new generation of technology, is revolutionary and will impact on economies through new consumer products, manufacturing methods and materials usage Several studies have shown the use of silver nanoparticles coated on various substrates. For instance, silver nanoparticles were incorporated in materials such as montmorillonites Consequently, in this study polystyrene resin beads were coated with silver nanoparticles and were applied in deactivating Rohm and Haas Amberlite-IR-120 (hydrogen form) cation resin used in the study was purchased from Lenntech (Johannesburg, South Africa). Silver nitrate and reducing agent sodium borohydride was purchased from Merck (South Africa). Nutrient broth and agar were also purchased from Merck. The microbial strain used for the inactivation experiments was Silver was coated on the cation resin beads by modifying the method described by Nath et al. The structure of the resin beads was characterized by using an ALPHA Fourier transformed infra-red (FT-IR) spectrometer (Bruker Optics GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany), on the attenuated total reflection (ATR) diamond crystal at 4  Contaminated water containing Bacterial contaminated water at initial concentration of 6 The mass of silver coated resin material was kept constant at 15 Two environmental water samples (groundwater) were collected from Delmas boreholes in Mpumalanga Province of South Africa. In the dynamic experiments, the water was pumped vertically upward at a flow rate of 2 Samples from the effluent were collected in sterile conical flasks at known time intervals of 60 Non-linear sigmoidal regression models are utilized to fit and extract model parameters. When The general form of the logistic equation used to analyze breakthrough data is: The models described in Eqs. When operating a fixed bed column, the objective is to reduce the concentration of a given contaminant to a value below the maximum allowable concentration. For a given bed mass the performance is directly related to the number of bed volumes processed before the breakthrough point (point when The rate of at which the antibacterial material become exhausted indicates how often the material is replaced and the operating costs involved. The antibacterial material exhaustion rate (AER) is defined as the mass of antibacterial material exhausted per volume of water treated at breakthrough point and is expressed as: Low value of AER indicates good performance of the bed and is the main performance indicator for comparing different operating conditions. The FT-IR spectra shown in Elemental composition and morphology of resin coated with silver nanoparticles were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) assisted with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis (EDS). Operating parameters such as bed mass, flow rate and initial bacterial loading are very important when designing a column for water treatment. In this study the effects of these parameters for water disinfection by resin beads coated with silver nanoparticles were investigated. By varying the bed mass of the resin media coated with silver nanoparticles and fixing the flow rate and initial bacterial loading in the influent, the amount of active sites in the material available and the contact time between bacteria and the antibacterial material are increased. In this experimental run, the initial Contaminated water was pumped in an upward flow mode at an average volumetric flow rate of 2, 5,7 and 10 The bacterial concentration in contaminated water can have a very wide range of variation depending on the nature of the source water. As such it is important to know how a given media will perform under such conditions. Consequently, the influent contaminated water at three different initial concentrations of 6.6 Two borehole water samples coded A4 and A7 with  The authors acknowledge the