For many real data, long term observation consists of different processes that coexist or occur one after the other. Those processes very often exhibit different statistical properties and thus before the further analysis the observed data should be segmented. This problem one can find in different applications and therefore new segmentation techniques have been appeared in the literature during last years. In this paper we propose a new method of time series segmentation, i.e. extraction from the analysed vector of observations homogeneous parts with similar behaviour. This method is based on the absolute deviation about the median of the signal and is an extension of the previously proposed techniques also based on the simple statistics. In this paper we introduce the method of structural break point detection which is based on the Adaptive Regression Splines technique, one of the form of regression analysis. Moreover we propose also the statistical test which allows testing hypothesis of behaviour related to different regimes. First, the methodology we apply to the simulated signals with different distributions in order to show the effectiveness of the new technique. Next, in the application part we analyse the real data set that represents the vibration signal from a heavy duty crusher used in a mineral processing plant.Physical variables observed/measured by advanced data acquisition systems in real world applications are often processed, modelled, and analysed in order to extract information about the process. In many cases, long term observation (long might mean very different period depends on application) in fact consists of different processes that coexist or occur one after the other. There are many examples that during single observation Process A reveals very different properties than Process B and they cannot be processed/analysed with the same tools (simple example is switching from stationary to non-stationary signal). Less radical case is that two segments might have the same type of model, but with different order and values of parameters. It leads to conclusion that very first step in experimental data analysis is signal segmentation, i.e. dividing the raw observation into smaller pieces (segments) with homogeneous properties. Note that Process A or Process B might be single process or mixture of processes. From signal processing perspective, one of the most fundamental reason for segmentation is finding locally stationary segments in non-stationary signals. In such a context the segmentation is a problem of identifying the time instants at which the statistics of the observed signal changes. Signal segmentation is also generalized and considered in the context of signal detection and localization by means of recognition and identification of the time of appearance of event that differs from “normal” signal, The basis (criterion) for signal segmentation might be different in various domains, contexts and applications. Change of process from Process A to Process B might be related to appearance of seismic event, machine regime switching, fault in the system, financial crash on stock market, natural radiation, wind behaviour, etc. A key issue is to find proper description of processes in order to highlight the difference between them. In some cases, the difference between processes is visually identifiable, but often advanced processing is required to find breakpoint. Signal segmentation might be done in different manners. Some of the methods are based on the statistical properties of raw time series Signal segmentation has been applied in many areas. It is especially crucial in condition monitoring (to isolate shocks related to damage) In this paper we propose a novel segmentation technique. This method is an extension of the algorithm proposed in The motivation of our analysis is the time series presented in The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section In this part, we introduce a new method of estimating the critical point of scale parameter for time series satisfying property given in For the purpose of estimating parameters Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) approach is a non-parametric, spline-based regression technique introduced in The general idea of the MARS is to form a set of pairs The way of estimating the parameters of the MARS model In this subsection we briefly recall the general idea of the regime variance testing presented in According to In the last step of the procedure, the underlying time series This section is supposed to describe the main differences between the methodologies described in the foregoing sections, see Sections In this section we describe the results of performed simulations for the methods presented in Section the pure Gaussian case with the pure Lévy-stable case with the pure Lévy-stable case with the pure Lévy-stable-Gaussian case with the pure Gaussian case with the pure Lévy-stable case with the pure Lévy-stable case with the pure Gaussian–Lévy-stable case with In terms of the results for the first scenario under consideration, where all test cases are based on the assumption that the corresponding critical point is hardly visible are presented in Gaussian case with Lévy-stable case with Lévy-stable case with For the three considered cases, we see that the approach proposed in In this section we apply the discussed techniques to the real data set presented in For the time series consisting of 20 The complementary part of this section is to provide details about potential family of distributions for the sub samples obtained by splitting the original sets of observations In terms of the fits to the first empirical data sets To be more precise, for the first vector of observations The results obtained by fitting the Gaussian model to the both samples force us to reject the hypothesis that the data is normally distributed as the observed Anderson–Darling and Kolmogorov–Smirnov test produces In this paper we have introduced a new technique of time series segmentation, i.e. extraction from the originally signal such parts that have similar statistical properties. The proposed technique is based on the simple statistics (absolute deviation about the median) based on given time series. The structural break point detection method proposed here uses the Adaptive Regression Splines technique, which is an extension of the classical regression. Except the introduction of the estimation procedure for the recognition of the critical point that divides the observed time series into two regimes, we have also developed the statistical test of testing two-regimes behaviour. The universality of the presented methodology comes from the fact that it does not assume the distribution of the examined time series, therefore, it can be applied to a rich class of real data sets. The theoretical results we have illustrated using the simulated time series and analysis of real data set that represents the vibration signal from a heavy duty crusher used in a mineral processing plant.