Finite element analysis (FEA) is employed to study the effects of nonlinearities on the accuracy of the analytical solution for the shaft loaded blister test. The FEA model was validated using constrained blister test measurements showing a good correlation between the experimental and the FEA data. The analytical solution is then compared with the energy release rate obtained from J-integral evaluation in the FEA. For small and large shaft displacements deviations larger than 20% are encountered which is explained with the violation of the membrane limit condition and the onset of plasticity for larger displacements, respectively. Simplifications of the analytical solution are discussed using a random sampling method and it is shown that the thickness ratio between film and substrate can be neglected for thin films on rigid substrates. Further, values for the angular quantity, ω, which is required to calculate the mode mix phase angle are tabulated for the case of thin, elastic films on stiff substrates using a crack surface opening displacement extrapolation method.Thin polymer coatings are widely used across many industries to protect underlying substrates from wear and tear. Strong adhesion to the substrate is often one of the main performance criteria and hence quantitative assessment of the interface bond strength is highly desired. A test considered particularly suitable for this task, is the blister test as it allows determination of the energy release rate with a relatively simple experimental setup. The blister test was initially suggested by Analytical solutions for the blister test typically consist of two integral parts. One is the description of the mechanical behaviour of the film in respect to its loading condition. The second part is the underlying fracture mechanics model. Despite the equal importance of these two parts most previous work has combined elaborate theory of plates and membranes, e.g. nonlinear Föppl membrane theory, with relatively simple classical fracture mechanics concepts. In these models, based on energy conservation, the energy release rate, In many applications polymer coatings are applied to rigid substrates resulting in a large mismatch of the mechanical properties between substrate and coating. This research is motivated by the development of aerospace coatings where the mismatch is particularly large as common substrates are aluminium and fibre reinforced plastics. When desiring to test such interfaces using the shaft loaded blister test a series of aspects not previously discussed in great detail become of importance. This paper tries to address these issues as outlined below. From a practical point of view understanding the influence of the nonlinearities, namely geometric nonlinearity, contact at the shaft and material nonlinearity, is crucial to ensure reliable energy release rate values are measured. Most analytical solutions, except for ( In order to simplify the analytical solution and to make it more suitable for practical testing various simplifications can be made. Commonly discussed simplifications are, a very small film thickness (Material 1) to substrate thickness ratio, When testing and comparing energy release rates of different materials, the mode mix becomes of importance as only energy release rates obtained under similar fracture modes can be compared. From a practical perspective employing a closed form analytical solution for the SLBT bares many advantages, however in order to derive a closed form solution simplifications are made which deviate from the experimental setup. The closed form analytical solution proposed by The paper is organised as follows: first, the theory necessary to understand the content of this paper is briefly summarised (Section  For the system shown in Coupling the fracture mechanic model discussed above with the governing equations for the SLBT is achieved via the membrane stress and the bending moment at the crack tip. It is worth noting that the two loads As suggested by Eq. In order to tabulate The complex stress intensity factor can be obtained from Eq. In this section all analytical theory used in the subsequent sections has been introduced. Eqs. This research is motivated by the desire to measure the adhesion strength of polymer aerospace coating to a wide variety of substrates using the SLBT. Based on typical material combinations the parameter range shown in Two finite element analyses were employed in this paper. The first was used to study the behaviour and the influence of the nonlinearities occurring in the shaft loaded blister test. The results obtained from this analysis are the shaft load ( The emphasis of this analysis lies on modelling the shaft loaded blister test including the effects of nonlinear material behaviour, geometric nonlinearities and contact nonlinearities at the shaft/film contact. For this study a shaft ball point radius of The contact problem between the shaft’s ball point and the film was modelled with the CONTA172 element for the film edge and the TARGE169 element for the contact edge of the shaft ball point. Penetration tolerance was set to 0.01 with penalty stiffness 0.1. For the contact behaviour “No Separation” (KEYOPT (12) A constrained blister test setup was used where the polymer film is clamped between two metal plates with a hole in the centre. For the validation of the FEA a centre hole of equal diameter to the medium blister radius ( The nonlinear solver substep was set to a fixed incremental shaft displacement of 0.025 In order to utilise the FE results in combination with the analytical solution, the external forces ( A cantilever beam model was used to extract the node displacements of the crack surface required to tabulate The model was validated by comparing Before starting with the discussion of the results from the FEA the validity of the simplified analytical solutions are investigated in this section. It can be seen that the non-simplified equation for the energy release (Eqs. Simplification with As expected the simplification In Section   Whilst knowledge of the mode mix phase angle is not necessary to calculate the energy release rate of the shaft loaded blister test, knowing the value of the phase angle can give important additional information. Of particular interest is the phase angle when comparing energy release rates of different materials, as only energy release rates obtained under similar loading conditions are deemed comparable ( For this reason the mode mix parameter FEA was employed to study the effects of nonlinearities, i.e. contact, geometric and material nonlinearities, on the accuracy of the analytical solution for the shaft loaded blister test. Using a random sampling approach it was shown that the assumption This work was conducted as part of the CRC–ACS research program, itself supported by the Australian Government CRC Program. The first author wishes to acknowledge financial support from the CRC–ACS and the University of Queensland in the form of a confirmation Ph.D. scholarship.