Osteosynthesis for calcaneal fractures remains controversial. We osteosynthesize all displaced intraarticular fractures, the only contraindications regarding age, local and arterial status, or non-compliance. We here report a prospective study of 31 calcaneal articular fractures, with a mean 4.5 years follow-up.
                  Following CT scan, patients were operated at a mean 6.1 days with the same surgical (single surgeon-extended lateral approach) and post-operative protocol. On Sanders' classification, there were 18 type II, 8 type III, and 5 type IV fractures. Twenty-six patients had clinical and comparative standard X-ray follow-up; 19 also had CT assessment.
                  Two complications needed repeat surgery: one limited skin necrosis, one infected hematoma. Fifty-eight % were very satisfied, and 42% satisfied; 77% returned to work. Mean Kitaoka score was 86.2. Tibiotarsal motion was normal, and subtalar motion 45%. X-ray confirmed anatomical reconstruction: no joint reduction defect; medial arch angle, calcaneal pitch, calcaneal soft-pad thickness, and calcaneus height, length and width subnormal. Mean Boehler angles were: 6.6° preoperatively, 32.3° postoperatively, and 27.1° on follow-up for injured vs. 32° for non-injured foot. Thirty-six % had posterior subtalar remodeling on standard X-ray, and 79% on CT scan, without correlation with functional results or radiological type.
                  Due to calcaneal posterior facet height loss, we recommend 10 weeks' non-weightbearing. These good results match the literature, generally indicating surgery for displaced calcaneal intraarticular fractures.Controversy persists as to the preferred treatment for intra-articular calcaneal fracture A continuous homogeneous series of 31 patients was managed surgically by a single hyperspecialized surgeon, (JLB) between 1995 and 2000, and followed up prospectively, under a single protocol with regard to the extended lateral approach, surgical technique, rehabilitation program, and pre-operative and follow-up X-ray and CT assessments. Patients operated on between 1990 and 1994 either with a ‘classical’ lateral sub-malleolus approach Mean patient age at the time of the accident was 42.1±10.4 years (range: 24–59 years). The large majority were male (87%: 27 men vs. 5 women). Sixty-nine % of accidents were during leisure time, 27% work accidents, and 4% road accidents; 55% involved falls of over 2 All patients underwent the same protocol: simple lateral and oblique X-ray (sometimes associated to an axial heel view); systematic CT-scan with coronal and horizontal images and sagittal reconstruction (12 bilateral scans and 19 of the injured foot only). All views were examined independently by two physicians (JLB and JPA) and results (classifications and values) compared. On simple X-ray ( The mean interval before surgery was 6.1±2.9 days (range: 2–14 days). The operation was scheduled according to cutaneous status (blisters, healing of wound in open fractures) and oedema regression. Oedema regression was encouraged by bed rest with elevation, associated to an antalgic and anti-inflammatory regime with compressive bandaging, and twice-daily manual lymph drainage. In our experience, with this appropriate management, 4–8 days are enough to obtain total oedema regression; only four patients were operated at two days because there was little edema. Patients were positioned in strict supine decubitus. Surgery was under general or spinal anesthetic with a pneumatic thigh tourniquet. The approach was in all cases extended lateral, para-Achilles-to-plantar The rehabilitation program was the same for all patients: 71% of them attended the same rehabilitation center, on an in-patient or day-patient basis. During the first 3 weeks, only active and passive talo-crural and toe mobilization was worked on, so as to allow the lateral ligament to heal. On day 21, the sutures were removed and sub-talar mobilization was initiated; non-weight-bearing pool physiotherapy was then allowed insofar as skin healing permitted. At 2.5 months, weight bearing was gradually resumed in water, and ambulatory weight bearing at 3 months. At 4 months, the canes were definitively given up, and proprioceptive work was intensified. After their regular follow-up in consultation with the surgeon (JLB), patients were also seen by an independent examiner (JPA). Subjective evaluation (patient satisfaction), interview findings and clinical assessment (gait, hindfoot axis, podoscopic examination, healing, comparative ankle and sub-talar articulation amplitudes, etc.) were noted on a form. Functional examination was in terms of the Tegner activity level scale The data harvested were analyzed using the StatView 4.02 software. Descriptive statistics comprised calculation of means, standard deviations and ranges for quantitative data, and of frequency distributions for qualitative data. Statistical analysis employed Fisher tests and analysis of variance (ANOVA) to compare quantitative data, non-parametric Wilcoxon tests to study matched pairs of quantitative variables, and regression curve correlation tests to compare certain quantitative variables. Twenty-six patients (83%) were followed up for a mean 4 years 5 months±2 years (range: 16–114 months). The five patients lost to follow-up had been followed for 1 year. Three early complications (9%) arose: One case of skin necrosis localized in the incurved part of the approach site, requiring a supra-malleolar flap to be grafted at 13 months; the final result, however, was excellent. One infected hematoma required surgical draining on day 10; there was no secondary osteitis, but the final result was medium. One case of reflex sympathetic dystrophy, with a medium outcome. Six patients showed healing delayed for less than 1 month. One patient showed subluxation of the peroneal tendons on follow-up. For 13 patients (42%), the osteosynthesis material was removed 19±10 months (range: 9–45 months) postoperatively, with associated peroneus longus tenolysis in some cases. At the beginning of the series, we hesitated to propose material removal; but the first time we performed removal, we found impingement between the peroneus longus and the screw in the anterior inferior part of the plate. We therefore now prefer to remove osteosynthesis material systematically at 1 year. At 4 years 5 months follow-up, no secondary sub-talar arthrodesis had been performed. All of the patients operated on declared themselves either very satisfied (54%) or satisfied (46%). After a mean period of 8.5±4 months (range: 4–14 months), 66% of them had resumed their former occupation, 15% in adapted conditions, 88% with normal footwear, 27% with permanent or occasional plantar ortheses. On the 10-point Tegner activity level scale, the mean score was 3.9±1.2 (range: 1–7) before surgery and 3.5±1.7 (range: 1–7) on follow-up, indicating a slight limitation in sporting or leisure activity. Certain patients, on the other hand, had resumed tennis, jogging or mountain sports. The mean Kitaoka score was 86.7±7.5 (range: 67–100): four (15%) excellent, 19 good (73%), three (12%) medium, and no poor outcomes. The mean pain rating (/40 points) was 31.9±4.9 (range: 20–40), and the functional rating (/50 points) 45.0±4.2 (range: 37–50). Total functional scores and pain ratings did not correlate with radiological severity, whether on the Duparc or on the Sanders scale, and with material removal. A trend could be seen for the mean overall functional score to be lower for work accident (82.5±5.7: five good and two medium) than for leisure accident cases (89.5±6.4: four excellent and 11 good), although this difference was not statistically significant in the present study (perhaps due to the sample size). The hindfoot axis of the operated foot was identical to that of the non-injured side in 92% of cases and the plantar footprint likewise in 96%. The scar had a satisfactory aspect and was pain-free (92%), only two patients complaining of moderate dysesthesia. Ankle motion in dorsal and in plantar flexion were identical between the operated and non-operated sides ( Surgery in all cases restored a normal Boehler angle (pre-operative injured foot: 6.6±11.4°; post-operative injured foot: 32.3±6.2°; non-injured foot: 32.5±5.1°). There was a 5.6±5.3° secondary correction loss (injured foot at follow-up: 26.5±8.2°), which did not, however, correlate with the functional Kitaoka score or the Duparc or Sanders radiological scales, although it was slightly greater in case of comminution (Duparc V: 8.3° loss; Sanders IV: 9.7° loss). Djian (medial arch) angle (injured foot: 118.4±6.8°; non-injured foot: 117.2±7.1°) and calcaneal pitch (injured foot: 19.9±4.8°; non-injured foot: 21.1±4.5°) did not significantly differ between injured and non-injured feet. Comparative calcaneal parameters showed no difference in calcaneal length or sub-calcaneal plantar fat pad height, but just a slight difference in calcaneal height, correlating with the reduction in Boehler angler ( All 20 patients who had had comparative control scans of both hindfeet showed perfect posterior sub-talar joint congruence with no reduction defect. The posterior sub-talar joint was strictly normal in 20% of cases, and presented remodeling in 60% and narrowing in 20% ( The overall complication rate was low in the present series, at 9%, and comparable to other reports using an extended lateral approach Our excellent functional results (88% excellent or good on the Kitaoka scale) confirm those of other recent series of calcaneal intra-articular fracture osteosynthesis Clinical examination of the operated side proved normal, except for limited sub-talar mobility. Mean inversion amplitude was 46% (range: 10–100%) on the operated as compared to the non-injured foot. Like Raymakers The present prospective study included both a very thorough comparative X-ray examination of the operated and non-injured feet, with standard weight-bearing views, and a CT scan. The Boehler angle On simple X-rays and CT scans, reduced calcaneal height correlated with the reduction in Boehler's angle (and the widening of the calcaneus on CT); simple comparative weight-bearing lateral X-rays are therefore sufficient for assessing the anatomic quality of the calcaneal reconstruction. CT scanning, on the other hand, is essential in order to ensure sub-talar congruence and to assess the condition of the sub-talar and calcaneo-cuboid joints. The calcaneo-cuboid joint showed remodeling in only between 5% (CT scan) and 7% (plain oblique X-ray) of cases, whereas 42% of patients had fracture lines extending there; this point is moreover never taken account of in any CT classification, while anterior process reduction can prove difficult. CT scans were more severe than X-rays in assessing the posterior sub-talar joint, only 20% as against 52%, respectively being considered normal. Comparative bilateral CT scanning was needed to differentiate joints showing remodeling (60%) from those showing narrowing (20%). These alterations did not correlate with the overall or pain-related Kitaoka scores. Such high rates put a question mark on the future. Even so, in case of painful arthritis, any secondary sub-talar arthrodesis would be performed on a reconstructed calcaneus, whereas malunions on non-operated calcaneal fractures cause a whole range of problems that are not easy to manage The few randomized or comparative studies of functional management vs. osteosynthesis in the literature are discordant. Buckley's first randomized study in 1992 So as to limit complications, certain authors Gavlick Our 88% good functional results at 4.5 years follow-up confirm the literature data. The extended lateral approach accounts for the very low incidence of cutaneous complications. The frequent posterior sub-talar joint remodeling, uncorrelated with the functional result, may lead to deterioration over time, but in that case, any secondary sub-talar arthrodesis could be performed under optimal conditions. We systematically obtained anatomical reduction, whatever the Sanders type. This reconstruction and perfect joint congruence, essential for a good result, depend on the surgeon's experience. The 5° secondary correction loss found with whatever type of fracture is the justification of our current attitude we advise AO-type plate monobloc osteosynthesis, at least 10 weeks early non-weight-bearing rehabilitation and bone-substitute graft in case of large sub-thalamic defect. After a suitable interval to improve soft tissue status, we advise osteosynthesis for any displaced intra-articular calcaneal fracture if the operator has passed beyond the learning curve. In case of contra-indication relating to age, associated pathology such as diabetes or arteriopathy, or psychiatric disturbance or insufficient operator experience, we advise functional management or plaster cast immobilization for relatively congruent fractures, and closed percutaneous pinning or screwing for more displaced and incongruent fracture.