One necessary point towards achieving the enhanced mechanical properties in the nanocomposite systems, comprising a polymeric matrix and the graphene sheets (GSs) as the reinforcement, is the number of GSs layers regarding its relation with the gyration radius of the matrix. In this study, a stable suspension containing the surfactant wrapped graphene sheets (SWGSs) was successfully synthesized via a facile electrochemical route in the sodium dodecyl sulfate media. The effect of the applied potential was qualified and quantified during preparation of SWGSs by employing X-ray diffraction, chronoamperometry and Raman spectroscopy. It was found that an increase in the level of applied potential from 5 to 15 V improves the production yield of SWGSs (≈56%). The prepared SWGSs, which contained monolayer as well as multilayer sheets, were then dispersed in the Poly(Vinyl Alcohol) (PVA) matrix through liquid blending method. It was observed that the tensile strength and Young's modulus of the fabricated nanocomposite (PVA/SWGSs) increase even at low level GSs content. Furthermore, the effect of temperature on the fabrication process of the nanocomposites was evaluated via thermal analysis.The graphene sheet (GS), a monolayer of carbon atoms (sp Recent advances in the production of bulk quantities of the exfoliated GSs from graphite bring the possibility of GSs application in the molecular gas sensors A survey of previous literature on electrochemically production of SWGSs provides some clues about the usage of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) Graphene can be well dispersed in poly(styrene), poly(acrylonitrile) and poly(methyl methacrylate) matrices and accordingly it improves the Young's modulus and the ultimate strength The aim of the present work is to synthesis a stable aqueous suspension containing SWGSs via an electrochemical technique; this suspension is used for the production of polymeric based composites via liquid blending method. The benefit of such synthesized monolayer/multilayer GSs is the well distribution of graphene in polymeric matrix which can effectively enhance the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites. All the reagents used in this study, including graphite plate, SDS, hydrochloric acid and PVA (with M All experiments were conducted in a two-electrode electrochemical cell with working volume of 50 mL at 25 °C. A platinum plate and a pure graphite electrode (polished to a mirror finish, washed with acetone and distilled water) were used as the cathode and anode, respectively. The geometric area of the anode and cathode were 1.5 × 1 cm The SWGSs/PVA composites were synthesized in a simple liquid phase blending method. Since, the SWGSs are stable in water and PVA is soluble in water too, this method will result a homogenous mixture simply. A composite film of SWGSs and PVA in different percentage of SWGSs (0.06, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 vol%) was made by drop casting route on a plexiglass substrate and keeping in the vacuum oven at 45 and 60 °C for 24 h, separately. Consequently, after drying completely, the films were peeled off from the substrate. During the synthesis process, the Current–Time Transient (CTT) curves were recorded at different applied potentials. In order to investigate the structural features of SWGSs, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) and High Resolution TEM (HTREM) were employed (JEOL, JEM-2100) operating at 200 kV. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images of the SWGSs were obtained in tapping mode (Dualscope/Rasterscope C26, DME, Denmark). In order to study the density of defect and number of SWGSs layers, Raman spectra were recorded by Raman Microprobe Nicolet ALMEGA with 532 nm excitation source under 100 mW power. Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectra of the graphene dispersion were collected on a Bruker (Vector 33). Also, the morphology of SWGSs and the fracture surface of the nanocomposites were studied by Mira∖∖Tescan Field Emission Electron Microscopy (FESEM). X-Ray diffraction (XRD) of the GSs and nanocomposite films were carried out by using Equinox 3000/INEL, France diffractometer with Cu k The reaction between graphite (C During this reaction, DS  The defects percentage of the obtained SWGSs at different applied potentials can be estimated using In FT-IR spectrum of the SWGSs produced at 15 V has been shown in According to the AFM image presented in The transparency and thickness of multilayer SWGSs were evaluated using TEM. In order to assess the structure, crystallinity percentage and interlayer changes of the fabricated nanocomposites, XRD was carried out. The sharp peak around 2θ = 19.4 (a d-spacing of 0.45 nm) and the feeble bulge appeared at 2θ = 40.4 (a d-spacing of 0.22 nm) ( It is worth mentioning that Gong and co-workers have shown that the optimum number of GSs for reinforcing polymers is related to the polymer layer thickness. According to their results by increasing the polymer layer thickness, maximum composite modulus will obtain by multi-layer GSs According to It is remarkable that the prepared nanocomposite films at 45 °C show yielding points in their stress-strain curve, while, the produced films at 60 °C do not have yielding point and their strength increase uniformly till fracture point ( In order to study the effect of SWGSs on the dynamic crystallization of PVA and the macroscopic properties of the nanocomposite films, DSC was conducted. As it is shown in Thus, the significant improvement in the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites stems from the presence of these crystalline shells which creates an effective attachment of PVA to the nanosheets of SWGSs that constrains the segmental motion of the polymer chains According to the results given in It should be noted that the drying process of the nanocomposites was conducted from ambient temperature up to 45 and 60 °C. At the higher temperature range (ambient temperature to 60 °C), the movement of polymer chains is more than other sample; i.e. the structural order becomes lower at the higher temperature. Since, the time of drying process was set the same for both nanocomposite films, it can be concluded that the crystallinity percentage of samples that were dried in the range of ambient temperature to 45 °C, is higher. An interesting point regarding the mechanical properties is that the percolation point corresponding to the sample prepared at lower temperature range (ambient temperature to 45 °C) occurs at 0.2 vol% of SWGSs; while, for sample dried at higher temperature range, the percolation point is at 0.1 vol% of SWGSs. The higher volume percentage of the SWGSs in the former case is another reason for the more crystallinity percentage of these samples. For further evaluation, the TGA curves corresponding to the pure PVA films A comparison between the thermal and the mechanical properties of the pure PVA and SWGSs/PVA nanocomposites at the percolation threshold indicates that the SWGSs can effectively reduce the effect of degradation of the PVA during the synthesis process of nanocomposites (synergetic effect). Consequently, the yielding point of the nanocomposites shifts to the higher percentages of SWGSs for the prepared samples at 60 °C. According to the FESEM images of the fracture surface of the nanocomposite films ( In this work, SWGSs were successfully prepared in a double electrodes cell in the presence of SDS. The role of applied potential on the formation of the SWGSs was clarified. According to the characterizations by increasing the level of applied potential (5–15 V), the obtained SWGSs have better quality and quantity. Also, it was confirmed that the product at 15 V has low defect density with thinnest thickness of 1.87 nm (700 nm width) indicating the presence of a mixture of GSs with various numbers of layers. Thus, it is a suitable candidate for reinforcing the polymer matrix (PVA). In the second step of the work, we synthesized the PVA/SWGSs nanocomposite films via liquid blending method. Surprisingly, the mechanical properties of the nanocomposite films in the present of the low content SWGSs showed a notable improvement which it is related to well distribution of the multilayer SWGSs in the matrix and strong interactions between them and polymer chains. Furthermore, in order to more study the mechanical properties of the films, the thermal investigations were carried out. The presence of crystalline shells in the nanocomposites is responsible for the improvement of the mechanical properties. According to the thermal analyses results SWGSs in the prepared samples at 60 °C have the synergetic effect; it means that as well as the reinforcement role, they compensate the higher rate of decomposition samples at higher temperature and it is the origin of the differences in their stress-strain curves.