The flotation technique is the most effective method for the silicon removal from magnetite ore, and mixed collectors exhibit superior selectivity and strong synergistic interaction in the flotation of muscovite, feldspar and spodumene ores. In this work, the flotation separation of enstatite and magnetite was investigated using mixed cationic collector cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) and anionic collector sodium oleate (NaOL). The micro-flotation experiments were conducted on single minerals and mixture minerals with pure and mixed collectors. The results show that it is difficult to separation of magnetite from enstatite with CTAB or NaOL collector alone, and mixed CTAB/NaOL exhibits excellent performance with the mole ratio of 2/1 (CTAB/NaOL) at pH 5.5-8.5. Zeta potential measurements and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analyses were performed to detect the underlying mechanism. The results show that the co-adsorption of NaOL and CTAB is found on magnetite and enstatite surface. The limited CTAB adsorb on magnetite surface through hydrocarbon tail-tail interaction and CTAB is bound to the oxide and silicate on enstatite surface by electrostatic adsorption. The adsorption model of the mixed collector CTAB/NaOL on the mineral surface was drawn.With increasing demand for high-grade magnetite in the iron and steel industries and the reserve depletion of high-grade magnetite, low-grade iron ores should be utilized. Therefore, there is a need to process and improve the quality of low-grade iron ores according to its mineral physical properties and character. The most commonly used beneficiation methods for iron ores are the magnetic separation and flotation techniques [ The gangue minerals in iron ores typically include quartz, Fe-bearing silicates as amphiboles, micas, enstatite and feldspars. Dry and wet low-intensity magnetic separation is used to process magnetite ores with high iron content, a high degree of liberation of iron oxides from gangue and quartz as the major gangue mineral [ Studies on iron ore flotation revealed the direct anionic flotation of iron oxides and the reverse cationic flotation quartz and Fe-bearing silicates were feasible flotation routes [ Starch and its derivatives are the most common used depressant during the reverse cationic flotation of iron ores due to its wide availability and good depressing abilities for iron oxides [ The use of cationic and anionic collector mixtures can provide increased flotation selectivity compared to the use of single collector [ According to our knowledge, the flotation separation of magnetite from Fe-bearing silicate with mixed cationic/anionic collector systems has not been studied. However, in the reverse flotation of magnetite ore with anionic and cationic surfactants as collectors involving sodium oleate (NaOL), quaternary ammonium salt has been investigated [ Pure magnetite and enstatite minerals were handpicked from Daye area of Hubei, China. The mineral samples were dry ground and then sieved through 74 μm standard specification sieve. The +37-74 μm fraction was used for the flotation tests, and −37 μm samples were further ground to −5 μm for zeta potential measurements. XRD spectrums (showed in Chemically pure reagents were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China. The anionic collector sodium oleate and surfactant CTAB with 99% purity have a molecular weight (M.W.) of 304.50 g/mol and 364.45 g/mol, respectively. The critical micelle concentration (CMC) of CTAB is 9.2 × 10 Micro-flotation tests of pure magnetite, enstatite and mixture minerals were carried out in a laboratory flotation machine with 40 ml cell. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 3.0 g minerals to 40 ml solution at 1800 rpm agitation speed. Test charge of artificially mixed minerals was 1.5 g magnetite and 1.5 g enstatite. The desired value of pH was achieved by addition of HCl or NaOH. After adding the collectors, the suspension was stirred for 5 min. Flotation time for all tests was fixed at 4 min. The forth products and tails were weighed separately after filtration and drying, and the recovery was calculated based on the weight of the products. In mixed minerals flotation, the contents of Fe in the products were assessed by chemical analysis followed standard techniques. Reliability of the results has been also confirmed by the average of three times tests in the same experimental conditions. The zeta potentials of mineral surface were measured using electrophoresis instrument. A suspension was prepared by adding 30 mg of pure mineral particles ground to −5 μm in an agate motar to 40 ml deionized water or collector solution. The collector solutions of NaOL, CTAB and mixed collector were 4 × 10 The fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the minerals were treated and untreated by the collector were recorded using a spectroscopy instrument (BRUKER ALPHA-T, Germany) at 25 °C. The wave number of the spectra was 4000-500 cm The flotation behavior of magnetite and enstatite using NaOL and CTAB as collector was evaluated by the single mineral flotation tests. The flotation performances of magnetite and enstatite had been investigated using mixed CTAB/ NaOL as collectors. Considering the effect of the mole ratio to the mixed collectors, different mole ratios of CTAB to NaOL were investigated in the flotation performances. The flotation recoveries of magnetite and enstatite with mixed CTAB/NaOL as a function of pH are given in The flotation texts of mixture minerals were carried out for further investigates the separation ability of mixed CTAB/NaOL at pH 6.6, as shown in The surface charge is widely used to characterize the solid surface interactions with reagents in flotation [ More interestingly, the zeta potentials of magnetite in the mixed CTAB/NaOL are more positive than those in CTAB solution at pH 2–4, indicating more CTAB adsorption on magnetite surface. The flotation tests show that the recovery of magnetite is higher at pH 2–4 than those at pH 5–12 with mixed CTAB/NaOL as collector. According to the reports [ In order to investigate the adsorption mechanism of mixed CTAB/NaOL, the FTIR spectra of magnetite and enstatite treated by CTAB, NaOL and mixed CTAB/NaOL are shown in As For the spectrum of enstatite in Surface crystal chemistry studies show that the planes (111) and (210) are the most likely cleavage planes for magnetite and enstatite, respectively [ In this study, flotation separation of magnetite from enstatite with the mixed CTAB/NaOL was investigated. The mixed CTAB/NaOL exhibits high selectivity for the flotation of enstatite from magnetite with a CTAB/NaOL mole ratio of 2:1 at pH 5.5 than single CTAB or NaOL. More CTAB is adsorbed on the surface of enstatite than on magnetite, and active Fe sites occupied by oleate hinder CTAB adsorption on the magnetite surface. The co-adsorption of NaOL and CTAB on magnetite surface through hydrocarbon tail-tail interaction is limited. The electrostatic adsorption of CTAB on enstatite surface is not be affected by the chemical adsorption of NaOL because of the existence of negative charged oxide and silicate. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the