The vitamin and trace mineral enrichment of eggs can be achieved by manipulating the diet of laying hens. Eggs enriched with certain trace minerals, vitamins and a variety of bioactive substances can be an excellent source of these substances in human diets. Several studies have confirmed that it is possible to produce novel eggs with an enhanced level of some important trace minerals (in particular Se, I, Fe and Zn) and vitamins, in particular fat-soluble ones (vitamin E, A and D), but also some water-soluble ones (especially vitamin B12 and folate). This review includes a description of the most relevant aspects of these compounds and special attention is paid to the different research results related to vitamin and trace mineral enrichment of eggs through nutrition. The vitamin and trace mineral levels reached in standard and enriched eggs are compared.Eggs are a natural, low calorie food that contains a great number of essential nutrients, including vitamins, minerals and other bioactive compounds (as lutein, zeaxanthin, choline and antimicrobial molecules). Egg is widely used as whole food and food ingredient and represents an important part of human diet ( The nutritional value of eggs can be improved greatly through the dietary manipulation of hen diets. Eggs enriched with certain trace minerals, vitamins and variety of bioactive substances can be an excellent source of nutrients in This review is divided into two sections regarding the different vitamins and trace minerals, including a description of the most relevant aspects of these compounds. Different research findings related to egg vitamin and trace mineral enrichment through nutrition are presented and special attention is paid to vitamin E, vitamin A, vitamin D, folate. In particular the vitamin and trace mineral levels reached in standard and enriched eggs are compared and the implications on recommended daily allowances (RDA) and consequently on consumer health are discussed. More information about this subject can be found in the review articles of  In the European Vitamins are organic substances which are not chemically related like other groups of nutrients (carbohydrates, proteins or lipids) and that are active at low levels, which is to say that they are required in very small amounts (mg or μg). Traditional vitamin classification is based on solubility, a property which determines its behaviour in the body. The fat-soluble group includes the vitamins A, D, E and K, while vitamins of the B complex (B Vitamin concentration in hen feed is the most important factor in determining vitamin content in egg. This is particularly true for fat-soluble vitamins. The lipid components of the egg, including fat-soluble vitamins, are present only in the yolk. During the last 10 days before hen ovulation, the lipids of Vitamin A is the collective term for compounds that show the biological properties of retinol, including maintenance of epithelial tissue and visual One IU of vitamin A activity is equivalent to the activity of 0.3 Vitamin A is involved in several processes such as vision, reproduction, bone development, immune response, cell differentiation and proliferation. In fact, vitamin A plays an important role in the maintenance of integrity of epithelial tissue, particularly in the oviduct. Some studies indicate that variations in vitamin A dosage are reflected in parameters relating to the yolk and ovulation and underline its importance in embryo development ( Vitamin A is deposited in egg yolk and comes from the liver storage. The liver plays an important role in the metabolism and egg deposition of vitamin A. Some studies have concentrated on increasing the levels of vitamin A in the egg (   However, it is important to point out that there is a negative interaction, on the level of absorption, between vitamin A and the other fat-soluble vitamins, as well as possible interactions with other nutrients. This is dealt with different studies which demonstrate a clear interaction between vitamin E and vitamin A in the deposition of both ( The recommended daily allowance for vitamin A is 800 Vitamin D is a generic term that refers to cholecalciferol (vitamin D Cholecalciferol is stored in an inactive form, mainly in the liver and adipose tissue. This form is rapidly hydroxylated to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25OHD) in the liver. However, this metabolite needed an additional hydroxylation to issue to the active form of vitamin D and this last step if precisely regulated depending on the balance of the calcium metabolism in birds. This metabolite (25OHD) is carried to the kidneys where it is converted to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol or calcitriol, which is the active form of vitamin D in animals. These successive hydroxylation reactions that convert An IU of vitamin D Regarding enrichment of the eggs with vitamin D, Eggs are one of the limited foods contributing human dietary vitamin D and also contain substantial amounts of 25OHD (25% of the total vitamin D activity). 25OHD is absorbed better and faster from the diet than native vitamin D and has metabolic effects of its own in regulating cell growth and calcium metabolism ( The term vitamin E includes a range of closely related active components. These components are divided into two groups: tocopherols and tocotrienols. Of the tocopherols the alpha form exhibits greatest biological activity and the broadest distribution, being very commonly found in the ingredients used in animal feeds. The natural isomer of alpha-tocopherol is RRR-alpha-tocopherol or d-alpha-tocopherol. This is the isomer with greatest biological activity, and is usually the reference compound when vitamin E is referred to. It is important to remember that most plants can synthesize vitamin E, although animals and human beings do not have this capacity. This means that meeting vitamin E requirements relies exclusively on food intake. The synthetic form of alpha-tocopherol (alpha-toc) is a racemic mix of eight stereoisomers, esterified to an acetate group. This form is designated dl-alpha-tocopherol acetate (dl-alpha-TA) and is accepted as the standard for The minimum requirements of vitamin E established for laying hens by the National Research Different authors have investigated the possibility of increasing the vitamin E content of the egg ( Another important aspect is the egg vitamin E deposition pattern. The most important studies in this field are those of In As mentioned before in Another important factor is the reduction in egg alpha-toc concentration during processing and storage. Some works have demonstrated that vitamin E content remained almost constant when shell eggs were stored ( The RDA of vitamin E for humans is about 12  The main function of vitamin K is to regulate the formation of various factors involved in blood clotting. Recently it has been suggested that vitamin K is also involved in the mineralization process during skeletal development and eggshell formation. Requirements of vitamin K for layers have not been sufficiently established, with the National Research Council giving a minimum requirement of 0.5 An average of 9 Egg contains all the vitamins with the exception of vitamin C. The B water-soluble vitamins are found in both, yolk and albumen. Biotin, pantothenic acid, thiamin B A standard egg contributes up to 30% RDA of vitamin B The literature about water-soluble vitamin enrichment in egg is scarce. We found some results related with vitamin B Folacine and folate (the naturally occurring form) share compounds with pteroylglutamate, but differ with respect to oxidation state and number of attached glutamate residues. Both are forms of the water-soluble vitamin B On a practical level, dietary recommendations for layers are at a somewhat higher level (0.4–1.0 Folate metabolism is entirely related to the metabolism of many other methyl group donors (S-adenosylmethionine, serine, vitamin B The egg provide 50 In relation to folate egg enrichment, it has been demonstrated that laying hens have the capacity to convert high doses of folic acid added to the feed into natural folates in their eggs ( Recent studies also describe a similar egg folate deposition model with significant increases on addition of a small dose of folic acid, which reaches a plateau ( We can conclude that it is possible to enhance the folate content of eggs by 2–3 fold (50 Several years ago, Some promising results have been highlighted by Some modifications related to vitamins B The relationship between diet and human health has received a great deal of attention in the last few years, due to the realization that unbalanced diets can cause serious health-related problems. The enrichment of hen eggs with additional trace elements could provide new niche markets and improve the nutritional status of particular cohorts of people at risk to trace minerals deficiency. In general, most trace minerals are deposited in the yolk, whereas their concentrations in the white portion of the egg is limited. Trace element enriched eggs may be achieved by supplementing the laying hens’ diets with trace elements in both inorganic and/or organic forms.  The average hen’s egg contains about 5 The biological effects of selenium in poultry have been extensively reviewed by Supplemental selenium is commonly added to diets as sodium selenite (Na Selenium egg enrichment has recently been reviewed by It has been shown that the selenium content in eggs can easily be manipulated, especially when organic selenium is included in hen’s diets at a level that provides 0.3–0.5 Experimental studies that compare inorganic and organic Se sources have shown that both selenium forms increases the selenium egg content, but the organic form is more efficient ( A beneficial influence of combined dietary iodine and selenium supplementation have been found and iodine enhances the selenium egg content ( The selenium that is delivered in a single enriched egg varies from 20 to 40 The average hen’s egg contains 4–10 Most iodine in feeds is presented in inorganic form, which is absorbed very efficiently (in form of iodide, I The iodine requirement for poultry is 0.3–0.4 In areas where goitre is endemic, precautions are generally taken by supplementing the diet with the iodine in the form of iodized salts. Inorganic iodine is usually supplemented in birds as calcium iodate (Ca(IO Several studies pointed out that iodine concentrations in the egg yolk, egg albumen and whole egg increase with increased iodine supplementation (   A dietary iodine supplementation of up to 6 Iron is found in egg yolk in association with phosvitin. Very little iron is found in the albumen, where it forms complexes with ovotransferrin in order to protect the egg from bacterial infections ( Dietary iron is available both in organic and inorganic forms and either The enrichment of hen eggs with additional iron could provide new niche markets by improving the nutritional status of particular cohorts of people at risk to iron deficiency or anaemia. Several groups of people are considered to be at risk of iron-deficient anaemia: infants, growing children, pregnant women, and certain cultural and socio-economic groups. Enriching the iron content of eggs could be a particularly useful strategy because other iron-rich foods, such as meat, may not be suitable or available for all those people at risk to iron deficiency, and in many cases it may be a more viable option than fortifying staple foods with iron, which is often of low bioavailability (    The combined supplementation of dietary zinc, iron and copper on the carry-over of these elements in eggs has been investigated in depth by Fe-enriched eggs may contain 10–20% more iron than standard eggs; this would provide up to 10% RDA for humans. However, the mixed results that have been obtained in iron egg enrichment in different experiments highlight the need to consider the source of iron supplementation, the dietary interaction with other minerals, the effect of the age and strain of birds and the differences between individual birds in the iron concentration in the eggs. The total zinc content of eggs from hens consuming standard laying rations is generally 10–11 Zinc is an essential trace element for physiologic and metabolic functions, such as physical growth neuro-behavioural development, the reproductive function, and the immune system function. Zinc is an important pigmenting metal in feathers and it is also an activator or cofactor of more than 200 enzymes. Zinc deficiencies impair all metabolic pathways, the regulation of gene expression, and the cell division ( Zinc is usually supplemented in inorganic form (zinc sulphate, zinc oxide, zinc carbonate) or organic form (complexed to amino acid) ( 