To understand the adverse effects of TiO2 on alumina leaching, the reaction behavior of TiO2 in a series of pure substance systems relating to Bayer digestion was systematically investigated based on thermodynamics, experiments, and comprehensive analyses. The results show that TiO2 is almost unreactive without alkali in the Bayer system. When free alkali does exist, TiO2 preferentially forms amorphous, metastable sodium titanate as a reactive intermediate and induces more side reactions. The physicochemical characteristics and the transformation of the amorphous metastable phase were described in detail. The findings from this study provide strong evidence explaining titanate species' reduction of the dissolution efficiency of alumina through amorphization and the elimination of adverse titanate effects via promoting the crystallization of amorphous metastable phase. Knowledge of these mechanisms deepens the understanding of the effects of titanate species in the Bayer process and assists in the prevention and control of titanate industrial hazards.Globally, more than 95% of alumina is produced from bauxite. As one of the main components of bauxite, TiO The dissolution of both diaspore and boehmite in synthetic Bayer liquors is inhibited in the presence of TiO Many studies have considered using CaO to reduce the impact of Ti-containing minerals ( The adverse effects of Ti-containing minerals on the digestion of bauxite remain problematic. The problem is difficult to solve for several reasons. First, too many elements exist in the Bayer digestion system. Relative to the main components of Na, Al, Si, Ca, and Fe, Ti accounts for a low percentage, which impedes the elimination of impurity interference ( In order to eliminate impurity interference, a series of pure-substance systems were systematically employed to study the reaction behaviors and mechanisms of TiO The reaction behaviors and industrial hazards of TiO All hydrothermal reactions were performed in a KTFOZ-6.0 autoclave (Keli Research Institute of Automatic Control Equipment, Gaoxin District, Yantai City, China) ( The reaction products obtained in the pure substance systems above were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), specific surface area (SSA), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and particle size measurement, combined with thermodynamic analysis. The equilibrium composition of each specific system was thermodynamically analyzed by the Equilibrium Composition module of HSC Chemistry software (Outotec, Espoo, Finland). XRD analysis of the raw materials and products was performed in a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer, operated at 40 The reactions between TiO Regarding this problem, the reaction behaviors of TiO The thermodynamic results ( However, a significant difference is observed between the experimental results in aqueous solutions and the thermodynamic results calculated by the software relating to the reaction between TiO In alkaline solutions, the reaction behaviors of TiO  Free alkali in the Bayer system promotes the reactions of Ti-containing minerals. In the presence of elements like Al, Si, and Ca, TiO Hydrothermal experiments in the Na In order to avoid the influence of impurity elements, the TiO In order to determine the specific chemical formula of the generated sodium titanate, the equilibrium composition in the system was calculated thermodynamically using HSC Chemistry software. The results in The starting material of anatase and the solid products in In order to improve the crystallinity of the sodium titanate, the reaction conditions of TiO The physical properties of anatase and the reaction products were also characterized comparatively by particle size and SSA. From the compared size distribution curves ( Based on the pure-substance experiments above, amorphous sodium titanate can be formed similarly by the reaction between TiO The experiments above indicate that changes in kinetic factors alone (prolonging reaction time and reducing agitation speed) in the Bayer process cannot trigger the amorphous-to-crystalline transformation of sodium titanate. Regarding changes in thermodynamic factors, such as elevating the temperature, When CaO is added to the reaction system at n(CaO):n(TiO For the dispute over the adverse effect of TiO It can be concluded that the key to eliminate the adverse titanate effect lies in the titanate transformation from amorphous to crystalline state. Therefore, the preparation of new crystalline-accelerator is predicted as one of possible research tendencies for the prevention and control of titanate industrial hazards. TiO Increasing the temperature and alkaline concentration slightly promotes the amorphous-to-crystalline transformation, while increasing the reaction time and decreasing the agitation speed does not. Compared with these transformation approaches, the addition of CaO is the most effective way to trigger the complete conversion of amorphous sodium titanate to crystalline perovskite (CaTiO This study was financially supported by the