Mechanical and fracturing behaviors of natural rocks largely depend on the pattern of major discontinuities. The focus of this study is to elucidate the co-effects of the bedding planes and parallel structural flaws on the rock rupture and fracture coalescence. Uniaxial compression tests are conducted on the analogue rock specimens with various combinations of bedding inclinations (from 0° to 90°), bridge angles (-45°, 0° and 45°) and flaw directions (pro-dip and anti-dip). By analyzing the stress-strain curves and the fracture images recorded throughout the test processes, three stress-strain relationship types, six fracture arrays and seven coalescence categories of the structurally anisotropic rocks are generalized. The experimental results show that mechanical parameters, fracture propagation and fracture coalescence are significantly influenced by the arrangement of bedding planes and flaws. The occurrences of the different fracture arrays are also illustrated from the perspective of mechanisms. A careful comparison of the experimentally observed fracture arrays with field examples shows good applicability of the laboratory experiment to the practice. Stress states in the bridge areas are depicted, which account for the macroscopic coalescence patterns. The different coalescence behaviors resulting from the interplay of bedding planes and structural flaws have implications to the faulting process in bedded strata.Bedded rocks consisting of rock matrixes and discrete discontinuities are widely distributed in nature. Deformation of such rocks has attracted many researches because it is responsible for some of the tectonic phenomena in the bedded strata (hinge kinking, lozenge deforming, hangingwall faulting, etc.) ( Over the past few decades, the mechanical behaviors of bedded rocks have been extensively studied by means of physical experiments and numerical simulations ( Recently, the authors performed a series of uniaxial compression tests on bedded analogue rocks containing single structural flaws and subsequently summarized the fracturing process of the bedded rocks affected by the flaws ( Therefore, the focus of this study is to elucidate the co-effects of bedding planes and parallel flaws on the rupture and fracture coalescence in anisotropic rocks. A series of uniaxial compression tests are conducted on analogue rocks where different values of bedding inclinations, bridge angles and flaw directions are assigned. The report of this study is structured as follows – Section Analogs are widely used for investigating the mechanical behaviors of rocks ( In this study, bedded analogue rocks are composed of a mixture of general silicate cement, sand, bentonite and water. The standards for the ingredients and the curing conditions are listed in Three instruments, i.e., a bedding cutter, rock cutter and high-pressure water jet, are used for the fabrication of the bedded specimens containing two flaws. The details of the instruments are as follows. The bedding cutter (see The rock cutter (see The high-pressure water jet (see The procedure for fabricating a specimen is illustrated in Step 1: Mixing of ingredients. The preweighed ingredients are stirred evenly to reach a semifluid state. Then, the mixture is slowly poured into the cuboid vessel, which is placed on a vibration table; meanwhile, the vessel is vibrated at 1 Hz for 300 s to exhaust the air inside the mixture. Step 2: Making beddings. After 200 min of standing, the mixture is hardened to a semi-solid state like a jelly. At this moment, the cuboid vessel along with the mixture is placed on the pedestal of the bedding cutter, and the plates on the three sides of the vessel are dismantled. Then, the mixture is pushed horizontally through the steel wires in order to make parallel bedding planes at equal intervals of 10 mm. Step 3: Curing of sample. The bedded analog is cured at a temperature of 20 ℃ and humidity greater than 90% for 28 days, ensuring complete hardening. Step 4: Preparing specimen. First, the large bedded sample is cut by the rock cutter into prismatic specimens with dimensions of 142 × 72 × 40 mm. The specimens have parallel bedding planes at various bedding inclinations. Then, every specimen is cut through by the high-pressure water jet to fabricate two parallel flaws. The length and width of a single flaw are 20 mm and 2.0 mm, respectively.  The uniaxial compression tests are performed using an MTS 815 rock mechanic apparatus, which is composed of a loading machine and a controlling computer, as shown in The results of the uniaxial compression tests are grouped by every three specimens and presented in All of the axial stress-strain curves pass through four phases: incipient nonlinear growth, linear growth, pre-peak nonlinear growth and post-peak drop. In most cases, the curves exhibit a small drop when the fracture coalescences occur, indicating that the coalescence may release the stress. The stress-strain curves exhibit similar shapes in the first three phases but distinct variations in the last phase. Thus, the curves can be divided into three types regarding their trends in the last phase: Type A - Gradual decline: The curve declines gradually after it rises to the peak. This type indicates that the rock fails in ductile mode, although the slopes of the curves in the post-peak phase are slightly greater than those in the pre-peak phase. Type B - Fluctuating decline: After reaching the peak, the curve drops rapidly followed by a process of continual fluctuating increase-decrease without a stable residual strength. This type represents a transitional failure of the rock between the ductile and brittle modes. Type C - Sharp drop: The curve drops sharply to a small stress level after reaching the peak and then remains stable. Compared to the former two, this type denotes typical brittle failure of the rock. To explore the effects of geometries on the stress-strain types (i.e., failure modes), we present the types identified from all specimens in Four parameters, i.e., the uniaxial compressive strength ( The effect of the geometries on the The variation in the The The Due to the uniaxial compression, multiple micro cracks gradually come into being and then evolve into macro fractures, leading to the failure of a rock. In this study, the fracture patterns are extracted from the video images, based on which the rupture behaviors of rocks are characterized. Regarding the arrangements and mechanisms, six types of fractures (or arrays) are identified as illustrated in General tensile fractures: The fracture is triggered by the tensile stress and does not contain any shear component. The term 'general' is used to distinguish these from the tensile fractures along the beddings. Ageneral tensile fracture could have a wing (Form 1), anti-wing (Form 2) vertical (Form 3) or anti-vertical (Form 4) shape. Stepped fracture array (tension dominated): The fracture array forms mainly due to the tensile stress. The developments of some tiny segments along the bedding planes are attributed to shear stress localization. Stepped fracture array (shear dominated): The fracture array is triggered by the shear action. The shear segments propagate along the bedding planes, and the tensile components form between two bedding segments. These two types of fracture segments are arranged in a stepped form. Bedding-splitting fracture: The fracture propagates along the bedding plane under the action of stretching. This fracture type is most likely to occur when the bedding plane is parallel to the loading direction. Bedding-shear fracture: The fracture propagates approximately along the whole bedding plane under the action of shearing. En-echelon fracture array: The arrangement of the fracture members exhibits an en-echelon form. Each member occurs mainly due to the tensile stress characterized by a vertical trajectory and two inclined tips that present a sense of shearing. The fracture array types identified in each specimen are summarized in For the specimens with gentle bedding planes, the fracture types are mainly the general tensile fracture and stepped fracture array (tension dominated), which are triggered by tensile actions. For the specimens with steep bedding planes, the bedding-shear fracture and stepped fracture array (shear dominated) are the main fracture types, which exhibit typical shear nature. For the specimens with vertical bedding planes, the failures of all rocks are controlled by axial splitting fractures. A stepped fracture array (shear dominated) is more likely to form in the specimens containing pro-dip flaws, while an en-echelon fracture array is prone to initiate in the specimens containing anti-dip flaws. This phenomenon indicates that shear and tensile stresses control the fracturing processes of bedded rocks containing pro-dip and anti-dip flaws, respectively. Compared to the specimens with negative bridge angles, an en-echelon fracture array is more likely to initiate in those with positive bridge angles. The damage severity of a specimen can be reflected by the NFR curve, which is illustrated synchronously with the stress-strain curves in By using video images, we captured the fracture pattern from the central area of 60 × 80 mm for each fractured specimen, as shown in Furthermore, the fracture coalescence categories identified in all specimens are listed in The fractures forming in a rock are always arranged in certain arrays due to a uniform stress field. We summarize the common fracture arrays identified in the anisotropic rocks in Section The en-echelon array, whose member fractures are parallel and arranged in en-echelon form, is commonly observed in fault damage zones ( Wing fractures are commonly initiated at the tip of a pre-existing fault in the field because such fractures can rapidly release the energy accumulated in the rock around the tip ( The stepped fracture array is a unique fracture mode in bedded rocks compared to those in homogeneous rocks. Regarding the mechanisms, the stepped fracture arrays are divided into two types, namely, stepped fractures dominated by the tension and by the shear, respectively, as described in Section The experimental images show that the macroscopic fracturing of a rock originates from the fracture coalescence between two structural flaws. Owing to the presence of bedding planes, bedded rocks exhibit anisotropic coalescence behaviors compared to homogeneous rocks. For comparison, we present the fracture coalescence images and the relative stress states of the rock bridges of homogenous rock and of bedded rocks with different bedding inclinations ( The fracture types and coalescence categories of bedded rocks with gentle bedding planes are quite similar to those of homogenous rock, but their differences are increasingly greater by steepening the bedding planes. Both coalescences categories 2 and 4 form in bedded rocks with Summarizing from To further explore the role of bedding inclination in coalescing fractures, the bedding fracture ratio (  In addition, although both of the flawed rocks in The comparison of the fracture coalescence affected by the bridge angle is illustrated in This study is an extension of our previous experimental study on single-flawed rocks ( In the single-flawed rock tests, fractures generally initiate from the flaw tips and propagate into the surrounding areas of the specimens. The specimens containing gentle beddings mainly develop tension-dominated fractures, which may locally propagate along the beddings; Steeper bedding planes tend to promote the development of shear fractures, and even those entirely going through the bedding planes. In double-flawed rock specimens, new fractures appear almost simultaneously from the outer tips of the flaws and the rock bridge area, leading to the fracture coalescence throughout the specimen and thus the rock failure. Such fracture pattern is particularly pronounced in the regimes of bridge angle ≥0°. The mechanism is explained as the release of accumulated energy in rock bridge area due to the applied loadings, which occurs when the loading excesses the strength limit. For the pro-dip beddings, fracture attributes regarding the spatial distribution and the nature are similar in single-flawed and double-flawed specimens. In the case of anti-dip beddings, the fracture density is remarkably larger in single-flawed specimens than that in the double-flawed specimens. As presented in The fracture arrays observed in single-flawed specimens are summarized in The roles of the bedding planes and flaws on fracture evolution are explored by assigning different values of bedding inclination, bridge angle and flaw direction to analogue rocks. Three stress-strain relationship types, six fracture arrays and seven fracture coalescence categories are identified from uniaxial compression tests on the anisotropic rocks. The presence of bedding planes and parallel flaws significantly affects the mechanical behaviors of the rocks. The co-effects of bedding planes and parallel flaws are outlined in The en-echelon fracture array, where the minimum principal stress is perpendicular to the trajectories of the fracture members, is triggered by the coaction of the tension and shear. The wing fracture array initiates due to the shear action along pre-existing flaws, although the wing fracture exhibit the tensile nature. The stepped fracture array dominated by the shear has longer bedding fracture segments than that dominated by the tension; furthermore, the bedding segments of the former one are triggered by the compression-shear action, while the bedding segments of the latter one initiate due to the tension-shear action. Comparisons with field examples show a good fit of the experimentally based results of fracture arrays to the practice. The variations in geometric parameters make the change of the stress state in bridge areas, resulting in distinct fracture coalescence behaviors. Contrasts of the coalescence behaviors under various geometric conditions provide an insight to the faulting process in bedded strata. We have no conflicts of interests to disclose. We also confirm that this work is original and has not been published elsewhere, nor is it currently under consideration for publication elsewhere. This research was funded by the