The requirement to dewater finely dispersed products is rising world-wide. Because the flow resistance increases with decreasing particle size, the mechanical dewatering of fine particle suspensions is time-consuming. The electrofiltration potential increases with the particle surface area. Therefore the combination of mechanical and electrical filtration seems to be an effective method to enhance the filtration kinetics. Experiments at the Institute of Mechanical Process Engineering and Mechanics (MVM) at the University of Karlsruhe (TH) showed that this combination results in an acceleration of the filtration kinetics. Thus the filtration time was less than half compared to traditional pressure filtration. If an electric field is applied in addition to pressure dewatering, four additional effects occur. On the one hand, the electrokinetic effects of electroosmosis and electrophoresis benefit filtration. The electrophoresis decreases the migration velocity of the particles. The electroosmosis moves the surrounding diffusive layer of the particles and promotes the filtration flow. On the other hand, electrolysis and a decrease in thermal viscosity occur. As a result of the applied electric field, the fluid is electrolytically decomposed and electrolytic gas is generated. This gas displaces water but also increases the electric resistance between the electrodes. The electric resistance of the bulk converts electrical energy into thermal energy, resulting in a temperature rise of the suspension or filter cake. An increasing temperature causes a lower viscosity and easier dewatering. These single effects and their influence on the process have to be known in order to succeed in industrial implementation of the process. The dewatering effect of the generated electrolytic gas can be calculated by a continuity balance. The change in viscosity can be eliminated by knowledge of the temperature. Based on the root equation of cake building filtration, Yukawa developed an equation for pressure electrofiltration. The electrokinetic effects can be separated using this equation. The electroosmotic pressure and the electrophoretic coefficient can then be calculated if the filter media and bulk resistance are known. Experiments on a specially constructed pressure/electro filter showed that the acceleration of the filtration kinetics is mainly caused by electrophoresis. Electroosmosis only has a little effect. The bulk resistance, which mainly influences the filtration kinetics, will be abated by the electrophoretically reduced particle velocity.slope (s/m filtration area (m ordinate cut (s/m volume concentration (−) electric field strength (V/m) critical electric field strength (V/m) liquid pressure (bar) solid grid pressure (bar) electroosmotic pressure (bar) hydraulic pressure (bar) spec. cake resistance (1/m resistance of filter medium (1/m) time (s) temperature ( voltage (V) filtrate volume (m porosity (−) dynamic viscosity [kg/(m·s)] concentration factor (−) density (kg/m zeta potential (V) The task of separating solids from liquids is important in nearly every field of industrial production: waste water treatment and environmental protection, mineral processing industry, coal and ore, basic chemicals and synthetic fertiliser, colour and pigment chemistry, pharmacy, food industry and biotechnology, drinking water treatment, just to name a few. In order to reduce the energy requirements for solid/liquid separation, mechanical separation processes based on filtration and sedimentation precede thermal dewatering processes. Because thermal separation processes such as drying and evaporation need a lot of energy, which also causes CO Because the flow resistance increases with decreasing particle size, the mechanical dewatering of fine particle suspensions is time-consuming. The electrofiltration potential increases with the particle surface area. In this way the combination of mechanical and electrical filtration seems to be an effective method to enhance filtration kinetics. The positive effect of an electric field on filter cake dewatering has been known for several years. However, this method has not yet been successfully applied in industry. The positive effect which emerged while working with certain materials under laboratory conditions was often much lower under pilot conditions or if a different material was used. Therefore a larger economic effort wouldn't have been justified. The reason is that if an electric field is applied to a suspension or a filter cake, four processes, which partly have opposite effects, take place simultaneously. These processes are electrophoresis, electroosmosis, electrolysis and a reduction in viscosity due to thermal effects. These single effects and their influence on the process have to be known to succeed in industrial implementation of the process. A method to separate these effects will be shown and their influence on filtration kinetics and residual moisture will be discussed in the following chapters. If solid particles are in contact with electrolytic fluids, the distribution of electric charge carriers at the phase boundary is different from the distribution within the solid as well as within the liquid phase. This accumulation of ions at the phase boundary is mostly caused by the dissociation of molecular groups and/or by specific adsorption of anions and cations The existing boundary charge attracts ions of opposite charge from the layer near the interface. Referring to the ‘model of Stern’ some of these dissolved ions are attracted so strongly to the surface that they can be regarded as fixed to the particle. The other ions form a diffusive layer around the particle. In this model of the concrete diffusive double layer, Stern combines the models of Helmholtz and Gouy-Chapman. In the concrete fixed double layer of Helmholtz, the potential decreases linearly with the distance. The model of the diffusive layer of Gouy-Chapman assumes an exponential decrease in the potential into the solution The model of Stern includes both models as boundaries. If there is a high concentration of ions of opposite charge, the model of Stern passes into the model of Helmholtz If the particle moves within the liquid, a shearplane is formed around the particle. The difference in potential between this shearplane and the bulk liquid is called the Zeta potential. In a first approximation, this shearplane lies in the Stern layer, i.e. in the boundary between the rigid and diffusive double layers, and therefore the Zeta potential is often considered as equal to the Stern potential. The electrokinetic effects due to the developing double layer are: electroosmosis: during the application of an electric field, the charged fluid of the diffusive double layer moves relative to the solid phase; streaming potential: because of the hydraulic pressure, the fluid flows around the particles and causes a change in electric potential; electrophoresis: during the application of an electric field, the colloidal particles move relative to the surrounding fluid; sedimentation potential: a change in electric potential is caused by colloidal particles moving due to gravity or a centrifugal field. The voltage which is applied to the electrodes during electrokinetic experiments is generally higher than the decomposition voltage plus the possible kinetic restriction, so that electrolysis reactions automatically take place. But these reactions are hardly considered in electrokinetic literature, and if they are mentioned a gas production due to electrolysis is only pointed out as the reason for deviation from the predicted behaviour Possible anode reactions are: Possible cathode reactions are: Yukawa Transformation and integration of The investigations were executed with specially designed pressure electrofiltration apparatus (see The results recorded on-line are the filtrate accumulation, the piston height, the temperature in the filtrate collecting system as well as the voltage and the current of the power supply unit. The voltage is tuned by the measuring program. The cathode is a perforated plate and the anode is a high-grade steel disk. The filter area is 51 cm The investigations can be divided into simple pressure filtration attempts and pressure electrofiltration attempts. The pressure filtration attempts took place at a pressure of Quartz sand SF 800 (density The filtrate volume and the piston height of a typical pressure filtration and pressure electrofiltration attempt are shown in Both attempts start at the same initial altitude and end with an identical equilibrium height, where the pressure electrofiltration attempt achieves this value faster. This increased kinetic response can also be observed in the filtrate volume, which results in a faster and larger measure. The increased kinetic response is shown in The following chapters describe which mechanisms triggered by the applied electric field are responsible for the accelerated kinetics and the increased filtrate volume, although the residual moisture is only slightly reduced. The gas resulting from the electrolytic decomposition of water has effects on the system in question. At the cathode this gas displaces liquid from the completely filled filtrate collecting system. At the anode the gas displaces filtrate from the suspension because it cannot escape to the outside. At the end of filtration the gas is stored in the cake, whereby the cake is no longer saturated and the residual moisture is reduced. The influence of the electrolytic gas on the filtrate volume, or the filtrate volume displaced by electrolytic gas, can be calculated by a continuum balance, because the increased filtrate volume referred to the suspension volume must have been caused by the emergent electrolytic gas. The electrolytically displaced filtrate volume and the electrolytically reduced filtrate volume are shown in A view of the electrolytically displaced filtrate volume in The rapid rise with achievement of the final cake height can be explained by examining the liquid and solid pressure distribution during the filtration and consolidation phase (see In the consolidation phase, in which the solid grid carries the applied pressure and the liquid pressure equalises the ambient pressure, the gas formed at the anode expands according to the Boyle-Mariotte law The electrolytically caused filtrate volume for different voltages is shown in Due to the inner electric resistance of the suspension or the bulk, electric energy is converted into thermal energy. Because of the heating of the liquid the viscosity decreases according to the following formula: The temperature of the filtrate flowing out of the bulk could be measured using a thermocouple attached below the cathode in the filtrate collecting system. The temperature of the pressure electrofiltration attempt started at The influence of the temperature can be detected in a flatter gradient of the non-corrected data. With knowledge of the corrected From the comparison, the acceleration of filtration kinetics results in approximately 25% by thermal heating of the suspension. This proportion decreases with arising energy input. For a voltage of Splitting of the thermal and electrolytic processes showed that the main influence with the acceleration of filtration kinetics results from electrokinetic effects. Using the presented method of Yukawa, the electrokinetic effects of electroosmosis and electrophoresis can be quantified by application of the inverse of filtrate volume over filtrate volume. The values in With this data, the resistance of the filter medium The electrophoretic coefficient could be reduced by increasing the energy input, i.e. the electrophoretic effect could be enhanced. However, a definite modification of the electroosmotic pressure with rising energy input could not be observed. Although a low voltage of Although the positive influence of the electric field on the dewatering of a suspension or a bulk has been known for several years, the use of electrofiltration is very rare because four processes with partly opposite effects take place simultaneously. The The model of Yukawa can be used for the mathematical description of the pressure electrofiltration processes, and extends the principal equation of the cake-forming filtration by the effects of electroosmosis and electrophoresis. The executed pressure electrofiltration attempts showed that the residual moisture can only be slightly lowered by the electrical field, which is only due to the generated electrolytic gas. However, an acceleration of filtration kinetics occurs caused by the electric field. The individual effects can be separated using the presented method. The electrolytic effect was calculated by use of a continuum balance. The influence of the heating up of the bulk on filtration kinetics could be eliminated by the viscosity. The resulting electrokinetic effects were calculated using the equation of Yukawa. The reason for the decrease in filtration time was primarily assigned to the electrophoretic and thermal effects, whereas the electrophoretic influence grows with increasing energy input. A rational use of the electric field should aim at accelerating the filtration kinetics and not in decreasing the residual moisture.