A novel approach for the management of solid and liquid wastes of mining was implemented in this work. Unmodified and modified metallurgical solid wastes, sulfate tailings, were used as adsorbents for the removal of cyanide ions from synthetic mine process water. Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (ED-XRF), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and nitrogen adsorption methods, based on Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) theory, were used for analysis of composition, structure and surface area of the adsorbents. A wet-granulation method was used for preparation of granules from sorbent powders with polyvinyl acetate as a binder and the further modification of the sorbent surface was carried out by atomic layer deposition (ALD) of Al2O3. The granules were used for the removal of cyanide ions from synthetic solutions by batch adsorption method. ALD-modified sorbent showed approximately 3.5 mmol g−1 adsorption capacity for cyanide ions. The adsorption isotherm was fitted with Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption models. The cyanide ions on the modified sorbent surface is enabled to form a stable and non-toxic cyanide complex in the solution, which can be reused as the complexing agent in the metallurgical industries.Cyanides are inexpensive and efficient reagents, which are used in various industrial processes, such as mining and exploration, pharmaceutical industry, agriculture ( The cyanide ion has a high affinity for gold and silver, which allows to be used effectively for metal extraction ( On the other hand, cyanide and its compounds are very toxic to living organisms and able to replace copper and sulphur-containing compounds, thereby disrupting oxygen transport processes in the cells ( Many studies have been reported for cyanide removal during the last decade: viz. photoelectrocatalytic ( In particular, potassium cyanide is neutralized with iron sulfide or iron hydroxide to form a non-toxic and insoluble ferrocyanide complex: Due to the selectivity and affinity of iron sulphide for cyanides, FeS-containing materials are used as a complexing agent to remove cyanides from solutions, and in particular from industrial water ( The mining and processing of mineral extraction generate a billion metric tons of solid waste annually. The majority of the waste are sulfate tailings. For some minerals, the amount of tailings might reach from 20% to 98%. Basic treatment procedure for tailings is storage in lakes until dewatered ( Two sulfate tailings (CaFe-Cake and SuFe) were provided by Norilsk Nickel Harjavalta, Finland. Both materials were wastes from the metal extraction process. Before use, the sulfate tailings were dried at 60 °C for 12 h in hot air oven (9000 Series, Termaks, Norway). After drying, agglomeration of tailings particles was observed, so both materials were ground to increase homogeneity. A wet-granulation with polyvinyl acetate as a binder was chosen ( A high shear granulator (Kenwood KM070, Japan) was used for the granulation of materials. Sulfate tailing powders (150 g) were added to the mixer. The binder was added with the powders without stopping the rotator. The mixing of powder and binder occurred within 120 s to form granules; the impeller speed was 220 rpm. The optimal concentration of binder was selected by the addition of PVAc with different concentrations (from 10 to 40 wt%) during the granulation process and it was found to be 30 wt%. The viscosities of the binder solutions were determined by the Haake Viscotester C. Trimethyl aluminum (TMA) was used as a precursor for the deposition of Al Since the modification of sulfate tailings if a multi-step process, which included granulation of raw material, drying and ALD coating, the average price of prepared sorbents is approximately 11.50 € kg The chemical composition of sulfate tailings was determined with an energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (ED-XRF) analyser X-Art (Joint Stosk Company Comita, St. Petersburg, Russia). FTIR spectra of raw, unmodified granulated and modified granulated sorbents were recorded with a Bruker Vertex 70v spectrometer. The particle size distribution of the materials was obtained using a dispersion analyser, LUMiSizer 610/611 (LUM GmbH). Zeta-potential of raw and developed sorbents was determined with ZetaSizer Nano ZS, Malvern, UK, and calculated from electrophoretic mobility measurements using the Schmalukowski equation. The samples were characterized with nitrogen sorption at 196 °C using a TriStar 3000 (Micromeritics Inc., USA). The specific surface area of the samples was calculated using the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) theory. Microstructure of the surface of raw and modified materials was examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nova Nano SEM 200, FEI Company). All experiments were carried out at low vacuum conditions in a secondary electron mode. Granules wettability was tested by mixing a known amount of granules with water at ambient temperature for 72 h. The strength and size of granules were determined before and after the wettability tests. After testing, all granules were dried in an oven at 80 °C for 12 h. All experiments were carried out at room temperature (22 °C) with mixing time and speed of 2 min and 490 rpm, respectively. The granule strength was measured from diametric compression of the single granules using previously described methods ( Sorption tests of cyanide were conducted by mixing a known dose (from 0.5 to 40 g L The percentage adsorption was calculated as: The zeta potential was calculated from electrophoretic mobility measurements using the Schmalukowski equation. Known amount of solid samples were conditioned in 50 mL of 0.001 M NaCl solutions at various final pHs for 24 h in a shaking bath. Each reported point value was an average of approximately 20 measurements. The pH of the suspension was adjusted using 0.01–1.0 M HCl and KOH. The granules produced should be stable under aqueous conditions for a longer period of time to allow for the use in wastewater treatment. The binder solution viscosity and matrix of the granulation test are presented in According to XRF analysis, the contents of iron are 10 wt% and 39 wt% for CaFe-Cake and SuFe, respectively ( Comparative data of chemical composition, specific surface area and pore size of original and granulated unmodified and modified materials are shown in SEM pictures ( It can be seen in However, the removal percentage increased upon increasing time and reached the maximum at 360 min for unmodified and 210 min for modified sorbents ( The pseudo-second order model described the adsorption process of cyanides better and assumed two-site-occupancy adsorption by the rate of the surface reaction (Eq. The pseudo-second-order model suggested that the system includes at least two reacting components with formation of one or two other compounds ( The adsorption of formed ferrocyanide complex by aluminum oxide which was coated to the modified sorbents can take place as additional sorption mechanism of cyanide removal from solution. The high adsorption capacity of Al Zeta potential measurements were carried out over the pH from 1 to 10 and shown in Oxidation of cyanide directly depends on solution pH. The removal of cyanide with both adsorbents occurs easily at pH 3–4 and with more positive values of the surface charge. Removal efficiency decreased significantly from 97% to 60% as pH increased from 6 to 9 ( The adsorption isotherms are used to explain the mechanism of pollutant removal. Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were used for the description of cyanide removal mechanism in this research: Isotherm parameters were calculated with minimization of the error distribution between experimental and predicted data by Marquardt’s percent standard deviation (MPSD): The maximum uptake capacity for cyanide ions was about three times higher for both modified sorbents than for unmodified ( Two parameters of the Freundlich isotherm that take into account the heterogeneity of sorbents surface describe the cyanide adsorption better than Langmuir. These data correlated with previous reports on cyanide removal from solutions with Freundlich isotherms ( The comparative analysis of maximum adsorption capacity of modified adsorbents and other reported adsorbents for cyanide ions is presented in The high affinity of cyanide ions to metal cations is resulted from the strong complex formation with iron compounds. The complex of hexacyanoferrate(II) ions produced by the reaction of Fe In this study, solid waste “sulfate tailing” were used as a potential source for the development of efficient adsorbent for the selective removal of cyanide ions from synthetic mine water. Granular materials from the solid wastes were obtained with a high strength which were used for the selective removal of cyanide ions from acidic wastewater and it was found to be very efficient even for very high concentration of cyanide ions. Approximately 97% removal was obtained for the 300 mg L Strong ferrocyanide complex formation prevents cyanide ions desorption into the solution. Surface modification with ALD increased granules strength and sorption capacities of sulfate tailings about three and five times, respectively. Modification of adsorbent reduced the adsorption time of cyanide ions by 40% and also less adsorbent dose of modified adsorbent is needed for cyanide removal in comparison to unmodified adsorbent. Removal of cyanides with modified sulfate tailings followed two different mechanisms. The first is the formation of ferrocyanide complex from iron and cyanide ions while the second is sorption of ferrocyanide with aluminum oxide coated to the sorbent surface during modification with ALD. The double retention of cyanide ions on the modified sorbent surface is enabled to form a stable and non-toxic cyanide complex in the solution, which can be reused as the complexing agent in the metallurgical industries. The removal of cyanide ions from water with sulfate tailings is a rapid and effective method, which allows reusing solid wastes and can be used for the treatment of cyanide polluted wastewater. Finnish Funding Agency for