The separation of different kind of plastic particles is required in the process of waste recycling. For the separation, drum processes with liquid can be used. The separation is based on the principle that particles either sink or float in a liquid depending on their densities. In this study, this process is numerically analysed for the separation of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) from polypropylene (PP) particles. The discrete element method coupled with the smoothed particle hydrodynamics method (DEM-SPH) is used for modelling purposes. The employment of the SPH for the modelling of the liquid exploits the strong side of this meshless method, namely, the relative ease in modelling large movements of the fluid with free surfaces and moving boundaries. This theoretical model is presented, and verification tests are performed, where a dam-break problem is considered as an example. Simulations of the plastic particle separation in the rotating drum are performed thereafter. The influences of the different operational and design parameters, such as the rotational velocity, feed rate, and number of lifters on the resultant purity of the plastic are estimated. It is expected that, in the future, the performed analysis will allow the numerical optimisation of drum separation processes.Mechanical plastic recycling is currently one of the weakest steps in recycling because only a low percentage of plastic waste is reused compared to the amount of recovered metal, glass, and waste paper Mechanical plastic recycling processes can be divided into wet and dry separation techniques. Among the wet processes, drum separators based on the float-sink principle The successful separation of binary plastic mixtures in rotating drums was studied experimentally by Dodbiba et al. Potentially, numerical modelling could contribute to the improvement of wet separation of particles. The discrete element method (DEM) can be used for modelling plastic particles. The DEM was first proposed by Cundall and Strack in 1979 and since then has been widely used in many areas of powder technology and mechanical process engineering By modelling a mixed fluid-particle system, a coupling between solid particles and fluid is required. In the coupled system, the fluid phase can be modelled at the sub-particle level such that the momentum exchange between fluid and particles is resolved in detail For modelling the fluid flow, the Navier-Stokes equations are usually solved using mesh-based methods, like finite volume or finite element methods Recently, the two-way coupling between DEM and SPH based on a local averaging technique was proposed by Gao and Herbst In the current investigation, the wet separation of plastic particles in a rotating drum is analysed numerically. The two-way coupled DEM-SPH method is used for this purpose. In our earlier work The DEM is used for modelling the solid particles. Newton's second law governs the motion of each particle: The SPH method The continuity equation and the momentum equation in a Lagrangian framework take the form The SPH particles carry variables, such as velocity, pressure, and mass. While no connectivity is modelled between the SPH particles, the function values are interpolated from the neighbouring particles using a smoothing kernel function. The kernel function is defined so that its value monotonously decreases as the distance between particles increases. The smoothing length An equation of state is used to estimate the pressure from the density field in the weakly compressible SPH method The continuity Eq. The momentum conservation Eq. The third term on the right-hand side in Eq. ( Furthermore, The fluid volume fraction Fluid particles are moved using a velocity smoothed by the average in their neighbourhood according to the kernel function (i.e., XSPH variant introduced by Monaghan An often-discussed topic in the SPH literature is the use of boundary conditions The interaction force acting on a solid particle In the current study, the correlation proposed by Di Felice Assuming that the pressure gradient ∇ The force For verification purposes of the theoretical model presented in In this test, a part of a rectangular container is filled with water (  A simulation of the dam-break problem, in which water is laden with solid particles, is performed as a second test case. The numerical results are compared with the experimental results reported by Sun et al. In A numerical analysis of the separation of plastic particles using a rotating drum is performed. The outline of the drum is presented in The separation of PET from PP is simulated. The density of PET particles is 1350 In the simulations, a simplified scheme of the laboratory scale drum shown in Overall, 10 simulations are performed to analyse the sensitivity of the separation quality to different parameters. The considered parameters are given in Several snapshots of the simulation of the BS at different instances of time are presented in The mass of the fed plastic particles and plastic particles inside the drum during the simulation are shown in From the amount of the removed particles, a mass flow rate is calculated. Because particles can be removed either when they are lifted to the SRZ, or when they float through the left opening in the drum (FRZ; see The influence of separating vertical walls (see A numerical analysis of the influence of the rotational velocity of the drum is conducted. In addition to the BS simulation, where the drum is rotated at 0.5 A completely different situation can be seen in the S2 simulation; just a very few PP particles are lifted into the SRZ; therefore, the ‘S2 SRZ PP’ curve always remains at zero level. This is observed because, when the drum rotates more slowly, the PP and PET particles have more time to separate from each other, and PP particles are not caught together with PET particles. The ‘BS SRZ PP’ curve remains at an intermediate level between corresponding S2 and S3 results. Thus, the rotational drum velocity has a big influence on the resulting purity of the separated particles. In the BS simulation, four lifters (see The influence of the feed rate of solid particles on the sorting process is analysed. Simulations with three different feed rates of solid particles are performed: BS with a feed rate of 29.3 The mixture of solid particles can be fed into the drum with different amounts of water. The influence of the water feed rate is analysed by performing three simulations with water feed rates of 1.035 The resultant PET purity obtained in the simulations is summarised in As seen in In the present study, an application of a coupled DEM-SPH scheme for the analysis of wet plastic particle separation was presented. The DEM-SPH scheme was described, and dam-break tests were performed. The results were compared with published results found in literature, which, together with our earlier study This project has received funding from the