Preoperative planning is important for all shoulder arthroplasty indications, but it is most crucial for fracture cases. Although proximal humeral anatomy may be somewhat distorted by prolonged wear and osteophyte formation in cases of chronic disease for which shoulder arthroplasty is performed, most reliable anatomic landmarks remain consistent despite the disease process. In fracture cases, however, these normally reliable landmarks are often displaced, thus making them useless as points of reference. Because of the lack of recognizable landmarks, preoperative planning is critical to establish the proper position for humeral stem implantation. Thorough preoperative planning minimizes the risk of placing the humeral stem at the incorrect height or version. Preoperative planning is of paramount importance and is detailed in this chapter. Additionally, important aspects of the clinical history and physical examination, the radiographic examination, and secondary imaging studies are highlighted.Preoperative planning is important for all shoulder arthroplasty indications, but it is most crucial for fracture cases. Although proximal humeral anatomy may be somewhat distorted by prolonged wear and osteophyte formation in cases of chronic disease for which shoulder arthroplasty is performed, most reliable anatomic landmarks remain consistent despite the disease process. In fracture cases, however, these normally reliable landmarks are often displaced, thus making them useless as points of reference. Because of the lack of recognizable landmarks, preoperative planning is critical to establish the proper position for humeral stem implantation. Thorough preoperative planning minimizes the risk of placing the humeral stem at the incorrect height or version. A thorough history is taken of the antecedent trauma responsible for the fracture. Most often, these proximal humeral fractures are caused by a fall from a standing position. Elucidation of the reason for the fall should be sought to assist in evaluating any underlying contributing medical conditions (i.e., syncope as a symptom of cardiac arrhythmia). The presence of any shoulder problems before the fracture should be noted in the history. A previous history of shoulder pathology, such as a massive rotator cuff tear or glenohumeral arthritis, influences surgical decision making (i.e., the type of prosthesis to be implanted, such as an unconstrained fracture prosthesis or reverse shoulder prosthesis). Physical examination in a patient with an acute proximal humeral fracture is limited so that the patient will not be subjected to pain unnecessarily. A detailed neurovascular examination is performed with specific attention to the sensory and motor function of the axillary nerve. The sensory function of the axillary nerve can always be evaluated by testing sensibility to touch of the posterior aspect of the upper part of the arm (superior lateral brachial cutaneous branch of the axillary nerve). Motor function of the axillary nerve may be more difficult to evaluate because pain induced by the fracture may inhibit deltoid contraction. The condition of the soft tissues, particularly anterior at the planned surgical site, is meticulously evaluated. Three radiographic views are obtained in all patients with a proximal humeral fracture. We prefer the same radiographic views that we obtain for patients being considered for unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty for chronic conditions: an anteroposterior view of the glenohumeral joint with the arm in neutral rotation ( Computed tomography is performed in all patients with substantially displaced proximal humeral fractures ( Placement of the prosthesis at the correct height and version remains one of the most difficult challenges in performing shoulder arthroplasty for fracture, especially with unconstrained humeral head replacement. Sumant “Butch” Krishnan has developed a technique for prosthetic positioning that we have found useful and reproducible; he terms the technique “restoration of the Gothic arch.” When using this technique it is necessary to perform preoperative planning with anteroposterior radiographs of the affected and unaffected humeri. From this radiograph, the length of the humerus from the superior aspect of the humeral head to the transepicondylar axis is measured and normalized for magnification. This measurement is obtained by first establishing the prosthetic axis proximally within the humeral canal. This is done by measuring the center point of the proximal diaphysis at two locations and connecting these points with a line running the length of the humerus. Next, a line perpendicular to the prosthetic axis is drawn at the superior aspect of the humeral head ( By using the anteroposterior humeral radiograph of the affected extremity, the prosthetic axis and transepicondylar axis are established ( Placement of the prosthesis at the correct height and version is critical for reverse shoulder arthroplasty for fracture. Use of specialized instrumentation enhances the surgeon's ability to place the prosthesis at the correct height and version to help ensure stability of the reverse prosthesis. A height gauge that attaches to the humeral trial implant and the final humeral implant is used to reproduce humeral height and humeral version (see