Hexagonal WO3 (h-WO3) nanosheets (NSs), nanoparticles (NPs) and nanorods (NRs) were synthesized by a facile, low-cost and environmentally friendly hydrothermal and sol-hydrothermal methods. The structure and morphology of the products were characterized by several techniques, such as XRD, FESEM, TEM, and HRTEM. These results showed that the as-prepared WO3 were hexagonal nanosheets and the diameter was about 400 nm. Gas sensing tests of side-heating sensors indicated that the h-WO3 NSs had the superior selectivity and sensitivity for BTEX vapors (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and p-xylol), which was 9 times more than h-WO3 NPs and NRs. At the optimal working temperature of 320 °C, the values of response based on the h-WO3 NSs sensor to 50 ppm BTEX vapors were 12.33, 27.73, 43.17, 36.27, respectively. The gas sensing mechanism of h-WO3 NSs was discussed in terms of DFT calculation, together with the XRD patterns. The results revealed that the adsorption energy of (100) facet to chemically adsorbed O2 molecules was more than that of (200) facet, which demonstrated strongly dependence on its exposed crystal facets to enhance gas sensing performance.With the rapid development of science and technology, people's quality of life is generally improved. At the same time, it also brings a lot of potential hazards and pollution. Out of the door, we are badly affected by the car exhaust, industrial waste gas, PM 2.5 and other atmospheric pollutants [ Nowadays, there are gas chromatography sensors [ Well known, oxide semiconductor sensor detects a certain gas by detecting a change in surface resistance of materials as a detection signal. That is to say, a redox reaction occurs on the surface of the sensors. Hence, the sensing performance is largely determined by the morphology of the metal oxide and the exposed crystal plane. The influences of morphology and exposed crystals on gas sensing properties have been reported in many references. For instance, Yao et al. [ In this paper, we reported a facile and effective one-pot hydrothermal method to synthesize hexagonal WO All the reagents employed in the experiments were of analytical grade, and used as received without further purification from Shanghai Chemical Industrial Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China) unless otherwise noted. Hexagonal WO h-WO 8.1 g (0.025 mol) Na 1.0 The crystalline structure was characterized by the powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a DX-2700 diffractometer using Cu K The as-fabricated gas sensor was based on our previous report [ The as-obtained gas sensor was placed in a testing system of HW-30A (Hanwei Electronics Co., Ltd., PR China). The testing principle and method are according to our previous report [ First of all, we prepared the h-WO The morphologies of h-WO Herein, the gas sensing properties of the as-prepared samples were examined. As is well-known, the working temperature of the sensor has a great influence on the sensing performance of the material. The responses of the different sensors based on h-WO The response/recovery time play a crucial role in a gas sensor. Moreover, it is also important to explore the effect of humidity on sensor. As shown in In order to compare the gas-sensing properties of h-WO As is well-known, WO In general, O Clearly, the level of response is related to the amount of electrons released, so the electron donating groups play an important role such as methyl and ethyl on the benzene ring, which can not only increase sensitivity but also help to accelerate the transmission of electrons. Therefore, compared with benzene vapor, the NSs sensor had superior sensitivity for the detection of toluene, ethylbenzene and p-xylol vapors. More significantly, h-WO To the best of our knowledge, chemisorbed oxygen plays a vital role in the gas sensing of h-WO In summary, h-WO This research was supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: