The removal of sulphate ions constitutes one of the main challenges in the mining, metallurgical and chemical industries, among others. Sulphate removal from aqueous streams is by far one of the most difficult and onerous tasks in these industries, and most existing processes are inefficient and costly. This work presents a method to remove sulphate ions in an acidic medium based on co-precipitation with aluminum salts, namely AlCl3 and a polyaluminum salt (PAC), followed by filtration. Herein, the different Al species react differently with sulphate, forming soluble and insoluble complexes, the latter of which causes insolubility and allows for the removal. The reaction kinetics depend on the activity of the so-called Alb species (which are classified as polymeric) and was proved here by different techniques. Better results were obtained with the inorganic salt AlCl3, when compared to PAC, probably because of the higher activity of the Al species. Co-precipitation of sulphate depends highly on the pH (which is optimal at 4.5), the mass ratio between reagents and sulphate ions (which is optimal at 7:1) and time (10min). Finally, it was concluded that the technique proposed here has good potential for the treatment of sulphate-bearing effluents, including acid mining drainage (AMD).Sulphate ions are naturally present in several mineral and metallurgical wastewaters after processing Barite (BaSO The reactions involving the oxidation of pyrite are expressed as follows ( If the oxidation potential is maintained, the proton acidity produced (Eq. AMD eventually migrates into superficial and subterranean waters, small streams and rivers, creating severe problems in coal- and ore-producing countries ( Other industrial activities involve handling sulphate ion-bearing effluents found in the production of fertilisers, dyes, glass, paper, soaps, textiles, fungicides, leather and metals. Sulphate can cause various kinds of problems depending on its concentration and on the earth alkaline cation ( Sulphate ions are some of the main contributors to so-called water “mineralisation”, thereby increasing the conductivity and corrosion potential of receptor bodies. These anions promote the following, among other things: corrosion and scaling in pipes, structures and equipment; fouling and deposition in boilers; and acidification of soils and blockage of soil pores, retarding irrigation or water drainage ( The World Health Organisation (WHO) has established the maximum tolerable level of sulphate in water as 500 The removal of sulphate ions from such waters is a complex problem due to the high solubility and stability of these anions in aqueous solutions. Partial sulphate ions removal is often accomplished through precipitation with lime ( The main processes for treating sulphate ion-bearing water are as follows: (1) biological degradation ( Many researchers have studied the coagulation performance of PACs, even for sulphate ion removal (   This work is part of a series of articles aimed at enhancing and provoking discussion on the removal of sulphate ions by physicochemical mechanisms. This first study evaluates the co-precipitation of sulphate ions onto aluminum colloids. The results are explained by the thermodynamic solution equilibrium and the electrostatic attractions between the sulphate ions and aluminum species. Sodium sulphate anhydrous (P.A.) was employed in the preparation of sulphate solutions. Polyaluminum chloride (Panfloc® TE1018 – Pan-Americana S.A.) and aluminum chloride (AlCl The pH of the solution was determined using the pH meter ANALION® (Model AM 608), and bench-scale precipitation experiments were conducted in beakers (250 Sulphate co-precipitation with PAC TE1018 and AlCl The kinetics of the reactions were studied by monitoring the sulphate removal with time. Then, the effect of the PAC/ Laboratory and pilot studies were carried out using dissolved air flotation at the bench and lamella settling in continuous studies. In the beginning, PAC and AlCl  The best results for sulphate ion removal were found using AlCl Similar to our present work, Aluminum salts do not precipitate at pH levels below three because of the solubility of aluminum hydroxides in acidic mediums. This fact prevents sulphate ion removal by co-precipitation mechanisms.  In  As the reagent concentration increased, the sulphate ions removal also increased, probably due to the higher volume and surface area of the colloidal precipitates; the anions appeared to be deposited and adsorbed electrostatically.    Applications of these techniques for sulphate removal are currently underway in laboratory and pilot studies. Preliminary results were obtained from a pilot plant installed in an acid mine drainage (pH This work involved separation of the flocculated colloidal precipitate by DAF at a lab scale and by lamellar settling at the pilot plant, with both processes substituting the filtration stage already discussed. Flocculation was performed with 30 DAF appear to be more effective than lamellar settling, probably because of some difficulties in the kinetics of settling of the rather loose and light flocs. Such comparative studies must continue at the pilot plant to elucidate these findings. Sulphate ions (sodium salts) were co-precipitated and were removed from water with aluminum-bearing colloids, formed from the hydrolysis of either AlCl The authors would like to thank all colleagues at the LTM and to all Institutions supporting research in Brazil (CAPES, CNPq, UFRGS). Special thanks also to Denise Nunes and Cristina Alfama Costa, among others researches, who initiated this research.