The effect of iron, substituted in the mineral lattice, on the froth flotation of sphalerite has been investigated at alkaline pH. It has been found that a critical copper sulphate concentration exists where sphalerite recovery is maximized, above which the recovery of sphalerite then decreases. The presence of iron in sphalerite is detrimental to the rate of sphalerite flotation and hence its recovery, with the coarser particles being more affected that the fines. The presence of iron reduces the activation of sphalerite by copper, which in turn results in a reduction in collector adsorption.As xanthate collectors have a relatively low affinity for zinc ions, activation of sphalerite by copper ions is generally required to float sphalerite. The activation of sphalerite involves the exchange of zinc for copper ions, thus providing a surface receptive towards collector adsorption ( The chemical composition of the low iron content sphalerite sample, ZnS, (Carthage, TN, USA) was 66.7% Zn, 0.3% Fe and 32.7% S (0.06% Cu and 0.07% Pb) while that of the high iron content sphalerite sample, (Zn, ZnS and (Zn, A first order rate equation, The cumulative recoveries of ZnS and (Zn, The flotation rate constant ( At 3000 In alkaline pH domains, the activation of sphalerite is believed to firstly involve precipitation of copper hydroxides, followed by exchange of zinc atoms for copper atoms on the sphalerite surface ( Copper sulphate concentration is critical in controlling sphalerite recovery at alkaline pH. A critical level of copper sulphate concentration exists where sphalerite recovery is maximized, above which the recovery of sphalerite decreases as a result of excess copper hydroxide on the sphalerite surface. The presence of iron in the sphalerite lattice has a detrimental effect on the flotation of sphalerite because copper activation is reduced, which in turn results in a reduction of xanthate adsorption as copper(I) xanthate. Most of the non-floating sphalerite particles are fine particles, because of their low collision efficiency with bubbles. The coarser particles are more affected that the fines by the presence of iron in sphalerite and by excess addition of copper sulphate. The authors wish to thank the financial support of the Australian Research Council (ARC), the University of South Australia and the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association (AMIRA).