Vibration is one of the mechanisms affecting bulk granular materials behaviour in transportation and material separation efficiency in pharmaceutical, chemical, food, mineral processing and other industries. Understanding fundamentals of vibration and their influence on bulk materials handling is gaining an increasing importance in the economies of scale. However, at present there appears to be no accurate and sufficient description of various phenomena observed in a granular material affected by vibration. This paper presents a concise review of physical phenomena observed in bulk granular materials affected by vibration, taken here as mechanical oscillations of relatively low amplitude and relatively high frequency. This includes three main characteristic regimes of vibration defined as vibro-fluidisation, vibro-compaction and vibro-boiling. The analysis of other factors influencing bulk granular material behaviour under vibration including air resistance, wave effects and particle oscillations decay are also given. A new characteristic regime of vibration is introduced, defined as vibro-hovering. Description of main characteristic vibration-induced bulk granular material states combined with the analysis of other contributing factors result in a more complete classification of vibration phenomena and an improved understanding of vibration-induced bulk material behaviour. Analytical conclusions are supported by the results of experimental studies, with significant potential for improvement in material separation efficiency indicated. Prerequisite vibrational parameters for effective bulk granular material flow promotion are discussed with a specific focus on physical separation processes and optimum ranges of vibrational parameters for separation and flow promotion of dry particulate matter are recommended.Vibration, taken here as mechanical oscillations of relatively low amplitude and relatively high frequency, has been extensively used in industry to affect bulk materials behaviour since the turn of the 19th century. Examples include densification of concrete using vibrating rods, soil compaction and tamping for road surface preparation and pile driving in civil and construction industry, preventing caking of fine powders and vibratory mills for fine comminution in chemical and pharmaceutical industries, vibratory conveyors, hoppers and screens in mining and bulk materials handling industries and many others. Vibration phenomena in bulk granular materials presents a complicated problem. This is due to the fact that vibration-induced bulk granular materials behaviour is, together with fundamental vibration parameters, also a function of material and feed-specific properties. These include material particle size and shape, particle size distribution (i.e. granulometry), physical characteristics of both the individual particles (e.g. surface area, density, friction coefficient etc.) and the feed (e.g. bulk density, layer thickness etc.), water content and type and other process variables. Main application areas of vibration in bulk materials handling can be broadly categorised as Transportation and metered flow Screening and separation Comminution Segregation Densification (i.e. compaction) Loosing (i.e. breaking cohesive bonds) Flow promotion (i.e. breaking adhesive bonds). Lack of knowledge of vibration influence on bulk granular materials flow behaviour often leads to undesirable effects resulting in costly mistakes, examples including material compaction instead of loosening and consequent processing equipment blockages instead of material flow promotion ( Understanding vibration-induced bulk material flow behaviour leading to reliable bulk material flow promotion measures becomes especially important in the economies of scale. However, despite significant research efforts over the last few decades at present there still appears to be no consistent and comprehensive description of various phenomena observed in a dry bulk granular material affected by vibration. Complicated nature of bulk granular materials with their many interrelated inherent characteristics combined with process variables presents an understandable challenge in providing an accurate analytical description of the vibration phenomena. Another complicating factor is that many available analytical approaches rely on the use of elementary models such as a single elementary material particle for representation of bulk granular material behaviour. As a consequence, this leads to the results of experimental trials differing significantly from analytical predictions derived from such theoretical treatments. Information about vibration-induced bulk granular material behaviour is scattered throughout various academic and engineering publications and is often difficult to find. As a consequence, uptake of vibration as an effective material handling mechanism by industry has been slower than expected, with many materials handling systems not performing to their optimum level. This paper presents a concise, integrated review of various physical phenomena observed in bulk granular materials affected by vibration. This includes description of three main characteristic regimes of vibration defined as vibro-fluidisation, vibro-compaction and vibro-boiling and analysis of other contributing factors such as air resistance, wave effects and particle oscillations decay. A new characteristic regime of vibration is introduced, defined as vibro-hovering. Description of main characteristic vibration-induced bulk granular material regimes combined with the analysis of other contributing factors lead to a more complete classification of vibration phenomena and an improved understanding of vibration-induced bulk material behaviour. Analytical conclusions are supported by the results of experimental studies of two dry bulk granular materials, with significant potential for improvement in material separation efficiency indicated. Prerequisite vibrational parameters for effective bulk granular material flow promotion are discussed, with a specific focus on physical separation processes. Optimum ranges of vibrational parameters for separation and flow promotion of dry particulate matter are recommended.  The following discussion of vibration-induced phenomena focuses on bulk granular material supported by a harmonically vibrating horizontal surface, oscillating vertically with amplitude At Bulk granular material behaviour in the range of 0 At Bulk granular material state at The range of Therefore, the state of vibro-boiling corresponding to the range of the vibration overloading factor of It is useful to note that this weakening of the inter-particulate forces starts at Discussed above main vibration-induced bulk granular material regimes are illustrated in The classification of various stages of vibration-induced bulk material behaviour introduced above differs from those offered previously in two more important aspects as follows.  Additionally, It needs to be pointed out that in reality, the boundaries of the vibration-induced bulk granular material characteristic states can vary from those shown in Next, we examine inclined vibration of supporting surface as shown in Let At In this regime, speed of material transportation can be approximated as ( In the case of material transportation using an inclined vibrating surface, due to the gravitational forces speed of material travel up the incline decreases, while that of travel down the incline increases. Maximum permissible value of the angle of inclination for the upwards transportation of the particulate material is dependent on dry friction between the material and the supporting vibrating surface, with values of up to 30° and higher possible ( Discussed above vibro-fluidisation, vibro-compaction, vibro-boiling and vibro-hovering phenomena represent the main characteristic states of bulk granular material affected by vibration. Some of the other potential factors that under certain conditions can influence bulk granular material behaviour are as follows. Vibrational segregation phenomena are characterised by particles of varying size and density segregating into reasonably well defined individual layers. Here, the lowest layer is formed by the smallest and the heaviest particles, followed by small light particles, than large heavy (or a mixture of small light and large heavy) particles, with the large size lightest particles segregating in the uppermost layer of material ( Contrary to some published results, the quasi-equilibrium state of vibrational segregation does not necessarily correspond to the minimum of potential energy value of the individual particles ( Furthermore, starting at Air resistance can be a significant factor for a relatively thick bulk material layer, especially containing large proportion of light fine and ultra-fine particles, at high values of vibration speed One of the main effects pertaining to air in a bulk material affected by vibration is the formation of a low air pressure zone in the lower part of the vibrating layer of granular material ( Slow convectional granular material flows at solid surfaces in a relatively thick layer of material facilitate material mixing and thus disrupt and inhibit material segregation ( Vibration-induced wave effects are yet another phenomena observed in a relatively thick layer of a particulate material. Here, dilution, concentration and standing waves originate at the material-supporting vibrating surface and propagate in the upwards direction ( At particulate material layer thickness of 10 to 20 average particle sizes, oscillation decay due to physical interaction of individual granular material particles can become significant. As a result, vibration amplitudes of the individual particles decay exponentially with the distance from the supporting material vibrating surface, the magnitude of decay inversely proportional to the square root of oscillations frequency ( As has been shown in the above discussion, some of the vibration-induced phenomena have been well described in published literature, with sufficient level of detail reported. However, it must be emphasised that despite significant research efforts over the last few decades the level of understanding of various vibration-induces phenomena combined with specific particulate matter and process considerations still appears insufficient. While certain aspects of the vibration-induced phenomena have been analysed well, no satisfactory overall model describing granular material behaviour under vibration in air is available at present. Additionally and equally importantly, the influence of other than the overload factor A complicated nature of bulk granular materials with their many interrelated inherent properties combined with process parameters and environmental factors places particular importance on experimental validation of analytical solutions for material flow promotion. Experimental validation of the analytical dependencies introduced above was carried out using a vibrational stand at the Mekhanobr Tekhnika Research and Engineering Corporation. The vibrational stand allows amplitude and frequency of vibration and vibration angle to be independently varied in a wide range of values. Two materials were selected for the experimental programme: Zirconium–Staurolite mixture of 0.05 For the experiments, a transparent graduated cylindrical vessel of 60 Particulate material state under vertical vibration was evaluated via its volume change and the depth of penetration of penetrometer ( As kinetic energy of moving in the particulate material penetrometer is completely dissipated by the particulate material, thus Experiments were conducted at vertical vibration amplitude values of 0.3 As can be seen from Decrease in bulk density of the particulate material was evident for the overloading factor range 1 At the same Up to 12% decrease in material bulk density was achieved at the overloading factor values slightly higher than Similar experiments to those with 720 The validity of the analytical dependencies presented above was further confirmed by experiments with a 712 One area of industrial use of vibration is physical separation of bulk granular materials, examples including electrostatic and gravity separation, dust extraction and others, with such equipment used for bulk materials separation since early 20th century. Here, individual material particles are extracted primarily from the surface of thin layer of granular material presented into the separator unit, for example by means of a vibratory feeder. Parameters of the vibratory feeder are usually set based on the requirements of speed of granular material movement through the separation zone. Assuming the vibration parameters are selected to ensure that the granular material particles are supplied into the separation zone of the separator in suspended-in-air state (i.e. vibro-hovering), it is reasonable to anticipate extraction of the particles not only from the surface of the layer of material but also from within the full depth of the layer. Therefore, regardless of the particular extractive mechanism employed (e.g. electrostatic field or air ejection etc.) presenting more individual particles, i.e. from a greater depth, to the separation media of the separator should improve the separation process efficiency. Physical separation of the individual particles in a bulk granular material is impeded by the inter-particular dry friction forces. It then follows that, physical separation is effective only when the extractive forces are stronger than the combined dry friction forces. Theoretically, the efficiency of such separation is proportional to the magnitude of the difference between the extractive and the dry friction forces, all other factors excluded. As discussed earlier, vibration causes the inter-particulate dry friction forces to weaken, this effect being the strongest at the overloading factor The description of specific vibration-induced phenomena presented in this paper provides the basis for development of materials handling technologies and process equipment to affect bulk material flow behaviour with vibration. The knowledge of these phenomena can also add value in other industrial applications where vibration is an undesirable side effect. A complicated nature of bulk granular materials with their many interrelated inherent properties combined with process parameters and environmental factors places particular importance on experimental validation of theoretical recommendations for material flow promotion. To ensure the highest vibration-aided bulk granular material separation efficiency, it is suggested that the amplitude and frequency of vibration should be selected on the basis of providing the vibration overloading factor Further research needs to focus on the development of an overall model describing behaviour of granular material under vibration. The influence of bulk material specific properties, including granulometric parameters, physical properties of the individual material particles and bulk material feed, process settings and equipment contact surfaces such as sidewalls of a vibrational feeder etc. on the vibration-induced phenomena also need to be understood.