The purpose of the investigation was to develop a procedure for optimisation of complex flotation circuits, using steam assays and pulp densities alone (i.e. no additional measurements or batch tests). Conventional models, based on pulp kinetics, were regressed directly to steady-state data from a nine-stage platinum flotation plant, to provide a basis for optimisation studies. ‘Froth factors’ were obtained by regression to characterise the froth in each stage and a ‘depressant factor’ was also required for gangue minerals, to account for effect of additional depressant in the cleaners. These factors improved the fit, but significant differences between plant data and the model were still present, particularly in the cleaning circuit.
                  The model for the froth was modified, to incorporate two rate constants for the recycle of particles from the froth. These parameters provided a workable approximation of the distribution of probabilities of particles being recycled in plant cells, depending upon where particles appeared at the surface. In order to maintain an acceptable number of model parameters, only two pulp kinetic parameters and two recycle parameters were used for the three mineral classes. The fit to the data was improved very significantly, when compared to the use of conventional pulp-based models with several pulp rate parameters. This relatively simple model did not require additional data from batch tests and it was suitable for plant simulations.
                  Simulations of various strategies for plant operation were tested, allowing the simulator to vary the concentrate flows from all or some of the stages, in order to maximise platinum recovery. The simulator was imbedded in an automatic optimiser and constraints on chrome content or mass flow of final concentrate were used. The simulations of the existing circuit demonstrated that an improvement in recovery of about 0.5 per cent could be achieved by optimising all concentrate flows. The mass pull of concentrate per unit area was used as a guide for maintaining efficient cell operation and in some cases cleaner cells were re-allocated to modify the volume of a stage. The addition of an extra cleaning stage was simulated, resulting in a further increase in recovery. Plant tests are in progress to verify the simulations.Research on modelling of froth flotation has been in progress since the early 1960s. The purpose has always been to use these models for scale-up of laboratory tests and to optimise plant design and operation, particularly plants with several cleaning stages. Most of the initial work was based on hand-scraped batch tests in laboratory cells and the results indicated that the rate of flotation was determined primarily by the rate of particle collection in the pulp phase. Hence the importance of air flux and particle residence time in the pulp. However, the froth phase plays an important role in separation of entrained gangue and the transport of the concentrate to the launder in plant flotation cells. A number of researchers are examining the behaviour of the froth. Competition for bubble space, caused by bubble coalescence and re-attachment of the more hydrophobic particles is not well understood and most models are empirical ‘add-ons’ to the pulp kinetic model. It should be noted that reconciliation of data from batch tests on plant streams (‘nodal analysis’, in A good fit of the model to the plant data is required, as relatively small changes in recovery can be significant. The raw plant data for mass and metal content is usually first adjusted, using mass-balance smoothing, to achieve a consistent mass balance. This process helps identify and eliminate anomalous data and it highlights the sensitivity of the mass balance to the certain measurements. Typical values of the water content of the froth can be determined and the flow of water around the circuit can be calculated from stream samples. The next step is to fit a model of the plant to the smoothed data. Additional measurements, such as air flux, froth depth, may be included. However, these vary from cell to cell down a bank, depending upon the wear on the impellers, etc. It was therefore decided to use average values per The regression of the model to the data is often complicated by an interaction between model parameters, typically mass fraction and flotation rate, resulting in a spread of feasible solutions. The best fit to the data is usually obtained by a non-linear search procedure and it is essential that the model of the plant be written in a compact form, which does not require iteration for mass-balance calculations. When the plant has several recycles the equations are complex, but the progressive changes in grade in a multistage plant provide scope for testing the robustness of the model and parameter interaction is reduced. This paper describes regression of models to data from a nine-stage platinum flotation plant and the introduction of a modified model of the froth. The use of the model for simulation and optimisation of the plant configuration is also described. Survey data from a platinum flotation plant, shown in The recovery of mineral species in a stage containing The regression was slow and various combinations of parameters were obtained. The fit was not as good as expected. Various ways of facilitating the search were tried, including a functional distribution of Models of the froth phase typically incorporate a recycle, which is a function of the residence time of the froth. However, mechanical plant cells produce froth over a relatively large area and particles appearing near a launder have a much lower probability of recycle than those appearing near the middle of the cell. There is a range of probabilities of recycle or froth residence time and one way of modelling this phenomenon is to use two rate constants for recycle from the froth. It is known that hydrophobic minerals can be selectively re-adsorbed in a froth column and hence it is likely that fast-floating minerals have lower recycle rates than other minerals. Various combinations of pulp and froth parameters are possible. Bearing in mind the need to use relatively few model parameters for a plant model, it was decided that only two pulp rate constants and two froth rate constants would be used. The same four parameters were used for the three mineral classes. The best values for these rate constants and the mineral mass fractions were determined by regression. The fractional recovery of mineral by the froth ( Hence, the overall recovery of each mass fraction per stage was calculated using the following equation ( It should be noted that the froth residence time in each stage remained a regressed variable, having a function equivalent to the froth factor. This was a key part of the new model, as it provided a simple means of adjusting the ‘pulling rate’, when the model was used for simulation. The non-linear regression of the new model to the smoothed plant data proceeded relatively rapidly, indicating that there was less interaction between variables. The fit to the data was remarkably good, as shown in The authors were sufficiently encouraged by the good fit of the new empirical model to proceed with simulation studies. The plant survey data included the grade of concentrate and the froth depth of individual cells. The former made it possible to calculate solids flows from individual cells and hence the modelling can be based on individual cells. However, it was noted that progressive and significant changes in froth depth down banks of cells were being used on the plant to compensate for changes in froth stability. Hence, modelling and simulation is significantly more complex if based on individual cells. The linkage of model parameters to froth depth, air flux and froth ‘stability’ is also not clear and is the subject of on-going research by others. The use of average conditions per stage is therefore justified for the initial optimisation. The down-the-bank data is being incorporated in the regression procedure, to improve the model robustness. The model was converted to a simulator by maintaining the parameters associated with minerals ( The regressed model flows were used as the base case and the first step was to determine how the platinum recovery could be improved at the existing mass flow of final concentrate. Increases in recovery of about 0.5% were obtained, when the pulling rates were maintained within practical limits. The main changes in the operating conditions were a reduction in the pulling rate of low-grade material from the rougher scavengers (stages 2 and 4) and an increase in the recycle rate between stages 5 and 6. The reduction in pulling rate of the scavengers increased the loss of pgm’s to the secondary rougher (scavenger) tail, but the increase in recovery obtained in the cleaners, due to increased residence time, resulted in a net gain. The base case had a large residence time (72 Cells in the simulator were re-allocated to modify stage volumes, to facilitate the changes indicated in point 1 above. Hence the number and size of cells used in stage 5 were reduced and the number of cells used in stage 6 was increased. These changes brought the pulling rates per unit area into line and resulted in a further small improvement in recovery. The relatively small volume indicated for stage 5 pointed to the use of a single cell. However, the use of three smaller cells with the same total volume gave a better recovery, confirming the need to avoid short-circuiting. The effects of adding an additional cleaning stage, upstream of stage 5, or stage 8, were also investigated at a constant combined mass of concentrate. The result was a significant improvement in recovery. These predictions are being checked by making modifications to the arrangement of the cleaners on the plant. The effects of varying the total mass of concentrate were also simulated, allowing the computer to optimise all pulling rates as before. It was noted that platinum recovery fell significantly when the mass of concentrate was decreased, but recovery increased only marginally (1%) when the concentrate mass was increased substantially. The chrome content of the concentrate increased with increasing mass, indicating that contamination by chromite, possibly by entrainment of ultra-fine particles, was occurring faster than contamination by talc.  A model containing a combination of two rate constants for the pulp phase and two rate constants for the froth phase, fitted data from a complex plant much more accurately than a conventional model with three or more pulp rate constants per mineral class. In view of the comparable number of parameters, it appears that the improvement is due to the possibility of fast-floating minerals having a lower probability of recycle. The average froth residence time is an empirical parameter, which provides a means of adjusting the pulling rate of a stage. It could not be linked to control variables such as froth depth and air rate, due to progressive changes in the froth stability. The model can be used as a simulator, for simultaneous optimisation of plant operating conditions, i.e. pulling rates for all stages. The simulator assumes that the rate constants remain the same and clearly large changes in pulling rates per unit area will result in changes (e.g. proportionately more entrainment of gangue). Hence, the pulling rates need to be constrained to realistic levels in some cases and re-allocation of cell volume may be needed. Model regression and automatic plant optimisation proceeded rapidly using a MATLAB optimising program. This is ascribed to a policy of developing equations for the recycle streams. Minor variations in cell configuration were achieved by varying the number and volume of cells, including the use of zero values to simplify the circuit configuration. Regression and optimisation should initially be based on adjustment of The sharpness of the separation can be improved by utilising more stages and quantity of recycle between them ( The support of Mintek and the platinum mining company is gratefully acknowledged.