Standing at the heart of the term neocolonialism is a sort of paradox. Kwame Nkrumah, the anticolonial leader and first president of Ghana, and the first theorist of neocolonialism as such, defined the condition as “modern attempts to perpetuate colonialism while at the same time talking about ‘freedom’” (1965:41). In his formulation, it was the “last stage” of imperialism because it emerged in the context of the Cold War and the deepening militancy of ex-colonial territories. Neocolonialism was no longer “naked colonialism” but rather a raft of more invisible modalities—economic, ideological, political, and cultural—through which colonial exploitation was perpetuated. For Nkrumah the control by imperial powers over nominally independent states was achieved through new forms of corporate and especially financial capital, by a psychological dependency among “Third World” elites, by the effects of what he called “limited wars” and by the capitulation of African, Latin American, and Asian leadership to the hegemonic forces of the former colonial states. While the term had been first deployed at the European Summit in Paris in 1957 (referring to European Common Market trade relations with respect to overseas territories) and subsequently by Jean-Paul Sartre in his writing on Algeria in 1964, neocolonialism as a body of theory developed by Nkrumah was very much a transnational product of the Black Atlantic. Nkrumah both participated in, and was deeply shaped in his thinking about decolonization and neocolonialism by, the Pan African Congresses of the early- and mid-20th Century and by the black radical tradition of W.E.B. Du Bois, Marcus Garvey, George Padmore, and C.L.R. James. While the term is less commonly used now, the key insights of neocolonialism, which turn on the hegemony of the West, and the distinctive forms in which modern imperialism exercises power over former colonies including the role of finance capital, remain central to contemporary critical accounts of global capitalism and the forms of subordination experienced by postcolonial states in Africa and elsewhere (Mbembe, 2001).Standing at the heart of the term neocolonialism is a sort of paradox. Kwame Nkrumah, the anticolonial leader and first president of Ghana, and the first theorist of neocolonialism as such, defined the condition as “modern attempts to perpetuate colonialism while at the same time talking about ‘freedom’” (1964:41). In his formulation, neocolonialism was the “last stage” of imperialism because it emerged in the context of the Cold War—during which the Third World, as the contemporary Global South then identified itself, became the site of proxy anti-communist struggles—and the deepening militancy of ex-colonial territories. The Cold War, said Westad, was simply colonialism in another form (see Cold War). Neocolonialism was no longer “naked colonialism” as Nkrumah put it but rather a raft of relatively invisible modalities and power relations—economic, ideological, political, and cultural—in which colonial exploitation was perpetuated. For Nkrumah, the imperial powers achieved their control over nominally independent states through three key mechanisms: new forms of corporate (and especially financial) forms of capital; a psychological dependency among Third World elites, by the effects of what he called “limited wars”; and the capitulation of African, Latin American, and Asian leadership to the hegemonic forces of the former colonial states (see Modernization). While Nkrumah first gave voice to the concept of neocolonialism as an analytical device, the substance of the term was already an integral part of African anti-imperialist theorizing and in particular deeply rooted in the Pan Africanist and black radical anticolonial traditions associated with Marcus Garvey, George Padmore, W.E.B. Du Bois, and C.L.R. James. Nkrumah spent 10 These anticolonial and socialist traditions were important in understanding the generation of Third World public intellectuals, activists, and postcolonial leaders who strode onto the world stage during the rise of the Afro-Asian Conferences of the 1950s and 1960s. Twenty-nine countries that participated at the first Bandung Conference in 1955 represented nearly one-quarter of the Earth's land surface and a total population of 1.5 billion people and included leaders such as Zhou Enlai, Jawaharlal Nehru, and Gamal Abdul Nasser. For the Bandung generation, the threat of neocolonialism was taken for granted even if the word was not widely deployed; neocolonialism was hard wired into their goals of full decolonization (and independence) and the need for nonalignment with Cold War powers. Among this generation it was Franz Fanon in particular, in his searing account of Algeria who laid out a profound map of the forms and norms of the neocolonial condition. Fanon was born in Martinique, in the West Indies in 1925, educated in France and subsequently he moved to Algeria in 1953 to practice psychiatry. Soon embroiled in that nation's violent struggle to gain independence from France, Fanon wrote, as the Algerian war of independence was nearing its end, his most celebrated book, Fanon was the first major theorist of anti-imperialism to appreciate that nationalism followed the same track as imperialism; if it appeared to concede authority to the nationalist bourgeoisie, it was in fact really extending its hegemony (see Decolonization). As Fanon put it bluntly: “History teaches clearly that the battle against colonialism does not run straight away along the lines of nationalism” (Fanon, 1965:119). The pitfalls of national consciousness and its complicity with bourgeois interests were profound; a national bourgeoisie might dispense with popular legitimacy, turning its back more and more on the oppressed classes, political emancipation, and the realities of uneven development and instead turn to corruption, one-party states, tribalism and exporting the enormous profits to foreign countries in the name of development while remaining dependent upon the former colonial powers. The task, said Fanon, is to move—and to move quickly—from national consciousness to political and social consciousness. In his understanding, drawing from the “new nations” he witnessed arising from anticolonial struggle, a sterile and unproductive bourgeoisie collectively constituted a comprador elite who constituted a radical threat to the sovereignty of the nation. As Fanon (1965:141) eloquently put it, the elites were “incapable of great ideas and inventiveness and do not even succeed in extracting spectacular concessions from the West, such as investments which would be of value for the country's economy.” These sorts of ideas were not only central to Nkrumah's thinking but were widespread on the African continent among leaders such as Leopold Senghor, Alioune Diop, and Albert Memmi all of whom articulated similar sorts of assessments of the challenges facing postcolonial states during the 1950s and 1960s (see Sovereignty). Central to the idea of neocolonialism is the persistence of “colonial” (or more properly, “imperial”) and therefore exploitative relations. There are three broad senses in which exploitation is usually deployed in this regard: First, as a modern form of industrial or commercial land use (or mineral extraction), derived probably from its Latin origins as an arrangement or explanation. A second meaning of exploitation is a generic sense of unjustness or oppression, potentially referring to a wide range of social relations across time and space (e.g., exploitation of men by women, workers by capitalists, slaves by slave-owners, low by high castes, serfs by feudal overlords). The range of opinion here can be substantial, from the Kantian view that exploitation refers to the instrumental treatment of humans (Buchanan, 1985), to coerced activity (Moore, 1973), to psychological harm (Hill, 1994). The analytical content here is of less concern than its moral standing and the moral force of the reasoning (whether and how the state or groups of states should prohibit exploitative transactions or refuse to enforce such agreements). The third meaning that is central to neocolonial theorizing is explicitly analytical in the sense that it purports to provide a theoretical and conceptual ground on which the claim “A exploits B when A takes unfair advantage of B” can be assessed. In philosophical terms, one can say that social science seeks to understand the truth conditions under which such a claim can be made about a particular social setting. The theorization of exploitation in neocolonialism was originally (and to a large extent still is) associated with the work of Karl Marx and the notion of surplus appropriation and the labor theory of value. Marx's account identifies a fundamental contradiction at the heart of capitalism: a contradiction between two great classes (workers and owners of capital), which is fundamentally an exploitative relation shaped by the appropriation of surplus. Unlike feudalism, in which surplus appropriation is transparent (in the forms of taxes and levies made by landowners and lords and backed by the power of the church and crown), surplus value is obscured in the capitalist labor process. Marx argued that labor is the only source of value—and value is the embodiment of a quantum of socially necessary labor. The source of surplus value is the difference between the sale of a worker's labor power and the amount of labor necessary to reproduce it. The means by which capital extracts this surplus value under capitalism (e.g., through the working day, labor intensification, enhancing labor productivity), coupled with the changing relations between variable and constant capital, determine (in Marx's view) the extent, degree, and forms of exploitation. In the first volume of A long line of Marx-inspired theorizing has, of course, attempted to grasp exploitative relations between countries, and this contributed directly to Nkrumah's original formulation. Exploitation stands at the heart of most theories of imperialism (Lenin, 1916; Marx, 1992), whether understood by Fanon as the coercive extraction of surplus through colonial states, through Arrighi and Pearce's notion of unequal exchange, or through the imperial operation of transnational corporations and multilateral development institutions (e.g., the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)). The so-called “antiglobalization” movement (especially focusing on institutions such as the World Trade Organization) and the “sweatshop movements” (focusing on transnational firms such as Nike) are contemporary exemplars of a politics of exploitation linking advanced capitalist states and transnational companies with the poverty and immiseration of the Global South against a backdrop of neoliberalism and free trade (see Neoliberalism in the Global South). Decolonization refers to the often long, tortuous, and violent process by which colonies achieve their national aspirations for political independence from the colonial metropolitan power. Decolonization can be understood as the final phase of colonialism. Implicit in the notion of neocolonialism, however, is the idea that decolonization was incomplete, or perhaps aborted. One consequence is that “decolonized” states are subject to a perpetual form of metropolitan or imperial hegemony. Modern colonialism in its various norms and forms extended over the period from the 15th to the 20th centuries (see Empire). The New World had been subjected to Spanish, French, Portuguese, and Dutch colonial rule in the The first challenge to the first wave of colonization came in 1776 as British North American colonies declared independence. While Britain maintained its Caribbean and Canadian colonies, the Napoleonic upheavals in Europe so weakened Spain and Portugal that European settlers from Mexico to Chile expelled their imperial masters. By 1825, the Spanish and Portuguese empires were dead. In the subsequent 115 Decolonization is a process marked by the achievement of political independence (see Decolonization, Sovereignty); however, the duration, depth, and character of decolonization movements vary substantially. Colonization was barely accomplished in some African colonies, and anticolonial resistance movements of varying degrees of organization and capability often limited the degree to which imperial hegemony actually operated in practice. In some cases, an organized anticolonial and nationalist movement came late, accompanied by a rapid and hastily assembled set of political negotiations in which it is clear that the metropolitan power wished to hand over the reigns of power with utmost expedience (Nigeria). In still other cases, it took a war of liberation—a bloody, armed struggle by leftist guerillas or nationalist agitators pitted against white settlers or intransigent colonial states (as in Laos, Vietnam, and Zimbabwe). One of the problems with analyzing decolonization, as Fred Cooper notes, is that the story if often read in reverse privileged the termination of colonialism without acknowledging what preceded it. It should also be said that any account of decolonization—or for that matter neocolonialism—presumes an account, or a theory, of colonialism itself. Top-down theories of colonialism take colonial projects at face value, whereas the nationalist account denies any reality to the goal of modernization that the colonial state purported to bring. In general, decolonization is seen as either (1) self-government as an outcome of negotiated preparation and vision from above by a colonial state apparatus, or (2) as a nationalist triumph from below in which power is wrested (violently or otherwise) from recalcitrant colonizers. In practice, decolonization took multiple forms and trajectories and was an enormously complex process that involved something of each of these views. It was shaped both by the peculiarities of colonialism itself and by the particular setting in world time in which the nationalist drive began (see Nation). There are two forms of decolonization that rest on what one might call nationalist triumphalism. The first is built upon social mobilization, in which a patchwork of anticolonial resistances and movements (many of which are synonymous with colonial conquest itself) are sown together into a unified nationalist movement by a Western-educated elite. This happened in places such as Malaysia, Ghana, and Aden. Mobilization occurred across a wide and eclectic range of organizations—including trade unions, professional groups, and ethnic associations. These organizations were brought into political parties and propelled by a leadership focused on racism, liberation, and the sense of the colony's national identity in light of its own history and cultures. The second form of colonization is revolutionary, with Franz Fanon being its most powerful and articulate spokesperson. In this form of colonization, the vanguard is not Western-educated elites or workers but the peasants and lumpenproletariat. Revolutionary success depends on two factors: violence and the rejection of any semblance of neocolonialism. Decolonization rejected bourgeois nationalism (of the first sort); rather, as Fanon put it, “the last shall be first and the first last. Decolonization is the putting into practice of this sentence” (1965, p. 30). Both forms of decolonization depict nationalism as subsuming all other struggles which both obscures and misses much history. Each posits, as Cooper notes, something like a “True Cause” in which there is little truck with opposition. Mamdani's enormously influential book on Africa makes the important point that decolonization posed the possibility of breaking with traditions of European colonial indirect rule (what he called “decentralized despotism”) in which African custom granted enormous powers to local systems of traditional (and therefore cultural) authority. But rather than a civic nationalism in which cultural politics did not play a key role, what replaced it was a colonial model, however, in which African colonial subjects were granted a racial equality and citizenship rights but in which “indigenes” (Indigenous ethnic groups) were simultaneously given a sort of bonus (that is to say other political rights and entitlements). In the historiography of the period, the nationalist road to self-government tends to take for granted the depth and appeal of a national identity. It is precisely the shallowness of these nationalisms in the postcolonial period that reveals how limited is the simple nationalist account of decolonization itself. In practice, decolonization occurred in the context of all manner of contradictions and tensions between the national question and other social questions. There exists another narrative of decolonization that, unlike the two forms above, which has a different and singular vision, this time from the side of the colonial state. In this narrative, colonial bureaucracy (long before nationalist parties arose) shaped self-government on a calculus of interest and power derived from an older conception of colonial rule (e.g., New Zealand and Canada). This action was a stepping stone to independence. In this view, Africa, by 1947, had already been set on the road to decolonization even though the Colonial Offices typically saw early African leaders as schoolboys or demagogues. Another version of decolonization theory is rendered through the cold calculation of money and cost. It was the decision-making rationale of accountants estimating costs and gains—and who in particular gained—against the backdrop of imperial power's economic performance after World War II that sealed the fate of the colonies. In all of these accounts—for India as much as for Indonesia or Iraq—colonialism is as monolithic as the explanations of decolonization. There is a reduction involved in seeing Indians or Kenyans simply as colonial subjects or as national or proto-nationalist actors. An alternative approach pursued by the so-called Subaltern School (Guha and Spivak, 1988) sees colonialism as an antimetropolitan project, moving against trends to exercise power under universal social practices and norms. In other words, the hegemonic project of colonialism fragmented as colonial rule attached itself to local idioms of power. From this experience—characterized by hybrid forms of identity, blurred boundaries, and contradictory practices—the process of decolonization must necessarily look more complex than simply self-rule managed from above by the colonial state or mobilized from below by nationalist forces. In the same way, the shift from decolonization to neocolonialism operated through similar sorts of complexity and intermixing, in which hegemonic metropolitan power was exercised through a battery of institutions and practices (“development,” “capitalism,” “socialism”). The term neocolonialism has fallen out of fashion since the 1970s (with perhaps the exception being a flood of Soviet Marxist–inspired, and largely ideological, studies published through the mid-1980s). It is quite true, however, that the broad thrust of critical development work from the late 1960s onwards all placed their emphasis on relations of exploitation between former colonial states and the advanced capitalist core. The most prominent trends in development discourse included dependency theory, emerging from Latin America (Frank, 1967); the calls for a New International Economic Order; unequal exchange theory (Arrighi, 1972); the French In the 1990s and 2000s, the so-called antiglobalization protests, the critique of corporate power—that is, of the expanded role of finance capital in the impoverishment of the Global South and the imperialist role of multilateral development institutions such as the IMF and World Bank—fully resonates with Nkrumah's account. The revivification of neocolonialism is especially clear in the World Social Forum (WSF), which first took place in January 2001 in Porto Alegre, Brazil. This was the first annual meeting held by members of the so-called antiglobalization movements—sometimes dubbed the movement of movements—to provide a setting in which global and national campaigns could be coordinated, shared, and refined. The WSF is not an organization or a united front. As it explains on its website, it is “an open meeting place for reflective thinking, democratic debate.… by groups and movements of civil society that are opposed to neoliberalism and to domination of the world by any capital or any form of imperialism.” The WSF has grown substantially from its first meeting in Brazil. Subsequent meetings in 2002 and 2003 were also held in Porto Alegre, and thereafter in Mumbai (2004), Porto Alegre (2005), and Nairobi (2007). In 2006, a “polycentric forum” was held in Bamako (Mali), Caracas (Venezuela), and Karachi (Pakistan). In 2001, 12,000 people attended the WSF; in 2007, the number had grown to 60,000 registered attendees and 1400 organizations representing 110 countries. The WSF has also prompted the establishment of a number of regional fora, including the Asian Social Forum; the Mediterranean Social Forum; and the US Social Forum; however, the offshoots do not all stand in a similar relation to the “parent body.” Porto Alegre is a city with strong connections to the Brazilian Left and the Workers' Party, as well as home to an innovative model of local government and participatory democracy (see Social Movements). That 4 of the 11 WSF meetings have been held in says much about the WSF's broad ideological thrust: It is clearly antineoliberal and in opposition to free market capitalism. The WSF is left-leaning, but it also looks for new and different models of economic and political organization. To do so, it draws from a vast array of experiments embracing the landless workers' movements, antidam struggles, Indigenous peoples, and anticorporate and multilateral struggles. The idea of a global convention of anticapitalist movements standing against neocolonialism was in part driven by the desire to provide a counterweight to the World Economic Forum held every year in Davos, Switzerland. It was likewise inspired by the difficulty of organizing a mass protest in Switzerland that was capable of generating sufficient media coverage to challenge the prevailing hegemony of free market discourse and practice. The protests against the World Bank and IMF annual meetings in 1999 and thereafter—most notably in Seattle, Genoa, and Washington DC—were an important milestone in the move toward an alternative forum for civic movements opposing unfettered capitalism around the world. While some of the energy has been drained from the WSF of late, it is impossible to understand the WSF outside of the so-called counterrevolution in development thinking which arose in the late 1970s and in particular the growing dominance of neoliberalism (free markets, free trade, privatization, and state cutbacks). The abandonment, in the 1980s, of Keynesian models of capitalist development—marked by the ascendancy of Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher, and Helmut Kohl—and the rapid adoption of the economic ideas associated with Frederick Hayek and Milton Friedmann, and the Mont Pelerin Society, had massive and direct implications for the Global South, beginning with the massive onslaught of structural adjustment and stabilization programs (see Neoliberalism). It was out of this combination of “economic reform” (namely, the rapid liberalization of state-led development), “shock therapy,” and, in many places, massive economic recession (for example, the early 1980s and the late 1990s) that the plethora of movements arose, many of which arraigned against the privatizations of various commons. In contradistinction to the triumphalism (and purported inevitability) of globalization that dominated the 1990s, the WSF was convinced that, in its own language, “another world is possible.” It refused to believe that there was “no alternative” to the current political climate. In some circles, the WSF is held up as a shining example of what Negri and Hardt called “the multitude.” The term neocolonialism does not appear prominently in the WSF, but the affinities are clear. The language now is of “recolonization” or “empire” (as the process)—and “empowerment” and “alternative development” (as the solution) (see Empire, Empowerment). Neocolonialism, more than anything, was a key marker of a certain sorts of 1960s Third World nationalism. It was a by-product of its largely African and Marxist origins, of the Bandung moment, and of the contradictions of decolonization as it unfolded in the wake of World War II and in the heart of the Cold War. It was, for a while, central to thinking of the theories of imperialism within a Marxist framework, but it fell out of intellectual fashion. The so-called neoliberal counterrevolution and the devastating consequences of structural adjustment and economic reforms in a large part of the Global South (and in Africa in particular) have given theories of neocolonialism a shot in the arm. The anti-IMF movements across Africa in the 1980s and 1990s had, in this respect, more than a tinge of Nkrumah's original intent. There are certainly, as Young notes, close affinities between neocolonialism in the Nkrumah sense and certain aspects of postcolonial theory (see Postcolonialism). The neoliberal grand slam which has drawn all of the world into the universe of capital flows and the expanded reach of corporate and military powers of the Global North (and it needs to be said of parts of the Global South such as China and Brazil) has made Nkrumah's ideas on the power of finance capital and Fanon's ideas on the weaknesses of corrupt postcolonial elites feeding at the trough of their former colonial masters, more relevant than ever. 