PPy@Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19/CNFs particles were successfully synthesized through two-steps. First, Barium strontium ferrite (Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19) was deposited on carbon nanofiber (CNFs) via the sol-gel method and second, Polypyrrole (PPy) was coated on Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19/CNFs powders via reverse in-situ polymerization. The Polyurethane-PPy@Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19/CNFs composites were prepared for the microwave absorption test in the X-Band. The morphology and phase evaluation for PPy@Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19/CNFs were carried out using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The magnetic parameters of particles were determined via using vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). The dielectric and magnetic parameters of composites were evaluated by the vector network analyzer (VNA) in the frequency range of 8.2–12.4 GHz. It was seen that the PPy coating decreased the magnetization values while increasing the dielectric values of Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19/CNFs. The minimum RL value was obtained at lower thicknesses with composite containing 2:1 PPy to Ba0.5Sr0.5Fe12O19/CNFs. The results showed that PPy conductive shell provided the lowest RL values while causing narrow bandwidth.The electromagnetic waves have become a source for detecting targets, especially in the military field. Therefore, electromagnetic wave absorbers have been popular research areas in recent years. In recent years, researchers have focused their attention on the development of electromagnetic wave absorbing materials include broadband absorbing properties with low thickness. To obtain these properties, hexagonal ferrite, magnetic nanoparticles or conductive polymers are widely used [ In order to achieve sufficient electromagnetic wave absorbing properties with broadband frequency, the dielectric fillers such as graphene and conducting polymers and magnetic fillers such as ferrites are always used in the matrix [ The hexagonal M type hexaferrites are commercially available magnetic materials, with wide applications due to permanent high saturation magnetization [ In this study, Ba All chemicals and materials were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The Sr(NO Barium strontium ferrite powder with the nominal composition of Ba Polypyrrole (PPy) was coated on magneto-dielectric (Ba The absorber samples were prepared with polyurethane: powders = 3:1 mixture ratios. The 25 wt.% of each powder (1:1 and 2:1) were separately mixed in polyurethane matrix and homogenized with mechanical stirring (10 min) and ultrasonic water bath (15 min). An adequate amount of dispersant, Defoamers, Desediment agents were used for preparing single layer microwave absorber sample. Finally, samples were molded in the dimension of 22.6 × 10.1 mm with various thickness. The PPy coated Ba The X-ray powder diffraction technique with the relevant JCPDS-ICDD Powder Diffraction Files were used for determine the crystal structure of the obtained materials (XRD, Unisantis XMD-300, Cu-K The XRD results of Ba Wu et al. [ The morphology of Ba The hysteresis loops of Ba The complex permittivity (ε* = ε′–jε′′), complex permeability (μ* = μ′–jμ′′) and loss tangent (dielectric: tan δε = ε′′/ε′, magnetic: tan δm = μ′′/μ′) of powders filled polyurethane composites were given in According to the transmission line theory, the microwave absorption performance of the materials can be determined by the reflection loss (R As seen in The matching thicknesses, impedance matching (Z = Z For the minimum reflection and maximum absorption, the impedance matching should be close to free space. The best microwave absorption performance can be obtained when the impedance matching value is close to 1. Otherwise, the incident waves mostly reflected on the surface of the samples [ The Z values of P1, P2 and P3 composites are shown in As seen in It is well known that the eddy current effect determines magnetic loss behavior of materials and calculates as bellow equation [ According to the skin-effect method, if the magnetic loss is caused by eddy current loss, the value of The Ba There is no conflict of intrest. The Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: