Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), such as photolysis, photocatalysis, ozonation, Fenton process, anodic oxidation, sonolysis, and wet air oxidation, have been investigated extensively for the removal of a wide range of trace organic contaminants (TrOCs). A standalone AOP may not achieve complete removal of a broad group of TrOCs. When combined, AOPs produce more hydroxyl radicals, thus performing better degradation of the TrOCs. A number of studies have reported significant improvement in TrOC degradation efficiency by using a combination of AOPs. This review briefly discusses the individual AOPs and their limitations towards the degradation of TrOCs containing different functional groups. It also classifies integrated AOPs and comprehensively explains their effectiveness for the degradation of a wide range of TrOCs. Integrated AOPs are categorized as UV irradiation based AOPs, ozonation/Fenton process-based AOPs, and electrochemical AOPs. Under appropriate conditions, combined AOPs not only initiate degradation but may also lead to complete mineralization. Various factors can affect the efficiency of integrated processes including water chemistry, the molecular structure of TrCOs, and ions co-occurring in water. For example, the presence of organic ions (e.g., humic acid and fulvic acid) and inorganic ions (e.g., halide, carbonate, and nitrate ions) in water can have a significant impact. In general, these ions either convert to high redox potential radicals upon collision with other reactive species and increase the reaction rates, or may act as radical scavengers and decrease the process efficiency.Trace organic contaminants (TrOCs) are groups of naturally occurring and synthetic organic compounds, which are ubiquitously present in freshwater bodies ( Although TrOCs are detected in low concentrations ranging from a few nanogram to micrograms per litre level in freshwater bodies, some recent studies have shown that TrOCs may affect human health due to prolonged ingestion ( An AOP may exhibit low efficiency due to the wastewater matrix and/or resistant nature of TrOCs ( Integrated AOPs can be used to achieve better degradation of resistant contaminants, to reduce reaction time as well as to increase the mineralization process. For instance, Based on the available studies, combined AOPs may be categorized as UV irradiation based AOPs ( This article provides a critical overview of the advanced oxidation processes that have been reported in the literature for the removal of TrOCs in water or wastewater streams, with a particular focus on the integrated AOPs as classified above. Based on an extensive literature review, a brief outline of the standalone AOPs followed by an in-depth account of the emerging integrated AOPs have been presented. While discussing the integrated AOPs, a brief process description, and different parameters affecting the removal efficiencies (such as pH, temperature, TrOC initial concentration, oxidizing agent dose, and reaction time) are explained. Impact of interfering chemical species such as organic and inorganic ions on the removal of TrOCs in different integrated AOPs are also illustrated. AOP treatment can lead to the formation of toxic by-products that impact water quality. Thus, available information on effluent toxicity of individual and combined AOPs has been critically analysed. A cost assessment of the standalone and integrated AOPs is also presented. Based on an extensive literature review, this study also provides future recommendations for TrOC degradation by integrated AOPs. There are several review papers on individual AOPs. However, there is a dearth of critical review of the integrated AOPs. This paper addresses this omission in the literature. AOPs are aqueous phase chemical processes based on highly reactive species that transform the structure of target organic contaminants ( Based on data from independent studies listed in Supplementary Data Photolysis involves the degradation of TrOCs upon absorption of UV radiation ( Photocatalysis for TrOC degradation involves photo-excitation of an electron from valance band to conduction band on the surface of photocatalyst by UV irradiation, resulting in the generation of an electron (e Ozone is a strong oxidant (E° = 2.07 V) that degrades TrOCs by either direct attack on specific sites or indirectly through the generation of Sonolysis involves ultrasonic waves or longitudinal waves having a high frequency (up to 40–1000 KHz) in an aqueous phase that produces cavitation bubbles. Cavitation bubbles collapse and generate hot-spots having high temperatures (5000 k) and pressure increase (500 atm) ( Anodic oxidation requires direct means of energy input for contaminant degradation ( Anodic oxidation treatment for TrOCs proceeds via three pathways; i) the direct transfer of electrons to the surface of the anode; ii) formation of reactive species due to the oxidation of water at the surface of the anode, promoting mediated redox reaction in the bulk; and iii) ions of electrolyte present in the system also generate reactive species that react with TrOCs. TrOC degradation efficiency depends significantly on the anodic material. For instance, A similar trend was observed by Fenton process generates hydroxyl radicals by Fenton reagent (iron oxides and hydrogen peroxide) in acidic medium (around pH 3) ( Some TrOCs are extremely persistent and hence add to the difficulty in the treatment of TrOCs-containing wastewater. Individual AOPs have been studied extensively for the removal of TrOCs in recent years but most of them appeared as ineffective treatment for complete degradation of a variety of TrOCs in the mixture ( In ultraviolet irradiation based AOPs, different oxidants/chemicals or nanoparticles (solid photocatalysts) in the presence of UV radiation, generate a large number of reactive species ( UV irradiation transforms TrOC chemical structure through electronic excitation of atoms present in the structure. When the applied UV irradiation does not possess enough energy for electronic excitation of a TrOC, ineffective TrOC degradation occurs. For instance, UV photolysis of hydrogen peroxide produces two hydroxyl radicals in the system. These radicals may combine to either form hydrogen peroxide or react with other chemical species present in the system. Therefore, the probability of the availability of free hydroxyl radicals in the system is 50%. UVC irradiation plays an important role in the generation of these radicals. Hydrogen peroxide does not break down by irradiation with λ > 254 nm. Therefore, UVC irradiation must be used for hydrogen peroxide photolysis. Other factors that affect UV photolysis of hydrogen peroxide are transparency of the reaction solution and optical properties of the UV reactor. Thus, for significant production of radicals, a higher concentration of hydrogen peroxide is required depending on the above-mentioned factors ( Combined AOPs not only help in better degradation of the parent compound but can also increase the level of mineralization. For instance, Fenton process generates hydroxyl radicals from the reaction of Fenton reagents (iron salt and hydrogen peroxide) at acidic pH (around 3). At higher pH, ferrous ions (Fe Photocatalysis can degrade a broad range of TrOCs but complete mineralization of TrOCs may require a longer operation period, making the process energy-intensive ( For instance,  In photocatalysis, active sites of catalysis get blocked by TrOCs or some interfering species present in the reaction system, thus reducing process efficiency. Therefore, it can be combined with other AOP such as ultrasound to improve the process effectiveness ( Sonolysis individually is suitable for volatile TrOCs as they can enter into the centre of the cavitation bubble, while the removal of non-volatile TrOCs occurs through hydroxyl radicals attack in the bulk. Breakdown of cavitation bubble in the bulk produces hydroxyl radicals through pyrolytic cleavage of the water molecule. It has been reported that a small concentration of iron enhances the removal of pollutants because it creates Fenton like process in the system ( Recently sulfate radical-based AOPs have gained attention due to various advantages such as high redox potential, longer radical life, and less susceptibility to radical scavenging effect ( In recent years, combination of UV irradiation and free chlorine has been studied for TrOCs degradation ( Ozonation/Fenton process-based AOPs involve the coupling of Fenton reagents, ozone, hydrogen peroxide, chlorine, or persulfate to generate different reactive species as shown in Traditionally, Fenton process involves the generation of hydroxyl radicals by catalytic reaction of hydrogen peroxide and iron salt (iron oxide), but the generation of such radicals is only favored at pH below 3. With an increase in pH, hydroxyl radicals react with ferrous ions and produce ferric oxide that precipitates out from the system as sludge. Further, neutralization after treatment is required for safe disposal of treated effluent. Heterogeneous Fenton processes based on iron oxide can overcome the problem of the classical Fenton process ( Ozone can be combined with hydrogen peroxide to enhance the degradation efficiency of a wide range of TrOCs. A combination of ozone and hydrogen peroxide is called peroxone ( Persulfate or permonosulfate based AOPs have gained much attention recently ( Anodic oxidation involves direct energy input for TrOCs degradation as compared to oxidants driven techniques or UV radiation based processes ( Electro-Fenton process is an indirect electrochemical process to produce hydroxyl radicals in the reaction media. In this process, hydrogen peroxide is generated electrochemically in the system via oxygen reduction, and iron is added either in the system or regenerated from ferric ions. Thus, hydroxyl radicals are produced in the system that degrades TrOCs. Electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide avoids issues around transport, storage, and handling of this chemical ( Coupling of sonolysis with Electro-Fenton process at acidic pH can improve TrOCs degradation by producing more radicals in the system as shown in Electro-Fenton process can be improved by combining with UV irradiation, and this process is known as photo-electro-Fenton (PEF) process. UV irradiation regenerates hydroxyl radicals from ferric ions as well as promotes the oxidation of iron complexes ( To date, AOPs have been mostly investigated with synthetics wastewater spiked with TrOCs. However, different interfering compounds are present in real wastewater that can affect TrOC degradation. Inorganic species such as halide, carbonate, bicarbonate, and nitrate ions can either enhance or retard the degradation of TrOCs, especially in photo-assisted AOPs as shown in Indirect UV/H In chemical-based combined AOPs, Presence of different inorganic species in the water matrix may lead to specific types of by-products formation during TrOC degradation. For example, if halides are present in the water matrix then oxyhalides such as chlorate, chlorite, and bromate can form. If bromide ions are present, then they may react with hydroxyl radicals to form bromate by-products. The formation of chlorinated by-products occurs under certain circumstances with hydroxyl radicals ( Bulk organic matter present in water may inhibit the degradation of TrOCs by the AOPs ( Linden et al.,(2005) reported a negligible increase in toxicity of the final product in UV/H TrOCs with different functional groups such as halogen, nitro, alcohol, amides, N-nitroso compounds   Toxicity of sulfamethoxazole solution was evaluated using the Microtox bioassay test after treatment with photo-Fenton process by Cost of AOPs involves, for example, energy required for catalyst activation, UV lamp operation, and electricity for anodes in electrochemical processes. E Combined UV/chemical-based processes have a mean E  This critical review provides an overview of different individual AOPs with a special focus on their combinations and various aspects including impact of reaction parameters, radical-scavenging effect, by-products formation of different organic and inorganic species, toxicity of treated effluent and process feasibility, and therefore enables us to explore some research questions for future investigations. Individual AOPs as well as their combinations have been investigated in deionized water mostly, thus overlooking the impact of water matrix and different radicals on the degradation of TrOCs. Presence of certain chemical species in water either promotes or retards the degradation of the TrOCs ( Low mineralization of TrOCs in individual AOPs may lead to the formation of more resistant by-products compared to the initial contaminant and require more time or chemicals for complete mineralization. On the other hand, combined AOPs may result in better contaminant degradation, help in minimizing the radical-scavenging effect, as well as achieve mineralization in a shorter time period ( Incomplete mineralization may also lead to the formation of toxic degradation by-products that can affect the quality of treated water. Furthermore, the presence of excess added oxidizing chemicals after treatment may also affect the treated water quality ( The efficiency of individual AOPs or combined processes for TrOCs degradation depends on the operating cost. To facilitate the energy usage comparison for AOPs, E Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) involve hydroxyl radicals for oxidation of TrOCs present in water/wastewater. Limitations of individual AOPs warrant their combinations. Combined AOPs offer great potential to enhance TrOC degradation efficiency. For example, the sonolysis/photocatalysis process can take advantage of ultrasonication cleaning of the photocatalytic surface while improving the reaction rate. Moreover, combined AOPs can generate different reactive species that can efficiently work over a wide range of reaction conditions and with different types of TrOCs. Combined AOPs are particularly important for TrOC degradation in real wastewater, which contains myriad radical scavengers. These processes can also result in low effluent toxicity because of higher mineralization. Nonetheless, these combined AOPs are at the initial stage of their development and further studies on both technical and economic feasibility of these technologies are recommended.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research has been carried out with the support of a The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at