The separation of cadmium and nickel from sulfate leach liquors of waste Ni–Cd batteries is investigated by using ternary phase diagrams. Experimental studies are carried out to obtain ternary phase diagrams of nickel sulfate, cadmium sulfate and water mixture at 40°C and 80°C. The eutectic point is determined to be composed of CdSO4.8/3H2O+NiSO4.6H2O and CdSO4.H2O+NiSO4.6H2O, for 40°C and 80°C, respectively, while two univariant curves and two crystallization regions are observed corresponding to CdSO4.8/3H2O and NiSO4.6H2O at 40°C, CdSO4.H2O and NiSO4.6H2O at 80°C. Both low (40°C) and high (80°C) temperature systems belong to a simple saturated type while no double salts or solid solutions exist.Today, handling of waste batteries is gaining more importance due to increasing economical and environmental concerns. In order to keep sustainability in battery consumption, recycling seems to be the favored handling option. Recycling methods for waste batteries can follow either pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical routes Pyrometallurgical processes use heat to selectively volatilize metals at high temperatures. These processes are simple and do not require crushing of batteries to fine pieces. However, they are energy-intensive and produce a substantial amount of emissions Hydrometallurgy, on the other hand, benefits from aqueous chemistry rather than heat for the recovery of metals. Leaching is the basic hydrometallurgical process and it is followed by several chemical processes like solvent extraction, electrowinnig, crystallization, precipitation, etc. Compared to pyrometallurgical processes, hydrometallurgical processes are more economical, effective, predictable, controllable and eco-friendly Crystallization is one of the most used separation techniques in hydrometallurgical processes. Phase diagrams provide a basis for crystallization The aim of this study is to investigate the possibility of selectively crystallizing cadmium sulfate and nickel sulfate from leach liquors of spent Ni–Cd batteries. Experimental studies are carried out in order to obtain ternary phase diagrams of nickel sulfate, cadmium sulfate and water mixture at 40 The chemicals used are of analytical grade and were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Inc. and Merck Chemicals (CdSO Nickel and cadmium concentrations of solutions are determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Thermo Scientific 6000 series). Crystallographic structures of wet solid residues are determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Miniflex 600) analysis and confirmed by Schreinemakers’ method of wet residues. According to this method, points representing the compositions of synthetically prepared initial solution, wet-solid phase and saturated solution in a ternary diagram must be on the same line and the line passed through these points is used to find the solid phase composition at equilibrium. All samples of different solutions must be in equilibrium with the same solid phase. The hydration state of the solid phase is also determined graphically The starting solutions of NiSO After equilibrium is achieved, two samples are taken from bottles; one from saturated solution by syringe (10 To obtain wet-solid phases, the saturated solution is quickly separated from the solid phase by using sintered glass filter having a porosity of 4 (maximum pore size of 10–16 The equilibrium compositions obtained in the experiments are placed on a ternary diagram, whose left and right vertices correspond to cadmium sulfate and nickel sulfate, respectively. The equilibrium compositions of the ternary system (H According to Schreinemaker's wet residue method and XRD results, solid phases are determined as CdSO The equilibrium compositions of the ternary system (H According to Schreinemaker's wet residue method and XRD results, solid phases are determined as CdSO The ternary system (CdSO Most of the work reported in this paper was performed within a continued project funded by