Milling is a common process used in the material production industry, e.g. mineral processing, cement and high performance ceramics [ The present study has several objectives: (i) characterise the effect of ball milling on the powder properties, (ii) understand the differences in behaviour between two uranium oxides, and (iii) evaluate the effect of powder milling on the mechanical resistance of green pellets. Two raw powders synthesised by a dry route process, were chosen as our starting materials: a batch containing UO To avoid uranium powder contamination during the milling process, the milling balls are made of metallic uranium; they have a cylindrical geometry with equal length and diameter. Their characteristics (geometry, weight) are given in A powder mass of 200 g was used. The ball milling time, rotation speed, inclination angle, and adimensional filling factor U are summarised in Morphology examinations, particle size distribution measurements and specific surface area measurements were carried out by a scanning electron microscope (NOVA NANO SEM 450, FEI), by laser granulometry (LS 13 320, Beckman Coulter) and by BET in an N The porosity, agglomerate density and pore size distribution were measured by mercury porosimetry (Pascal 440 Thermo Finnegan) with a low pressure system (up to 0.0015 MPa) and a high pressure system (up to 300 MPa). The Washburn equation [ The powder density was determined using a tap density volumeter with a JEL tamping machine (Stav2003). We measured the free density (bulk density, d With the objective of understanding their flow properties, the powders were characterised using a rotational shear cell supplied as a component of the FT4 Powder Rheometer (Freeman Technology Inc.). The testing procedure consisted of four steps: conditioning, consolidating, pre-shearing and shearing [ This made it possible to compare the flowability of different powders according to the FF in line with the JENIKE classification [ Powder compressibility was measured using an INSTRON machine and the relative density D Compacts were obtained using a double-effect uniaxial pressing system (SAE) at a maximum pressure of 450 MPa. After pressing, each compact was measured in order to determine the mass and geometric characteristics. The mechanical resistance of the compacts was quantified. The mechanical response of a fragile material essentially depends on the flaw size and population. The flaw distribution is random and difficult to determine precisely, which is why the weak-link approach is usually considered when dealing with mechanical behaviour of brittle bodies. The failure probability can be calculated using the Weibull theory [ The fracture strength was obtained by diametral compression tests, which are also referred to as Brazilian tests. All tests were performed 2 h after pressing to avoid any changes in the mechanical properties of the compacts. The cylindrical compact was compressed between two polished punches according to the conditions detailed in the report by Fahad [ A friability test, developed in our laboratory, was performed to obtain another quantitative assessment of the compact cohesion: vertical vibrations were applied on 10 compacts using a vibrating column (Retsch, AS200 basic). After 1 h, the quantity of ‘eroded’ powder was weighed and the mass ratio between this eroded powder and the initial compact mass was used to quantify the friability or cohesion of the compacts in question. SEM observations ( The agglomerates were no longer spherical after milling. They appeared as elongated angular lamellae due to the shear forces and the impact of the milling bodies, with some exceeding 50 μm. Few U At higher magnification, it can be seem that some of the aggregate ‘necks’ for both powders are broken and the resulting particles seem more convex. To obtain a particle size distribution, 100 g of UO Before the milling process, both initial powders were mostly composed of a population of particles between 45 and 100 μm in size. The UO After milling, the particle size distribution seemed to remain unchanged for UO The particle size distribution of powders dispersed in aqueous solutions was also determined before and after ball milling; the results are reported in These measurements show that the raw powders were agglomerated before milling, with the majority of the particles exceeding 10 μm before the application of ultrasounds. With ultrasounds, the UO After milling, both UO The BET specific surface area (SSA) and the equivalent diameter (Φ Both powders were found to have similar specific surface areas before and after milling, thereby confirming the SEM observations. The specific surface area after milling was approximatively 50% higher than the original value. Associated with the decrease in the equivalent diameter of the grains, this increase can be attributed to the fragmentation of aggregates under the mechanical action of the milling balls. More precisely, this fragmentation may cause the powder necks to break as it can be seen from SEM observations. These results show that ball milling can be efficient enough to crash the bridges of neighbouring uranium oxide particles in the aggregates [  Before milling, the results highlighted a lower absolute density for the U After milling, the absolute densities proved to be higher than the initial densities. The relative densities are higher for the milled U These measurements show that the milling step leads to similar absolute densities for UO  Furthermore, the semi-log scale representation distinguishes two classes of powder. The first class corresponds to raw and milled UO  The graphs show the multimodal distribution of the pore sizes for the powders in question. The first stage is assumed to correspond to inter-granular porosity The porosimetry data was interpreted based on the assumption that all the mercury was in the pores and that there was no closed porosity in the solid particles. This assumption was used to determine the agglomerate density and the compactness of both the bulk and packed powders through the bulk and packed densities reported in Raw powders show a higher intrusion volume for U The results in Whether relative or absolute, the agglomerate density of the two powders increases after milling. A trend identical to that of the bulk density ( The bulk compactness for UO The final result is that the two powders share rather similar characteristics after milling: the bulk and packed absolute densities ( To evaluate the influence of the milling step on the powder flow properties, Carr index (C The conventionally accepted scale of flowability based on C The Carr index and Hausner ratio ( In the case of UO In the case of U Due to the high uncertainties on the Carr index and the Hausner ratio measurements, flow properties were also quantitatively characterised by a powder rheometer. It gave us an indirect measurement of the bulk cohesion and flowability index.  For UO The flow factor makes possible to classify powder flow properties according to the Jenike classification ( In this section, we discuss the effects of the powder ball milling step on compaction and on the mechanical strength and friability of compacts. Compressibility tests characterise the ability of a powder to be shaped under the action of a gradually increasing pressure up to 500 MPa. The Heckel equation presents the compaction behaviour of the powder in terms of its relative density D under applied pressure P [  The K This result is in agreement with flow results: the more C After pressing, the geometrical dimensions of the compacts were measured using a digital micrometre calliper. In order to describe the mechanical properties of the green pellets as a function of the relative density, the bulk density (ratio of the powder mass to the volume of the green pellet) was calculated according to: The green density is higher after milling for the two powders in question. This increase can be attributed to the broken agglomerates in the milled powder and the more spherical shape of the aggregates. The mechanical properties of these powders were determined using the Weibull strength and modulus results obtained from diametral compression tests performed on 20 green pellets ( The U After milling, the compression tests revealed a clear improvement in the fracture resistance of the UO The better mechanical strength of the compacts obtained from the milled powders may be attributed to the several factors. Firstly, the larger volume of the green pellets which is illustrated by a higher H/D ratio ( An erosion procedure was developed to complete our characterisation of the green pellets. This test was used to quantify the behaviour of the compacts in terms of surface resistance or friability, which is a key characteristic when defining handling and transfer operations. The green pellets were subjected to vertical vibrations so as to determine the percentage of the powder eroded from the compacts. The results give the mass percentages of the compacts and the resulting powder (see As expected from the diametral compression tests, the friability of the raw powder compacts tends to be higher for UO Furthermore, these experiments show that the level of friability decreases when the UO Furthermore, these results show that erosion tests are more discriminating compared with diametral compression tests. The decrease in the friability of the compacts by milling is more visible in the two cases in question. Another test was carried out by mixing raw UO Therefore, the ground powder influences the friability of compacts even when it is in minority in the mixture. This experimental work examined the impact of ball milling on the physical characteristics of two uranium powders (size, morphology, particle size distribution, etc.) and on their basic properties (flowability, mechanical strength, friability, etc.). It was observed that the same milling conditions produce different particle size distributions in UO Milling does improve the flow properties of UO The green density is higher in both powders after milling. This increase is attributed to a better arrangement of the powders during compression because of broken agglomerates in the milled powder and the more spherical shape of the aggregates. After milling, the higher compactness of U In conclusion, an improvement in the properties of uranium powders and compacts could be observed after milling in our conditions due to the effect of abrasion fracture and agglomeration. Although this effect is markedly less pronounced in the U The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.