The rapidly growing fleet of electric vehicles contributes to transforming transport but presents challenges for managing spent lithium-ion batteries in the coming decades. Recently in Joule, Chen et al. reviewed the advantages and limitations of existing lithium-ion-battery recycling processes. To scale rapidly, recycling must be profitable, even for low-cobalt batteries.The use of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) is growing rapidly, primarily for electric vehicles (EVs)—worldwide sales of which are projected to grow to over 11 million annually by 2030 The energy that is stored by batteries is increasingly generated by renewable sources such as the sun and wind and by nuclear power, hopefully reducing greenhouse gas and other emissions from the life cycle of the device using the batteries. However, the increasing use of EVs does not necessarily reduce these emissions meaningfully now, as recently shown for EVs in parts of China, where the electricity is generated by old coal-fired plants. The most commonly discussed option for used EV batteries is repurposing (second life): reuse in another, less demanding application. This is attractive because it is thought that EV owners will become unsatisfied with vehicle performance when the range is reduced to 80% of its original value. At that point, the battery still has significant storage capability and can be used by utilities, other businesses, or residences to store energy generated off peak for use on peak. It can even store energy at a charging station for use in another EV. Reuse of any product reduces the environmental impacts per use. However, to be reused, an EV battery needs to be tested, reconfigured, and fitted with a new battery-management system (BMS) suitable for the new use. This could make it more expensive than a new battery, given that prices are coming down, and its remaining life is uncertain. Designing batteries for reuse could reduce this drawback. For instance, development of a programmable BMS could enable its reuse along with the recovered battery modules. In any case, even if the battery is used again, it will eventually be unable to function. However, it still contains valuable raw materials that can and should be recycled. Optimum recycling infrastructure can be built up to anticipate the stream of used batteries. Although a few plants are operating, most of the LIBs coming out of service today are small consumer cells, which have very low collection rates. A recent paper in The second process type (the middle loop in the diagram) is hydrometallurgy, or leaching. In this method, batteries are shredded, the copper and aluminum metal foils are screened out for recovery, and the active material powders are generally treated with acid so the metal ions can be extracted from the cathode structure. These can then be separated by various precipitation and solvent extraction methods and recovered as salts for sale. These salts can be used as raw materials for making new cathode materials. Electrolyte and anode carbon are generally not recovered. This process is commercial on a large scale in China and Korea but not in the US, where labor and construction costs are higher. It also will suffer reduced revenues because cobalt content of the cathode materials is reduced. The smallest loop, direct recycling, is still in the development stage. Materials are recovered in as close to their final usable form as possible. Physical processes are used to recover cathode material without breaking down its complex and valuable crystal structure, thus retaining value even if the cobalt content is low. Other cell components, including anode carbon and electrolyte solvents and salts, can also be recovered to provide additional revenue and avoid disposal costs. Direct recycling is likely to be economical on a smaller scale than either of the other processes; this could prove to be an advantage, enabling smaller, local plants and avoiding the high transportation costs incurred because used LIBs are class 9 universal wastes because they pose potential hazards. Different processes at different scales can be analyzed and compared before any plants are built to minimize costs, energy use, and emissions. The new EverBatt As discussed in the recent The current rapid growth in EV sales will be mirrored in 10 years or so by rapid growth in end-of-life EVs and their batteries. Those batteries will be a valuable domestic source of raw materials. However, cobalt content of EV batteries is decreasing rapidly, so even with some improvement from ongoing development, currently commercial recycling processes are likely to need subsidies or regulatory support to operate profitably. Fortunately, R&D on novel recycling processes holds the promise of enabling recycling to be driven by market forces. This work was created by Argonne National Laboratory, a US Department of Energy laboratory managed by UChicago Argonne LLC under contract no. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The US government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly by or on behalf of the government.