The solvent extraction of manganese(II) has been studied from chloride solutions using a mixture of Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 301 dissolved in kerosene. The mixture has shown a significant synergistic effect at XCyanex 272
                     =0.6. The synergistic enhancement factor was calculated to be 14. The extracted species in the organic phase was found to be MnH2A2B2 using slope analysis method. Stripping experiments showed that manganese could be recovered using dilute sulphuric acid solutions from the loaded mixture. The mixture has a potential for the separation of Mn(II) from other associated metals.Manganese is an important metal used in industries such as steel, iron, battery, nonferrous alloys, and fine chemicals. The physical properties of steel like strength, hardness and resistance are improved by the addition of Mn. Therefore, the demand for manganese has been increased due to growth in steel and battery industry. Separation and recovery of manganese has been carried out using solvent extraction by utilizing various kinds of extractants ( Solvent extraction of manganese from chloride solutions with di(2-ethyhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) in kerosene was investigated. The composition of the extracted species in the organic phase was found to be MnR The solvent extraction of Mn(II) from sulphate solutions using sodium salt of Cyanex 272 was studied and the extracted species was determined as MnA   Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272, Cytec, Canada), and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid (Cyanex 301, Cytec, Canada) were used without purification. Kerosene (Chemically pure grade) was used as diluent. Stock solutions of Mn(II) were prepared by dissolving MnCl A Thermo Orion star A211 pH meter was used for the measurement of pH of the aqueous solutions. The concentration of Mn in the aqueous solution was determined using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (Spectro, Arcos). Equilibrium experiments were carried out on a wrist action shaker (Burrel, USA). Solvent extraction experiments were performed by mixing equal volumes (10 The extraction of Mn(II) was investigated as a function of aqueous phase acidity from chloride solutions containing metal concentration of 500 The solvent extraction of Mn(II) with Cyanex 272, (HA) Although Cyanex 301 was used for the extraction of Mn(II), the detailed study on solvent extraction of Mn(II) has not been discussed.  The extraction of Mn(II) with 0.30 To determine the number of moles of extractants involved in the extraction reaction and composition of the extracted complex, experiments were carried out by varying the concentration of one extractant at a fixed concentration of the other extractant, keeping all other conditions constant. Therefore, from the above results, the synergistic solvent extraction reaction can be written as The equilibrium constant, K Taking logarithm of Eq. First, the equilibrium concentration of the extractants was calculated by using the following mass balance equations. The equilibrium constant was calculated by substituting the equilibrium concentrations of the extractants, values of equilibrium pH and the distribution coefficient for each data into Eq. The effect of diluents on the extraction of Mn(II) was studied from chloride solutions of initial pH To determine the separation possibilities of manganese with other associated metals of the group, the extraction behavior of commonly associated metals (Fe(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), and Zn(II), 500 The loaded organic phase (0.30 The present paper reports the synergistic solvent extraction of manganese(II) from chloride solutions using the mixture of Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 301. Significant synergism was observed with the mixture of Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 301 at the mole fraction of Cyanex 272 of 0.6 with a synergistic enhancement factor of 14.1. The synergistic extraction reaction was proposed and the extracted species was found to be MnH This work was supported by a grant operated by