The purpose of the work was to prove the ability of LIBS to provide on-line analyses for raw ores in field conditions. An industrial LIBS machine was developed and successfully tested for on-belt evaluation of phosphate measuring Mg, Fe, Al, Bone Phosphate Lime (BPL), Insoluble phase and Metal Impurity Ratio (MER) and of coal measuring its ash content. The comparison of LIBS on-line data with control analyses revealed good correlation, which corresponds to the required detection limits and accuracy. With frequent elemental data from a LIBS system, process engineers have the tools to best optimize the process. These processes could be minerals blending and separation to meet customer specifications, monitoring and controlling the efficiency of a minerals process, or a minerals accounting function.In many mineral-processing installations, providing efficient mineral contaminant removal is of paramount importance. Contemporary on-line analysis instruments are improving productivity and adding value to mineral resources throughout the world by providing automatic, continuous, rapid and accurate process data in real time. Laser-Induced Breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) offers to mineral processing plants the following opportunities: It is possible to rapidly analyze a large volume of material “as is”, providing a high sampling statistical data, specifically when changes in the mineral grade under analysis are not abrupt. A multi-elemental analysis detects the presence as well as the range of concentration in just one measurement. The results are on-line. Statistical sampling and the aimed accuracy only limit the response time. Technologists and engineers would then be able to make rapid decisions about a variety of technological issues, such as the type and amount of mineral contaminants in an ore feed. It offers mineral-processing plants an opportunity to improve grade control and significantly increase their operating efficiency. There have been a limited number of developments for analyzing bulk ore lots. Available sensor technologies include nuclear, optical, electrical, magnetic, acoustic, thermal, and various others specific to the ore. Of most interest are those properties, which are directly connected with mineralogical composition of accepted and rejected minerals. Two methods, which directly determine the major elements of separated minerals, are X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) and Prompt Gamma Neutron Activation Analyses (PGNAA) techniques. XRF is not suitable for light elements (usually with atomic number less than 20), and in many cases is not selective enough, because there can be many elements present with characteristic emission similar to those of the valuable components. The big advantage of the PGNAA method is its ability to accomplish volume measurements. However, these devices are bulky and represent potential health-hazard and strict regulatory demands. We believe we were the first to propose Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS) for on-line evaluation of bulk minerals on a moving belt conveyer The major drawback of LIBS for on-line mineral analyses on moving conveyer belts is its ability to analyze only the surface of the moving rock, while it is necessary to know the impurity concentrations in the volume. Moreover, only a small fraction of particles from the surface is analyzed. Thus the task has to be selected where the analyzed material is so mixed that surface represents the volume. The greatest challenge was to prove that in most minerals transported on a conveyor, the surface chemistry is the same as the average of the total cross-section. It was initially proved using laboratory scale conveyer and after that during long-term stability tests in the field conditions of open mines. This paper demonstrates the actual potential of this technique in real field conditions. Laser Detect Systems (LDS) has developed a LIBS machine for evaluation of different ores ( The same optical system is used for laser-beam focusing and plasma emission acquisition. A beam splitter is used to divert the returning plasma light to the fiber optic cable that carries the signal to the spectrometer. A small and robust CCD spectrometer (Avantes, AvaSpec) was incorporated, which has no moving parts and use slits of fixed width that is selected based on needed spectral resolution. Correspondingly, the grating may be selected. At present applications we used the spectral range from 250 to 340 nm with spectral resolution of 0.5 nm. An external trigger is applied to the spectrometer, and a TTL output port is available to trigger a pulsed laser. The delay before starting the measurement can be set in the software, starting from several ns. In our machine a delay of 1 μs and gate of 9 ms are used. The spectrum is reported to the system computer, which generates the analyses and controls the whole system. The system has sealed panels, shock absorbers and an air conditioner, enabling it to operate outdoors under such environmental conditions as dust, rain, extreme temperatures (5–50 °C) and mechanical vibrations. The optical system is additionally sealed and has positive air pressure. Two photo-elements evaluate the laser energy and the total created plasma intensity. The software was installed, which makes it possible to operate the system from any remote computer using either VNC VIEWER or PC ANYWHERE software. The difficult analytical problem is the quantitative determination of the elements. The intensity of the line in each spectrum associated with any element depends on more than the concentration of that element. Many factors influence the emission line intensity, such as the laser intensity, the distance from the laser to the sample, the sample geometry and the quantity of moisture present in the sample. However, usually the ratio of the lines intensities of various elements from the same sample is almost constant. Thus in each specific case the element has to be found which varies over a relatively small range, and all other element spectra have to be normalized to its analytical line intensity. The specific mineral matrix also affects the analytical line intensity, and usually several different minerals are present on the conveyer. Thus each mineral present in the specific rock was studied separately in order to find its individual breakdown spectrum for the sake of identification. During on-line analyses, the LIBS unit examines the spectrum from each pulse and determines if it contains adequate information. Not every pulse does, since sometimes the laser can “hit” between large pieces of ore (obscuring or defocusing the plasma), or sometimes the laser will hit a pocket of water, producing a “blank” spectrum. The LIBS unit is designed to operate until a predetermined number of informative spectra, usually from 500 to 1000, are collected. These spectra are then analyzed by special software. It decides to what mineral each spectrum belongs and considers it for specific line intensity evaluation. Once a spectrum is identified, the areas under each of the peaks of interest are integrated. The output from the program gives the number of spectra that fell into each mineral category and the total area for analytical line of each element for all the spectra in that category. Relationships were investigated between laboratory chemical analyses of collected samples and collected spectra. Analytical algorithms were developed to transform the spectra to concentration measurements. This was developed using a trial and error method to minimize the absolute deviation of predicted versus actual analysis for the data. Samples of phosphates production pebble were obtained from the pebble product belt. The samples were coincident with the pebble that was examined by the LIBS Unit. The sampling point was on the pebble product conveyor belt approximately 45 m downstream of the LIBS unit. In all cases, the quantity of pebble sent to the laboratory was approximately 1 kg. The estimated numbers of particles of rock were 5000–10,000. During all the test work, the digital record of each spectrum was collected in files and was then analyzed to determine relationships between the analytical data obtained from the samples and the spectrum collected. Impurities in the phosphate rock significantly affect the ability to efficiently recover phosphate from the rock in the production plant and produce on-grade products. The most significant variables are the CaO, MgO, Fe Method for improving the rock quality would be to continuously analyze the rock received by the production plant and then stack it in places on the pile with similar compositions. Then rock could be retrieved from the pile by pulling from various places on the pile to hold the overall composition relatively constant. While this would significantly improve the rock variability and quality, it will only become practical when a continuous analyzer becomes available that can accurately and quickly provide the several analyses required on the rock as received without sample preparation This task is very easy for a LIBS on-line analyzer, because the need is semi-quantitative, that is to determine if MgO concentration is more or less than the certain level, while the accuracy of this level determination is not very strict. Besides that, Mg impurity is not disseminated more or less uniformly through apatite, but is present in dolomite veins. Thus the actual task is to detect the parts of the rock with substantially elevated Mg levels. A prototype LIBS machine was successfully tested for on-line, real-time evaluation of Mg content in phosphate ore (Four Corners Mine, Florida)  Approximately 300 samples were taken from conveyer and analyzed in the laboratory for MgO, Fe While the MgO content is the most troublesome impurity in phosphates, another parameter is also essential for phosphate rock treatment. It is the MER (Metal Equivalent Ratio), which is a measure of how difficult it will be to produce on-grade fertilizer products. The lower the number, the easier it is to make on grade fertilizer products. It is calculated from the following equation: For MER evaluation, additional parameters, such as Fe, Al and BPL, were determined. During the LIBS machine test, the phosphate plant began experiencing problems with high Insoluble phase concentration in the pebble, which is a portion of the ground sample that does not dissolve in aqua regia. While most of the Insoluble is silica, it also contains some aluminum (as a silicate) and minor amounts of other acid insoluble minerals. Thus LIBS was tested to identify Insoluble in the rock. The analytical line of Si at 288.1 nm was selected for Insoluble evaluation. The best-fit linear regression line is characterized by In order to evaluate the analytical ability of the LIBS machine and its applicability for on-line phosphate analyses, a comparison with the existing technique is important, namely with the routine analyses of rock samples in the analytical laboratory. It is clear that laboratory analyses are more accurate, while on-line analyses have a substantial advantage because of its continuous nature against periodical sampling. The phosphate rock on the belt is the result of discrete “scoops” of matrix from the mine cut. There is very little mixing of rock in the screening system, so the rock composition can change dramatically between “scoops” and even within “scoops” as quite often there is a dramatic change in rock composition over even a few feet of depth. Thus even less accurate continuous measurements may be substantially better than more accurate data, which are much less representative. A LIBS average error (difference between chemical analysis and LIBS value) was calculated for all evaluated parameters and compared with the corresponding laboratory errors. There are many variables that could lead to distinctive errors in laboratory data, mainly sampling errors due to ineffective sampling stations, sample preparation errors and sample analysis errors in laboratory. A number of tests were conducted to determine the precision of the sampling, analytical, and sample splitting error. In the first set of tests, the sample of rock collected was coned and quartered repeatedly and the total sample was used in making up samples for the laboratory. Up to10 samples were prepared from the sample taken. These were submitted to the laboratory over several weeks and were not identified as duplicate samples. A total of 32 analyses were performed on 5 separate sets of samples. A second set of tests consisted of two people taking samples at the same time. These samples were submitted to the laboratory at the same time, but were not identified as duplicate samples. A total of 11 sets of duplicate samplings were taken. During the 9 months test period there were no mechanical problems with the system. The data gathered demonstrated the large variability in rock composition and the potential ability to significantly improve the rock quality by timely discarding a small portion of the pebble. For example, Online impurities content evaluation makes possible raw and washed coal quality monitoring and control, sorting, blending and stockpiling control, beneficiation plant optimization, product compliance monitoring, boiler feed control, coke oven and furnace feed control, consignment and batch monitoring and integrated coal quality management systems. Presently PGNAA machines have been used for this task. The physical principle is that neutron activation of coal stimulates prompt gamma emission, which is analyzed to determine what elements present in coal and what their concentrations are. This information is used as is or re-calculated to ash content. Such approach proved to be effective, but the machine is very bulky (minimal weight is 3200 kg) and neutron source represents potential health hazards and strict regulatory demands. LIBS machine may be an alternative approach, with such advantages compared to PGNAA as its weight (250 kg) and radioactive source absence. Online LIBS technique potentially is also capable of accomplishing the quantitative analysis of C, Fe, Mg, Ca, Na, Si, Al, Ti, K and other impurities in coal, which are the main ash-forming elements and may be recalculated to the ash content. In order to evaluate LIBS machine potential for on-line ash evaluation, laboratory−scale conveyor simulation experiments were performed for coal with known concentrations of impurities and ash content. Laboratory equipment combined a laboratory scale conveyer belt and analytical setup, imitating our machine in field conditions. These results encouraged the production of the new LIBS unit, which was put on field trial on Optimum colliery in April 2007. The analytical task is more challenging compared to the previously described phosphate case. The coal from colliery is going to an electrical power plant and the demands for the accuracy of the ach content evaluation is rather stringent. The ash analyses standard error should be < During the field test the LIBS machine worked at a 5 Hz frequency and the averaged result was taken after each 5 min period, thus 1500 pulses have been analyzed for each analytical point. LIBS analytical results are compared with routine laboratory data and with PGNAA on-line data. We developed the technology, assembled a machine and successfully tested it in field conditions for on-line analyses of phosphates and coal on moving belt conveyers. It was experimentally demonstrated that for these cases the surface analyzed by LIBS represents the volume. Thus the LIBS on-line machine is a worthy competitor for existing on-line analyzers in minerals industry, such as PGNAA, and offers a potential solution to practically every analyzing task of minerals on a moving belt conveyer. We wish to thank Florida Institute of Phosphate Research (FIPR) for financial support.