In comminution processes, the equipment normally operates at non-optimal conditions and due to poor access to crushers and deficient monitoring of them, this information is not acquired. Cone crushers have a crushing chamber that is revolved around its centre axis and crushing does not occur all at once but in a circular motion. This property gives rise to a potential non-optimal crushing in the form of power draw fluctuations due to the variance in feed across the crushing chamber with respect to e.g. mass flow, particle size distribution and other material properties. Studies have shown that a high rate of the power draw measurement provides the ability to expose a feeding miss-alignment. This paper shows how changes in the operation of the crusher, due to differences in feed material properties as a segregation, can be diagnosed and determined for future comminution process improvements.Compressive crushing is energy efficient as a consequence of the crushing principle and the imposed stress-state, in comparison to other principles not conditioned by form ( Cone crusher mantles are mounted on the main shaft which rests in an eccentric bushing, creating an angle between the main shaft and the mantle centre axis pictured in In crushing processes the crushers are closed off from the surroundings for safety and contamination purposes. Therefore, the state of operation of the crusher is visually concealed and other methods for process diagnostics has to be implemented. Power draw measurement is a suitable method due to its installation being nonintrusive, the required investment resources are low and the measurement is sufficiently accurate. The crusher operation can be affected by multiple factors such as a miss-aligned feed, feed segregation and stiffness and shape of the material. The purpose of this study is to diagnose a feed segregation as detection of a miss-aligned feed has already been established using power draw sampling ( Segregation is a phenomenon that refers to the change in attributes of the processed material across the geometric position e.g. in a crusher or on a belt feeder. The attributes that vary in comminution processes are often the Particle Size Distribution (PSD) or the mechanical properties of the material. The cause of segregation when referring to a difference in particle size is granular convection. In a volume of different sized particles, the smaller fall to the bottom, causing the larger to rise up, when subject to vibrations or similar excitations ( Any change to the material in the feed of the crusher has an impact on the energy required and its variance. A wider PSD will give a higher bulk density during inter-particle breakage, thus, increasing the mean required power draw. Bigger and fewer particles will affect the variance in the power draw since the energy required for breakage pulsates with every particle, in comparison to a higher number of smaller particles resulting in an evener power draw. Material properties, such as stiffness, will affect the power draw intuitively. It has been shown that any variance in the power draw is disadvantageous ( To solve the problem with segregation, the feed can be mixed in various ways ( To investigate how segregation in a cone crusher affects the power draw, a feed with a controlled segregation was created. The chosen method for creating this difference was to use two completely different materials, both by PSD and by composition. Since segregation in itself can depend on many factors, the used materials needed to be different by any means and not necessarily only in PSD or composition. The crusher used was a lab scale cone crusher of the model Morgårdshammar B90. A belt feeder was used to feed the crusher, A divider plate was put into the feeder hopper containing the materials which were then pulled out on each side of the belt, creating one feed that was divided by the middle, shown in As the segregated feed was crushed, the power draw was sampled at a rate of 10 kHz with a resolution of 24 bits. The speed of the crusher was 600 RPM or 10 Hz and thus, 1000 samples were made for every crusher revolution giving an angular resolution of 0.36 degrees. In To more closely see how the power draw varies throughout crushing, a section of 0.5 s or 5 crusher revolutions starting 10 s into the tests are shown in In To investigate this difference in power draw distribution, two smaller sections from each test without abnormal peaks were chosen for closer examination, In The polar plots show signs of being moved slightly during the entire tests. A polar plot that is moved has previously been showed to occur as feeding miss-alignment is present. As the feed cannot be said to be completely aligned, the polar plot can show the signs of a miss-aligned feed but it can also reflect the results of a mixed feed. The bulk density could have been increased due to the imposed segregation, increasing the power draw on one side, with maintained levels of variance, resulting in a moved polar plot. Both tests contain the same characteristics, which is not the case in the histograms in To provide a clearer picture of the phenomenon created by the segregation, artificial signals have been created with a number of features that will describe the measured data. First, a constant signal multiplied by a random gain at every data point is shown in Secondly, a sinusoidal term is multiplied with the signal. The sinusoidal term has a frequency corresponding to the polar plot frequency and the result is a moved polar plot and a histogram showing two main levels in Finally, To further clarify the histogram behaviour in A tool for investigating the polar plot throughout the test is introduced in the form of a bivariate histogram of the polar plotted values shown in As a result of the tests and the experiment with the constructed signal, a pattern of two types of imperfections in the power draw can be observed. Both types are variances but their domain is separated. The local variance in one part of the crusher will induce a variance between revolutions and thereby over certain parts of the power draw signal. This variance will show up in the histogram as a skewed distribution and in the polar plot as variations for a certain circle sector. Having a miss-aligned feed, or a segregation giving the same result, will induce a variance in the power draw signal but might be stationary as of the power draw for every crusher revolution. Consider the sinusoidal signal with the frequency of the crusher. The signal has a variance but for every crusher revolution, the power draw is the same for all parts of the crushing chamber. The corresponding histogram then shows two levels. This phenomenon has been encountered and investigated before ( The countermeasures for the discussed types of variances or crushing operating conditions are simple. For the equivalent feed miss-alignment condition, which shows up as a power draw signal similar to a sinusoidal function, the feed can be moved to reduce the overall variance in the power draw. This means that the crusher mass flow becomes balanced throughout the crushing chamber. In this study, the higher variance for a certain part of the crusher likely comes from the significantly coarser PSD on one side of the feeder and crusher inlet. The coarser PSD gives a higher variance in the mass flow itself, thus creating a variance in the crusher power draw. Since this material is only fed into one side of the crusher, the increase in the variance of the power draw only occurs for parts of the signal. This phenomenon has to be addressed by mixing or generally altering the feed since a flow redirection is not sufficient to change the difference in variance due to segregation. The mechanical system that is the crusher produces all of these power draw variations and to uncover them, a high rate of sampling of the power draw is required. Since the crusher is operating under these conditions, it is also suffering from the mechanical drawbacks of having the internal forces varying. This means that the equipment will have reduced fatigue life, which is only one of the resulting drawbacks. Another result of these variations can in some cases be a decrease in crusher performance, both regarding the product and the process operation ( To mitigate these variations, a number of countermeasures can be utilized. Mainly, there are two types described above. To move the feed is comparatively effortless and changing the feed mixing is more demanding. The key to beginning the process of improving the crusher operation is nevertheless the diagnostics of the current conditions. With the measures presented in this paper, the severity of the problems, as well as the inherent types of them, can be identified using only a high sampling rate of power. Without a large number of tests, this type of analysis has been showed to give a consistent and unambiguous diagnostic of the used crusher system. With further tests of different conditions and materials as well as different equipment, the potential for the process improvement methods is vast. The authors wish to express gratitude towards the