Biocompatible and biodegradable polyelectrolyte complex consisting of carboxylmethyl cellulose (CMC) and chitosan (CHI) were studied as a template for calcium phosphate biomimetic mineralization. CMC/CHI/calcium phosphate hybrids were prepared using different concentrations of simulated body fluid (2, 5 and 10×SBF) for producing hybrids with different organic/inorganic ratio. These hybrids were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). The equilibrium swelling extents of the hybrids were found to be dependent on the inorganic % in the hybrids. The release profile of bovine serum albumin as a model drug in simulated intestine solution (pH 7.4) during 24h has established the efficiency of the hybrids as a sustained delivery system. The hybrids developed in this contribution exhibit a great potential in bone tissue engineering and drug delivery applications.Recently, the combination of ceramic particles with polymeric matrices has been extensively investigated as an alternative in bone tissue engineering ( Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), the major commercial derivative of cellulose, is anionic polysaccharide widely used in pharmaceuticals ( Chitosan (CHI) is the nature unique cationic polysaccharide composed of β-(1,4)-linked glucosamine that is produced via the alkaline deacetylation of chitin, the second- most abundant natural polymer after cellulose ( Polyelectrolytes are mixtures of positively and negatively charged polymers blended at the molecular level ( The current article focuses on the development of biodegradable porous scaffolds made from naturally derived polymers. CMC and CHI were chosen because their composition exhibits virtually no endotoxicity, cytotoxicity, and no antigenic properties upon implantation. The biomimetic mineralization process of polyelectrolyte could be enhanced using high concentrations of simulated body fluids (SBF). The study also addresses the morphology, crystal phase of mineralized calcium phosphate on the swellable CMC/CHI polyelectrolyte's. Moreover, the release profile of bovine serum albumin, a model for macromolecules and drugs, as a function in inorganic ratio was investigated. Carboxymethyl cellulose sodium salt (>99.5%) with high viscosity (4% in water at 25 CMC (100 Simulated body fluids with different concentrations were prepared as shown in Attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) was done on a Thermo Nicolet FT-IR Nexus 470 with a diamond crystal. Spectra were recorded from 500 to 4000  Scanning electron microscopy was done on a JEOL JXA-840A Electron probe microanalyzer with tungsten filament (30 Thermogravimetric analysis was done on a Linseis STA PT-1600 thermal balance in air from 20 to 600 The equilibrium swelling of the CMC/CHI polyelectrolyte and the calcium phosphate/polyelectrolyte hybrids were investigated in pH similar to that of physiological fluid (7.4). The buffer solution composed of phosphoric acid (0.054 BSA-loaded polyelectrolyte/calcium phosphate hybrids were prepared by hybrids incubation in glass vials with 5 The aim of the current study was to investigate the feasibility of the CMC/CHI polyelectrolyte polymer as a template for calcium phosphate mineralization. Bearing opposite charges, the combination of CMC and CHI via ionic interaction can form a polyelectrolyte complex in the form of hydrogel, the precursor for biomimetic mineralization process in this study. Moreover, the ionic interaction between two polymers avoids the use of organic precursors, catalysts, or cross-linking agents which alleviating the concern about toxicity or reactions with a therapeutic payload. Porous polyelectrolyte was examined under SEM after freeze drying which is desirable as no organic solvent residual traces are left behind.  Polyelectrolyte CMC/CHI was incubated in a simulated body fluids with higher concentrations to those present in human blood plasma by 2×, 5× and 10× for 72 The XRD patterns of the mineralized CMC/CHI hybrids at different SBF concentrations are displayed in CMC/CHI polyelectrolyte and mineralized hybrid samples formed in different concentrations of SBF were subjected to thermogravimetric analysis to estimate the thermal stability and the actual content of the mineralized calcium phosphate. The thermogram assigned three ranges of mass loss of the polyelectrolyte/calcium phosphate samples ( Morphologies of calcium phosphate synthesized at high ion concentrations (2×, 5× and 10 The EDX analysis detected the presence of Ca and P elements as the major constituents with Ca/P ratio 1.42, 1.61 and 1.69 for polyelectrolyte 2×, 5× and 10×, respectively. Moreover, EDX shows sharp increase in the Ca and P content on the surface of the hybrids, likely due to the consequence increase in SBF concentration. In addition, the Ca/P atomic ratios of the mineralized surfaces for PE 2× (1.42) are below the stoichiometric value of 1.5 for amorphous calcium phosphate. PE 5× and 10× have Ca/P atomic ratios from 1.61 to 1.69 which below the stoichiometric value of 1.67 for hydroxyapatite. Deviation from the stoichiometic value are known in the literatures and may be due to cationic substitutions at the Ca It is reported that, the driving force for calcium phosphate inducing crystals is not only precipitation of calcium phosphate salts but also the activity of anionic and cationic functional groups to start nucleation process (   CMC/CHI polyelectrolyte hydrogel could be used as a template for calcium phosphate biomimetic mineralization. Polyelectrolyte/calcium phosphate hybrids synthesized in different concentrations of simulated body fluid solutions have different surface morphology and different organic/inorganic ratios. Thermogravimetric analysis showed an inorganic content of 7.3–38.57 This work was supported by the