Shape-selective methylation of toluene (T) with methanol (M) was carried out in a continuous flow fixed-bed reactor over modified HZSM-5 catalysts. The effect of metal modification on the catalytic performance, especially the catalyst stability, was investigated. Various techniques including X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), were used to characterize the catalysts. The results showed that P–Mg modified catalysts with 3wt% SiO2 exhibited excellent stability (more than 500h), but lowered p-xylene selectivity (less than 90%). Upon further increasing the amount of SiO2, the catalyst deactivated in a relatively short time on stream, although the para-selectivity was significantly increased up to 99.5%. The high p-xylene-selectivity catalyst modified further with Pt, Pd, Co, Ni metal demonstrated excellent stability, even after 100–400h on stream, and the selectivity for p-xylene of more than 98.3% with toluene conversion of 20.0% was achieved. Hence, loading metals with good hydrogenation properties, such as Pt, Pd, Co and Ni, was an effective method to improve the catalyst stability.p-Xylene is an important raw material for the industrial production of terephthalic acid and dimethylterephthalate, which are essential intermediates in petrochemical production. Currently, p-xylene is produced predominantly by disproportionation of toluene and the p-xylene-oriented isomerization of mixed xylene isomers. In these processes, however, large quantities of benzene are also produced and the cost of product isolation and purification is relatively high. The alkylation of toluene with methanol, as a promising way of producing p-xylene, has therefore been studied extensively over the past few decades. A variety of zeolites have been used for catalyzing this reaction To extend the catalyst lifespan, the deactivation of the HZSM-5 catalyst in the toluene alkylation with methanol has been studied Aboul-Gheit et al. In this work, P–Mg modified nano-scale HZSM-5 (SiO X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was carried on a RIGAKU D/Max 2400 with Cu Kα-radiation (1.542 The alkylation of toluene (T) with methanol (M) was carried out in a continuous flow fixed-bed reactor. Before the reaction, the extruded catalyst (1.0 The powder XRD patterns of catalysts A-1, A-2 and A-3 are shown in   Toluene alkylation with methanol as a typical shape-selective reaction was used to evaluate the catalytic performance of the modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalysts. It is well known that p-xylene selectivity of 24% over HZSM-5 was close to its equilibrium value (p-xylene 24%, m-xylene 51%, o-xylene 25%) in three xylene isomers. As shown in With increasing SiO For the present investigation on Pt modified nano-scale ZSM-5, the preparation method for Pt particles highly dispersed on surface externally of zeolite crystals was different from traditional methods. Pores of crystals were not be blocked, therefore, conversion of toluene and para-selectivity were unaffected, as can be seen from As shown in The average results of liquid and gaseous products are listed in Pd, Co, and Ni modified catalysts (A-4, A-5 and A-6) were also investigated and the results were shown in The catalyst with 1.0 The catalyst with 5.0 The catalyst with 3.0 In general, loading Co and Ni was also a good alternative path to improve the catalyst stability, because it is of critical importance to lower cost for a large-scale and comparatively low-cost production of catalysts. In conclusion, the shape-selective alkylation of toluene with methanol was investigated over modified nano-scale HZSM-5 zeolite catalysts. The modification with Pt, Pd, Co and Ni metal inhibited the formation of coke from alkenes and significantly improved the stability at the condition of high para-selectivity. The novel Pt, Pd, Co and Ni/modified nano-scale HZSM-5 catalysts show unprecedentedly excellent stability as well as high activity and para-selectivity at optimized conditions, which is of critical importance to a large-scale and comparatively low-cost production of p-xylene. The project was supported by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (No. NCET-04-0268) and the Programme of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities. The authors thank Prof. Roel Prins (ETH Zurich) and Dr. Marcel Schlaf (University of Guelph) for helpful discussions and suggestions on this work.