To function as flotation collectors for mineral processing, polymeric nanoparticles require a delicate balance of surface properties to give mineral-specific deposition and colloidal stability in high ionic strength alkaline media, while remaining sufficiently hydrophobic to promote flotation. Combinatorial nanoparticle surface modification, in conjunction with high throughput screening, is a promising approach for nanoparticle development. However, efficient automated screening assays are required to reject ineffective particles without having to undergo time consuming flotation testing. Herein we demonstrate that determining critical coagulation concentrations of sodium carbonate in combination with measuring the advancing water contact angle of nanoparticle-saturated glass surfaces can be used to screen ineffective nanoparticles. Finally, none of our first nanoparticle library based on poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate (PEG-methacrylate) were effective flotation collectors because the nanoparticles were too hydrophilic.Froth flotation is one of the cornerstones of most mineral processing operations because flotation can efficiently isolate valuable mineral particles diluted in large quantities of unwanted gangue materials Although our ultimate goal is the development of flotation collectors for pentlandite (nickel sulfide mineral) ores, much of our initial information was obtained from the flotation of glass beads with cationic polystyrene latex particles. Key findings included: surfactant-free cationic polystyrene latex will promote glass bead flotation In spite of much success, we have struggled to optimize nanoparticle surface chemistry because of the broad design space for polymeric nanoparticles. If there exists a domain in the property space where hydrophobicity, colloidal stability and deposition specificity are all appropriate, we are unlikely to discover it by tedious large-scale polymerization, latex characterization and flotation evaluation protocols. Instead we are designing combinatorial synthesis approaches to generate a large nanoparticle library which we plan to interrogate for potentially useful nanoparticles by screening based on two properties: (1) the nanoparticle critical coagulation concentration in sodium carbonate solution; and, (2) the water contact angle on a hydrophilic glass surface saturated with adsorbed nanoparticles. In previous work, we have shown that the advancing water contact angle should be greater than 40° for good flotation performance Unless stated otherwise, all chemicals and supplies were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Styrene (99%) with <15 Experiments were conducted in a 250  Photographs of the nanoparticles deposited on glass beads with a nominal diameter of 30–50 Dynamic Light Scattering measurements were conducted with a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments) equipped with a He–Ne laser (633 Dispersions of nanoparticles in 5 The colloidal stability of nanoparticle dispersions was determined by measuring their relative turbidity in 3 Contact angle measurements were performed with a OCA 35 DataPhysics Instruments GmbH contact angle apparatus, equipped with a motorized stage. In a typical experiment, glass microscope slides (75 The measurement of the deposition of selected nanoparticles onto silica coated sensors was performed using a QCM-D (E4 model from Q-Sense, Sweden). In a typical experiment, a new SiO Laboratory scale flotation of glass beads was performed in the presence of 5 Industrial laboratory flotation tests using pentlandite ore were performed at the Vale laboratory in Mississauga, Ontario. In a typical experiment 1.0 A series of cationic polystyrene latexes was prepared by semi-batch emulsion polymerization – the recipes are shown in  To function as flotation collectors, the nanoparticles must spontaneously adsorb onto the target mineral particles. For our mechanistic studies, the targets were glass beads. The nanoparticles were positively charged, whereas glass is negative, suggesting an electrostatic driving force. However, the flotation experiments were performed in 5 In spite of our concerns, SEM examination of glass beads collected in flotation experiments showed the presence of adsorbed nanoparticles. For example, Nanoparticle adsorption onto silica surfaces was followed by quartz crystal microbalance (QCM-D) measurements in flow. The results are summarized in Glass bead flotation recovery measurements were performed in 150  PEG macromonomers were employed to increase the colloidal stability of the polystyrene nanoparticles. Critical coagulation concentrations (CCC) in sodium carbonate were used as a measure of colloidal stability. In our target industrial application, flotation is conducted in ∼7 to 13 In addition to colloidal stability, the nanoparticles must be sufficiently hydrophobic to promote adhesion to air bubbles. In previous work we observed a direct correlation between the advancing water contact angle (  The deviant behavior of the two outliers is further illustrated in When performing the flotation experiments, we observed that the froth (foam) bubble size seemed much smaller and foam more durable in the case of the outliers (P2000-4 and P950-4) – see photographs in  The PEG-based nanoparticle covered a wide range of PEG densities. We estimated the reduced grafted density indices We evaluated the P2000-4 nanoparticle as a potential flotation collector for pentlandite ore. The best nickel separation in This work is one of our first steps towards the implementation of combinatorial synthesis and high throughput screening of potential nanoparticle flotation collectors. In this work we have focused on validating screening assays to accept/reject candidate particles. For example, if we consider the thirteen nanoparticle types plotted on the contact angle vs. CCC plane in Effective nanoparticle flotation collectors must be sufficiently hydrophobic. We used the water contact angle as a measure of hydrophobicity, and as a criterion for rejecting particles. Of course, it has been long known that mineral contact angles alone cannot predict flotation efficiencies Our semi-automated contact angle assay consists of placing concentrated latex drops on a patterned glass surface with circular hydrophilic domains. The glass is rinsed and allowed to dry. The advancing water contact angle is then measured. Previously, we compared this advancing water contact angle with two other types of contact angle measurement: (1) smooth film measurements where an adsorbed latex layer was partially dissolved in solvent and dried to give a smooth film; and (2) receding contact angles where air bubbles were attached to latex coated surfaces immersed in buffer In this work we used traditional, 100 The conclusions from this work are: Critical coagulation concentration values (CCC) and advancing water contact angle measurements ( PEG-methacrylate (MW 300–2000 Polystyrene particles with a dense PEG surface layer stabilize smaller bubbles during flotation, giving anomalous higher apparent flotation recovery due to enhanced entrainment. We hypothesize that latex stabilizing species smaller than PEG macromonomers are required for nanoparticle flotation collectors – particles stabilized by higher molecular weight PEG chains are too hydrophilic. The authors acknowledge useful discussions and technical assistance of Dr. Berno from the The supporting material file includes: NMR characterization, glass bead particle size distribution, details on the calculation of coverage and reduced grafted density, and SEMs of QCM-D sensor surfaces after latex deposition experiments. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 