We have studied the mechanochemical synthesis of NaNbO3, prepared from a powder mixture of Na2CO3 and Nb2O5. The formation of NaNbO3 during milling was followed using thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction. According to the thermogravimetric analysis, after 20 and 40h of milling there was still some residual carbonate, while the X-ray diffraction shows NaNbO3 as the major crystalline phase present in the mixture. Based on the quantitative XRD phase analysis, the residual reactants were amorphous and as such undetectable with the X-ray diffraction. Furthermore, an X-ray line-broadening analysis was used to determine the NaNbO3 crystallite size and the microstrain. A decrease in the NaNbO3 crystallite size coupled with an increase in the amount of microstrains was found from 10 to 40h of mechanochemical treatment. Finally, the TEM analysis confirmed the NaNbO3 crystallite size determined by the X-ray line-broadening analysis.Sodium niobate (NaNbO Alkaline niobates are usually prepared by conventional solid-state synthesis routes. However, high temperatures and long annealing times are often required to obtain a pure final product. The problem with preparing alkaline niobates is that these high temperatures can lead to the volatilisation of alkaline species, resulting in the formation of undesirable secondary phases. Furthermore, good homogeneity of the starting compounds, which is essential to avoid the formation of secondary phases, requires wet milling and this represents an additional step in the synthesis procedure. In order to overcome these problems, a new, alternative way for the synthesis of alkaline niobates must be undertaken. Mechanochemical synthesis is considered as an alternative preparation method, where good homogeneity and low synthesis temperatures can be combined in a one-step synthesis route. A study of the mechanochemical synthesis of NaNbO In our previous work, In a mechanochemical process, a fraction of the kinetic energy of the colliding balls is transferred from the balls to the powders. Comminution or multiple rupture of the particles, resulting in a reduction of their size and the simultaneous increase in the specific surface area, and the formation of structural defects during milling are only examples of the numerous phenomena that occur as a result of high-energy ball impacts. One of the ways to follow the mechanochemical formation of a compound is to measure the crystallite size and amount of crystal defects formed as a result of the mechanochemical treatment. In order to follow the evolution of the NaNbO A sample containing 1.42 The mechanochemical treatment was performed using a Retsch PM 400 planetary mill. For this type of mill, the ratio of the vial's rotational speed to the supporting disk's rotational speed is 2, and the distance between the rotational axes is 15 In order to make comparisons with the mechanochemically treated samples, a powder mixture of Na The thermogravimetric analysis (TG) was performed using a NETZSCH STA 409 analyser. The samples were dried at 70 XRD patterns were recorded using a home-made diffractometer built in collaboration with the INEL company. The primary beam is supplied by a sealed tube associated with an one-reflection Ge(1 The amount of amorphous phase, which contributes to the XRD background and subsequently referred to as the “XRD amorphous phase”, was determined by mixing the samples with a known amount, i.e., 30 The particle morphology of the powder after 40 The X-ray line-broadening analysis of the mechanochemically synthesized NaNbO Due to the significant NaNbO The thermogravimetric and the differential thermogravimetric (DTG) curves for the non-milled Na The sample milled for 10 In the sample milled for 20 Finally, after 40  From the XRD patterns in The amount of XRD amorphous phase before and after the quenching experiment was determined using the Rietveld refinement method. Since the ZrO  Due to the significant NaNbO The sample milled for 40 The mechanochemical synthesis of NaNbO The work was supported by the Slovenian Research Agency. Financial support from the Slovenian-French bilateral project (Proteus, BI-FR/03-001) is gratefully acknowledged. Ms. Jana Cilenšek is acknowledged for the thermal analysis.