Single, or complex copper, nickel and zinc ores and concentrates, frequently contain important amounts of silver and gold, together with other minor metals. Cu, Ni and Zn are easily and efficiently dissolved in mesophilic or thermophilic bioleaching processes, while Au, Ag and Pb remain in the residue. Having a mainly jarositic matrix, these residues are usually refractory to conventional cyanidation or concentration processes. The PLINT technology developed by Técnicas Reunidas is a simple, clean and efficient procedure for gold and silver recovery from bioleaching residues (especially of a jarositic nature) unable to be treated by conventional processes. This process is very flexible and adaptable to suit every specific application requirement. Results of a preliminary feasibility study on the application of the PLINT technology on a copper bioleaching residue are presented in this paper. Very appealing economic figures are shown together with main technical performance parameters and a summarised process description.Single, or complex copper, nickel and zinc ores and concentrates frequently contain important amounts of gold and silver that could be the key to the viability of such a mining project or could represent a substantial improvement in project profitability. Nowadays, bioleaching treatment of these ores or concentrates is the most successful alternative in many mining projects or industrial applications, especially for low-grade ores or complex minerals. Copper, nickel and zinc metals are easily and efficiently dissolved in bioleaching mesophilic or thermophilic processes, while lead remains in the leach residue in the form of lead sulphate, basic lead sulphate or plumbojarosite. Due to the bacterial leaching conditions (pH 1.5–2 and Jarosite compounds are very stable and normally tend to enclose specific metals, such as potassium, sodium, lead, silver, etc. ( Jarosites are compounds difficult to attack ( The value metals (silver, gold and lead) are efficiently dissolved in hot brine solution. Leaching conditions are adapted to every feed material requirement, running under neutral, acidic, alkaline or oxidant conditions. Any leached sulphate or iron would be removed by lime addition, giving a clean pregnant solution. Dissolved silver and gold are recovered from the pregnant solution by cementation with iron, lead or zinc, depending on the kind of metallurgical residue being treated. The precious metals cement produced is purified to produce Au–Ag bullion. Lead is recovered in the form of pure lead oxide concentrate, which can be sold at any lead secondary plant, or treated on-site, in a rotary furnace, to produce lead ingots. If convenient, lead could be recovered as lead metal after cementation with zinc or iron scrap. The depleted hot brine solution is sent to the leaching step again to close the loop. The PLINT process can be adapted to a variety of bioleaching residues—oxidised, sulphated and especially jarositic—which makes it very flexible. No liquid effluent is produced in the process and it has a low energy and reagent consumption. It does not use sophisticated or highly contaminant consumables because the main input streams are lime, and metal powder as a reductant. A sensitivity analysis shows that profitability can be achieved at over 200 g/ton of silver, or even lower for large tonnage operations. The PLINT process can be a suitable alternative to conventional cyanidation, because the cyanide leachant can be replaced by brine leachant, which also forms stable complex with Ag and Au. This is particularly advantageous for those ores refractory to conventional treatment, and also for those ores with a medium or high content of precious metals. The PLINT technology has been tested at demonstration scale and is now ready for industrial application. A preliminary economic evaluation has been made to a base case for silver recovery from a thermophilic bioleaching residue of a copper concentrate. Some inputs were considered for this case, such as a throughput of 200,000 ton/year of bioleaching residue with a silver content of 700 g/ton. A conservative silver recovery of 90% of the Ag contained (based on our lab test) was used to calculate the annual production of silver, giving 125,000 kg/year. By applying the PLINT technology, interesting outputs were obtained, such as an operating cost of million US$6, and a yearly income of million US$18. The TIC industrial plant has been calculated as million US$20. All of these figures allow a payback time of less than three years. The PLINT process is an attractive solution for treating bioleaching residues, recovering the Ag, Au and Pb content in those secondary materials. It is simple, flexible, eco-efficient and environmentally friendly. In addition, it produces value-added products with a high metal recovery. Economic results are very promising for residues containing above 200 g/ton. For a particular application to a copper bioleaching residue containing 700 g/ton, the estimated payback is less than three years, which means a non-intensive capital process. The PLINT technology could therefore boost the economy of many bioleaching processes, and be a suitable alternative to the undesirable cyanidation process in precious metals recovery.