Oxidized coal is usually difficult to float using common oily collectors in a traditional flotation process. In order to float oxidized coal efficiently, this paper proposed a novel flotation process which was named zero-conditioning flotation process. Samples of oxidized anthracite coal were used in flotation tests throughout the paper. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to indicate the chemical properties of coal samples. A comparison of traditional and zero-conditioning flotation performances of oxidized anthracite coal was investigated. It was found that the zero-conditioning flotation process was suitable for the upgrading of oxidized anthracite coal. Combustible matter recovery in the zero-conditioning flotation process was much higher than that in the traditional flotation process. In addition, concentrate ash content in the zero-conditioning flotation process was a little lower than that in the traditional flotation process.Coal is easily oxidized in air, e.g. in an underground coal mine, stored in coal bunkers, and even in the process of long distance transport A special flotation process called ‘the zero-conditioning reverse flotation process’ has been proposed for the upgrading of coal in literatures In this investigation, a novel flotation process which was also named the zero-conditioning flotation process was proposed. Our zero-conditioning flotation process was, in essence, different from the zero-conditioning reverse flotation process in literatures. Our zero-conditioning flotation process is described as shown in Meanwhile, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to indicate the chemical properties of coal samples. Throughout this study, our zero-conditioning flotation process was found to be especially suitable for the upgrading of oxidized anthracite coal. The aim of this paper is to propose a novel flotation process for the upgrading of difficult-to-float coals, such as lignite and oxidized coals. Oxidized anthracite coal samples were obtained from the Key Laboratory of Coal Processing and Efficient Utilization, Ministry of Education in China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou. It was subjected to a series of experiments, such as screening analysis, crushing analysis, and floating and sinking analysis. After these analyses, the coal sample was refused and oxidation processes occurred under a natural weathering process. The period for a natural weathering process was about 1 For the FTIR analyses, a Bruker Vertex 80v spectrometer was used and the spectrum was obtained at 2 In traditional flotation tests, the coal samples were first added into the flotation cell and pre-wetted with water for 3 In our zero-conditioning flotation tests, the flotation reagents (dodecane and frother) were added into the water in the flotation cell and the flotation reagents were conditioned with the water for 1 The dodecane dosages were 0, 1, 2 and 3  The primary hydrophobic functional groups are CH   In the traditional flotation process, the combustible matter recovery is only 16.04% without the addition of collectors. With an increase of collector dosage, the combustible matter recovery is increased from 16.04% to 37.12%. In contrast, the concentrate ash content is decreased from 10.94% to 8.15% with the increase of collector dosage. It indicates that the addition of an oily collector in the traditional flotation process not only improves the floatability of oxidized anthracite coal but also reduces the ash content of clean coal. Oily collectors have been found to improve the selectivity of coal in the flotation process Patil and Laskowski In our zero-conditioning flotation process, the flotation process began as soon as the coal was added into the flotation cell. The air valve of the flotation cell was quickly opened as soon as the coal was added into the conditioned water. The coal sample was only conditioned with water or flotation reagents for a very short period (only about 5 This paper proposed a novel flotation process which was named the zero-conditioning flotation process. The zero-conditioning flotation process is described as follows: flotation reagents (collector and frother) were added into the water in the flotation cell, the water was conditioned with the flotation reagents for a short period of time, the flotation process began and the air valve of the flotation cell was opened as soon as the coal was added into the water. The coal sample was only conditioned with water or flotation reagents for a very short period (only about 5 A comparison of traditional and zero-conditioning flotation performances of oxidized anthracite coal was investigated. Both the combustible matter recovery and concentrate ash content are improved by our zero-conditioning flotation process. The bubbles coated with the collector would be easier to attach to the surface of incomplete-wetted coal particles in the zero-conditioning flotation process than air bubbles attaching to the surface of completely-wetted coal particles in the traditional flotation process. As a result, our zero-conditioning flotation performance of oxidized anthracite coal was better than the traditional flotation performance. With the increase of collector dosage, the combustible matter recovery in traditional and zero-conditioning flotation processes is increased from 16.04% and 24.30% to 37.12% and 55.35%, respectively. In contrast, the concentrate ash content in traditional and zero-conditioning flotation processes is decreased from 10.94% and 8.63% to 8.15% and 7.89%, respectively. This work was supported by the support of the