Aqueous-phase reforming (APR) of methanol over nickel supported on zirconium, cerium and lanthanum oxides was performed in continuous laboratory scale reactor and discussed in this paper. The role of composition and physico-chemical properties of the supports were investigated and significant benefit of using mixed oxides CeO2-ZrO2 and La2O3-ZrO2 over the pure oxides, in term of methanol conversion and hydrogen production, was demonstrated. Methanol conversion of over 50% with hydrogen production efficiency of over 40% were achieved with the most active catalyst Ni/25%CeO2-ZrO2.
                  Furthermore, catalyst stability, the most challenging issue within APR studies, was thoroughly investigated and discussed. Slight deactivation of the prepared catalysts during APR experiments or reduction was observed and addressed to the Ni particles sintering. On the other hand, other common reasons causing catalysts deactivation under APR conditions, such as leaching of Ni, changes in Ni oxidation state or changes in the supports lattice were not observed by wide range of characterization methods The most stable catalyst, Ni/10%La2O3-ZrO2, exhibited a slight decrease of MeOH conversion within two subsequent experiments (each per 6h) from 46.3% to 42.7%.Aqueous-phase reforming (APR) is a promising technology converting organic compounds in aqueous solutions preferably to hydrogen and carbon dioxide. Therefore, APR can be considered as a potential route for transformation of organic compounds found in biorefinery wastewaters to value added products. This would lead to increasing economic efficiency of processes such as biomass pyrolysis and Fischer-Tropsch synthesis and make them more environmentally friendly by decreasing the amount of organic compounds in wastewater streams. In comparison with well-known steam reforming, APR has proven to be more energy efficient because of no need of evaporating feedstock to gas phase Very challenging task within the research focused on APR has been the finding of a suitable catalyst, which would show high activity in reforming reaction (Eq.   In general, Group VIII metals exhibit high activity for C Zirconium and cerium oxides are used extensively as catalyst supports in various applications Doping cerium oxide with a lower-valence metal, such as lanthanum, leads to increase of oxygen mobility and oxygen storage capacity via the formation of oxygen vacancies. In case of pure zirconia, lanthanum doping leads to stabilizing of the oxide lattice Platinum modified mixed oxides of CeO In addition to platinum catalysts, Ni supported on mixed oxides such as LaAlO The main target of the current investigation is to study the application of APR process in the treatment of biorefinery wastewaters. Based on the typical compositions of wastewaters originating from Fischer-Tropsch process as well as of biomass pyrolysis water streams Granulated zirconium dioxide supplied by Saint-Gobain Ceramic Materials was calcined at 500 Zirconia, ceria and lanthanum oxide and their mixtures (ZrO Wide range of characterization methods such as atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), nitrogen adsorption and desorption (BET and BJH method), high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), were used for describing the properties of the prepared catalysts. The metal loading of the prepared catalysts was analyzed using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). 200 Nitrogen physisorption (Ultra Surfer, Thermo Fisher) was used to determine surface area, pore volume, and pore size distribution of the pure supports and the prepared catalysts. The degassing of the samples was performed prior to the measurement under vacuum for 3 Hydrogen static volumetric chemisorption (Ultra Surfer, Thermo Fisher) was used to determine nickel dispersion and its surface area. The catalyst was reduced at 450 The type of the surface species on the catalyst was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using PANalytical X‘Pert PRO MPD Alpha-1 diffractometer with Cu Kα1 radiation (45 An aberration-corrected JEOL-2200FS microscope (JEOL Ltd., Japan), operated at 200 The CO APR experiments were performed in a continuously operated stainless steel tubular reactor using downward flow. The catalyst (1.5 The outlet stream from the reactor was cooled down and separated into gas and liquid phases at the reactor pressure. The gaseous products were analysed online by MicroGC (Agilent 490 Micro GC Biogas Analyzer) consisting of a dual channel cabinet including a 10-m CP-Molsieve 5A with argon as carrier gas, and a 10-m CP-PoraPLOT U column channel with helium carrier gas and equipped with 2 thermal conductivity detectors (TCD). The liquid products were taken at specific time intervals and analysed offline by a gas chromatograph (Agilent 6890 series) equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID) and a Zebron ZB-wax Plus column (60 After the experiment, the catalyst was kept in the reactor, re-reduced using the same reduction condition as in the case of fresh catalyst and tested again in a subsequent APR experiment under the same reaction conditions. After the second experiment, the spent catalyst was characterized in order to determine reasons for potential deactivation. The results of the catalyst screening in APR were evaluated in terms of hydrogen production efficiency (E Deep characterization of all prepared catalysts, namely Ni/Zr (10%Ni/ZrO Ni content in fresh and spent catalysts detected using AAS method is shown in The textural characteristics of pure supports and Ni-modified catalysts (fresh and spent) are shown in The surface areas and pore volumes ( Negligible differences in surface areas and pore volumes were observed in case of spent Ni/Zr, Ni/17Ce-Zr, Ni/25Ce-Zr and Ni/10La-Zr. However, significant decrease of surface area was observed in case of spent Ni/17Ce-5La-Zr compared to the fresh catalyst. This material (pure support and Ni modified catalyst) exhibited the highest surface areas and pore volumes as well as the smallest average pore diameters. Therefore, the blockage of the smallest pores by Ni particles sintering led to the most significant differences in measured values between fresh and spent catalyst (see below Section The N On the contrary, CeO In order to determine an accessible Ni surface and dispersion, H As discussed below, larger Ni particles were determined using H XRD patterns of the pure supports and their Ni modified forms are presented in Nickel oxide is typically characterized by the five diffraction peaks listed in XRD patterns of the spent catalysts are shown in Supplementary material (Fig. S2, Section S3.). XRD patterns typical for all supports, in exception of CeO XRD pattern of spent Ni supported on CeO However, the deactivation of Ni/CeO XRD line-broadening and Scherrer equation were used to estimate the crystal size of NiO and metallic Ni in fresh and spent catalysts, respectively ( Crystallites of NiO, being in the range from 11 to 13 As mentioned above (Section Comparison of NiO crystal size present on fresh catalyst and Ni crystal size present on spent catalysts ( On the other hand, lower sintering was determined in case of Ni supported on 10La-Zr mixed oxide lattice. This can be consequence of strong interaction of between Ni and La In addition to the determination of the crystallite size of the active metal, XRD line-broadening and Scherrer equation were used to determine the crystal size of the oxides in the pure supports as well as in the Ni modified fresh and spent catalysts ( The selected nickel-modified catalysts were characterized by TEM in order to determine the nickel particle size, morphology, and their distribution on the catalyst surface ( Because of the fact that elements present in the supports (Zr, Ce, La) are heavier then Ni, it was not possible to see metal particles using neither HR-TEM, nor STEM. Therefore, the elemental maps determining the location of the elements were recorder and they are presented in Temperature-programmed desorption of CO One broad CO Desorbed CO All prepared catalysts were tested in APR of methanol aqueous solution under the same reaction conditions (See Section Hydrogen, methane, CO and CO  As a contrast, Ciftci et al. It was detected that the selectivities towards the products ( Hydrogen production rate, and yields of products obtained in APR of methanol over tested Ni modified catalyst are shown in Supplementary material (Section S4., Table S2). In order to achieve high hydrogen production, high activity in the reforming reaction should be accompanied by high activity in WGS. Evaluation of WGS is primarily expressed as a ratio of CO WGS is reversible mildly exothermic reaction which should result to almost total conversion of CO to CO It has been published previously that the ceria-supported catalysts generally show very high activity in WGS reactions because of high oxygen storage capacity of those materials The possibility of the catalyst reuse after their re-reduction in the APR reaction was tested for all catalysts except Ni/Ce, which showed very low activity in the first run. Methanol conversions as a function of reaction time with the fresh and re-reduced catalysts are compared in When comparing fresh catalysts, only Ni/10La-Zr and Ni/25Ce-Zr showed stable activity with no decrease of MeOH conversion after reaching steady state. Slight deactivation during the experiment, with 5% decrease of MeOH conversion (compared to steady state), was observed using all other catalysts. Remarkable drop of activities can be seen from comparison of fresh and re-reduced Ni/17Ce-Zr and Ni/25Ce-Zr, suggesting that the sintering of Ni particles causing catalysts deactivation occured during the reduction step. This fact was already suggested while comparing results obtained by XRD and H When comparing re-reduced catalysts, most of the spent catalysts showed stable activity with low decrease of MeOH conversion, being around 3% in exception of Ni/25Ce-Zr where MeOH conversion drop was almost 10%. Compared to Ni particles of 11–13 As can be seen from As a result of all listed deactivations, comparable conversions of MeOH after 12 The selectivities towards the products listed in Comparing selectivities to CO The lower amount of methane was formed over all re-reduced catalyst in exception of Ni/La-Zr where CH It can be concluded that some deactivation addressed to sintering of Ni particles was observed in case of catalysts tested within the current study. However, deactivation observed over tested catalysts was much lower in comparison with the most catalyst tested in APR studies. It should be emphasized here, that the lattice of supports remained intact and metallic Ni did not undergo change in its oxidation state. Problem with the sintering of Ni particles could be avoided by using different preparation methods, which might lead to the stronger interaction between Ni and support. Other preparation methods improving Ni dispersion and resistance toward sintering can be solution combustion, co-precipitation, sol-gel or some complexing methods Activity of series of nickel catalysts supported on ZrO Slight deactivation of catalysts was observed during either APR experiments or reduction steps and was addressed to Ni particles sintering. Other deactivation processes typical for APR studies, such as leaching of Ni and changes in Ni oxidation state or in the supports lattice were excluded based on results of the various characterization methods, which indicates that the prepared catalyst exhibited very promising stability. This work was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: