A simple framework is offered here for relating dental function, particularly the size of the dentition and its supporting skeleton, to the rest of the mammalian body. Built up from a simple understanding of the fracture properties of foods in mammalian diets, it predicts that mammals that reduce their body size rapidly will have jaws that become too small to house all their teeth. Dental overcrowding, with eventual reduction in tooth size or reduction in tooth number, is a logical result. The Flores finding shows a dentally crowded jaw entirely consistent with this theory. However, the theory also predicts that reduction in the values of certain mechanical properties of foods, particularly their toughness, will also bring about similar trends without changing body size. Dental crowding in modern humans is considered the combined result of tool use to comminute foods and cooking to modify their mechanical properties, such as toughness.The proposal that problems with human health have their basis in recent evolutionary developments is supported by dental evidence. Usually, when people say something like this though, they are alluding mainly to tooth decay and gum disease. An entire health profession (dentistry) has grown up to cope with the consequences of these problems because they are frequent enough to warrant that the mouth requires regular surgical attention. No other part of the body is so commonly afflicted. A major tendency towards dental disease reflects the profound change in diets that have taken place over the last 10,000 years. However, the root cause must predate it. We have other difficulties with our mouths now that, even though emerging in historic time, also probably reflect dietary trends that extend back to much earlier periods. The major one is that our mouth parts do not appear to fit together properly, impairing normal function and predisposing to yet more dental problems. Primarily, the mouth is often too small to contain the teeth that develop in it. Very frequently, the last (third) molar teeth, the so-called ‘wisdom teeth’, fail to erupt. Less frequently, these teeth never even develop. This latter circumstance is not isolated. There is a statistical association between the non-development of the last molar and that of the upper lateral incisors and the second lower premolar When our teeth erupt from their crypts in the jawbone into the mouth, they are frequently maloccluded, i.e. they are variably twisted or tilted out of their usual position. Some of the misfit is natural because eruptive trajectories must be slightly imperfect and so mammals have developed various mechanisms to allow teeth to drift into their optimal positions. However, the aim of our teeth is now bad enough that these mechanisms cannot correct it. Comparisons with other mammals show how extraordinary the mess is because their teeth sit in perfectly ordered arcades. While malocclusions are occasionally seen in primates All the above refers just to All these problems are broadly attributed by physical anthropologists, either overtly or by implication, to extra-oral food processing. The use of stone tools for comminution, which goes back at least 2.5 million years We have dates for the first appearance of stone tools, but how long ago did cooking begin? While most researchers are happy to accept that cooking developed about 300,000 years ago, there is a newer viewpoint that this technique could be nearly 2 million years old The above narrative is cased only in terms of human evolution. However, the overwhelming importance of teeth for documenting mammalian evolution–simply because they fossilize better than any other part of the body–surely makes an overarching investigation of the dentition vital for understanding health issues. One observation of relevance is that mammals that rapidly reduced their body sizes, something that appears to follow quickly after the isolation of large mammals on small islands, seem to have teeth rather larger than would be expected from their body sizes It is impossible to divorce the size of teeth from the size of the body that the teeth have to service and so some background is needed to make a general argument. The anterior teeth, the incisors, serve to get food into the mouth, a process called ingestion. The posterior teeth, the premolars and molars, act usually to reduce the particle size of foods, a process called mastication. Fragmented particles are then mixed with saliva before being swallowed. The body uses energy at some rate above that of its basal metabolism. The mouth is the first of a series of chambers in the digestive system where food is processed in batches in a sequential manner. The action of the mouth is mechanical, while the rest of the digestive system is reliant on chemical activity, but both depend on the extent of their surfaces for their success. However, regardless of how they operate, any sequence of processes like this can only run as fast as their slowest component—meaning that each individual element of the system must be designed up to speed or the animal would starve. Most of the literature on tooth size has dealt just with mastication and the sizes of posterior teeth, the premolars and molars. Pilbeam and Gould A general trend in mammalian evolution is increase in body size, so there is a ready test of this theory. Fortelius There is nothing in these considerations to help in understanding why tool use or cooking might have affected tooth size in the human lineage: there seems to be no mechanics involved. What could be missing? Well, there is actually some mechanics embedded in these arguments; it is just a little hidden. Any scaling argument such as the above has to be based on some common factor—some similarity factor If both large and small mammals were to eat the same-sized food objects, just ingesting them in different quantities, then Fortelius' Generally, solid objects of a given material do not break at characteristic stresses. If prepared in the same shapes and subjected to the same loading regime, the size of these objects is extremely important. Foods are, in this mechanical sense, materials. When materials behave in a ‘Hookean’ manner, i.e. with stress proportional to strain almost until breaking, they actually fracture at lower stresses when they are in larger pieces. The property controlling fracture is not stress, but toughness, which is defined as the energy required to make a unit area of crack. The scaling arguments are rigorous and proven Adding a mechanical extension to Fortelius' argument based on the energetics of fracture, Lucas All this analysis is following the tradition of the subject as it dates from Pilbeam and Gould To examine whether tooth size in modern humans could be a consequence of cooking, the problem can be tackled the same way but without such severe simplification. Although there is no space here to include it, earlier in the analysis given in Lucas In plain language, if the toughness of an important food in the diet (a staple food or a food critical to survival during some part of the year) reduces after cooking, then the linear dimensions of the teeth should gradually reduce too. However, although this may encourage a reduction in tooth size, it says nothing about any potential crowding of the jaw. Suppose in addition though that the ingested particle size is also reduced drastically as a result of tool use in human evolution to comminute particles. This would reduce demands for a wide gape. [In fact, modern humans have very small gapes, suggesting that we are ‘small object feeders’ probably due to extra-oral comminution of particles.] A proto-human group that is both comminuting foods with tools and cooking them prior to ingestion would start to become a ‘facial dwarf’, the size of all its dentition and its jaws reducing in size. This could easily lead to dental crowding if the degree of particle size reduction during to ingesting smaller particles outstrips the reduction in posterior tooth size. That depends very much on the foods that were being cooked. The hunt for dietary components that might explain the need to have developed cooking is not difficult. Once cooked, many foods in the modern Western diet can be swallowed and digested almost completely by humans without any chewing Starch seems the key to this. As the storage form of carbohydrate in plants, it is found in leaves, specialized storage organs and, very often, in seeds. Unless stored and utilized rapidly, its granular form is generally insoluble, which makes it extremely difficult to digest. There is little or no digestion by humans of raw starch in most of these plant foods, with the probable exception of leaves (where storage is temporary and full granular structure not achieved), unless the component granules are first broken down by heat. Linked to this is the fact that there has been duplication of the amylase gene in recent human evolution Wrangham et al. Why have so much amylase in the saliva? There seems no point to start the digestion of starch so early in the digestive system, when the action of amylase in either the mouth or gut is so rapid on granules that are so small (granules range in size from 2 to 100 μm dependent on their source). Amylase could be there to detect the presence of starch—to pass a sweetness signal to the body to confirm its presence Thinking of solid breakdown in terms of fracture energies rather than conventional stress-strain mechanics could change perspectives on many aspects of body form, not least the dentition. The problem though with studying the mechanical behaviour of foods is that their fracture is complicated. Foods, like other biomaterials, have a variety of behaviors. Many do not show linear stress-strain behaviour and a number shows structures that disconnect strained elements, effectively blocking energy transfer between component parts. Actually, the prediction for the relationship of tooth size with body size above is simply a lower bound In addition to understanding the behaviour of raw foods, the variety of ways in which food can be cooked produce important changes in fracture behaviour. In particular, the path of cracks can be drastically changed. Perhaps, the most important thing right now is to define what cooking actually does to foods and how the perception of ‘cooked’-ness in foods relates to its physical behaviour. All this should help not only in understanding the evolution of oral health, but also provide the relevant background to the food industry, where interest in food texture is immense.