Background
                  The purpose of this study was to investigate whether healed tuberosities yield better rotational range of motion (ROM) and functional outcomes compared with unhealed tuberosities after reverse shoulder arthroplasty in elderly patients with comminuted proximal humerus fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  This study included 38 patients who underwent reverse arthroplasty because of 4-part proximal humerus fractures; 14 patients had healed tuberosities (group A) and 24 patients had unhealed tuberosities (group B). Functional assessments included visual analog scale pain score, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score, Constant score, and active ROM.
               
                  Results
                  There were no significant differences in the patients' demographics between the 2 groups. At final follow-up, no significant differences were found between groups in visual analog scale score (group A, 1.4; group B, 1.6; P = .647), American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score (74.3 and 70.7; P = .231), and Constant score (67.9 and 63.9; P = .228) and ROM with forward flexion and internal rotation. However, in external rotation, there was a significant difference between groups (29° and 10° in external rotation with the elbow at the side [P < .001]; 25° and 7° in external rotation with shoulder abduction [P < .001]).
               
                  Conclusion
                  After reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fracture, tuberosities were healed in an anatomic position in 37% of patients. However, there were no significant differences in functional outcomes and ROM between the 2 groups, with the exception of external rotation, which was better in the healed tuberosity group. Therefore, tuberosity healing is not a prerequisite for satisfactory outcomes after reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fractures in elderly patients.In the treatment of comminuted 4-part proximal humerus fracture in the elderly patient, hemiarthroplasty with tuberosity fixation has been widely used. Several studies recently demonstrated satisfactory outcomes after reverse shoulder arthroplasty for treatment of osteoporotic 4-part proximal humerus fracture, although the prosthesis used for the studies was a conventional stem for rotator cuff arthropathy, not a stem for fracture having special coatings and modifications at the metaphysis, with the expectation of osseointegration between implant and tuberosities. Although reverse shoulder arthroplasty has yielded satisfactory forward flexion restoration in rotator cuff arthropathy, the improvements in external and internal rotation are less notable. These rotational movements are imperative for activities of daily living, such as personal hygiene and combing hair. In reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fracture, if the tuberosity can be healed in its anatomic position and consolidated around the proximal portion of the humeral stem, both function and rotational ROM should be improved. However, there are relatively few studies to examine this issue. The purpose of this study was to investigate clinical and radiologic outcomes after reverse shoulder arthroplasty in elderly patients with 4-part proximal humerus fracture based on tuberosity healing. The hypothesis was that patients with healed tuberosities would have better functional outcomes and rotational ROMs compared with patients with unhealed tuberosities. This was a retrospective case-control multicenter study including 47 elderly patients with 4-part proximal humerus fracture who underwent reverse shoulder arthroplasty between October 2009 and February 2014. The indication for reverse shoulder arthroplasty in this study was patients older than 70 years at the time of surgery who had 4-part proximal humerus fracture in the setting of poor bone quality where osteosynthesis was not feasible. The inclusion criteria were patients who underwent surgery with these indications and were available for follow-up at least 2 years after surgery. The exclusion criteria were patients who had concomitant pre-existing irreparable rotator cuff tear, previous surgery of the affected shoulder, old fracture with malunion of the tuberosity, and cuff atrophy. Nine patients were excluded and 38 patients were evaluated in this study. The group assignment was determined according to the degree of tuberosity healing. If the repaired tuberosities were well healed and united in an anatomic position, the patient was assigned to group A ( Functional evaluation included pain score on a visual analog scale; American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons shoulder score; Constant-Murley score; and active ROMs of forward flexion in the scapular plane, external rotation with the elbow at the side and external rotation with shoulder abduction in the plane of the scapula, and internal rotation. Internal rotation was measured by assessing how far up the spine the patient could reach with the thumb. To facilitate the statistical analyses, the spinal segment level reached by the patient was converted into a number: T1 to T12 levels were indicated by 1 through 12; L1 to L5 levels were indicated by 13 through 17; and the sacrum was indicated by 18. Radiologic assessments included AP view on plane radiography and 3-dimensional computed tomography of the shoulder before surgery to identify displacement and comminution of the fragment. After surgery, greater tuberosity healing was assessed with a true shoulder AP radiograph and AP radiograph in 20° of external rotation; lesser tuberosity healing was assessed with an axillary view obtained at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year and annually thereafter. The inferior scapular notch was identified using the Sirveaux classification. In a deltopectoral approach, reverse shoulder prosthesis (Aequalis; Tornier, Montbonnot-Saint-Martin, France) was used in all patients. After removal of the humeral head, greater and lesser tuberosities were identified. Four nonabsorbable cerclage sutures were placed in the posterior cuff from inside to outside, and 2 nonabsorbable cerclage sutures were placed in the subscapularis tendon in the same manner to handle the tuberosities. Two holes were drilled at the lateral cortex of the diaphysis 1 to 2 cm from the fracture site, and 2 nonabsorbable sutures were passed to the holes from outside to inside and then from inside to outside for a vertical cerclage tie. After tenotomy of the long head of the biceps from the supraglenoid tubercle, biceps tenodesis was performed at the upper border of the pectoralis major. While the humeral stem was being inserted with bone cement in 20° retroversion and with appropriate depth referencing the medial calcar of the proximal humerus, deltoid tension was determined at the surgeon's discretion with a humeral polyethylene component. At that point, the greater and lesser tuberosities were secured in their anatomic positions relative to the lateral and anterior cortexes of the humeral shaft; among the 4 sutures placed in the posterior cuff, 2 sutures were tied to secure the greater tuberosity and the stem. The remaining 2 sutures were passed through the subscapularis tendon from inside to outside and tied to secure both tuberosities and stem together. Finally, for the vertical cerclage tie, 1 end of the 2 sutures placed in the diaphysis was passed through both tuberosities and tied with the end of the 2 sutures. If the greater tuberosity was placed under significant tension during reduction and suture fixation around the humeral cup, the anterior half of the supraspinatus was eliminated, and the remaining posterior cuff was attached to the greater tuberosity. All operations were performed by 4 orthopedic surgeons with the same techniques in 4 academic hospitals. The affected arm was kept in a sling for 4 weeks, and in this period, pendulum and self-assisted circumduction exercises was encouraged. Four weeks after surgery, self-assisted passive ROM exercises were started, such as forward flexion in the supine position and table sliding/stretching exercise, preferably during or after a hot bath or shower. After 6 weeks, self-assisted active exercises were started. Isotonic strengthening exercises using an elastic band were started 2 months postoperatively. Three months after surgery, the patients were allowed to gradually return to their daily living activities. Statistical analyses were conducted using the SPSS program (version 21.0; IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). The Mann-Whitney Among the 38 patients, the greater tuberosity was healed in its reduction position in 14 patients (37%) and the lesser tuberosity was healed in 23 patients (61%). Healing of both tuberosities was achieved in 14 patients (37%, group A). The remaining 24 patients had either resorption or migration of a repaired tuberosity (group B). The mean age at time of surgery was 81.1 years (range, 75-89 years) in group A and 79.6 years (range, 73-87 years) in group B. There were no differences in patient demographics between the 2 groups ( At final follow-up, there were no differences in clinical outcomes and ROM except for external rotation ( This study investigated whether elderly patients with healed tuberosities would show better functional outcomes and restoration of shoulder ROM compared with elderly patients with unhealed tuberosities after reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fracture. Patients with healed tuberosities did not yield better functional outcomes or ROM, with the exception of external rotation with the arm at the side. In this study, the rate of healed tuberosity was lower than that in previous studies (47%-88%) for reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fracture. There are several reasons for the low tuberosity healing rate in this study. First, the prosthesis used in this study did not have a porous coating surface on either the humeral cup or the proximal portion of the stem. Supposedly, this may be related to a low rate of tuberosity healing even after tuberosity fixation with nonabsorbable sutures. Second, the position of tuberosity fixation around the humeral cup in reverse shoulder arthroplasty was lower than its original anatomic position, and this might entail tuberosity fixation under high tension, despite removal of the anterior part of the supraspinatus tendon to relieve the tension. In this study, the medial calcar of the proximal humerus was used as a reference point for the appropriate depth of the stem. However, on occasion, insertion of a thick polyethylene component results in considerable tension to the reduced tuberosities. Third, the mean age of the patients in the current study was relatively high. As a result, these patients may have higher rates of severe osteoporosis and poor bone healing, although preoperative bone mineral density was not evaluated. Fourth, we filled the cement up to the end of the proximal metadiaphysis. If we had removed the cement and packed the zone between tuberosity and metadiaphysis with cancellous bone, we might have achieved a better tuberosity healing rate. In this study, both patients with healed tuberosities and patients with unhealed tuberosities yielded satisfactory outcomes in shoulder function and ROM in forward flexion. There were no significant differences in functional outcomes or ROM, with the exception of external rotation. Considering that reverse shoulder arthroplasty has been performed for rotator cuff arthropathy or irreparable massive rotator cuff tear deficient of external or internal rotators and has yielded satisfactory outcomes including ROM in forward flexion, we surmised that although forward flexion might be similar in both groups, rotational ROM would be better in the patients with healed tuberosities and would entail better functional scores. However, as indicated before, the shoulder functional outcomes except for ROM in external rotation were contrary to our hypothesis. The healed tuberosities did not yield better functional outcomes or ROM. When reverse arthroplasty is used in the treatment of comminuted proximal humerus fracture, the role of the rotator cuff might be eliminated or countervailed by deltoid function. Nevertheless, we think that the healed tuberosities contribute to stability of the reverse shoulder arthroplasty and suggest that they be preserved and fixed instead of excised, especially in comminuted fractures. Controversy still exists on tuberosity fixation in reverse shoulder arthroplasty because several studies have indicated satisfactory clinical outcomes regardless of tuberosity healing. Cuff and Pupello described a tuberosity healing rate of 83% with no significant differences in outcomes except for ROM in external rotation between a healed group and a resorption group. This study has several limitations. First, this is a retrospective case-control study with a limited number of patients despite low incidence of 4-part fracture of all proximal humerus fractures. Because of the small sample size for both groups, a lack of difference may arise from type II error due to low statistical power. Second, this study has a relatively short period of follow-up after surgery. Third, there are inherent weaknesses related to multicenter study designs because of potential bias, variables in surgical technique, and assessment of functional outcomes and ROM. After reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fracture in elderly patients, tuberosity healing in an anatomic position was achieved in only 37% of patients. However, patients who underwent reverse shoulder arthroplasty for comminuted proximal humerus fracture obtained satisfactory functional outcomes regardless of tuberosity healing. There were no significant differences in functional outcomes or ROM between the 2 groups, with the exception of external rotation, which was better in the healed tuberosity group. Therefore, tuberosity healing did not seem to be a prerequisite for satisfactory outcomes after conventional reverse shoulder arthroplasty for 4-part proximal humerus fracture. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.