Calculations by a top–down method based on copper output and the efficiency of milling and smelting show that in making of 101×103 kt of metal from ore in the US 12.9×106 kt of tailings and 212×103 kt of slag containing 16.5×103 kt of copper were placed in wastes retained at mill and smelter sites through the 20th century in the US. The lost copper is 14% of the metal content of the ore processed, and its recovery would supply nearly 10 years of copper demand in the US at present consumption rates. Comparison with end-of-life copper in the different use categories shows that mill and smelter residues are the single largest component of the copper waste budget for the US. Because state-of-the-art copper production techniques were promptly adopted worldwide through the 20th century, the top–down method can be used to determine milling and smelting losses in the global anthropogenic copper cycle.The metal lost to waste deposits during the milling, smelting, and refining of copper from its ores is a potentially important component of the technological copper cycle, the budget that describes the life cycle of copper from extraction of ore from the lithosphere through its ultimate end-of-life disposal in waste repositories. Since comprehensive records of copper production wastes are lacking, the cumulative magnitude of these wastes has been determined by a top–down method that uses well-documented metal production data and the technological characteristics of the milling, smelting, and refining techniques practiced through the c century. This investigation is a component of the Stocks and Flows (STAF) Project of the Center for Industrial Ecology at Yale University that seeks a comprehensive accounting of the anthropogenic mobilization of copper and other metals in the industrial economy (  Most copper produced in the 20th century was made by pyrometallurgy. Mine overburden is ordinarily free of copper minerals. The copper ore itself consists of copper-bearing minerals mixed with barren (gangue) minerals such as quartz. Ore is milled before either pyrometallurgical smelting or SXEW by grinding it into particles fine enough to break the valuable mineral grains free from the gangue. The copper mineral is separated from the gangue by techniques based on differences in the density or other physical properties of the minerals. Mills today process ores that contain from 2 to 0.5% copper into concentrate containing 25–35% copper and a residue (tailings) consisting of most of the gangue and the unseparated copper-bearing mineral. Milling is done as close to the mine as possible to avoid the cost of hauling barren material to a smelter. The resulting tailings are left at the mill site. Chemical processes are required to separate copper from the iron, sulfur, oxygen, or other elements present in the copper-containing minerals of the concentrate. The SXEW process uses leaching by an appropriate solvent followed by electrolysis of the leachate to make pure copper. The pyrometallurgical technique uses reactions carried out in furnaces at high temperatures to produce impure metal (blister copper) and slag that contains the copper lost in smelting. Subsequent refining of the blister copper results in some additional wastes. However, these refinery residues, whether originating from pyrometallurgy or electrowinning, are typically reprocessed, and contribute little to the overall waste stream. At the opening of the 20th century most copper producers had access to ores containing at least 2% or more of copper. While some smelters processed the richest ores directly, most first milled them to reduce the amount of barren mineral passing through their furnaces. After grinding the ore, gravity techniques separated the relatively dense copper-bearing minerals from the less-dense gangue. At this time miners in the western US were just beginning to exploit low-grade porphyry ores, in which the copper mineral was finely disseminated. The established milling techniques were relatively ineffective in processing these ores. The introduction of the froth-flotation process made exploitation of the porphyry ores profitable. Mill operators had long known that finely-ground sulfide minerals added to water would often form a floating scum. Carrie Everson carried out experiments, described in her 1885 patent, that showed how sulfide minerals could be separated from gangue with the aid of oil. In 1901 Aleide Froment demonstrated that oiled sulfide minerals could be made to form a floating froth by agitating ground ore in a mixture of oil and acidified water. Many inventors strove to apply these concepts to practical milling processes in the next decade ( The grade of copper ores declined as miners, after first taking the richest ores, turned to successively poorer ones ( Milling ores that contained from 2 to as little as 0.5% copper through the 20th century left large quantities of tailings at mill sites. By 1957, 600 acres of Flin Flon lake in Manitoba held 30×10 The large quantity of tailings left from copper mining is illustrated by the wastes that have accumulated at the Morenci mine complex in Arizona, the largest producer in the US in 1995 ( Much disseminated copper mineral (the porphyry ore containing 1–4% copper) existed below the now-worked-out surface deposits at Morenci. In 1892 the Arizona Copper Company began extracting this ore and milling it with the best available gravity separation methods ( Miners had leached ores with dilute sulfuric acid to extract copper since 1752. They retrieved the dissolved metal by cementation, precipitating the copper on scrap iron ( Mine operators elsewhere also reworked old tailings. The Utah Leasing Company built a flotation plant in Newhouse, Utah in 1918 to reprocess tailings from the Cactus Mine that contained 0.75% copper ( In 1921 the Phelps Dodge Company acquired control of the Morenci district from the several independent companies, and in 1928 began exploration of a new source of copper by drilling through hundreds of feet of cap rock. It found nearly 3×10 We lack a complete inventory of tailings that have accumulated at Morenci. However, from 1956 through 1987, 762 430 kt of tailings were produced (US Geological Survey (USGS) Minerals Yearbooks Domestic Area Reports). An extrapolation based on subsequent copper production indicates that at least 960 000 kt of tailings remain from the mill that opened in 1942. At a mean copper content of 0.175%, typical for tailings from modern mills, these tailings contain at least 1600 kt of copper. We will see later that this represents 10% of all the copper lost in production processes in the US. The matte smelting technique adopted by most copper producers by the beginning of the 20th century remained the standard method for the next 75 years. Concentrate is heated to 1200–1300 The reverberatory furnace does not utilize the thermal energy that could be realized from burning the sulfur in the concentrate. Additionally, the stack gases it releases are too dilute for efficient recovery of the sulfur dioxide that smelters use to make sulfuric acid. Because of these limitations, rising energy costs, and new environmental regulations adopted in the 1970s, copper producers adopted new copper smelting techniques. By 1980 industry metallurgists considered six new bath smelting, two new flash smelting, and two new converting processes proven techniques ( In bath smelting, reactions occur predominantly in a molten mass of concentrate while in flash smelting concentrate is dispersed in air or oxygen and reactions occur while the particles are in flight. The first of the flash smelting methods were the Outokumpu process developed in Finland and the Canadian INCO technique. In both these processes the oxidation of the sulfur in the concentrate provides the heat needed for smelting. However, oxidation with cold air cannot attain the temperature of 1200–1300 Separation of matte from slag is not as efficient in flash smelting as it was in the older, reverberatory furnaces. Where reverberatory slag typically contained 0.35% copper, flash-smelting slag contains more than 1%. Flash smelters rely on a slag cleaning process to recover copper and mitigate environmental problems with the disposal or reuse of slag. The slag is cleaned either by re-melting in an electric furnace to recover more matte, or by milling and flotation ( Copper is lost from the matte into the slag in reverberatory or flash smelting furnaces either as metal droplets or in solution. When this slag cools, all the copper it contains forms copper–iron sulfides. The loss of copper to the slag in converters is larger than in reverberatory furnaces. However, since the sulfur content of the converter slag is low, nearly all the copper is in the form of metal drops ( Early in the 20th century smelter slag typically contained about 0.35% copper, and was discarded directly from the furnaces to nearby dumps ( The ratio of slag discarded to the amount of metal made depends on the grade of ore and the copper content of the concentrate. This ratio averages about 2.0, and has changed little through the 20th century ( By 1915 the metallurgists at a mill in Ajo, Arizona, had successfully introduced electrowinning in place of precipitation on iron to recover the copper dissolved by leaching. Copper was precipitated from the leachate on cathodes placed in electrolytic cells fitted with lead anodes. Electrowinning required ten times as much energy as electrolytic refining because of the formation of water and acid at the anodes ( The introduction of solvent extraction, first used at the Bluebird mine in Arizona in 1968, greatly increased the utility of hydrometallurgy in the extraction of copper. After leaching the ore with dilute acid, an organic solvent (the ‘extractant’) was added to the leachate to selectively remove the copper. High-quality metal could then be made by electrolysis of the resulting high-purity electrolyte. This process (usually designated ‘SXEW’) was adopted at mines in Arizona, Chile, and Africa in the 1970s, and was significantly improved with new extractants in the 1980s ( Since electrowinning requires more electrical energy than electrolytic refining and established solvent extraction techniques do not work well on primary (sulfide) ores, hydrometallurgy techniques have remained complementary of smelting. Today about 15% of the world copper production is from solvent extraction of ores ( Metallurgists expect to make more use of leaching techniques in the future because as ore grades become lower, it is more difficult to meet the smelter requirement for high-grade concentrate and achieve a high recovery rate with established milling methods (Nathaniel Arbiter, personal communication, October 2000). Additionally, a small amount of copper is now won by leaching ore bodies in place.  Here we use a top–down method to compute the total amount of copper in mill and smelter wastes. We start with records of copper production, which will be more-nearly complete than the milling records since producers publicly document their sales more systematically than their internal materials processing. The quantity and copper content of mill tailings and smelter slag resulting from the recorded copper production are computed from the technical characteristics of the production processes used. In addition to the amount of metal made, four additional parameters are needed to compute the amount of copper residing in the mill and smelter waste deposits: the ratio of the weight of mill tailings made to the weight of metal made, The production data for new copper ( To compute the weight of tailings made per unit weight of metal produced, we assume all the copper in the ore is in the principal copper mineral, chalcopyrite, CuFeS The USBM and subsequently the USGS compiled the national average yield of copper from milling ores from 1906 through 1973, and both the yield and the grade of ore mined for 1973–1997 for the US (John H. DeYoung, letter 22 November 2000). The yield is the ratio of the copper actually recovered from the ore after milling, smelting, and refining to the amount of ore used (usually expressed in percent). There are several additional sources of grade data. The USBM–USGS yield data corrected for Data on slag production and the copper content of smelter slag reported by The data in The total quantity of copper-containing tailings in the US computed by the STAF method (the procedure described above, which is part of the STAF project) on the basis of copper production losses shown in Results of the STAF calculation of copper-production wastes produced through 1999 are summarized in The effect of the adoption of the SXEW process in place of some smelting operations in the US is illustrated by computing the production wastes that would have been made if SXEW had not been used ( The copper production records are the most accurate component of the data used here. In one test of these data, we found that the standard deviation of the differences between the STAF data set and production data compiled independently by Professor Nathaniel Arbiter (Letter, October 2000) is 3.4%. Mill tailings are the dominant repository of copper production wastes. The quantity of tailings depends on While the recovery efficiencies of mills differed substantially in the early decades of the century ( Smelter practice was standardized and changed relatively little in the US through 1970. Introduction of new techniques thereafter led to larger differences in smelter performance. The surveys of smelter operations reported by The copper content of mill tailings depends on both the head grade and mill efficiency. Mill operators often consider data on the grade of their mill tails proprietary, and few comprehensive surveys have been published. Data for 12 Canadian mills operating in the 1950s ( After the early years of the 20th century new deposits of rich ore could no longer be found, and the world's copper smelters turned to processing progressively leaner ores. Some of these ores contained a lower concentration of copper than that present in the waste deposits from older milling and smelting operations. While mill and smelter operators have sometimes reprocessed old milling wastes, most deposits remain untouched and contain a substantial amount of metal. The SXEW process already has been proved an economical way of getting copper out of tailings that have a somewhat higher copper content than those typically remaining at US milling sites, as at the Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines in Zambia ( Any of a number of factors could make old mill and smelter wastes an economically attractive source of copper. These include substantially improved recovery technology; a large increase in demand with an accompanying increase in copper prices; the inclusion of metal recovery as a component of clean-up operations at mine, mill, and smelter sites; further decline in the grade of available ore; or environmental restrictions on new or expanded mining operations. Reworking would entail disturbance of long-established tailings ponds with the associated risk of mobilizing toxic material. Environmental regulators would have to balance this risk against the continuing presence of copper-laden tailing deposits. Calculations by the top–down method are an effective way of determining the contribution of milling and smelting wastes to the overall anthropogenic copper cycle. For the US they show an apparent 16% undercounting of tailings reported to the USBM. In making 101×10 Since copper smelting has been a mature technology shared worldwide through the 20th century, the loss rates computed here for the US can be used in computations of anthropogenic copper budgets for other regions. However, the balance between production and consumption elsewhere is typically different from that in the US. Thus, the computed copper budget for Europe in the year 1994 shows extraction of 690 kt of copper from ore with 90 kt of copper placed in tailings and 12 kt in smelter slags. Europeans supplemented their indigenous new copper production with 480 kt of copper in imported concentrates and blister metal, and 1.3×10 Extraction of the copper now stored in tailings in the US would meet the national demand for copper over the next 9 years at the present level of demand. It appears that the necessary technology to use this resource will soon be at hand. A decision to make the reprocessing of tailings part of a clean-up of the environmental effects of past mining and milling could influence the economic feasibility of recovering the copper they contain. I thank Professor Nathaniel Arbiter for generously sharing his knowledge of the copper industry gained through a lifetime of experience and research, and John H. DeYoung of the US. Geological Survey for assembling copper grade data for me. I have benefited from discussions with all members of the STAF project at Yale, and particularly thank Professor Thomas Graedel for insights on issues in industrial ecology, and Sabrina Spatari for organizing our copper data and help with the figures. Dylan Fuge assembled the copper production data. This research was supported by NSF grant BES-9819788.