In this work, the flotation recoveries per size liberation class are modelled using the particle surface area. The resulting model presented a very good adjustment for recoveries per size with correlation factors above 0.9. In addition, once it is directly connected to particle characteristics, this model directly indicated the effect of particle size and liberation on flotation.It is well known since the early days of flotation that coarse and fine particles do not float as well as intermediate-sized particles ( Predominantly, this result has been explained in terms of the effect of size on the probability of flotation sub-processes: collision, adhesion and detachment, as described by Due to their lower mass, fine particles present low inertial forces that reduce the probability of collision to bubbles. Detachment is not expressive for fine particles, which tend to form stable bubble particle aggregates after adhesion. However, the negative effect of lower probabilities of collision and adhesion overwhelms the advantage of the lower detachment probability, leading to reduced recovery ( Coarse particles present large surface areas and higher probability of collision in comparison with fine particles. However, due to their weight, the probability of detachment is also higher in comparison with fine particles, especially in the froth. Detachment is considered the main cause of the lower recovery of coarse particles. The effect of particle size, however, is conditioned by the degree of hydrophobicity, which mainly depends on the liberation, mineral texture and reagent adsorption. The role of liberation has also been recognized for many years ( The degree of hydrophobicity is usually evaluated by contact angle or particle-bubble attachment time. Several studies have demonstrated the isolated impact of liberation or hydrophobicity on flotation. As an example, The work of The work of Other studies were developed using artificial ores ( Therefore, it is important to further investigate how liberation, in conjunction with size, affects flotation performance, using a real ore in a continuous circuit, under conditions close to industrial ones and after some sort of stereological correction and reconciliation of liberation data. This is the main objective of this study and of a series of others based on the same tests. In this work, the behaviour of size liberation classes was evaluated using a chalcopyrite ore floated in a continuous mini pilot plant circuit, with conditions equivalent to industrial flotation in terms of particle size, solids percentage, and feed mineralogy. The process was accurately sampled, providing measurements of flow rates and grades. To minimize error propagation, hierarchical mass balance and mineralogical correction were performed simultaneously, in which the resulting distribution per liberation classes was consistent with the reconciled process data. The behaviour of size liberation classes was evaluated here in the first rougher cell. The results show how size and liberation distributions are linked to flotation performance in this first rougher, or, in general terms, for the particles that float fast. A mathematical model links flotation performance to the estimated chalcopyrite mineral surface area for this ore. The basis of this work is the same as described in The circuit included rougher, scavenger and cleaner stages at a feed rate of 110 g/min–118 g/min (∼7 kg/h), at 30% solids and with a particle size approximately 85 percent <210 μm. As this circuit aimed to evaluate the characteristics of flotation size-liberation class, there was no regrinding of intermediate concentrates, which would involve a change in the particle size distribution and, therefore, a resetting of the model in the middle of the circuit. Tests were conducted in an open circuit to obtain a high accuracy in the parameters. It is important to clarify that it would not be difficult to achieve circuit stabilization with recirculation loads. However, flow rates are small in the MPP, only some grams per minute in intermediate flows. If circuit was closed, sampling of recirculating flows should be performed in small aliquots of 20 s taken every 10–15 min. Then, to obtain the appropriate amount of material to perform all the analyses, at least 200 g, the duration of each test and ore feed consumption would be multiplied several times, what would not be feasible due to the limited amount of ore available for these tests. With an open circuit, it is possible to collect the intermediate concentrates over the required time, around two hours, what reduces sampling bias and promotes accuracy.  Due to the small flowrates, the whole flows of products were collected. Therefore, the obtained material was not a “sample” as a “portion” of the flow, but was the whole flow accumulated during a certain time. Tailings were taken in aliquots of 1 min. In particular, concentrate flows were accumulated for two and half hours. Considering that the residence time of the circuit was around 45 min (∼15 min in Rg + Sc and ∼ 30 min in Cl), concentrate flows were taken during 3 residence times without interruption. Due to this timespan, this was a very accurate product from a circuit, once it was able to absorb any process fluctuation. Flows of solids and water were determined with this whole amount. From this product, samples were split for chemical and physical analysis. Details can be referred to in Santos and Galery (2 0 1). These products were screened at 210 μm, 150 μm, 74 μm, and 44 μm and the fraction below 44 μm was analysed in a cyclosizer. Chemical analyses of Cu, Fe, Si, and S were performed for the overall sample and the size fractions. The mineralogical analysis was conducted in QEMScan for size fractions of −210 μm +150 μm, −150 μm +74 μm, −74 μm +44 μm and −44 μm +20 μm, for the feed and the rougher 1 concentrate, rougher 2 tailings, scavenger concentrate, cleaner concentrate and cleaner tailings. The liberation distribution in other size fractions and streams was obtained through the QEMScan estimate and mass balance. Data were balanced using the revised Savassi method ( Using this approach, global flow rates as well as mass proportions by size and liberation class with their mineral grades were reconciled for all flows. An overview of the results of the first rougher comparing the different froth heights is presented in This work details and models the effect of liberation on flotation for the first rougher considering the mineral surface area, showing how size and liberation are related to flotation performance. The whole circuit as well as the more detailed results on the kinetics of liberation classes will be the subject of future studies. In the ore, chalcopyrite is the main copper mineral and contributes to approximately 6.2% of the mass. Other copper minerals such as covellite, digenite and malachite are rare. Gangue is composed of quartz, feldspar, actinolite, iron oxides, mica and chlorite. This ore was considered a binary system formed by chalcopyrite and gangue.  Most chalcopyrite, approximately 80%, is distributed as intermediate-sized particles, ranging from 20 μm to 150 μm. The set of results comprises global mass flow rates and grades, size distribution and mineralogical distribution for each flow, as well as the respective grades per size and class. Once there are two levels of distributions under global results, data can be presented in several different ways, depending on the basis used to determine the distributions. The method that defines the variables used in this study corresponds to the mass distribution by liberation class ( The basic variables are   d     The chalcopyrite distribution per size liberation class is shown in It is remarkable that 42% of the chalcopyrite available in the feed is liberated/almost liberated, in which the majority (40%) is below 74 μm. Most chalcopyrite (84%) is distributed in particles with more than 45% chalcopyrite grade. In composite particles, chalcopyrite presents relatively large size grains. Test Cal 03, with a high froth thickness (4-cm height or a froth volume fraction of approximately 17% of total volume) is used as the basis for this work. The global chalcopyrite recovery  However, the enrichment ratio of coarse particles was much higher than that of the other particles. Despite lower recovery, the concentration was effective in this fraction, especially when considering that coarse particles are not liberated. For coarse particles, a similar behaviour was also observed in shallow froths: recovery was lower, but the enrichment ratio was higher than all the other sizes. For this test, due to the high froth thickness, fine particles presented an expressively lower recovery with high enrichment ratio. A different behaviour was observed in shallower froths. For a given froth height, the recovery of fine particles was still lower compared to the other sizes. However, comparing different froth thickness, due to the lower drainage and large entrainment in shallower froths, the recovery of fine particles increased and the enrichment ratio reduced as the froth became shallower. The comparison among froth heights was reported by The interesting observation here is the effectiveness of coarse particle concentration. Considering that coarse particles are predominantly heavy composites, a lower recovery would be expected. However, the enrichment was higher than expected. The loss in recovery should occur in the lowest chalcopyrite grade particles and the flotation of other composite classes should prevail even though these particles do not present high chalcopyrite content. Based on the data presented in  As expected, the higher the content of the chalcopyrite, the higher the recovery of a class in a size fraction. Recovery in the finest size fraction (<20 μm) was significantly lower because of the high froth thickness in this test. However, it was interesting to note that, for most composite classes, when a comparison was made within a liberation class, for example, 25%–35% cpy, the recovery of larger particles, above 74 μm, tended to be higher than for particles below 74 μm. This behaviour could be justified considering that a 150 μm particle with 25%–35% chalcopyrite presents a much larger chalcopyrite surface to adhere to air bubbles than a 20 μm particle. Hence, chalcopyrite recovery in the first rougher could be related to the proportion of chalcopyrite surface available in the feed flow, to be collected by air bubbles. When this hypothesis was raised, it was not possible to determine, via mineralogical analysis, the amount of chalcopyrite available in the external surface of the particles in the feed. However, the total chalcopyrite surface could provide some trends. Even if part of the chalcopyrite content were locked, the total amount of chalcopyrite in the classes, converted to a surface proportion, could indicate some correlation with the recovery. To convert masses into volumes, the values of mass distribution of each size liberation class in the feed were divided by the class average density, ρ The surface area of particles in each class Further, the superficial area of chalcopyrite in particles belonging to class  The process performance per liberation class was evaluated through the distribution of the total chalcopyrite recovery, equal to 81.2%, across the classes. This distribution was calculated according to Eq. To establish a correlation, these recovery distribution values across the liberation classes were divided by the chalcopyrite surface area in the feed shown in It is remarkable that these ratios presented a linear relation with the particle size for all classes above 15% chalcopyrite, as shown in By class comparison, the slope of these lines was higher for higher grade classes, reflecting the ease of flotation and the higher recovery for particles with higher chalcopyrite content. For composite particles, the slope is lower for lower chalcopyrite grade classes. Potentially, the lower slope for composite particles also includes the effect of the more disseminated or locked chalcopyrite in these particles, or the bias in overestimating the mineral surface area based on the whole chalcopyrite grade, as if all chalcopyrite were available on the surface of particles. In this sense, this slope can reflect the effect of mineral texture on flotability. These results indicate that, for a given particle size, recovery can be directly determined by the amount of chalcopyrite surface area in the feed. For each liberation class above 15% chalcopyrite, the ratio of chalcopyrite recovery over chalcopyrite surface area in the feed is linearly related to the particle size. Mathematically, the ratio between the recovery and the surface can be described as a linear function of size d A rearrangement of these equations provides a model for chalcopyrite recovery based on the surface area in the feed: This result presents a new perspective for evaluating flotation by size liberation class, showing, in a simple way, how chalcopyrite surface area in particles can affect flotation performance. The linear coefficients φ and ϑ for test Cal 03 were obtained using the least squares method.  Only for the class with the smaller chalcopyrite grade, 0.1%–15%, is this relation between recovery distribution and surface area not linear for all sizes. In this class, the low amount of chalcopyrite is not enough to keep large particles in the froth and they detach. Consequently, the trend is parabolic, as shown in For this class, a parabolic curve can be adjusted to replace the linear equation used in other classes. These results show how the chalcopyrite surface area determines flotation effectiveness in the first rougher stage. This behaviour may be associated with two main aspects: First, the particle size distribution after grinding, approximately 85% < 212 μm, is appropriate for this ore, in a conventional flotation circuit, as it should be in an industrial operation. The mass proportion of coarse particles is comparable to the ones in other size fractions but, in terms of mineral content, this coarse fraction represents a small proportion of chalcopyrite, and most of it was able to float in the first rougher. Losses were significant only in the lowest chalcopyrite grade class. Coarse composite particles with intermediate grades floated even better than much finer particles with the same mineral proportion, especially considering that it was just the first rougher. If this ore was ground to a coarser size, say 300 μm or higher, the distribution of particles would change, increasing the proportion of the lowest grade class, where size prevails over liberation, and a higher loss in recovery would be attributed to the coarse particles. The second aspect is related to the mineral texture. A simple mineral surface area distribution per particle size may be one of the reasons why, for most classes, composite coarse particles presented higher recoveries in comparison to composite fine particles in the same class. Once mineral texture is predominantly formed by large grains, it is possible to compare single particles. For a similar chalcopyrite content, there is a larger chalcopyrite surface area in a coarse particle compared to a fine one. This large surface area favours collection and potentially adheres strongly enough to support the particle weight. Only when the chalcopyrite content is too low is the loss in recovery excessive. Another factor that may contribute to the high recovery in coarse particles is a potentially larger probability of coarse particle collection in comparison to an equivalent mass of fine particles that present the same chalcopyrite surface. For the same amount of superficial area in a class, the number of coarse particles is much smaller than the number of fine particles, as illustrated in During the same first few minutes of residence time and for the same total mineral content in the size fractions, a large particle has a larger probability of being collected than a whole set of smaller particles, which present less This study indicates that, considering a set of chemical and hydrodynamic conditions, for an ore with a simple texture, ground to an appropriate size, flotation is predominantly determined by the chalcopyrite surface area available for collection. Distribution of recovery per liberation class could be linearly associated with mineral surface area in the feed for particles with a chalcopyrite grade higher than 15%. It is likely that the same trend can be verified in ores with similar textures when they are ground to a size amenable to flotation. Based on this trend, a simple mathematical model for recovery per liberation class was developed in relation to feed mineral surface area, for particles with mineral grades higher than 15%, with good correlation with measured data. Recovery of low grade particles could be modelled using a parabolic curve. There is a good probability that a parabolic model or other curve models can fit the recoveries of ores that present a more complex texture or are ground to a much coarser size in relation to its liberation. It is important to reinforce that all size liberation data must be reconciled to minimize error propagation and stereological bias, guaranteeing the representativeness of mass balance in all levels. This model, as well as the concept and methods behind it, may be the basis for analysing and comparing flotation process conditions, control tactics, new equipment, flash flotation and different circuit configurations. Current work is underway to compare the results of this model for different froth thickness in the first rougher and to verify whether it is applicable to other stages. Further, the model can be the basis for evaluating the effectiveness of grinding and flotation, and can also be included in mine-to-mill strategies. I would like to thank