The separation and concentration of cobalt from ammoniacal solutions containing nickel and cobalt by an emulsion liquid membranes (ELMs) using 5,7-dibromo-8-hydroxyquinoline as extractant has been presented. Membrane solution consists of a diluent (kerosene), a surfactant (Span 80), a modifier (tributylphosphate), and an extractant (DBHQ). Very dilute sulphuric solution containing EDTA as complexing agent, buffered at pH 5.0, has been used as a stripping solution. pH of ammoniacal feed solution containing cobalt and nickel was adjusted to 9.0 with hydrochloric acid. The important variables governing the permeation of cobalt have been studied. These variables are membrane composition, pH of the feed solution, cobalt and nickel concentrations of the feed solution, mixing speed, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, EDTA concentration and pH of the stripping solution, and phase ratio. After the optimum conditions had been determined, it was possible to selectively extract 99.0% of cobalt from ammoniacal feed solution containing Co2+ and Ni2+ ions. The separation factors of cobalt with respect to nickel, based on initial feed concentration, have experimentally found to be of as high as 247.5 for about equimolar Co–Ni feed solutions.Cobalt and nickel are amongst the most important nonferrous metals. There are two main sources for the recovery of cobalt and nickel: sulfides and laterites. Laterites are accessible in appreciable amounts and in the future may constitute a source for cobalt and nickel production; therefore, appropriate technological processes for their processing, which are often hydrometallurgical, are under development The separation of cobalt from nickel in aqueous solution has always been a problem in hydrometallurgy. Their adjacent positions in the transition metal series in the periodic table results in aqueous somewhat similar chemical behaviour but differences do exist. For example, although both cobalt and nickel preferentially exist as divalent hexahydrated ions in dilute aqueous solution, the rate of water exchange on the cobalt ion is very much higher than for nickel. Thus complex ion formation often proceeds much more readily with divalent cobalt than with nickel. On the other hand, the trivalent cobalt ion is much less labile and forms in preference to nickel even though the redox potentials for the Co Besides from sulfides and laterites, there are also other sources of cobalt such as industrial effluents and waste waters. Cobalt is one of the heavy metals and exists in the vast majority of industrial effluents and waste waters, such as mining effluents, etching or pickling baths, dilute leaching solutions generated during hydrometallurgy, electroplating rinse liquors, etc. In the present work, in order to have a better understanding of the dynamics of ELM technique, the major parameters, such as pH of the feed solution, mixing speed, modifier concentration, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration (DBHQ), EDTA concentration and pH of the stripping solution, and phase ratio, influencing the extent of extraction were studied and the selective separation and extraction of cobalt were investigated from the ammoniacal solutions, containing Co If an excess amount of ammonia is added to the feed solution containing Co   A liquid membrane consists of a surfactant, a carrier, a modifier, and a diluent. The non-ionic surfactant used for stabilizing the emulsion is sorbitan monooleate which is a product of Fluka and commercially known as Span 80. The extractant is 5,7-dibromo-8-hydroxyquinoline (DBHQ) which is purchased from Merck, Germany. The modifier is tributyl phosphate (TBP) which is purchased from Daihachi Chemicals, Japan. A commercial kerosene (TUPRAS Oil Company, Turkiye) were used as diluents. Etylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used as the disodium salt and was purchased from Merck, Germany. Cobalt and nickel stock solutions were prepared from reagent grade cobalt (II) sulphate (CoSO In 250-ml beaker, a 30-ml portion of 5,7-dibromo-8-hydroxyquinoline (DBHQ), sorbitan monooleat (Span 80), and tributylphosphate (TBP) in diluent (kerosene) are emulsified with the stripping solution at mixing speed of 1800 Initial ammonia concentration in the feed solution, contained cobalt and nickel ions between 200 and 500 In 600 The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) is used for metals’ (Co, Ni) determinations. Hydrogen ion concentrations were measured by pH meter with a glass electrode. All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 The extraction of cobalt by chelating acid extractant DBHQ is represented by Eq. The stripping reaction, given by Eq. ELM extraction studies reveal that EDTA solution was somewhat suitable for the stripping the extracted cobalt. The stripping efficiency of EDTA in the stripping solution was studied in the range 0–0.02 Surfactant concentration has an important bearing on the stability of the emulsion. Too little Extractant concentration in the membrane phase plays a vital role in the overall extraction behaviour of ELM systems. To study this effect, the extractant concentration in the ELMs was varied in the range of 2–8%. The results were showed in The effect of the modifier concentration studied was in the range of 0–6% as shown in Mixing speed plays a major role in mass transfer of cobalt through ELM. Since globule size distribution gets affected by mixing rates, higher mixing rates lead to formation of smaller sized globules, thereby increasing the interfacial area between feed phase and the membrane phase, leading to an increase in the rates of mass transfer. Higher mixing speeds can also lead to more swelling and globule rupture. Appropriate mixing speed needs to be selected for optimal performance of ELMs. The effect of mixing speed studied was in the range of 300–800 The volume ratios of the stripping phase to the membrane phase were varied between 3/6 and 6/6. The results given in Treatment ratio is the ratio of the emulsion phase ( The optimum conditions were experimentally determined and are shown in On the other hand, extraction of Under the optimum conditions, the extraction of cobalt and nickel for two feed mixtures of about equimolar compositions are given in  An emulsion liquid membrane using DBHQ to separate and concentrate cobalt from ammoniacal solution has been investigated. It has been shown that under the best experimental conditions, 98% of cobalt can be extracted from equimolar cobalt–nickel solutions (500 Cobalt and Nickel occurs within both laterite and sulphide ores and they are also associated with deep-sea nodules. The processing of laterites by hydrometallurgical techniques involved an ammoniacal leaching step to bring cobalt and nickel into solution as its ammine complexes. After separation by classical methods other metals in the solution, with this technology can be selectively extract and separate cobalt from these ammoniacal solutions containing cobalt and nickel The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the State Planning Organization of Turkiye (DPT) that supported this work.