The properties of asphalt binder modified with corn stalk fiber were investigated in this study. The physical-mechanical behaviors of the fiber modified asphalt binder were studied by the penetration and softening point tests, dynamic shear test, bending beam rheometer test and rotational viscosity test. The results indicate that the addition of corn stalk fiber decreases the penetration and increases the softening point of the asphalt binder. Furthermore, the addition of the corn stalk fiber increases the complex modulus and decreases the phase angle of the asphalt. The creep stiffness of the asphalt binder at low temperatures first decreases and then increases with an increase in corn stalk fiber content. The variation of the m-value of the asphalt binder is the opposite to which of the creep stiffness. The corn stalk fiber has good uniformity in the asphalt binder, followed by basalt fiber and finally lignin fiber. The viscosity results indicate that the addition of corn stalk fiber can increase the viscosity of the asphalt binder, and the temperature sensitivity of the asphalt binder decreases.As a high-strength, light-weight and reinforced material, fiber is used to significantly improve the performance and extend the service life of asphalt pavement. Much research has been carried out around the world on this use of fiber. At present, the most commonly used road fibers are polyester fiber, basalt fiber, glass fiber and lignin fiber. Lignin fiber is mainly used to adsorb asphalt in an asphalt mixture. Polyester fiber and glass fiber are mainly used to stabilize asphalt, and basalt fiber has the function of preventing crack propagation in an asphalt mixture Stalk fiber composites have developed rapidly in recent years. The depletion of the earth's resources and the increasing awareness of environmental protection have focused attention on stalk fibers. Due to its good mechanical properties, the fiber is added as a reinforcing phase to a matrix material to form a reinforced composite. At present, more and more international automakers are using this material. An increasing number of auto parts in Europe and North America are composed of plant fiber composite materials, such as seat backs, interior trim panels, instrument panels and sun visors In recent years, many researchers have begun to study the use of different stalk fibers to make composite materials. Mehrab Madhoushi et al. As a large agricultural country, China produces hundreds of millions of tons of crops per year. In the November 2018 supply and demand report, the US Department of Agriculture showed that corn production of China in 2018–2019 was estimated at 256 million tons In asphalt pavement industry, fibers, especially lignin fibers were mostly popular used in stone matrix asphalt (SMA) mixtures. The effect of fiber in SMA is normally thought as stabilizing and absorbing asphalt. Considering the preliminary test results which shows a rough surface for corn stalk fiber, the effect of corn stalk fiber in asphalt may be similar with that of lignin fiber. Therefore, the performance investigations of asphalt binders made with different kinds of fibers, including corn stalk fiber, lignin fiber and basalt fiber, need to be conducted and analyzed. In this study, the corn stalks were reduced to corn stalk fibers by physical and chemical methods. The physical methods include mechanical separation, cutting, crushing and comminution of the raw corn stalk materials, while the chemical methods refer to the removal of hemicellulose and lignin from the corn stalk fiber with a chemical reaction. The corn stalk fibers were then used as an asphalt stabilizer. And the properties of asphalt binders modified by corn stalk fiber, lignin fiber and basalt fiber were investigated through experiments including the penetration and softening point tests, dynamic shear rheometer (DSR) test and bending beam rheometer (BBR) test, and rotational viscosity test. AH-90 asphalt produced by CNPC Liaohe Petrochemical Co., Ltd. was used in the experiments. The corn stalks used in this study were acquired from a village in Dehui City, in the province of Jilin in China. The surfaces of the corn stalks were not damaged or moldy. The color of the corn stalks was yellow and the corn stalks were dry. Skin and marrow form a corn stalk. The marrow of a corn stalk contains much protein, fat and sugar First, some undamaged corn stalks were collected, and the skin and marrow of the corn stalks were separated by a skin-marrow machine. Second, the skin of the corn stalks, which is mainly composed of corn stalk fiber, was subjected to a water washing process to clean impurities from the surface of the skin. Third, an oven was used to dry the skin, until it had a constant weight. Fourth, the skin was cut into strips with a size of 0.4_1.6 × 2.9_4.9 cm and then each the strip was crushed by a WKF250 crusher instrument ( In a sixth step, the 50 g of rough co rn stalk fibers was immersed in 1000 mL of sodium hydroxide solution with a fixed mass concentration  The role of lignin fiber in asphalt pavement is to adsorb asphalt, which means to increase the amount of asphaltene and reduce malthene. Therefore, lignin fiber can increase the viscosity of asphalt mastic and improve the adhesion between an asphalt binder and an aggregate. The effect of corn stalk fiber in asphalt should to be similar to that of lignin fiber. Therefore, corn stalk fiber should change the performance of asphalt by absorbing asphalt. Before adding corn stalk fibers into the asphalt, the physical properties of the fibers were investigated ( The fiber-asphalt mixture was created with a dry mixing process. The use of wet mixing in this article is because that we only focused on the performance test of fiber asphalt binder. Therefore, fiber was directly added into asphalt. In addition, the advantage of wet mixing compared with dry mixing is that wet mixing can make the fiber more evenly dispersed in the asphalt binder. However, the disadvantage is that if the asphalt binder with wet mixing is not used immediately, the fiber and asphalt will separate again after storage for a period of time. And normally the wet mixing method will also increase the time and the cost required during the construction process Corn stalk fiber, lignin fiber and basalt fiber were each used in the asphalt binder test. The lignin fiber was produced by Jilin Zhengxiang Company, China and the basalt fiber was from Jilin Tongxin Basalt Technology Co., Ltd., China. The physical properties of the lignin fiber and basalt fiber are lisited in According to the Chinese specification (JTG E20-2011), several physical-mechanical tests were used to investigate the performance of the asphalt binder modified with corn stalk fiber. First, the empirical penetration and softening point tests were conducted to analyze the relative hardness and high-temperature stability of the fiber-modified asphalt In the DSR test, the parameter G*/sinδ (where G* is the absolute value of the complex modulus and δ is the phase angle) was used to account for the rutting resistance of the materials, also known as the rutting factor. According to the standard DSR test procedure, the heated asphalt was cast at the center of the test plate, and the test plate was mounted to the rheometer after the asphalt binder had hardened. The gap between the oscillating plate and the asphalt binder was then adjusted, and the temperature was adjusted to the desired test temperature. Finally, the asphalt binder test was carried out under stress or strain control mode. The DSR test temperatures were 64 °C, 70 °C, and 76 °C. In addition, the frequency sweep test with DSR was also completed. During the test, the complex modulus and phase angle of the asphalt binder modified by corn stalk fibers were measured at different temperatures (40 °C, 50 °C and 60 °C) and frequencies (0.1–60 Hz). Then the master curves for complex modulus and phase angle had been presented. In BBR test, according to the standard test procedure, the prepared rectangular asphalt binder test piece was placed in a constant temperature water bath at the test temperature. After the test piece was kept at a constant temperature for 60 min, it was placed on the holder, and then the load was manually applied to the test piece to ensure contact between the test piece and the load head. Finally, the automatic test system was activated to test the asphalt binder. The stiffness and m-values of asphalt binder modified by corn stalk, lignin and basalt fibers were measured and calculated. Three test temperatures including −12 °C, −18 °C and −24 °C were used in the test. The viscosity of asphalt reflects its ability to resist flow and shear deformation. According to the standard rotational viscosity test procedure, the viscosity of the asphalt binder at different temperatures was measured using a Brookfield viscometer and the viscosity-temperature curve was plotted. In this study, five test temperatures, including 110 °C, 120 °C, 135 °C, 150 °C and 160 °C were used. The viscosity at each temperature was measured and plotted to evaluate the temperature sensitivity of fiber modified asphalt.  The penetration of the asphalt binder modified with lignin fiber decreased when the lignin fibers were incorporated, although the penetration then slightly increased above 1.5% content before again decreasing. This showed that after the incorporation of a small amount of lignin fiber, the performance of the asphalt was effectively modified due to the action of the lignin fiber adsorbing the asphalt. However, when too much lignin fiber was incorporated, since asphalt was already saturated with fiber, no additional modification effect was seen. This was because the lignin fiber itself was very soft and flocculated, and too many lignin fibers could become entangled and cause uneven distribution in the asphalt binder. The penetration of the asphalt binder modified with basalt fiber decreased slightly with the addition of the basalt fibers. This is because the surface of basalt fibers is relatively smooth, and its ability to adsorb asphalt is relatively weak, thus the modification effect of the basalt fiber on the asphalt binder was not obvious. It could be also noticed from In dynamic shear rheometer test, the rutting factor is used to evaluate the high temperature performance of asphalt. When the rutting factor is greater than 1.0 kPa, the asphalt meets the standard. According to the test data (  Based on the effects of the three fibers on the high-temperature performance of asphalt, lignin fiber has the strongest ability to adsorb and stabilize asphalt, followed by corn stalk fiber, with basalt fiber theweakest. However, the test data also shows that the effect of the lignin fiber can be achieved by the incorporation of more than 8% corn stalk fiber into the asphalt. It is known that the viscoelastic parameter curves of asphalt binders have the same geometry at different temperatures, and can be shifted left and right along the time axis to form a master curve. In viscoelastic theory, the Williams-Landel-Ferry (WLF) equation, which is used to describe the shift factor, is given as: Based on the time-temperature superposition principle (TTSP), the master curve of the corn stalk fiber-modified asphalt binder was obtained by the generalized Christensen-Anderson-Marasteanu (CAM) model, which can be expressed by: The phase angle master curve equation is as follows: Fitting parameters of the complex modulus and phase angle master curve model are presented in  The low-temperature performance of the asphalt binder was characterized by measuring the low temperature stiffness S and the creep rate m-value. Under low temperature conditions, if the S value of the sample is large and the m-value is small, the pavement normally has bad thermal cracking resistance. The stiffness and m-value test data of asphalt modified by corn stalk fibers at a 60 s loading time were presented in According to the stiffness of lignin fiber asphalt binder, the stiffness of the asphalt decreased slightly when 1% content of lignin fiber was blended, which indicates that the incorporation of a small amount of lignin fibers had a good impact for the low temperature performance of asphalt. And then, when the content of lignin fiber exceeded 1.5%, the variations of the stiffness for lignin fiber asphalt at three different temperatures didn’t follow the same trend (increase at −24 °C, decrease at −18 °C and smooth at −12 °C), but in general the variations of stiffness along with the increase of fiber’s contents are small. These irregular variations may be caused by the non-uniform distributions of the excessive lignin fibers. It can be seen from It can be seen from the experimental data As to the variations of m-value, The viscosity test results of the asphalt modified with different corn stalk fiber content were shown in The viscosity of the asphalt binder decreased with increasing temperature, and the variation of the viscosity temperature curve conformed to the form of a power function:   For further analysis, Viscosity-Temperature Susceptibility (VTS) is now defined as the viscosity-temperature index and calculated as:  This paper introduced physical and chemical methods for preparing corn stalk fibers, and studied the physical properties of asphalt binder modified by corn stalk fiber. Some conclusions are the following: The addition of corn stalk fiber decreases penetration and increases softening point. Asphalt binders with low penetration numbers and high softening points can resist deformation at high temperature. The advantage of lignin fiber was that it had a stronger ability to adsorb asphalt than did corn stalk fiber at the same mass ratio, while the advantage of corn stalk fiber was its better mixing uniformity. The addition of corn stalk fiber increases the complex modulus and decreases the phase angle for the asphalt binder at high temperatures, which means that adding corn stalk fiber could increase the deformation resistance and elastic recovery performance of control asphalt. As the corn stalk fiber content increases gradually, the stiffness of the asphalt binder first decreases and then increases, and the m-value of the asphalt binder first decreases and then increases. With the increase in fiber content, the corn stalk fiber has a better dispersion uniformity in the asphalt binder, than lignin fiber. The addition of corn stalk fiber increases the viscosity of the asphalt binder,. In addition, the Viscosity-Temperature Susceptibility function and modeling had shown that the variation of viscosity is small along with the increase of corn fiber’s contents. In general, corn stalk fiber could behave similar behaviors as lignin fiber in fiber asphalt binder. As to its potential application in SMA pavement, more performance tests on the asphalt mixtures would be needed. None. Thanks for the financial support of the China National Natural Science Foundation (No. 51878229), Jilin Transportation Science and Technology Projects (2017ZDGC-2-1) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. HIT. NSRIF. 2017043).