Very few cases of simultaneous occurrence of tibial tuberosity fracture with lower pole patella and distal patellar tendon rupture type injuries have been reported in adolescent athletic age group, but its occurrence in osteogenesis imperfecta (OI)* has not been reported to the best of our knowledge in a literature search of last 5 years in the English Language. The mechanism of avulsion injury after low-velocity trauma and the underlying pathology is a unique combination in our patient and a note on updates in general management of osteogenesis imperfecta is discussed.Over 230 cases of tibial tubercle (TT) avulsion fracture in adolescents have been reported in the past since it was first reported in 1853; a few have reported bilateral occurrence. An 11-year-old male presented to the emergency department with history of pain and swelling of the left knee after minor tripping and fall following which he couldn’t walk. He had no other injuries. The patient, who was known to have OI, had a history of multiple un-displaced fractures including that of humerus, metacarpals, tibia and foot bones which were managed conservatively and healed well with good alignment in the past at a space of once in 3 years. The patient had a pixie face, blue sclera and very mild hearing loss due to otoscelrosis. The patient was not on any medical management in the form of bisphosphonates due to an extremely low rate of fractures per year in the past. The patient’s mother, maternal cousin and her son had OI. On examination, it was tender over tibial tubercle and he was not able to perform straight leg raise test. Radiograph suggestive of the tibial tubercle and lower pole patella fracture, see The pre-operative workup was done and he underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture. Anterior approach was used with a midline incision over tibial tubercle and patellar tendon, tibial tuberosity fracture was identified ( The patient recovered well and gained functional recovery at the end of 6 months ( Incidence of simultaneous TT avulsion fracture and PT avulsion is extremely rare. D.H.Y.Tai et al., in 2016 reported such a case that was associated with tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency and also discussed about 11 such cases. Osteogenesis imperfecta or the brittle bones disease is a genetic generalized connective tissue disorder due to mutation in the genes encoding type I collagen. Patients with this disorder have osteoporotic and fragile bones increasing the risk of a long bone or spine fracture, deformities of long bones and spine. It is associated with other non-orthopedic issues like blue sclera, dental issues, hearing impairment and others symptoms as they manifest according to a range of clinical severity. The incidence for the occurrence of such injuries peak between the age of 12–15 and mainly associated with sports injuries where there is continued violent contraction of Quadriceps muscle even after the fracture occurred or violent flexion of the knee in opposition to hardly contracted Quadriceps muscle while the foot is fixed on the ground. The relevance of Osteogenesis Imperfecta in this case is that the fact that mild varieties burn out by adolescence is well known. However till the skeleton fully matures : the give away occurs in the event of a traumatic force happens at a potentially weak area which in this case is the traction apophysis and hence the tuberosity got avulsed due to a violent pull.The TT avulsion fractures are classified by Ogden et al. The diagnosis of PT rupture in a with TT fracture is very important where on plane radiographs Patella can be seen high riding increasing the distance between the distal pole of the patella and avulsed TT fragment, MRI helps in confirming the diagnosis. The treatment of these injuries has been described to consist of open reduction and internal fixation of TT fracture usually with compression screws and surgical repair of the avulsed PT. There are numerous ways described for reinsertion of PT tendon using staples, S.T. Nathan Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetic disorder of quantitative or qualitative synthesis of collagen 1 which has a widespread distribution in normal individuals. Because of this, there are several skeletal and extra-skeletal manifestations. It can be classified in number of ways and is controversial. The genetic classification includes the classical Sillence type I to type IV which was described in 1979, and the list has grown unto 18 types as new mutations are still being discovered. It can also be classified depending upon the grade of severity as mild (type I), moderate (type IV), severe (type III) and extremely severe (type II). The diagnosis of osteogenesis imperfecta is dependent on clinical and radiological features and is generally done by experts based on the study of radiographs of long bones and skull in addition to evaluation of dentition. The general signs include short stature, relative asymmetric macrocephaly, blue-sclera, typical facial and thoracic configuration, hearing impairment, scoliosis and sarcopenia. The treatment of osteogenesis imperfecta essentially depends on its type, age of the patient and should be multi-disciplinary. When a patient has moderate to severe osteogenesis imperfecta the main problems are multiple fractures, deformities, disabilities and pain. This calls for an expert multidisciplinary team approach which includes professionals from paediatrics, orthopaedics, physiotherapy, orthotics, genetics, dentistry and otology and individualised delivery of care suitable for the patient. While a patient with a mild disease seldom has deformities, but has issues of fractures that are generally treated conservatively except when a fracture occurs at the same place twice or more. From Orthopaedics point of view treatment can be Non-surgical, surgical and Pharmacological. The surgical management is indicated in cases of recurrent fractures and severe deformities in moderate to severe osteogenesis imperfecta for upper limb, lower limb and spine and is combined with pharmacotherapy and pre and post-surgery rehabilitation. Intramedullary nails fixed length or with a telescoping mechanism such as the Bailey-Dubow, Sheffield and Fassier-Duval nails have been described to be used as plate and screw constructs are not suitable biomechanically. Until the mutated allele is modified by gene therapy the main aim of Pharmacotherapy would be to improve bone density, alleviate pain and increase growth velocity. Amongst the agents employed currently that include bisphosphonates, denosumab, RANKL-inhibitory antibodies or cathepsin k inhibitors; bisphosphonates are considered to be standard of care. Although bisphosphonates improve bone mass they are thought not to improve the fragility of bone. Concomitant TT avulsion fracture and PT rupture is very rare, a high degree of suspicion has to be kept in mind as such diagnosis can be missed. Open reduction and internal fixation is necessary with the repair of the extensor mechanism with the restoration of the patellar height. Recurvatum can be seen after tibial tuberosity injury in a growing bone and has to be dealt with according to its severity. Treatment of osteogenesis imperfecta is multidisciplinary and is tailored as per individual patient. The treatment is indicated in patients with symptoms or who have complications following treatment. Fractures are treated conservatively, the intramedullary nails are used for the treatment of recurrent fractures and severe deformities. Intravenous Pamidronate is used to improve bone mass and rehabilitation. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.  None.