This paper describes a frit and sleeve sparger designed to control the size of bubbles produced. The design comprises a porous ring (frit) surrounded by a sleeve through which water is passed to generate shear. A prototype is described and results confirm that bubble size can be controlled independent of gas velocity and is governed by the shear in the annular gap between the frit and sleeve independent of gap size.cross-sectional area of the gap (cm bubble size distribution Sauter mean diameter (mm) bubble size (mm) diameter of the bubble gas holdup (%) distance between porous ring and sleeve (mm) superficial gas velocity (cm/s) superficial liquid (water) velocity in the sparger (cm/s) flotation rate constant (s water flux through the sparger (cm bubble surface area flux (s It is well known that the gas dispersion properties in the flotation process have a direct influence on performance ( Previous commercial sparger designs for flotation columns (USBM, Cominco, Microcel™) have sought to address this problem by using variable air–water flow to control shear either at the outlet of the sparger (USBM and Cominco) or through in-line mixers (Microcel™). The USBM external bubble generation system was based on a pressurized chamber in which air and water are contacted in the presence of media such as glass beads in order to improve the action ( Some designs used in laboratory scale columns based on venturi ( This work presents a different possibility of providing shear that allows control over bubble size. The sparger presented is based on a “frit and sleeve” design ( The frit and sleeve type sparger constructed is shown in The sparger is connected to a mass flow meter/controller (MKS Mass Flow controller M100B) to control the gas (air) flow rate. Water flow rate ( Since the water provides shear, and the shear depends on the water velocity within the gap, it is convenient to define a superficial water velocity ( The method uses the McGill bubble size analyzer (MBSA) ( Typically, in excess of 3000 bubbles are imaged. The images are processed off-line to yield bubble size distribution (BSD) data. The Sauter mean diameter ( The test solution was prepared by adding 20  The figure shows that one criterion for independent bubble size control is met: for the same The dashed line on  The frit and sleeve sparger, therefore, meets the objective in terms of independent bubble size control. While designed primarily for laboratory-scale test work, the possibility of industrial scale use exists. Some issues that would need addressing include wear on the gap, quality of the sparger water and any impact sparger water may have on the flotation response. The frit and sleeve sparger design offers control of the bubble size independent of superficial gas velocity. This control is determined by the shear inside the sparger, produced by water passing through the gap between the frit (porous ring) and the sleeve. There is an inverse relationship between the shear and the size of the bubble produced and bubble size is independent of the size of the gap at equivalent shear. This work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through an NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) grant now sponsored by Vale Inco, Xstrata Process Support, Teck Cominco, Agnico-Eagle, COREM, SGS Lakefield Research, Shell Canada and Flottec. W. Kracht would also like to thank the Chilean Government for the Chilean National Scholarship that makes possible his PhD studies at McGill University.