In this research, Ti-Cr-N coatings on tool steel were prepared using DC magnetron sputtering at 25 °C (RT), 130 °C and 190 °C. Coating corrosion behavior was observed in a 3.5% NaCl solution at 25 °C using Potentiodynamic Polarization and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS). EIS circuit models for corrosion kinetics were proposed and the surface area and porosity of the coatings were recorded. Corrosion resistance was found to be higher for the coatings grown at 190 °C. This could be attributed to high density as well as low porosity. The EIS circuit model suggests the penetration of corrosive electrolytes into pores reaching the steel substrate for the coatings grown at RT. Finite length diffusion inside pores was also observed. The slow infiltration of corrosive electrolytes into the steel substrate could be seen in coatings grown at 130 °C with diffusion inside the pore similar to that in the coatings grown at RT. However, the EIS circuit model did not exhibit a finite length diffusion of the coatings grown at 190 °C. Owing to high coating density and smaller pore size, corrosive electrolytes could hardly penetrate through and reach the steel substrate.Tool steels such as H13 steel, have been widely used in several industries due to their superior properties, for example, high strength at elevated temperatures. Typically, tool steel must be heat treated prior to use in order to achieve optimum mechanical properties. The heat treatment process starts with hardening by austenizing and quenching, and is followed by tempering to obtain toughness [ Tool steel grade AISI H13 and a Silicon wafer were used in this study. H13 steel, having a chemical composition (wt.-%) of 0.43C, 1.02Si, 0.45Mn, 4.71Cr, 1.32 Mo, 0.8 V and balanced Fe, was used as the substrate for corrosion tests using Potentiodynamic polarization and EIS. A silicon wafer was used as substrate for coating characterization. The AISI H13 steel was cut into disks with a diameter of 25 mm and a thickness of 3 mm. The silicon wafers were cut into 10 mm × 10 mm. The AISI H13 steel was polished with SiC paper down to 4000 grit number, followed by alumina powder with a mesh size of 1 μm. Before placing all specimens into a PVD chamber, they were cleaned in acetone using an ultrasonic cleaner and stored in a desiccator before deposition. The Ti-Cr-N deposition process was performed using the DC magnetron sputtering method. The deposition parameters used are shown in Phase analysis of the coating was done by Glancing Incident Angle X-ray Diffraction (GIXRD) using a Cu Kα X-ray at the incident angle of 3°. The surface morphology of the coating pre and post corrosion test was observed with a scanning electron microscope (SEM). In order to discuss the corrosion behavior of the coating obtained from electrochemical tests in relation to the coating structure, the coating surface area was measured using Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area analysis (Quantachrome Autosorb gas absorption system) within a relative pressure (P/P The level of corrosion was examined using Potentiodynamic polarization as the primary corrosion resistance investigation and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) to study the corrosion behavior of the coating in more detail. Corrosion testing was performed in 3.5% NaCl solution with a volume of 500 ml and a pH of 6.8 at room temperature (25 ± 1 °C) using the Potentiostat/Galvanostat (PGSTAT 302 N). It was conducted in a three electrode cell using Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode (RE), a Pt plate as a counter electrode (CE) and a sample as the working electrode (WE). The sample, with a surface area of 245 mm Before the polarization measurement, the coated samples were immersed in the solution for 1.8 ks to stabilize corrosion potential (E The morphology of coatings grown at RT, 130 °C and 190 °C were firstly investigated using SEM while the coating chemical composition was analyzed with EDS. In this research, texture coefficients, ( It was found that The Ti-Cr-N coating grown at 190 °C has higher hardness and Young's Modulus than those grown at RT and 130 °C due to the change of microstructure from columnar to equiax. The change of columnar to equiax, which is caused by higher atomic mobility at higher temperature, designates a change of structure zone according to Thornton Model. According to Thronton model, coating with an equiax structure is well known to achieve a greater density than that of a columnar structure. The reduced surface roughness at higher coating temperature evidently supports the change of coating structure [ The RT-grown coating with columnar structure has a greater pore size than that of 190 °C-grown coating with equiax structure, as shown in Polarization was used to preliminarily estimate corrosion resistance of the coating prior to EIS corrosion testing. Polarization curves of each coating grown at RT, 130 °C and 190 °C are shown in The interfacial electrochemical reactions with diffusion can be obtained from an EIS equivalent circuit. Specific characteristics of a single semi-circle Nyquist or Bode plot after 2.7 ks immersion suggests that corrosion occurs at the interface between the solution and the coating surface [ Equivalent circuit modeling in EIS of samples immersed for 2.7 ks can explain the interfacial electrochemical reaction described above [ The main components of a circuit are solution resistance (R Fitting results of the proposed circuit models are displayed in Movement of corrosive electrolytes toward the substrate could be facilitated by certain characteristics of porosity [ Samples were tested for corrosion in 3.5% NaCl solution with a pH of 6.8. The major ions destroying the sample surface were chloride ions (Cl Equations: In order to confirm the above equations, the quantity of ions in the electrolyte after potentiodynamic tests is listed in Differences in corrosion resistance among the three coatings were reflected by the surface morphology after corrosion testing as shown in In this study, Potentiodynamic polarization and EIS techniques were employed to investigate the corrosion behavior of Ti,Cr, N coating grown at low temperature (<200 °C). Equivalent circuit models were successfully constructed to explain the corrosion behaviors of coatings deposited at different temperatures. Coatings grown at 190 °C show a single-loop circuit consisting of coating resistance (R The authors acknowledge financial support from the