Lignocellulosic biomass will definitely contribute to the implementation of a bio-based economy toward mitigating the negative environmental impacts promoted by the extensive use of oil-derived fuels. In a biorefinery context, lignocellulosic sugars constitute an interesting platform to be transformed into a wide range of products (fuels, chemicals, and materials) through fermentative processes. Moreover, lignin also represents an important source for producing certain oxygen-containing aromatic compounds. Nevertheless, the highly recalcitrant structure of lignocellulose limits these conversion processes by hindering the accessibility of biomass. The development of an effective fractionation technology is therefore of utmost importance for the optimal valorization of lignocellulose components into the targeted products. In the last few years, several pretreatment processes have been evaluated, some of them even at commercial scale, for increasing the accessibility of different lignocellulosic feedstocks. This chapter includes an updated revision of the most interesting pretreatment technologies for lignocellulosic conversion in a fermentation-based biorefinery, highlighting the most recent results and the main challenges to overcome toward cost-effective industrial processes.Authors thank the Spanish “Agencia Estatal de Investigación” (AEI) and “Fondos Europeos de Desarrollo Regional” (FEDER) and MINECO for partially funding the present work via ACMIBIO (ENE2017-86864-C2-1-R and ENE2017-86864-C2-2-R) and LIGNOYEAST (ENE2014-54912-R) projects, respectively. A.D. Moreno also acknowledges MINECO and the specific “Juan de la Cierva” subprogram for contract FJCI-2014-22385. With a yearly production of more than 10 Lignocellulosic materials are made of three main polymers: cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin along with a lower proportion of pectins, proteins, extractives, and ash The recalcitrant structure of lignocellulose and its heterogeneous composition hampers, however, the accessibility of the sugar components to enzymes, thus limiting the hydrolysis of these materials. To overcome the physicochemical barrier of lignocellulosic feedstocks and ease the hydrolysis process, different pretreatment methods have been designed and tested In addition of being an essential step for lignocellulose conversion, pretreatment has a great impact on the process economics. In fact, it is second after feedstock to contribute to the overall costs (about one-third of the total costs) Pretreatment is crucial to alter the structural characteristics of biomass and increase the accessibility of carbohydrates to the hydrolytic enzymes ( A large number of pretreatment technologies have been developed up to now, and can be classified into physical, chemical, physicochemical, and biological pretreatments. The following sections are dedicated to summarize the actions and mechanisms of main pretreatment methods and their potential industrial applications. Chipping (10–30 Compared to traditional milling processes (e.g., dry ball mailing or hot compressed water), technologies such as wet disk milling has shown lower energy requirements during pretreatment of herbaceous biomass (rice straw), also attaining higher hydrolysis yields These physical pretreatment technologies have been previously considered unaffordable for their implementation at industrial scale due to their high energy demand. However, in combination with other technologies they show synergistic interactions, resulting in improved process efficiency and reduction of the overall costs. Extrusion is another promising physical pretreatment method for biomass conversion. It is based on the simultaneous heating, mixing, and shearing of lignocellulose into the extruder, resulting in different physical and chemical modifications of biomass (e.g., higher cellulose surface area available and lower cellulose crystallinity and degree of polymerization) Extrusion has high versatile process configurations and can therefore be adapted to the addition of chemical and/or biological catalysts [acid, alkali, organic solvents, ionic liquids (ILs), and enzymes]. This technology does not require harsh conditions, thus preventing the formation of biomass degradation products. Moreover, it also allows working at high solid concentration and in continuous mode. Extrusion has recently been used to pretreat corn fiber Both concentrated and diluted acids have been used to pretreat a wide range of lignocellulosic feedstocks. Compared to concentrated acid pretreatments, dilute acid is much more attractive for industrial processes, since they show less equipment corrosion problems and there is no need for acid recovery. Acid catalysts have a strong effect on hemicellulose, lignin, and crystalline cellulose. One of the main advantages of acid pretreatments is the solubilization of hemicellulosic sugars in monomeric form, which favors lowering the total enzyme doses. In contrast, these pretreatments promote extensive biomass degradation and the concomitant release of several inhibitory compounds for the subsequent hydrolysis and fermentation steps. Pretreatment with dilute acid is usually performed at high temperatures (≥ Sulfuric acid (H In addition to inorganic acids, organic acids such as maleic, fumaric or even acetic acid can also be used for biomass pretreatment. Nevertheless, relatively high concentrations of organic acids are usually needed for pretreatment due to their lower acidity potential The use of alkalis including NaOH, KOH, Ca(OH) Alkaline pretreatments can be performed at room temperature with residence times ranging from seconds to days, and are less effective when using feedstock with high lignin content Organosolv pretreatment uses organic or aqueous solvents (ethanol, methanol, ethylene glycol, acetone, glycerol, tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol, etc.) to promote lignin extraction and thus increase cellulose accessibility. In general, organosolv pretreatment is performed at temperatures ranging from 100°C to 250°C using a specific solvent to water ratio. At temperatures below 200°C, acid catalysts (HCl, H Among its main disadvantages, organosolv can generate significant amount of furfural, HMF and soluble phenols in the resulting pretreated slurry, depending on the process conditions Recently, a new organosolv pretreatment process named co-solvent enhanced lignocellulosic fraction (CELF) has appeared as a promising method. The CELF employs a tetrahydrofurane solution that is highly effective for the extraction of lignin polymer, also yielding a pretreated residue easy to hydrolyze. The CELF has been shown to remove about 90% of the initial lignin content from biomass, obtaining in turn, 95% sugars yields using enzymes loadings as low as 2 The ILs and IL-based solvents systems has lately emerged as promising green solvents for biomass fractionation The research interest in ILs for lignocellulose pretreatment has increased considerably since Swatloski et al. reported the ability of some imidazolium-based ILs to dissolve large amounts of cellulose (over 15%) The effectiveness of ILs has been proved on pure crystalline cellulose and also on different lignocellulosic feedstocks Similar to organosolv processes, the development of energy-efficient recycling methods is a prerequisite for the application of ILs at large scale The LHW is a hydrothermal pretreatment that uses high pressures to maintain water in the liquid phase at elevated temperatures (160–240°C). At these conditions, most of the hemicelluloses are solubilized and lignin is partially depolymerized and solubilized, making cellulose polymer more accessible The LHW has been shown to be capable of removing up to 80% of the hemicelluloses from herbaceous feedstock, including corn straw Since no catalysts or expensive corrosion-resistant reactors are needed, LHW is an attractive technology for the industry due to its cost-saving potential. In comparison to other pretreatment technologies such as dilute-acid and steam explosion, LHW is advantageous in terms of pentosan recovery and biomass degradation. Nevertheless, the water demand and the energy requirements in this process are high, representing important limitations for its development at commercial scale. Among ammonia-based pretreatment, AFEX is an important technology that combines both physical (high temperature and pressure) and chemical (ammonia) effects to achieve effective pretreatment of lignocellulose. During AFEX pretreatment, biomass is treated with liquid anhydrous ammonia at temperatures of 60–100°C and high pressures. After a certain residence time, pressure is released, vaporizing the ammonia and allowing its recovery and recycling. The ammonia has a marked effect on lignocellulose, causing swelling of biomass fibers, partial decrystallization of cellulose, and disruption of lignin-carbohydrates linkages. After pretreatment, the collected AFEX-pretreated biomass is solid, and requires both cellulases and hemicellulases for an efficient enzymatic hydrolysis process. Similar to alkali-based pretreatments, AFEX pretreatment is more effective on lignocellulosic feedstocks with low lignin content, such as agricultural residues and herbaceous crops Another promising ammonia-based pretreatment recently developed is extractive ammonia (EA). This pretreatment process must be performed in three steps: (i) reaction, where biomass is completely immersed in liquid ammonia for a certain residence time (this step promotes disruption of lignin-polysaccharides cross-linkages, and cellulose modification); (ii) extraction, where pretreated biomass is filtered to collect a solution containing ammonia and the extracted lignin; and (iii) product/solvent recovery, where ammonia is evaporated from the collected solution and recovered. Compared to AFEX pretreatment, EA pretreatment of corn stover results in higher saccharification yields with lower enzyme loadings (up to 60% lower doses) Ammonia recycle percolation (ARP) is another ammonia-based pretreatment. This pretreatment uses aqueous ammonia (5%–15% in weight basis) as mobile phase for a biomass-packed reactor. Temperature is normally fixed at 140–210°C, while percolation rate is set at about 5 Sulfite pretreatment to overcome recalcitrance of lignocellulose (SPORL) is a pretreatment process specially designed and developed for woody biomass. This pretreatment first soaks wood chips in an aqueous sulfite solution (a bisulfite solution can also be used), followed by a mechanical size reduction using disk refining The SPORL technology has been shown to be effective in pretreating spruce and pine, increasing the enzymatic conversion of cellulose Supercritical fluids are compounds (e.g., water, carbon dioxide, and ammonia) that at temperature and pressure above their critical point exhibit properties of liquids such as density and gases such as compressibility. CO Pretreatment with supercritical CO Pretreatment with supercritical fluids can also include a sudden depressurization step (explosion) to promote disruption of cellulose and hemicellulose structure, thus increasing the cellulose surface area available for enzyme adsorption. In comparison to AFEX and steam explosion pretreatments, supercritical fluids usually results in lower enzymatic hydrolysis yields. Nevertheless, this technology is also considered cost effective for biomass pretreatment and generates low concentrations of biomass degradation compounds Steam explosion is one of the most widely used technologies for lignocellulose pretreatment. It is a hydrothermal pretreatment in which the biomass is subjected to saturated steam at high temperatures (> The most important factors affecting effectiveness in steam explosion are particle size, temperature, residence time, and the combined effect of both temperature ( Steam explosion has been successfully proven for a wide range of raw materials such as poplar, eucalyptus, olive, corn stover, wheat straw, sugarcane bagasse, grasses, and hemp With the aim of avoiding biomass degradation, temperatures below 200°C and short residence times are recommended. In this context, the addition of an acid catalyst such as H Biological pretreatment of lignocellulose employs microorganisms and/or enzymes to promote delignification and hydrolysis of hemicelluloses, generating minimal concentration of degradation compounds White rot fungi such as In addition to white rot fungi, brown rot fungi and different bacterial strains have been used to pretreat lignocellulosic feedstocks, showing lignin removal of 50%–90% Pure ligninolytic enzymes and/or enzyme cocktails can be also used for delignification of lignocellulose. This strategy is substrate specific and offers the possibility to increase reaction rates and delignification efficiency, reducing the process time from weeks to hours with no carbohydrate consumption Although they are promising strategies, biological methods still imply from long pretreatment times and/or high enzymes costs Insufficient separation of cellulose and lignin, high energy demands, use of chemicals, and/or considerable production of wastes are important factors to consider for scaling up pretreatment technologies to commercial scale. Moreover, biomass pretreatment usually requires harsh conditions (e.g., high temperatures and pressures), leading to biomass degradation and/or production of inhibitory compounds that limit the subsequent saccharification and fermentation steps ( The nature and concentration of the inhibitory compounds are highly dependent on the raw material (hardwood, softwood, and herbaceous biomass), the conditions used (temperature, residence time, pressure, pH, and use of catalysts), and the type of pretreatment. Inhibitors can be classified into three main groups: (1) furan derivatives, (2) weak organic acids, and (3) phenolic compounds. The inhibition mechanisms of these compounds differ from one group to another. Moreover, inhibitors show high interaction and synergy between them, thus hindering the downstream conversion processes by affecting both hydrolytic enzymes and fermentative microorganisms. Furan derivatives include 2-furaldehyde (furfural) and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (5-HMF). These inhibitors are generated under acidic conditions from pentoses and hexoses sugars, respectively, and have a direct impact on glycolytic and/or fermentative enzymes, affecting cell growth and final ethanol yields Acetic acid, formic acid, and levulinic acid are common carboxylic acids generated during lignocellulose pretreatment. Acetic acid is produced from the solubilization of the acetyl groups that are present in hemicelluloses. Levulinic acid is a product of 5-HMF degradation, while formic acid can be generated from the degradation of both furfural and 5-HMF. In addition, hydroxycarboxylic acids such as glycolic acid and lactic acid can also be found as inhibitors when alkaline pretreatment conditions are applied Carboxylic acids mainly affect cell growth of the fermentative microorganism by influencing its intracellular pH. The undissociated form of weak acids can diffuse across the cell membrane and dissociate inside the cell due to the higher pH. This induces the use of ATP-pumps for regulating intracellular pH, causing an imbalance in the cell ATP/ADP ratio Partial lignin deconstruction during pretreatment leads to the solubilization of a wide range of phenolic compounds. In the same way that occurs with other type of inhibitors, the concentration and chemical nature of these phenols is highly dependent on the raw material. Some of the most common phenols formed during lignocellulose pretreatment are 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde, vanillin, dihydroconiferyl alcohol, coniferyl aldehyde, syringaldehyde, syringic acid, Hibbert's ketones, To overcome the negative impacts that degradation compounds have on hydrolytic enzymes and fermentative microorganisms, different physical, chemical, and biological strategies have been developed to remove and/or convert these products into less inhibitory compounds. Filtering and washing are the most typically applied methods to remove inhibitory compounds. Chemical additives (alkali, reducing agents, and polymers), nonfermentative microorganisms (mainly fungi), and liquid-liquid and liquid-solid extraction have also been tested for detoxification/conditioning of several pretreated substrates In contrast to the aforementioned methods, Biorefineries will ensure the sustainable utilization of lignocellulosic biomass to obtain different high-value products within a bioeconomy context, considering indigenous feedstocks, economic viability of the production processes, and potential environmental impacts. Thus, effective and efficient biomass fractionation is essential to develop such a bio-based economy, relying on different bioproducts. Techno-economic analyses of biomass processing technologies have identified the energy demand, water content in biomass, and the biomass and catalyst loadings to be the most important variables to be considered for an industrial process Despite the intensive research performed lately and the development of a large number of pretreatment technologies, there is no single method that can be regarded as the best pretreatment process, and the choice of an adequate pretreatment technology very much depends on factors such as biomass feedstock and/or the final product(s). Another promising strategy that is recently gaining attention is the combination of different pretreatment technologies, which allows reaching high sugar yields with milder process conditions (e.g., using lower concentrations of costly solvents and/or minimizing enzyme loadings), thus reducing the economic and environmental impact of biomass processing Effective biomass fractionation is crucial for the efficient conversion of lignocellulose within a biorefinery processing perspective. In the last decades, several pretreatment technologies with different action mechanisms have been tested to ensure optimal biomass utilization and the supply of a wide range of bioproducts. Still, none of the developed pretreatment technologies can be highlighted as universal, and the pretreatment method differs for each process depending on the used feedstock and the final product. Local biorefineries will have to make use of all lignocellulosic feedstocks available in the nearby areas in order to reduce transportation costs. In this context, pretreatment methods with low process requirements (energy demand and/or chemical addition) and effective to a wide range of lignocellulosic feedstocks are much more attractive than other technologies. Dilute acid pretreatment, steam explosion, extrusion, organosolv (CELF, ILs), and certain ammonia-based technologies (AFEX, EA) are therefore promising candidates with high potential for biomass deconstruction and valorization. A good balance between the increase in biomass accessibility and biomass degradation is also crucial for the viability of the pretreatment process from the economic and environmental point of view. Hence, combinations of different technologies such as steam explosion and extrusion, solvents and acid-based pretreatment, or alkali-based pretreatment and enzymatic delignification, take advantage of the synergistic effects between them for reducing process requirements and the overall environmental impact. Technologies such as steam explosion, dilute acid pretreatment, and AFEX have already reached the commercial scale. Nevertheless, further research at pilot and demonstration scale is needed to develop cost-effective pretreatment processes, which is of utmost importance for the implementation and realization of a bio-based economy.