In this study, the removal of Cu2+ and Pb2+ ions by precipitation from aqueous solutions by using six fly ashes with different compositions was achieved. The effect of four parameters on the removal of Cu2+ and Pb2+, which are contact time, fly ash composition, pH of the solution and fly ash concentration, were investigated. The fly ash concentrations required to achieve maximum Cu2+ and Pb2+ removal were found to vary between 0.2–10 and 0.075–3.5 g/l, respectively. It was also observed that both the Cu2+ and Pb2+ removal capacities of the fly ashes depend strongly on their CaO content.The heavy metal content of industrial waste waters is an important source of environmental pollution. The main sources of heavy metals are the mining and metal industries. The removal of heavy metals from waste water because of their toxic effects on living species is extremely important. Several methods, such as chemical precipitation, flotation, ion exchange, adsorption and biological treatment, are often used to remove the heavy metals from waste water. Fly ash is a waste material, which is formed as a result of coal burning in power plants. The principal oxide constituents of coal ash can be divided into those that are acidic (SiO In this investigation, six fly ash samples with different chemical compositions were used to remove Cu The fly ash samples used in the experiments were obtained from five different lignite burning thermal power plants in Turkey and from an industrial fluidized bed combustion system. The chemical analyses of the fly ash samples were conducted according to ASTM standards The X-ray diffraction (XRD) investigations were conducted out in a Philips Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) investigations of the fly ash samples were conducted in a JEOL The average particle size was determined using a Shimadzu Centrifugal Particle Size Analyzer (SA-CP, 20 Model). The effect of time on the pH of fly ash solutions prepared with concentrations of 10, 20 and 50 g/l was investigated. These solutions were shaken for 5, 10, 20, 40, 60, 120 and 180 min and then allowed to separate by gravity. The supernatant liquor was analysed for pH. The effect of concentration on the pH of the fly ash solutions was studied by changing the concentration between 0.034 and 80 g/l. In these experiments the solutions were shaken for 60 min. Aqueous solutions of copper and lead were prepared from analytical reagent grade copper sulphate and lead acetate with a concentration of 50 ppm. These solutions were mixed with different amounts of dry fly ash in polyethylene bottles and shaked (at 750 rpm) for 60 min. The mixture was then allowed to separate by gravity and the supernatant liquor was analysed for pH, Cu All experiments were at room temperature, and the fly ash samples were used without pre-treatment. The chemical composition of the fly ashes used in this study are given in The XRD studies showed that all of the fly ash samples contain quartz (SiO The fly ash solutions were shaken for various times to determine the changes of pH with time. The results of the experiments show that all of the fly ash solutions are basic. At the beginning, the pH of the solutions increased rapidly with the increases in shaking time. Time does not change the final pH of the solution significantly after 60 min shaking time except the fly ash sample FA3. As seen in The effect of fly ash concentration on the pH of the solution was investigated in a wide range of 0.034–80 g/l. Inspection of Fe The main mechanism of the removal of heavy metals in aqueous solution by fly ash are ion exchange, surface precipitation, bulk solution precipitation and adsorption The following equations describe the solubility of metal (II) hydroxides The pH value of the copper solution prepared at 50 ppm from analytical reagent grade copper sulphate was measured as 4.7, but fly ash addition to this solution causes an increase in its pH value. It was observed that if the final pH value of the mixture (fly ash-copper solution) after 60 min shaking exceeds 6, a sharp decrease in the Cu It is clear from the results presented in The pH value of the lead solution prepared at 50 ppm from analytical reagent grade lead acetate was measured as 5.3. Fly ash addition to this solution caused an increase in its pH value and consequently a decrease in its Pb Similar to the Cu Pb After the removal of Cu XRD investigations of the treated fly ash samples showed the removal of Cu The results of the experiments show that all of the 6 fly ash solutions are basic and the final pH of the solutions does not change significantly after 60 min shaking time. The solutions of the fly ash samples with the same concentration differ significantly in their final pH value. If the final pH value of the fly ash-copper solution mixture after 1 h shaking exceeds 6, it causes a sharp decrease in the Cu A sharp decrease in Pb There are significant differences between the fly ash concentrations that enable maximum Pb The CaO content of the fly ash sample is more effective in determining the alkalinity of the solution than their total basic constituents content. Therefore, the Pb SEM investigations showed the Cu