The dynamic changes of strain-induced strains and permeability are two key parameters to determine the production profile of coalbed methane (CBM) wells. Recent field observations from a group of anthracite CBM wells demonstrate that the permeability dramatically changed with depletion. In addition, different drainage strategies will induce different permeability evolution due to different matrix shrinkage behaviors. We carried out a series of experimental measurements on sorption induced strain evolution and its influence on permeability evolution for anthracites using a desorption-seepage testing system. The relationship between sorption pressure and its induced strains was studied. The results show that both axial and radial strains of a coal specimen increase with continuous methane injection pressure. It was found that the strain perpendicular to the bedding plane is higher than that parallel to the bedding plane. Under constant confining and axial stresses, the effective stress decreases with the increase of methane pressure, and permeability initially drops and then rebounds with continuous methane injection. The “check-shape” permeability evolution was observed for all three specimens and the turning points are 4–5 MPa for the tested anthracites. It was also found that sorption swelling strain depends on both petrographical properties and the degree of coalification. The strength of coal increases with the degree of coalification. At a constant confining and axial stresses, both sorption-induced swelling strain and the mechanical-induced strain decline with increase of coal strength. The sorption-induced strain increases with increase of the organic content. During primary CBM production, the permeability of coal initially decreases before reservoir pressure reaches the critical desorption pressure and it starts to increase at low pressure at which the reservoir pressure is below the critical desorption pressure. The results have theoretical and practical significance to guide the reasonable drainage of CBM wells.The dynamic change of the coal permeability is one of the key parameters that directly defines the production profile of a coalbed methane (CBM) reservoir. The permeability evolution with continuous pressure depletion is known to be influenced by the coal properties including coal texture, coal cleat system, coal matrix shrinkage/swelling features, coal petrographic characteristics and the degree of coalification. In addition to coal properties, the pressure depletion dynamics of a CBM well can also influence the permeability of the coal. For instance, the fast initial depletion can induce the near well bore fracture closure to reduce the average permeability of the whole reservoir. In order to maximize the CBM well production, it is worthwhile to investigate how to reduce and avoid the permeability loss during CBM well drainage ( Significant efforts have been devoted to characterize the permeability evolution associated with the influencing parameters. As demonstrated in literatures, the coal matrix strain, induced by either stress variation or matrix shrinkage, plays an important role to define the permeability evolution ( Coal permeability dynamically changes and its evolution is known to be influenced by the net effect of two competitive processes: one is the stress-driven permeability loss due to the mechanical compression and the other is the matrix shrinkage induced permeability enhancement due to desorption. For most of the existing permeability models, the cleat compressibility was believed to be a constant over a wide range of reservoir pressure and its variation has not been systematically incorporated into the permeability models ( Three coal samples were collected from No.3 coal seam of Permian Shanxi Formation in the southern Qinshui Basin in Jincheng mining field, China. The maceral analysis was conducted according to China national standard GB/T6948-2008: Method of determining microscopically the reflectance of vitrinite in coal and China national standard GB/T8899-1998: Determination of maceral group composition and minerals in coal. The coal samples are anthracite with maximum vitrinite reflectance ( The desorption-seepage testing system consists of a gas flowrate measurement unit, a strain measurement unit, a gas injection and monitoring unit and a loading unit. The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in The testing fluid is high purity methane and the experimental temperature keeps constant at 20 °C. For each specimen, the axial and confining stresses were kept constants at 9 MPa and 8 MPa respectively. These two stresses were chosen based on the field estimation of overburden stress and the minimum horizontal stresses. The pore pressure varies from ∼1 MPa to ∼7 MPa. The experimental stress boundary conditions and pore pressures were listed in The coal matrix swelling can be directly measured with a linear strain gauge with the data acquisition system. The matrix swelling leads to the decrease of coal permeability and the permeability can be estimated by the measured flow-rate at each injection gas pressure. The experiment measures the permeability with gas injection under the constant external stress condition and also it will continuously monitor the matrix swelling strain during the gas injection. The experimental procedure is as follows: (1) specimen was gradually stressed to the desirable external stress; (2) initiate the methane injection at constant pressure and both circumferential and axial strains were continuously monitored for about 12–24 h; (3) after the sorption equilibrium is achieved, the flowrate was measured by using a transient method and the permeability was estimated at this given gas pressure; (4) repeat the preceding steps for subsequent methane injection pressures until the last injection pressure was completed. To achieve a sorption equilibrium and stabilized matrix swelling, each injection pressure lasted at least ∼12 h. Relationship between radial/axial strain and time for each pressure point were obtained ( A Langmuir-type model was used to fit the strain vs time data (Eq. The permeability measurement is performed according a China national standard, The overall coal matrix strain includes sorption-induced swelling strain and the mechanical-induced strain by the change of effective stress. Based on the obtained results for all three tested samples, with the increase of adsorption equilibrium pressure and the decrease of effective stress, both axial and radial strains increase. But the radial strain is larger than axial strain for all three coal samples as shown in When the adsorption equilibrium pressure is less than 3 MPa, the overall coal strain is relatively small. When the injection pressure exceed 3 MPa, the overall coal strain increases rapidly for all three specimens. At the low adsorption equilibrium pressure, the effective stress of coal reservoir is higher, and adsorption swelling strain of coal matrix relatively small, which is suppressed by the effective stress. With the increase of adsorption equilibrium pressure, the effective stress of coal decreases, therefore the adsorption swelling strain of coal matrix increases rapidly. The axial strain ranges from 0.036% to 0.221% for tested three specimens and the average value is 0.099%. The radial strain ranges from 0.488% to 0.162% with the average of 0.26% when the adsorption equilibrium pressure is less than 7 MPa. Due to the difference of coal quality and the degree of coalification, when the adsorption equilibrium pressure is 6.99 MPa, 6.32 MPa and 6.51 MPa, the axial strains of the three specimens are 0.221% 0.448% and 0.039% and radial strains are 0.162%, 0.036% and 6.51%, respectively. The axis of cylindrical coal samples of No.1 and No.2 are parallel to the bedding plane, from The adsorption equilibrium pressure gradually increases during each experiment, and the gas continuously adsorbs onto the internal surface of coal matrix. With the increase of sorbed gas quantity, the sorption-induced swelling strain increases gradually ( The coal petrographical properties have a direct influence on sorption-induced swelling strain. For the high-rank coal, the strength of coal increases with the degree of coalification. At a constant confining and axial stresses, both sorption-induced swelling strain and the mechanical-induced strain decline when the coal strength increases. Mechanistically, when the coal strength is high, the coal matrix is hard to deform under both sorption and compression conditions ( In laboratory-scale, there are many methods and apparatus for measuring permeability of rock under various stress/strain controlled conditions, which can be classified into two kinds: steady state method and transient method. The transient method of low permeability rocks was first proposed by Brace in 1968. Because anthracite coal is tight and the porosity is relative low, thus, a transient method was chosen to improve the efficiency of measurements. The permeability of coal sample can be estimated using the following equation ( For the sake of the convenience, a dimensionless permeability ratio (K) was defined as follows. Under constant confining and axial stresses, with the increase of injection pressure in the specimen, the effective stress decreases. The permeability first decreases and then increases for the whole injection process. The variation of permeability ratio with the change of adsorption equilibrium pressure is shown in Because of the non-linearity of the adsorption isotherm, the sorption induced strain is relatively high at low adsorption equilibrium pressures (<4–5 MPa) due to the majority of the gas is adsorbed at low pressures. Thus, the sorption-induced swelling strain dominates the cleat structural change and the permeability deceases at these low pressure ( CBM production is a continuous process of desorption, diffusion and seepage. The primary production of CBM is to reduce the pressure of the CBM reservoir by depleting the formation water in the coal seam, so that the adsorbed methane gas can be desorbed and released. The relationships among formation depressurization, desorption and seepage of a CBM well is dynamically shown in It can be divided into three stages for the primary CBM production. Stage I is the stage of dewatering and depressurization, the pressure of the CBM reservoir is higher than desorption pressure of the coal. Adsorbed gas cannot desorb until the critical desorption pressure is reached, thus, the extracted fluid is mainly formation water along with a small amount of free gas and dissolved gas. Stage II is the stage of stable gas production. In this stage, the reservoir pressure is depleted below the desorption pressure, the gas production is relatively stable, and it reaches to the peak production at this stage and the water production drops to a low and constant level. Stage III is the stage of normal production decline, and it produces a small amount of water and gas production gradually declines and the Stage III can last very long period of time because of the nature of coal gas desorption. The variation of reservoir permeability during CBM production depends on three aspects as illustrated in During CBM depletion, with the decrease of reservoir pressure, the effective stress increases. Before reservoir pressure reaches the critical desorption pressure (Stage I), the effective stress effect is dominant and the permeability of coal reservoir declines. After the reservoir pressure declines to below the critical desorption pressure, the coal matrix shrinkage effect will play an important role in the permeability evolution, and the permeability will recover to a certain extent in both Stages II and III. Coal permeability evolution depends on the stress (not only the reservoir pressure and external stresses, but also the additional internal stress caused by matrix shrinkage). The overall stress in the improved Shi and Durucan (S-D) model can be expressed as follows: According to the permeability profile, Shi and Durucan proposed a concept of rebound pressure The second derivatives of Based on Eq. In the process of CBM well drainage, the dynamic variation of the reservoir permeability with the different gas saturation is described as follows: For unsaturated CBM reservoir, the early drainage of CBM well is mainly controlled by the effective stress. The permeability of coal reservoir decreases at the initial drainage stage. So it is important to make reasonable drainage rate at this stage and technically the drainage should be controlled at slow depletion rate which will effectively increase the drainage area of a well. There are most likely two circumstances at later time: One case is that the coal matrix shrinkage effect is not strong enough to compensate the effective stress effect. Then the overall permeability continuously decreases, as shown in For saturated and over-saturated CBM reservoirs, with the extraction of water and gas, water saturation of coal decreases gradually. The coal seam is gradually desorption, which leads to the increase of gas saturation in coal seam. In the early stage of CBM well drainage, the effect of effective stress is less than that of matrix shrinkage on coal seam. In this case, the permeability of coal reservoir increases monotonically with the decrease of the pressure of coal reservoir. In the late stage, the permeability of coal reservoir increases rapidly due to the gas slippage effect, as shown in  Under the constant external axial and confining stresses, with the increase of adsorption equilibrium pressure, the axial and radial strains of each coal specimen increase and the value of radial strain is greater than that of axial strain. The axial and radial strains are resulted from both coal sorption matrix swelling and effective stress change. At a constant confining and axial pressures, with the increase of adsorption equilibrium pressure, the effective stress decreases. The permeability first decreases and then increases. The turning point of permeability rebound for tested anthracites is about 4–5 MPa. The permeability of anthracite shows an asymmetric "check-shape" with gas pressure. For anthracite, the strength of coal increases with the degree of coalification. At constant confining and axial stresses, both sorption-induced swelling strain and the mechanical-induced strain decrease with the increase of coal strength increase. The strain of coal matrix increases with the increase of organic component content. During primary CBM production, the effective stress increases with the decrease of reservoir pressure. Before reservoir pressure reaches the critical desorption pressure, the effective stress effect is dominant and the permeability of coal reservoir declines. After the reservoir pressure is below the critical desorption pressure, the coal matrix shrinkage effect will play a prevailing role in the permeability variation, and the permeability will start to increase at low pressure. This study was partially supported by the