An experimental study was carried out with the intent of establishing the most significant rock properties influencing sawblade wear performance in the processing of ‘true’ granites. To achieve this goal, microstructural characterization of nine different rock samples was made on thin sections using polarized petrographic microscope for the determination of mineral modal composition, grain size distribution and other textural features. The samples were also tested for their physico-mechanical properties. Sawing experiments of the studied rocks were performed on a full-scale side-cutting machine, and specific wear rate SWR was adopted as the criteria for sawblade wear performance.
                  Statistical analysis of the experimental data indicated maximum grain size of quartz and alkali feldspar minerals (orthoclase/microcline) to be the most dominant factors influencing SWR. Despite its similar mineralogical hardness to alkali feldspar, the non-existence of a correlation between plagioclase feldspar (albite/oligoclase) grain size and SWR was discussed. A relatively weak correlation found between quartz content and SWR indicated that quartz content alone might not be a major contributor to sawblade wear performance. Except Shore hardness, none of the tested physico-mechanical rock properties showed a statistically significant correlation to SWR, suggesting that the physico-mechanical properties might not be a good indicator of diamond tool wear performance.
                  Valid for the tested granite types and sawing conditions, a newly developed petrography-based prediction model of the SWR, named Specific Wear Rate Index was introduced. The high correspondence between the laboratory-measured and calculated SWR values using the presently developed wear index suggests that, if confirmed by further studies, it can be used as a guide for preliminary wear performance estimations in the circular sawing of true granites.Due to their high performance as a durable building material and attractive aesthetic properties, trade of granites as a construction and decorative material is continuously increasing worldwide. As a result of this growing demand, processing of granites by using diamond segmented circular sawblades has found a wide field of application in the stone industry. Here, it is important to note that ‘granite’ in this usage is a commercial term corresponding to all hard crystalline igneous rocks capable of taking good polish. By scientific definition, however, the ‘true’ granites are one group of commercial granites essentially composed of quartz, alkali feldspar, plagioclase feldspar, lesser amounts of biotite and other accessory minerals. Even though their mineralogical and petrographical properties are quite different than those of the true granites, various hard igneous rocks like gabbro, syenite, diorite and gneiss are also marketed as granites in the dimensional stone industry. When compared to other natural stones such as marble and travertine, the sawing process of granites exhibits significant difficulties in terms of sawblade segment wear and sawing rate, mainly due to their relatively high abrasive wear potential and hardness. Sawblade segment wear, one of the major cost items in stone processing, is the result of two tribological contacts in the sawing zone: diamond-stone contact causing mainly the wear of diamond grits, and chip-bond contact causing the wear of the bonding metal (matrix) operational parameters; cutting depth, feed rate, peripheral speed, amount and composition of the coolant and cutting mode segment specifications; diamond grit type and concentration, matrix characteristics, segment manufacturing method workpiece properties As can be inferred from the preceding literature, due to large number of parameters involved, assessment of blade wear in stone processing is a highly complex problem. In such cases where analytical approaches are not possible due to the complexities involved, it is a common practice to make use of empirical means. Accordingly, some statistically derived models have been suggested in the literature directed to the prediction of blade wear in the processing of hard and abrasive natural stones. These regression-based models attempt to provide an estimate of blade wear performance mainly as a function of some selected rock properties. However, despite the fact that they represent the most widely used petrographic type of all commercial granites The primary goal of this study was to establish correlations, if any, between some selected fundamental rock properties and diamond tool wear performance in the processing of true granites. To achieve this goal, a series of circular sawing tests directed to recording sawblade wear performance were carried out on nine different true granites by using a full-scale sawing rig. For the characterization of the studied rocks, their quantitative petrographic properties and physico-mechanical properties were determined. To be able to examine and interpret the relations between the considered rock properties and tool wear performance, statistical evaluations of the experimentally gathered data were made. Also, in the second part of the study, under the light of the main findings presently reached, a newly developed petrography-based empirical wear index was introduced. For the execution of this study, the block samples of nine true granites (samples G1–G9 in Petrographic studies included the determination of modal composition and grain-size of the studied rocks. For this purpose, thin sections were prepared from each rock sample and examined using the Nikon Eclipse LV100POL polarized microscope ( Determination of the physico-mechanical properties of the rock samples included uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength, bending strength, Shore scleroscope hardness, seismic velocity, water absorption, apparent porosity and unit weight. Uniaxial compressive strength tests were performed on 10 cubical samples of 70 The circular sawing experiments were performed in the down-cutting mode ( The diamond segmented sawblade used in the sawing experiments was of 400 Wear performance of the sawblade was evaluated in terms of Specific Wear Rate Correlation analyses were carried out in order to be able to determine the relations between rock properties and Statistical evaluation of the experimental data, concerning the relations between physico-mechanical properties and Poor correlations between individual physico-mechanical properties of some granitic rocks and  In this part of the study, volume percentage and grain size of the major rock forming minerals in granitic rocks, often hold related to sawblade wear performance Statistical test results presented in While K-feldpar and plagioclase feldspar have similar mineral hardness values (i.e. with a Mohs scale hardness of 6 or Rosiwal hardness of 37), the non-existence of a statistically significant correlation between plagioclase grain size and The preceding experimental findings have shown that, in true granites, blade wear is greatly influenced by two main rock-forming minerals, namely quartz and K-feldspar. However, as mentioned before, true granites are only one group of so-called commercial granites, and thus, the findings reached so far cannot be generalized to all commercial granites in the natural stone industry. To check the validity of this presently made argument, three additional commercial granites (G10, G11 and G12 in Although the main aim of the present work was to study the influence of rock properties on sawblade wear, an empirical model is also introduced to provide an estimate of In order to be able to check the predictive value of the presently introduced model, specific wear rate values calculated from Eq. From the results of the experimentally determined sawing data, valid for the studied true granites and employed operational conditions, the following main conclusions were drawn: With the exception of Shore hardness, no statistically significant correlations were observed between various physico-mechanical rock properties and specific wear rate Except plagioclase feldspar, the grain size of main rock-forming hard mineral constituents has a significant effect on Although quartz content (volume percentage) is generally recognized as the most influencing rock property in the practise of stone processing industry, the relatively low correlation presently determined between quartz content and It is shown that the arbitrarily selection of rock types from the existing commercial granites could be a misleading approach when it is intended to establish correlations between their petrographic properties and sawblade wear performance. Such an approach could make it difficult to draw general conclusions regarding the influence of individual mineral constituents on sawblade wear performance. A newly developed empirical prediction model of the sawblade specific wear rate is introduced. The model is based on a combination of the square root of maximum grain size, volume percentage and Rosiwal abrasion hardness of quartz and K-feldspar minerals. If confirmed and updated by further studies, it is thought that the proposed prediction equation could be used as a practical tool for the preliminary estimation of blade wear performance in the circular sawing of true granites. Therefore, it is emphasized that the validity of the newly defined prediction model should be further investigated for other sawblades, operational conditions and granite types. The authors are most grateful to Granitaş A.Ş. stone processing company for supporting this research by kindly providing dimensioned rock samples for the sawing experiments and physico-mechanical tests.