We first survey the historical aspects of the term Stone–Thrower–Wales (STW) defect and its experimental identification. Physicochemical properties associated with the STW defect have been extensively investigated theoretically as well. However, it is difficult to verify the predicted properties by means of experiments. Here we demonstrate an experimental way to probe the vibrational properties of STW defects in single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) using surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). We also performed density functional theory calculations to support our interpretation of the SERS spectra. The characteristic fluctuations of peak intensities and frequencies are ascribed to dynamic motion of an STW defect in the hexagonal SWCNT lattice. The role of an STW defect at edges is also discussed in terms of its relevance to the stability and O2 reactivity of flat and curved graphene structures.The presence of topological defects, which are non-hexagonal arrangements of carbon atoms incorporated in the graphene lattice, provides unique and diverse morphologies to graphene-based materials (e.g. single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT)). Curved geometries have been theoretically explained by the presence of topological defects in carbon materials Since the pentagon and heptagon induce positive and negative curvature in the hexagonal network, respectively, a pentagon–heptagon pair does not introduce net curvature and the planar structure is preserved. This has been shown in a pioneering study by Thrower In this context, ultrasensitive techniques are required to unveil properties associated with the presence of STW defects. Since the Raman cross-section can be strongly enhanced when matter is located in close vicinity of metal nanostructures (e.g. silver or gold nanoparticles) – a phenomenon called surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) Here we first provide a brief historical and conceptual account of the STW defect. We then focus on the STW defect-associated vibrational properties in an SWCNT as revealed by the SERS technique. Assignments for the SERS spectra are supported by vibrational frequency calculations using density functional theory (DFT). How the presence of an STW defect affects the chemical reactivity of flat and rolled graphene is also analyzed. The presence of a pentagon–heptagon pair (5–7 pair) in the basal plane of neutron-irradiated graphite was first suggested by Thrower More recently, the concept of the 5–7 pair has played an important role in the evolution of our understanding of diverse geometries in SWCNTs. It is well known that the hexagonal graphene sheet can be rolled up, forming a carbon nanotube. A rolled graphene structure with a 5–7 pair results in an SWCNT consisting of two SWCNTs segments having different tube diameters seamlessly connected through the 5–7 pair ( Soon after the discovery of fullerenes, Stone and Wales proposed that many types of isomers of C Extending the Stone–Wales transformation to the hexagonal lattice, two adjacent pentagon–heptagon pairs are obtained ( An atomic configuration similar to the STW defect can be found in dicyclopenta[  The first-order Raman spectra of SWCNTs have been used extensively for characterization purposes, with a few observable signals such as low frequency radial breathing modes, disorder-induced D-bands, and multi-featured G-bands. Some predicted modes are still ambiguous in experiments. Since selection rules can be disrupted near the silver surface, resulting in observation of weak Raman modes or even IR-active modes Since SERS spectra show temporal fluctuations of frequencies and intensities ( A fully localized vibrational mode in the C–C bond centered at the STW defect is another characteristic mode for the STW defect ( In support of this assumption, we performed DFT calculations using the Gaussian 09 software package A practically significant example of the importance of orientation of the STW defect is the relative reactivity of the armchair vs. zigzag edge Topological imperfections including the STW defect, are now understand to be extremely important structural features in graphene and nanocarbon materials, determine the local atomic arrangements and potentially delocalized electronic property changes. It is thus required to develop experimental capabilities to probe such physicochemical properties, which remain ambiguous in many cases. We demonstrated that SERS is a powerful tool to sensitively detect the STW defect. Fluctuations of the SERS spectra are ascribed to defect migrations induced by strongly enhanced electric fields near the SERS-active sites. This enables investigations of dynamic behavior of topological defects using SERS. As single-wall tubular nanospaces exhibit unusual super-high pressure compression This work was supported by Exotic Nanocarbons, Japan Regional Innovation Strategy Program by the Excellence, JST. T.F. and K.K. thank Dr. K. Takahashi at the Institute of Research and Innovation (IRI) for providing the SWCNT sample. A.B.S.-T. and L.R.R. thank the Chilean sponsor (