Background
                  Complex intra-articular distal humerus fractures are relatively uncommon injuries but are fraught with poor outcomes such as malunion, elbow stiffness and deformity. Various types of internal fixation screw-plate constructs have been developed to improve fixation. Specifically, a 90° offset periarticular system lowers the profile on the lateral epicondyle, yet it is unclear how this design compares to other plate constructs. This study compared the mechanical stiffness and plate surface strains between two types of constructs for stabilization of complex distal humerus fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Identical bi-columnar segmental intra-articular fractures were created in ten epoxy composite left humeri. Models were randomly assigned to two groups (n
                     =5/group) with either parallel plates or perpendicular plates. Rosette strain gages were placed at the most distal possible space on the lateral plate for both constructs. Models were mechanically tested with estimates of physiologic loads in flexion, extension, varus, valgus axial compression and axial torsion. Data for mechanical stiffness, transverse plate strain and longitudinal plate strain were compared with a one-way ANOVA (P
                     <0.05).
               
                  Findings
                  There was no statistical difference in stiffness in any direction. The longitudinal strain for the 90° construct was significantly lower in axial compression. The 180° system demonstrated significantly lower transverse strains during axial torsion.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Both systems demonstrated similar mechanical stiffness theoretically providing similar fracture stabilization. Plate strain differences may affect fragment position, but it is unclear how much plate loading occurs in vivo. Surgeon experience and preference may dictate the choice of a plate construct for this fracture configuration.Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus typically involve metaphyseal comminution and articular disruption. While relatively uncommon among joint injuries, complications associated with malunion, elbow stiffness, and subsequent decreased function are still relatively common ( Typically, these plates involve a medial reconstruction plate with a lateral column plate. Intra-operative contouring of both the medial and posterolateral plates is time consuming and may not result in optimal fit to the complex anatomy of the distal humerus. The recent introduction of 90° offset periarticular plates presents the surgeon with the option of using pre-contoured plates. The theoretical advantages of periarticular plates include reduce operative time associated with contouring the plates and a greater surface area distally to allow for greater fragment fixation. This system has been shown to produce adequate to excellent clinical results ( Historically, two plate constructs at right angles have been considered to provide optimal rigid stabilization of the fracture ( Recently, the 90° offset method was evaluated compared to a dorsal only orientation of plates ( With relatively limited biomechanical data for periarticular plating of the distal humerus, it remains unclear as to whether perpendicular (90°) or parallel (180°) periarticular plating systems vary in biomechanical performance. The hypothesis to be tested was that the different constructs would indeed demonstrate differences in biomechanical performance. To test this hypothesis, the purpose of this study was to determine the biomechanical stability and plate strains associated with two different types of periarticular plate constructs for stabilization of complex segmental intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus. Identical bi-columnar segmental intra-articular fractures were created in ten epoxy composite left humeri (Pacific Research Laboratories, Vashon Island, WA, USA) using a custom cutting jig with a transverse cut 30 Lateral plates for both orientations were then instrumented with single T-rosette 120ohm strain gages (Part #: FCA-1-17-1LT, Tokyo Sokki Kenkyujo, Tokyo, Japan) with a reported sensitivity of 0.1%. The purpose for using rosette gages was to simultaneously capture plate deformations in two orthogonal clinically relevant directions. Gages were aligned on each plate to allow recording of surface strain in both the longitudinal and transverse directions relative to the humerus. Gages were applied as close to the distal end of the plate as possible (1.5 The cut proximal diaphysis of each humerus was then potted in a cylindrical mold using two part epoxy resin (Bondo Marhyde, Atlanta, GA, USA) for rigid fixation within the testing rig. Prior to testing, a custom ulno-humeral interface was created using epoxy resin by using the distal humerus as a mold. The mold was then refined to simulate the in vivo position of the ulna relative to the distal humerus and this relationship was then fixed for each direction of testing. This “joint” did not include joint capsule or ligamentous structures. For flexion and extension testing, specimens were mounted horizontally in an MTS 858 bi-axial testing machine. (Eden Prairie, MN, USA) The specimens were linked to the piston actuator with the custom designed ulno-humeral joint ( Implants and models were carefully inspected before and after testing and there was no evidence of implant loosening or plastic deformation of the plates. There did not appear to be deformation within the fixation construct as well. There were no statistical differences in physiologic stiffness between plating systems across tests ( Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus remain a challenging surgical situation ( In the current study, the 90° plating system had an equivalent stiffness to the 180° plating system across all tests. The 90° plating system had significantly lower longitudinal strains during axial compressive loading while the 180° plating system had significantly lower transverse strains in axial torsion. Due to the anatomy and biomechanics of the elbow joint, axial compressive load may be a more important structural variable than axial torsion. This may be of additional clinical importance in that typical post-operative rehabilitation protocols primarily use flexion/extension motions that would impart joint compressive loads. The stiffness data reported in the current study are lower in magnitude than those reported previously ( Another objective of the current study was to evaluate the lateral plate deformations associated with physiologic loading. While stiffness data provides information about the overall construct, an analysis of plate deformation may yield valuable information regarding the potential for changes in plate-screw orientation and thus the possibility of fragment migration resulting in malunion. This type of failure mode has been previously described following biomechanical testing ( As with any study, there may be some potential deficiencies to the current study. Synthetic models were used to eliminate problems associated with cadaveric bone quality and anatomical variability. An identical number of screws were used for each system and it may be the clinical scenario that all available screw holes would be utilized to maximize stabilization. As the plate systems differ in terms of the number of holes available for lateral fixation of the distal fracture fragments, it was felt that differing the number of screws for fixation would potentially favor one type of instrumentation. The authors felt that a side-by-side comparison eliminating the number of screws as a potential variable would best allow for evaluation of plate design and material. It should also be noted that there were material differences between the systems. The 180° offset system is made of slightly thicker titanium alloy while the 90° offset system is made from a thinner stainless steel. While stainless steel has approximately twice the modulus of elasticity as titanium, these material properties were not part of the analysis as the actual magnitude of plate deformation measured as microstrain was the variable of primary importance. The strain gages were placed as distal as possible for each construct but, due to differing plate designs, experienced a 10 Both systems appear to provide similar stabilization for this complex intra-articular fracture pattern under physiologic loads. From a clinical perspective, a system that provides greater stability during physiologic motion with more distal fixation should decrease the likelihood of fixation failure and thereby decrease the chances for malunion or nonunion. As failure testing was not within the scope of the current study, further efforts to understand failure mechanisms in the in vitro situation are warranted. From these data, the author’s feel that implant selection should still be based first on the complexity of the fracture pattern and then on surgeon preference and/or experience. This study was supported in part by a research grant from Zimmer, Inc. (Warsaw, IN, USA).