Hydraulic fracturing is a key technique to activate natural fracture networks aiming at increasing permeability of non-conventional reservoirs. In order to design effective stimulations, it is necessary a good understanding of the hydraulic fracture propagation and its interaction with natural fractures. A robust methodology was developed using the finite element method to study the mechanisms that influence the activation of natural fractures and the subsequent process of hydraulic fracture propagation. An innovated mesh fragmentation technic is developed to simulate hydraulic fracture propagation with arbitrary paths. The behavior of the hydraulic fracture is modeled using hydromechanical cohesive interface elements with progressive damage model. The Mohr-Coulomb criterion with tension cutoff is incorporated to represent the frictional behavior of natural fractures. The developed methodology is validated through literature data on experimental test results. The three main possibilities of interaction events (opening, crossing and arrest) are predicted accurately. Subsequently, the effect of some primary parameters such as the angle of approach between hydraulic and natural fracture, the stress ratio between minimum and maximum horizontal stresses and the internal friction angle of the natural fracture were studied to provide a better insight of the propagation processes of the hydraulic fracture. An interaction response diagram is proposed combining the effects of those parameters to provide a good estimative of fracture interaction.Hydraulic fracturing is a technique to stimulate reservoirs and increase oil and gas production. In many applications, short fractures are sufficient to increase permeability and obtain an economical production Several numerical techniques have been presented as viable alternatives to simulate and predict the interaction of hydraulic and natural fractures. Methods such as the discrete element method – DEM In this paper, a fully coupled 2D finite element methodology is developed to simulate the propagation of hydraulic fractures and the interaction with natural fractures. A novelty mesh fragmentation scheme is implemented to simulate hydraulic fracture propagation with arbitrary paths based on 6-node poromechanical cohesive interface elements. In order to provide a reliable description of a heterogeneous structure, crack propagation and fracture paths, we make use of Voronoi cells and Delaunay triangulation In order to simulate the hydraulic fracturing process and the interaction with natural fractures, several components are coupled: (1) mechanical deformation of the rock induced by fluid pressure on the fracture surface, (2) fluid flow inside the fracture, (3) fracture propagation in the rock formation, (4) fluid transfer between the fracture and the porous medium, and (5) interaction with natural fractures. Hydraulic fracture propagation is modeled using the pore pressure cohesive zone model (CZM) that defines the constitutive response directly in terms of traction-separation law (TSL). This model avoids the singularity issues of the stress at crack tip, which is present in linear elastic fracture mechanics. Several traction separation responses have been used to simulate crack propagation in different material types In naturally fractured media, normal traction is mainly induced by hydraulic pressure while shear traction may be generated by geo-stress contrast or shear stress around natural fractures The effective displacements at failure The Mohr Coulomb plastic model with tension cut-off In terms of effective stresses this plastification criterion is formulated according to In this expression, The normal ( More details about the implementation can be found in The governing equations of the HM interface element involve the interaction between mechanical deformation and fluid flow along and across the interface element. Based on the poroelastic theory for an interface element under the influence of internal fluid pressure and disregarding the body forces, the equilibrium equation is established The continuity equation of the mass conservation for the fracturing fluid flow combines fluid flow along and across the discontinuity, as follows: The normal flow represents the fracture fluid infiltration to the porous formation. This flow can be simulated by the pressure-dependent leak-off model, given by: Generally, natural fractures are partially or completely sealed. They act as a weakness plane and can be activated in hydraulic fracture treatments. In this work, we consider that natural fractures are initially sealants. During the interaction, the fluid in the hydraulic fracture is transferred into natural fractures when activation criteria are met. In one case, the elements are activated following the Mohr-Coulomb shear criterion inducing slippage and propagation along the natural fracture ( Cohesive zone model (CZM) have been used satisfactorily for the simulation of hydraulic fracture propagation and, more recently, for interaction with natural fractures The initial effective normal stress Blanton As observed in In the previous results, we could identify a relation between the horizontal stress ratio The proposed diagram is now compared with two independent laboratory experiments presented by Zhou From Generally, natural fractures are completely or partially sealed and act as weakness planes, which can be activated during hydraulic fracturing. The internal friction angle is an important factor to control the slippage of the natural fracture. This parameter varies with surface roughness and filling material. Then, we assess the effect of natural fracture friction angle values (17°, 45°) on the problems analyzed in the last section. In In Fracture interaction is one of the most relevant issues to consider in the management of naturally fractured reservoirs. This includes the interaction between hydraulic fractures and natural fractures as well as the interaction among themselves. Hydraulic fracturing in fractured media is a complex process and its numerical modeling represents a great challenge. The difficulty arises mainly from the non-linear coupling process, which involves the interaction of several components. A robust numerical methodology in the finite element method is developed to reproduce the coupling of those processes and simulate hydraulic fracturing propagation in naturally fractured media. The advantage and limitations of the proposed method are discussed briefly. The main advantage of this methodology is to predict the path and propagation direction of the hydraulic fracture using the developed mesh fragmentation scheme. Branching and crossing with offset are simulated. Furthermore, it is possible to simulate multiple cracks without worrying about multiple crack interactions. The adopted cohesive crack approach brings the benefit of avoiding the singularity issues of the stress at crack tip, which is present in linear elastic fracture mechanics. Plasticity, poroelasticity and fluid leak-off effects can be easily incorporated if necessary. The implemented Mohr-Coulomb model with tension cutoff is capable of representing the behavior of frictional natural fractures including dilatancy effects. Moreover, cemented natural fractures can be modeled by increasing the strength of the filling material (cohesion, tensile strength and internal friction angle). The main drawback in the developed method is that regular meshes cause biased crack propagations once the fracture can only propagate along quadrilateral element edges. Irregular meshes using Voronoi cells and Delaunay triangulation can greatly reduce this effect. The proposed method was effective by the numerical simulation of hydraulic fracture propagation and its interaction with natural fractures. Different possibilities of HF/NF interaction types (crossing, arrest and opening) are predicted accurately when compared to the experimental data. The interaction is more influenced by horizontal stress ratio Future works will extend this study understanding the effect of the natural fracture strength properties (cohesion, tensile strength and dilatancy angle) on the interaction with hydraulic fractures. This methodology will be applied to simulate hydraulic fracturing at different depths and into multilayered fractured rock formations. In addition, it can be extended to 3D simulations. The authors gratefully acknowledge support from Petrobras and from the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq).