The dynamic compression responses of quartz sands of different grain sizes and gradations are tested with a modified spilt Hopkinson pressure bar in which a single-pulse loading system is implemented. The yield stresses, the compressibility and the energy-absorption densities of the granular materials are calculated from the compression curves. The effects of the grain size and the gradation on those dynamic macro responses are investigated and presented. The grain size distributions of the samples after loading are obtained with a laser diffractometry instrument, and are analyzed quantitatively with the Hardin relative breakage index. The effects of the grain-scale properties on the dynamic macro responses of granular materials can be interpreted well with the particle breakage mechanism. The Theoretical analyses show that the energy-absorption density and the particle breakage extent are linearly related to the logarithm of axial stress respectively, and the slopes are both proportional to the compressibility. Moreover, a simple model for predicting the dynamic energy-breakage efficiency of the granular materials is derived. Based on the discrete element method (DEM), simulation of the granular material under one-dimensional dynamic compression is conducted to further interpret the experimental results. The size dependence of the coordination number of grains and its influence on particle breakage is discussed.Granular materials such as sand, gravels, and rock blocks are common materials in engineering. Investigations on the dynamic compression responses of granular materials, e.g. the compressibility and the energy-absorption capacity, are of great interest to the civil and earthquake engineering Granular materials are complicated and multi-scale systems, and are usually divided into three scales in the theoretical study Numbers of static compression experiments had illustrated that granular materials suffered distinct particle breakage at high pressures The spilt Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB), with a jacket to confine the samples, is often used to test the dynamic compression responses of granular materials The discrete element method (DEM) which models the movement and interactions of spherical (or cylindrical in 2D) particles as described by Cundall and Strack In the present study, effects of the grain size and the gradation on the dynamic macro responses and the particle breakage extent of granular materials will be investigated. The modified split Hopkinson pressure bar (MSHPB) will first of all be used to obtain the dynamic responses of quartz sand of different grain sizes and gradations. Then, the grain size analysis will be applied to the samples after loading to measure the grain size distributions of them. The yield stress, the compressibility, and the energy-absorption density of the sands will be calculated and interpreted based on the particle breakage extent evaluated by the Hardin relative breakage index. Finally, the DEM simulation will be used to interpret the micro deformation mechanisms in the granular material. Dynamic experiments are carried out with the MSHPB, and the schematic diagram of the setups is shown in The modified parts of MSHPB are the use of pulse shapers, the single-pulse loading system and the passively confined configuration. Square pulse shapers, made of rubber, are used to eliminate the wave oscillations caused by dispersion effects and increase the rising time of the loading pulses The grain-size analyses of the samples are carried out by the laser-diffractometry instrument called Mastersizer2000 which is functioned mainly based on the Mie's light-scattering theory Three kinds of quartz sands with different grain sizes and gradations are chosen as the experimental materials. According to the mean grain size and the initial gradation, the materials are termed as the fine quartz sand (FQS), the coarse quartz sand (CQS) and the well-graded sand (WGS), respectively. The WGS samples are prepared by mixing up the products of FQS and CQS after loading. The initial grain size distributions of the materials are shown in To prepare a sample, an aluminum block of a diameter 37 mm and thickness 11 mm are firstly fixed into the jacket by a pair of dowels. Then, a little petrolatum is smeared on the inner surface of the jacket wall to reduce the friction between the grains and the jacket wall Before experiments, the incident and the transmitted bars are aligned with the sample, and are compressed into the jacket to make good contact with the blocks. The sample is sandwiched between the incident bar and the transmission bar. The dowels are removed before loading. In the experiments, the impact of the striker on the incident bar through the pulse shaper generates an elastic incident wave propagating through the incident bar. When the incident wave travels to the interface of the incident bar and the sand sample, part of the incident wave is reflected as a reflected wave in the incident bar for the impedance mismatch of the incident bar and the sample, and the rest is transmitted as a transmitted wave in the transmission bar. The samples are compressed by the transmitted loads. The incident and the reflected waves are recorded by the strain gages on the incident bar, and the transmitted wave is recorded by the strain gages on the transmission bar. These signals are recorded by a high-speed digital oscilloscope, for example Tektronix TDS3084 in the present study. The incident wave and the transmitted wave are used to interpret the stress–strain curves and the strain rate histories of quartz sand with the two-wave method The stress uniformity across the sample during dynamic loading is significant to evaluate the effectiveness of the dynamic experimental results. The generally-used way to check the stress uniformity in the SHPB test is to compare the stress profiles at the impact and the support end of the sample The dynamic engineering axial stress–strain curves of FQS, CQS and WGS are shown in Compression curves of FQS, CQS and WGS under the same loading velocity of 15 m/s (the strain rates are all about 1000/s) are plotted in The yield stress and the compressibility of the granular materials are calculated and listed in Granular materials are promising in providing vibration isolation and shock absorption for structures in various engineering fields As shown in figure, the amount of the absorbed energy is small before yielding, but is linearly related to the axial stress after yielding of the granular material, which is consistent with the numerical results of Mcdowell et al. In fact, a theoretical relationship of the energy absorption density and the axial stress can be derived based on Eq. Then differentiate Eq. Substitute Eqs. Eq. Measurement results of the grain size distributions of the three sand samples after loading are presented in  The mean grain sizes of the three materials under different stress levels obtained from The Hardin relative breakage The evolution of the Hardin relative breakage of these materials with the axial stress is shown in It can be preliminarily concluded that less particle breakage occurs in the fine and well-graded granular samples than in the coarse and uniformly-graded samples. Since the mean strength of the grains decreases with the increasing grain size, larger grains are prone to break under a lower stress level than the smaller ones, and thus the coarse samples (CQS) suffer higher particle breakage extent than the fine samples (FQS) at the same stress level. However, differences in the breakage extent between the well-graded and the uniformly-graded materials reflect the competition between the grain size and the grain-contact numbers in determining particle breakage The theoretical relationship (dashed lines) of the breakage extent with the axial stress is derived as follows. According to the theoretical analyses in Ref. The coupling relationship shown in Eq. The boundary condition for Eq. As shown in Therefore, the compressibility and the energy-absorption capacity of granular materials are both intrinsically related to the particle breakage extent. The particle breakage mechanism should be taken into account in designing energy-absorption devices using granular materials when the impact load is higher than their yield stresses. The uniformly-graded materials can be used instead of well-graded materials. Multi-layer covers composed of both strong and weak granular materials can be designed, since coarse and weak granular materials have stronger energy absorption capacities at relatively lower stress levels while it is contrary for fine and strong granular materials. Substitute Eq. Comparison of the experimental results and the predictions of Eq. In the above discussion, the effects of the grain-scale properties on the dynamic macro responses of granular materials can be interpreted well based on the particle breakage mechanism. However, there are still two questions to be answered. One is whether the compression deformation of granular materials mainly comes from particle breakage after yielding, and the other is what role the coordination number plays in determining particle breakage. The DEM simulation will be used to answer the two questions. For clarity, the basic physical principles of the multi-scale model will be introduced. Readers can refer to the works of Huang et al. The one-dimensional dynamic compression process of the granular material is simulated. The compression curves of the breakable and the unbreakable granular material are shown in The grain size distributions of the breakable granular material are calculated in the simulation, and the results are presented in The average coordination number of the whole breakable granular assembly, Moreover, to examine the size dependence of In a uniformly-graded granular assembly under compression, the coordination number of the grains is similar to each other due to the narrow distribution of grain sizes, and thus particle breakage is mainly determined by the grain size. However, in a well-graded granular assembly the average coordination number of the big grains is much bigger than that of the small grains due to the fractal rearrangement In addition, the big grains in the well-graded material have bigger contact numbers than those of equal size in the uniformly-graded material. Therefore, though the sizes of the biggest grains in CQS and WGS are both around 2 mm, the grains in WGS will break under a higher pressure than those of the same size in CQS. That explains why the yield stress of WGS is higher than that of CQS, for the yield stress is usually determined by the biggest, i.e. weakest, grains in the granular assembly. Particle breakage is relatively harder and increases more slowly with loads increasing in the well-graded material, which explains why the breakage extent of WGS is the smallest of all at high pressures. Dynamic compression tests are carried out on the quartz sands of different grain sizes and gradations with the MSHBP setups. The grain size analyses are applied to the samples after loading and the breakage extents of the three granular materials are compared quantitatively with the Hardin relative breakage index. The experimental results show that the fine and uniformly-graded material exhibits a higher yield stress, and a smaller breakage extent than the coarse and uniformly-graded material at the same stress level. The uniformly-graded granular material exhibits a lower yield stress and a bigger breakage extent than the well-graded material when the sizes of their biggest grains are approximately the same. Moreover, the compressibility and the energy-absorption capacity of the well-graded granular material are both smaller than the uniformly-graded material. The theoretical relationships of the energy absorption density versus the axial stress and the particle breakage extent versus the axial stress are derived, and found to be well consistent with the experimental results. Theoretical analyses show that the compressibility is proportional to the increasing rate of the breakage extent with the logarithm of the axial stress, which interprets the physical meaning of the compressibility. Moreover, the energy absorption density is linearly related to the axial stress with the slope proportional to the compressibility. A simple model for predicting the dynamic energy-breakage efficiency of granular materials is derived. Predictions of the model are consistent with the experimental results and show that the breakage efficiency of the fine and uniformly-graded granular materials is the lowest of all. Simulation results show that the compression deformation of granular materials mainly comes from particle breakage after yielding. Particle breakage makes the uniformly-graded granular materials become well-graded materials in which the average coordination number of the big grains is much higher than that of the small ones. Therefore, the big grains are less prone to break due to the cushioning effects, and particle breakage becomes relatively harder than in the uniformly-graded material, which results in a final grain size distribution for the granular assembly. This work is supported by the