Salt cakes are toxic waste products which are produced when aluminium drosses are remelted under a salt cover to recover some of the metallic aluminium present. They are expensive to dispose of in waste dumps because they contain many toxic compounds and many water-soluble compounds. However, they also contain many relatively valuable compounds, some of which may be worth recovering. This paper shows that 90% of the Cl, 55% of the Na, and 45% of the K can be extracted by aqueous leaching of −2mm salt cake for 1h at 25°C.
                  Treatment of the aqueous leach residue by Bayer-type digestion at 100°C and 145°C for 15min was also investigated. It was found that elpasolite (K2NaAlF6) and metallic aluminium were fully extracted from fine ground material at both temperatures, that all aluminium nitrides were destroyed, and that all the resultant aluminium oxides and hydroxides were dissolved. Some other compounds were also dissolved. The total Al2O3 extraction was about 42%; this was comparable with that from typical bauxites.
                  Corundum (Al2O3) and diaoyudaoite (NaAl11O17) were insoluble in the solution and increased in proportion in the final residue. Sodalite (Na6[Al6Si6O24]·2NaCl) had precipitated in all the residues.Salt cakes are complex toxic waste products which are formed when aluminium drosses are melted under a salt cover to recover some of the metallic aluminium present ( Some of this work was conducted at CSIRO Minerals in Clayton, Melbourne, Victoria, and some at CSIRO Minerals in Waterford, Perth, Western Australia. Experimental work, following methods discussed by The original salt cake sample weighed about 4 One 100 Some leaching tests were conducted on −2 After grinding a batch of salt cake, the ground charge was screened on a 150 All of the liquors from each test were combined, the total volume measured, and the combined solution was sent for chemical analysis to determine the amount of material dissolved. All aqueous leaching tests, as distinct from the Bayer-type leaching tests described below, were conducted in a 1000 During each run a solution sample was taken for analysis at 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 After 4 Bayer-type leaches were conducted on the five washed residues from the above aqueous leaching tests and on the crushed head sample (−2 For the atmospheric pressure leaching tests, 100 For the high pressure/temperature leaching tests, a portion of the dried residue from the atmospheric digestion was digested in caustic liquor for 15 Chemical analysis of solids and solutions involved a wide range of techniques depending largely on the elements involved and their concentration. Metallic elements in solids were mostly determined by a standard X-ray fluorescence (XRF) method using a fused bead preparation technique. Metallic aluminium (Al Loss-on-ignition (LOI, 100–1000 Metallic elements in aqueous leach solutions were measured by ICP-OES. However, for Bayer leach solutions, the liquors were diluted 10 times with deionised water containing mannitol to stabilize alumina and then analysed for Al, Si, and Na by ICP-OES. In addition, the Al Carbon was determined by standard methods with a Leco CS600 unit. Carbon assays were used to estimate the aluminium carbide (Al Chloride in solution samples was measured by ICP-OES. Chloride in solid samples was measured by fusing 0.2 Nitrogen in solids was determined by the Kjeldahl method by first digesting a suitable sample weight in 1:1 HCl at 220 X-ray diffraction patterns were collected for the head sample and most of the leach residues after the samples were pulverised. Similar, though not identical, versions of the Philips X’Pert system were used in our Melbourne and Perth laboratories. The main difference was that copper Kα radiation was used in Melbourne and cobalt Kα radiation was used in Perth. Data were interpreted using XPLOT for Windows, Version 1.34, together with the International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD) database sets 1–55. A qualitative assessment of phase abundances was made by visually comparing the relative peak intensities, and categorising them into five sub-groups. These sub-groups, in order of decreasing abundance were as follows; major, medium, minor, trace, and <DL (below the limit of detection under the XRD conditions used, which was probably about 5%). Results of the initial characterisation of the salt cake head sample are discussed first and then the results of the aqueous leaching tests are briefly considered. This is followed by a discussion of the results of the Bayer-type leaching results tests on the aqueous leach residues, and then some general comments are made. A chemical analysis of the feed sample is given in As shown in Most of the sodium was present as halite (NaCl) and the potassium was present as sylvite (KCl), both of which are readily soluble in water. The aluminium nitrides and carbide present react readily with water ( Details of conditions of the six aqueous leaching tests are given in   Some aluminium (up to 20%) and silicon (up to 25%) dissolved in the high temperature alkaline leaches. Aluminium nitrides, as indicated by the nitrogen assays, were partly decomposed (45%) under the simplest leaching conditions (unground salt cake, water alone at room temperature) and almost completely decomposed (96%) under the severest conditions (fine ground, elevated temperature, alkaline solution). Relatively coarse metallic aluminium (>850 The salt cake head plus the five solid residues from the above aqueous leaching tests were leached under Bayer-type leaching conditions (100 When the preheated solids were added to the hot liquor in the atmospheric pressure leaching experiments, gas evolution was apparent and ceased within about 15 The detailed results in The prior wet grind and water wash clearly removed most of the water-soluble (unwanted) salts while most of the Al The processibility of bauxites is usually defined in terms of the “total available alumina” (TAA) or “g of extractable Al A reasonably high level of silica was digested during leaching resulting in high levels of dissolved silica in the exit liquors (0.8–1.6 The results of qualitative XRD examination of the leach residues from tests at atmospheric pressure and 100 Both elpasolite and metallic aluminium were apparently extracted from the ground salt cake during atmospheric pressure leaching. The XRD peaks of aluminium and elpasolite overlap and because the combined peak was no longer present in the XRD pattern of the leach residue it was concluded that both had been leached. Almost all the aluminium nitride in all samples was destroyed during leaching and the resultant aluminium oxides and hydroxides were dissolved in the solution. XRD and/or analytical results showed that any residual elpasolite and metallic aluminium were fully extracted from all samples. Furthermore, analyses showed that complete destruction and dissolution of all aluminium nitrides occurred in all tests. Sodalite precipitated in all residues due to the leaching of silica during digestion. Some sodalite was present in the original feed sample ( Both corundum and diaoyudaoite increased in concentration in the residues because they were insoluble during digestion. Cryolite and fluorite seem to have been partly extracted since they do not appear to have been concentrated in the residues as expected. Gibbsite was below the limit of detection by qualitative XRD in the original salt cake sample but was present in the aqueous leach residues and in the pressure leach residues. It is not clear if gibbsite was present in the starting material or was precipitated during salt cake formation. The major problem with using salt cake as part of a Bayer feed would be in the co-digestion of impurities. Of particular importance would be any remaining chlorides, phosphates, fluorides, and other salts which are in the original salt cake in higher concentrations than in bauxite. Bayer process liquors are sensitive to minor impurities in solid feeds due to the recirculating nature of the liquor, and this needs further investigation. This paper has outlined a possible route for the recovery of valuable products from salt cakes. The process involves crushing, grinding, and screening of salt cake to recover metallic aluminium. This is followed by aqueous leaching to extract and recover easily soluble salts such as sodium and potassium chlorides ( The Analytical Services Groups of CSIRO Minerals at Clayton, Victoria, and Waterford, Western Australia, are gratefully thanked for performing the many analyses required in this work.