Nucleobindin-1 (NUCB1), also known as Calnuc, is a highly conserved, multifunctional protein widely expressed in tissues and cells. It contains two EF-hand motifs which have been shown to play a crucial role in binding Ca2+ ions. In this study, we applied comparative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to characterize differentially expressed proteins in HA-CHIP over-expressed and endogenous CHIP depleted MC3T3-E1 stable cell lines, identifying NUCB1 as a novel CHIP/Stub1 targeted protein. NUCB1 interacts with and is down-regulated by CHIP by both proteasomal dependent and independent pathways, suggesting that CHIP-mediated down-regulation of nucleobindin-1 might play a role in osteoblast differentiation. The chaperone protein Hsp70 was found to be important for CHIP and NUCB1 interaction as well as CHIP-mediated NUCB1 down-regulation. Our findings provide new insights into understanding the stability regulation of NUCB1.CHIP ( Similar to other E3 ubiquitin ligases, CHIP binds to its substrate, and mediates its ubiquitination and degradation. E3 ligase substrate screening strategies are, therefore, based on these particular steps and characteristics. Yeast two hybrid screens, co-immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry, and bioinformatic approaches are utilized to identify new proteins interacting with E3 ligases of interest In our study, we applied comparative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis to characterize differentially expressed proteins in HA-CHIP over-expressed and endogenous CHIP depleted MC3T3-E1 stable cell lines. Three candidate proteins were identified by mass spectrometry. One of the proteins, nucleobindin-1 (NUCB1), interacted with CHIP. Protein levels of NUCB1 and CHIP were negatively correlated during osteoblast differentiation. Our results confirm that this approach can be utilized to discover new candidate substrates. Furthermore, our findings suggest that CHIP-mediated down-regulation of NUCB1 might play a role in osteoblast differentiation. The preosteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1 and 293T cells were cultured in minimum essential media (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Stable cell lines were maintained in MEM containing 400 Human influenza hemaglutinin (HA) tagged wild type and mutated CHIP constructs, HA-CHIP, HA-CHIP (K30A), HA-CHIP (H260Q), and Hsp70 constructs used for over-expression in 293T cells, and vector-based siRNA targeting Hsp70 or EGFP were kindly supplied by Dr. Zhijie Chang. The HA-CHIP (K30R) expression construct was generated by introducing a GCG (A) to AGG (R) substitution into the CHIP (K30A) gene sequence using an overlap extension PCR strategy. The NUCB1-FLAG expression construct was generated by inserting the ORF from a plasmid kindly supplied by Dr. Marc Pouliot with an added C-terminal FLAG tag into pEF/Bos/Neo at 293T cells were grown to 50% confluence in 6-well plates and transfected with 2.5 Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis was carried out as previously described Cells were lysed in 2 Total RNA was extracted, and reverse transcribed as previously described Two million cells were harvested and lysed on ice for 30 The in vivo ubiquitination assay was performed as described Forty thousand MC3T3-E1 preosteoblast cells were seeded into 100 One-way ANOVA and post hoc multiple comparisons were performed using SPSS10. Statistical significance was assessed at To identify novel substrates for CHIP, the wild type MC3T3-E1 cell line, MC3T3-E1 cell lines stably over-expressing HA-CHIP by transfection of a HA-CHIP expression plasmid and selected by G418 (MC3T3-E1 OE, clone 2# and clone 8#), and MC3T3-E1 cell lines with depletion of endogenous CHIP by stable transfection of a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting endogenous CHIP mRNA (MC3T3-E1 KD, clone 9# and clone 20#) were subjected to comparative proteomics analysis. For each independent experiment, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of protein extracts from the wild type MC3T3-E1 cell line, one MC3T3-E1 OE cell line and one MC3T3E1 KD cell line were performed in parallel to ensure maximum comparability. To verify the results of proteomic analysis, Western blotting assays were conducted to detect the protein levels of NUCB1, Cytb5 and Flna in whole cell lysates of MC3T3-E1 OE, KD and the corresponding mock control cell lines. As shown in We also measured relative To investigate whether NUCB1 is an E3 ligase substrate for CHIP, we co-expressed NUCB1-FLAG with increasing amounts of HA-CHIP in 293T cells. We found that the NUCB1-FLAG protein decreased in the presence of HA-CHIP in a dose dependent manner ( As an E3 ligase, CHIP targets its substrate through the ubiquitination process. We, therefore, examined the effect of CHIP on NUCB1 ubiquitination. To accomplish this, we co-expressed NUCB1-FLAG and polyhistidine-tagged ubiquitin in 293T cells with a control vector and either wild type HA-CHIP, the HA-CHIP (K30A) mutant which lacks the ability to bind to Hsp90 and Hsp/Hsc70 chaperones, or the HA-CHIP (H260Q) mutant which cannot bind cognate E2, thus abolishing E3 ligase activity. Ubiquitinated NUCB1 was precipitated under denaturing conditions and analyzed by immunoblotting with the anti-FLAG antibody. As shown in To understand how CHIP down-regulates NUCB1 expression, we analyzed the interaction between CHIP and NUCB1. As shown in To study whether Hsp70 alone facilitates NUCB1 down-regulation, we co-expressed NUCB1-FLAG with Hsp70 in 293T cells. We then used vector-based RNAi targeting Hsp70 to knock down endogenous Hsp70 gene, and investigated the expression of NUCB1-FLAG with or without HA-CHIP. As shown in To investigate the physiological role of CHIP in NUCB1 down-regulation, we induced the differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells with CHIP was previously shown to be involved in degradation of caspases. Caspase-3 activation is increased in CHIP knockout mice Nucleobindin-1 is a secreted DNA binding protein capable of increasing anti-DNA antibody production and binding to nucleosomal-laddered DNA and was initially cloned in a lupus-prone MRL/l mouse derived cell line Our study attempted to discover new CHIP targets and associated proteins during osteoblast differentiation. NUCB1 was identified as a novel CHIP binding partner using a comparative two-dimensional method. In 1995, NUCB1 was reported to be one of the minor constituents in the mineralized matrix of bovine bone Chaperons such as Hsp70 seems to be important for the CHIP-NUCB1 interaction as well as CHIP-mediated NUCB1 down-regulation, since a mutated form of CHIP lacking chaperon binding ability cannot effectively bind to NUCB1 ( Although EKLQAANAEDIKSGKLSR from NUCB1 was identified as a ubiquitinated peptide in human Jurkat T cells using a COmbined FRActional DIagonal Chromatography (COFRADIC) technology Within the current study, comparative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis was applied to characterize the proteins associated with CHIP in an osteoblast cell line. NUCB1 was identified as a new CHIP-interacting protein down-regulated by CHIP via both proteasomal dependent and independent pathways. Since NUCB1 expression is associated with lymph node metastasis in gastric adenocarcinomas The authors declare that they have no competing interests. We thank Dr. Zhijie Chang (Tsinghua University, Beijing, China) for kindly providing HA-CHIP expression constructs, vector-based siRNA targeting CHIP (CHIP RNAi), or EGFP (EGFP RNAi), MC3T3-E1 cell lines with HA-CHIP expression or endogenous CHIP knockdown, and polyclonal antibody recognizing endogenous CHIP. We thank Dr. Marc Pouliot (Laval University, Quebec, Canada) for the generous gift of the Nucleobindin-1 expression construct. We appreciate the help of Dr. Dacheng He and Dr. Lingyun Huang (Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China) for Q-TOF analysis. This work was supported by grants from the