The wide bubble size distributions (<2mm to >10mm) generated by jetting spargers have taxed the McGill bubble size analyser methodology. A revised image processing protocol is proposed (“alternative” filter) which includes selecting bubbles on the basis of the holes (bright centres) characteristic of the bubble images in two-phase systems. This allowed for the inclusion of small and large bubbles, while excluding bubble clusters. For the jetting sparger case, the alternative filter produced more regular distributions than the prior (“standard” filter) procedure based primarily on shape factor. Standard and alternative filters gave essentially the same output for narrow distributions, those typical of mechanical cells. The alternative filter revealed trends in the response of a jetting sparger to frother dosage and gas rate formerly obscured by the standard filter.Need for an accurate method to determine bubble size distribution in two- and three-phase systems has led to the development of a variety of measurement techniques. Among the simplest are those based on photographic images, which have seen significant advances over the past 25 years. Ranging from simple photography through the side of a flat-sided vessel ( By virtue of its angled window, the McGill bubble size analyser (MBSA) yields an approximately single plane of bubbles that are imaged and subsequently processed to give output distributions of at least 10,000 bubbles ( The image analysis software used with the MBSA relies on user inputs to distinguish between objects and background, and to set limiting values for filters determining which objects are counted. Ideally, only single bubbles would be counted, with foreign objects and bubble clusters excluded. A threshold value is first applied to the greyscale image. All pixels with a greyscale value above this value are considered black, while those below are considered white, where groupings of black pixels are deemed objects. The appropriate value for a given image is based both on the greyscale of the image background, and on the contrast between the objects and background. The value selected must be high enough to allow for the black pixels of the bubble perimeter to close (i.e., define a complete bubble), yet low enough to avoid the addition of extra pixels (due to the gradient in greyscale between the background and the bubble, In order to distinguish between single bubbles and other objects (i.e., dark background areas and bubble clusters), filters set by the operator are applied to each object, in this case minimum and maximum diameters, and minimum shape factor. A discussion on the implications of the shape factor criterion follows. This image analysis process has shown the McGill technique successful in trials typically involving bubble populations between 0.2 and 3 Shape factor (as defined in Eq. The potential for bias against large bubbles with reduced shape factors due to diminished sphericity also exists. A further complication is introduced: The shape of these bubbles fluctuates as they rise, i.e., the same bubble has multiple shape factors. In many practical systems, but particularly those with wide bubble size distributions, it is rare that a uniform minimum shape factor value can be set such that all single bubbles are counted, while all foreign objects and bubble clusters are ignored. It was due to the potential biasing of the output distribution that an alternative method of analysing bubble images was devised. A filtering method based on individual bubble characteristics, independent of bubble geometry is the objective. In air–water applications, since a single bubble features a single bright spot (the hole), identifying single bubbles is possible by selecting objects by the number of holes present. The procedure contains two filters. First, any objects containing no holes are removed, as are objects with more than one hole and a shape factor below 0.8. By setting the minimum number of holes to one, small dark spots in the background are eliminated. Inclusion of bubbles with high shape factors and more than one hole was found necessary, as large bubbles have a greater greyscale gradient, and thus are more prone to artefact holes appearing in the perimeter. It was noted that bubble clusters often had relatively high shape factors, but were excluded by setting the minimum shape factor of 0.8. The occurrence of single, large bubbles with shape factors below 0.8 was visually assessed as rare. Generally, large bubbles with low shape factors were captured as part of bubble clusters, justifying their exclusion. Remaining in the accepted data set are all bubbles with one hole, large bubbles with high shape factor and clusters comprising of two bubbles where the image of one is not closed. The latter, surprisingly, can account on occasion for up to 5% of the objects counted. These objects are removed by the second filter, which compares the area of the object with the area of a circle having the same maximum radius as the object. In the case of the undesirable objects, the ratio is low, so these objects are eliminated. The alternative filter is automated. Due to the reliance on holes, the application is strictly two-phase. To evaluate the performance of the alternative filter, several comparisons were conducted using both images and output bubble size distributions. The image comparison was performed by (i) identifying objects included by one filter and not the other, and (ii) objects counted by visual inspection and not the alternative filter. Visual inspection can be considered the absolute technique. The comparison was performed on a large number of randomly selected images from a jetting sparger (an example is shown in In the case of the jetting sparger, it is clear that neither method is ideal. While the standard filter counts some bubble clusters and background objects not counted by the alternative filter, some background objects are counted by the alternative filter and not by the standard method. The alternative filter does, however, reduce the number of undesirable objects counted. It can also be seen that some single, irregular shaped bubbles are counted that would not otherwise be counted using the standard filter. On comparison with the visual method, the alternative filter does not include some seemingly spherical bubbles. Upon higher magnification the reason becomes apparent: For some bubbles, while the bubble perimeter appears closed (i.e., is counted visually), pixel-by-pixel examination showed the object was not in fact closed, leading to its rejection by the filter. In the case of the mechanical cell, there is a clear improvement when the alternative filter is applied: While the alternative filter did not detect any additional objects, it did discount clusters of bubbles otherwise counted as single bubbles by the standard filter and only one additional object was counted using the visual technique.  In the case of the jetting sparger, the standard method clearly counts more small objects, which are not counted using the alternative filter. It is likely that these small objects (clearly deforming the distribution below 0.5 The mechanical cell distributions show little variation in the mean value and shape of the distribution, indicating that little gain is achieved by applying the alternative filter. The mean and standard deviation values for the standard filter distribution were 0.51 Another means of evaluating the effectiveness of the alternative processing method is by comparing the number ( The improved image processing indicated by the alternative filter prompted a return to previous datasets from tests designed to characterise jetting spargers. Bubble size produced by a jetting sparger with a 5 Consistent trends were evident in the bubble number size distribution ( When examined by volume ( The response to frother and gas flow rate help speculate the mechanism of bubble formation from jetting spargers. The large population of fine bubbles (peak <1 The large bubbles are probably produced by turbulent breakup at the end of the jet. Large volumes of air break away and are subsequently divided through hydrodynamic forces until the stable maximum bubble size is reached ( Compared with the standard shape factor filter, the alternative filter shows a marked improvement in counting accuracy, particularly in the case of wide bubble size distributions. The software currently available considers a hole to be one or more white pixels surrounded by black pixels. However, particularly in large bubbles, there is a gradient from light to dark grey on both sides of the perimeter. Therefore, it is not uncommon to have small holes present in the bubble perimeter. If the definition of a hole were altered to a defined minimum number of pixels, then large bubbles would be more likely to have only one (i.e., the true) hole, allowing for more true bubbles to be counted and removing all dependence on the shape factor criterion as a filtering technique. The greatest limitation is that the alternative filter is applicable strictly to two-phase systems. Bubbles in three-phase images often do not have a bright spot due to a coating of solid particles, and so cannot be discriminated using this filter. Revisions to the shape factor approach may be successful ( Data at the coarse end suffered from poor counting statistics: Counting may have to exceed 100,000 to achieve reliable metrics ( Using the proposed method, characterisation of a jetting sparger is now feasible. A clear A new filter developed to automate selection of objects during processing of two-phase bubble images has been presented. By removing the primary reliance on shape factor as a filter in the current methodology, and instead considering the number of holes present in the object, biasing is reduced. While little advantage is noted for distributions featuring a narrow size range of roughly spherical bubbles (i.e., those from a mechanical cell in the presence of frother), significant gain is made in the accuracy of wide bubble size distributions, for example generated by a jetting sparger. When Sauter and number mean values were plotted, a trend similar to that encountered with other bubble generating devices was present using the proposed method. This indicates consistent distribution shape, and increased reproducibility. This improved data processing quality was used for initial characterisation of a jetting sparger. Frother and flow rate gave little impact on the coarse portion of the distribution, implying that large bubble formation is not influenced by coalescence. At the fine end frother and flow rate did have an impact, i.e., coalescence is a factor. This difference in response between the coarse and fine end suggests two bubble production mechanisms. Funding was initiated under the Industry Chair in Mineral Processing co-sponsored by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Inco, Falconbridge, Teck Cominco, Noranda, and now Corem and SGS-Lakefield Research. The authors would like to thank Helin Girgin for providing the mechanical cell data, and Jorge Torrealba-Vargas for his programming assistance.