Over the last 35 years, there has been a debate concerning the interaction of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria and sulfide minerals. Two basic positions are held. The proponents of the direct mechanism argue that the bacteria possess a specific biological mechanism to degrade the mineral and thereby gain energy directly from the sulfide mineral. On the other hand, the proponents of the indirect mechanism argue that it is the ferric ions in solution that dissolve the mineral, and the bacteria gain their energy requirements from regenerating the ferric ions. The indirect mechanism undoubtedly occurs, but proponents of the direct mechanism argue that it is not the dominant route. In other words, the debate hinges on the kinetics of each of these possible paths. The evidence presented in the published literature both for and against each of these mechanisms has been critically examined. Arguments based on stoichiometry, bacterial attachment or observations of the mineral surface cannot resolve this debate. Since the critical factor is the kinetics of each proposed path, only kinetic studies can resolve the debate. Based on the evidence of the kinetic studies that were performed, a resolution to the debate is suggested.Sulfide minerals, such as pyrite and sphalerite, are leached by ferric sulfate. This reaction produces ferrous sulfate and other dissolved products. The ferrous sulfate is re-oxidized to ferric sulfate by bacteria. These reactions can be written as: However, in 1964 Thus, the distinguishing feature between the two proposals is the role played by ferric ions in the dissolution of the mineral. In the ‘indirect mechanism’ represented by In spite of much research and debate, the questions central to the proposal of a direct mechanism remained unanswered. In this paper, the necessary and sufficient conditions are discussed in detail, and the state of the evidence for the direct mechanism is established. The results of our recent work are summarised, and a resolution of the debate is suggested. It is clear from the discussion above that the sufficient condition is that the leaching of the mineral is due to a biological oxidant, not ferric ions or oxygen. The proposal that the direct mechanism exists is based on the assertion that the rate of leaching is increased by the action of the bacteria. Even though this assertion concerns the significance of the direct mechanism, rather than a requirement for its existence, it is a necessary condition for the debate to have any validity at all. The attachment of bacteria is a necessary condition for the existence of the direct contact mechanism. However, it is not a sufficient condition, because of the existence of the indirect contact mechanism, illustrated in A number of authors have observed that the surface of the mineral is pitted, or that there are indentations in the surface where bacteria had been attached. Holmes studied the surface of single crystals of pyrite leached in the presence and absence of bacteria Having observed the formation of depressions on the surface of sulfide minerals, In a detailed study of the electrochemistry of the leaching of pyrite, An argument that has presented itself in various subtle forms is based on the stoichiometry of the growth of bacteria. For example,  A necessary condition is that the action of the bacteria is to increase the rate of leaching of the mineral. This is a central question to this debate in that it concerns the significance of the debate. In spite of its importance, no detailed studies of the kinetics of leaching have been conducted, other than those by Crundwell et al.   Other authors have attempted to study the leaching of sulfide minerals with and without bacteria in the absence of iron  All studies that compare the rates of dissolution of a mineral in the presence and the absence of bacteria have been conducted under highly uncontrolled conditions. The leaching of the mineral by ferric ions always occurs, and the oxidation of ferrous ions by the bacteria always occurs. As a result, the trajectories of the concentrations of ferric and ferrous ions in the leaching experiment with bacteria will be different from the experiment without bacteria. If the concentrations of ferric and ferrous ions in solution are not controlled, a direct comparison of the rates of leaching with and without bacteria is of no use. Since all of the previous studies of the rates of leaching with and without bacteria have been conducted under uncontrolled conditions, the conclusions of these studies are rejected. From the survey of the previous work presented above, it is clear that prior to establishing the identity of possible biological leaching in the direct mechanism, it is critical to establish, in an unambiguous manner, whether the bacteria enhance the rate of leaching (at the same conditions in solution). No previous work has established accurate rates of leaching. Without this data, the debate has little validity. However, this is not easy. Because the bacteria replenish the ferric ions in solution, which does not happen in the chemical leaching experiment, the concentrations of ferric and ferrous ions in the batch experiment with bacteria will be different from those in the experiment without bacteria if these concentrations are not controlled. No previous experiments had attempted to control these concentrations. Consequently, we invented a new apparatus that controlled the conditions in solution, so that we were able to measure accurately the rates of biotic and abiotic leaching at the same solution conditions. The rate of leaching of sulfide minerals without bacteria is described by the electrochemical mechanism The leaching of pyrite occurs at a higher rate in the presence of bacteria than in the absence of bacteria under all the conditions studied. Analysis of the rate of reaction as a function of concentration indicates that the order of reaction with respect to ferric ions is the same in the presence and the absence of bacteria. The reaction order is 0.5. However, the order of reaction with respect to H It is important to appreciate the significance of the measurement of the orders of reaction, and their meaning in kinetic studies. The orders of reaction are the primary data used in establishing kinetic mechanisms in chemistry. The mechanism of bacterial leaching has always been cast in kinetic terms. No previous work in bacterial leaching has established the orders of reaction, and this is the only work that has explained these orders of reaction. It is also important not to confuse the kinetic analysis with stoichiometric analysis. Having established that the presence of bacteria enhanced the rate of leaching but that they do not change the mechanism of leaching, This means that the increase in the leaching rate of pyrite is a result of the indirect contact mechanism. The mechanism that explains our results is shown in  Recent work performed under extremely well controlled conditions has shown that attached bacteria may increase the rate of dissolution (at the same conditions in solution) in two cases. These are: (i) if the rate of dissolution of the mineral is affected by the formation of a porous layer of sulfur by a phenomenon known as product layer diffusion, then the removal of the sulfur by the bacteria will result in an increase in the rate of leaching. (ii) If the dissolution of the mineral increases with increasing pH at the mineral surface, then the attachment of bacteria to the surface may result in an increase in the pH at the surface, which increases the rate of reaction. In both cases, detailed examination of the kinetics of leaching revealed that even though attached bacteria increased the rate of dissolution under some conditions, the mechanism of leaching was the chemical dissolution by ferric ions.