Suitable electrochemical conditions for using zirconium as a cathode in the electrochemical recovery of silver from photographic fixing solutions were studied by cyclic voltammetry. The influence of the thin, natural zirconium oxide layer was investigated. A flowing system was tested to simulate industrial electrolysis and determine the recovery efficiency, the compactness and purity of the recovered silver. The influence of deposition potential and volumetric flow rate influences were studied. The electrowinning of silver is possible with an applied potential lower than 0.9 V between the cathode and a carbon graphite anode. The final Ag concentration in the bath was 20 mg/l, and 98% of the total silver was recovered with an electrical efficiency close to 92%. Silver deposits were very easy to remove from the electrode.Electroreduction appears to be one of the best processes for metal recovery from waste waters, at least for environmental protection, because no other polluting species are induced. In photographic baths, silver forms various complexes with the anions, such as S Massive cathodes have been principally made of stainless steel or graphite Porous or three-dimensional cathodes with various compositions have been described, for example carbon felt The nature of the photosensitive film causes the presence in the baths of halide ions which are very corrosive for numerous materials. Carbon graphite electrodes are corrosion resistant, but have a poor mechanical resistance. Zirconium is always covered with an oxide layer insulating the metal from corrosion, but allowing electroreduction processes In this work, we first studied the electrochemical properties of a commercial fixing solution by cyclic voltammetry on zirconium and silver electrodes. The same study was performed after an addition of silver ions using freshly polished zirconium electrode and the efficiency was also tested with a more oxidized zirconium electrode. Finally a circulating flow cell and a spent fixing solution, available from a photographic laboratory, were used to simulate industrial conditions. Experimental conditions were studied in order to limit the reduction of the fixing solution and silver deposit contamination Characterizations of the deposits were made by scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray diffraction. Rest potential determination, cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry were carried out using a PGP 20-1 three electrodes potentiostat (Radiometer, France) monitored by a PS-1 IBM computer with the ELCOM 201 software. The potential between working and auxiliary electrodes was recorded with an L 6512 device (Linseis, Germany). Electrolyte was circulated using a centrifugal pump (Eheim, Germany). SEM examinations and EDS analysis, were carried out in the microscopy centre of the University Claude Bernard, Lyon I (CMEABG) using an S800 scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan) and a CAMEBAX (Cameca, France). X-ray diffraction was done with a D500 diffractometer (Siemens, Germany) in the centre Henri Longchambon of the University Claude Bernard, Lyon I. Determination of silver concentration in the fixing solutions was carried out by ICP using a JY 38-3 spectrophotometer (Jobin-Yvon, France). For voltammetric studies, the working electrode was an EDI rotating disc electrode (Tacussel, France). The silver and zirconium rods were purchased from Aldrich (USA) and were 99% purity. They were embedded in a Teflon rod, the geometric electrode area was 0.0314 cm For the experiments performed in the flow cell, the cathode was a 3.14 cm During the preliminary studies, the rotating disc electrode was chosen rather than a rotating cylinder principally for three reasons: first it would be difficult to reproduce surface states by polishing a cylinder, second the deposits recovery was easier from disc and third the hydrodynamic conditions for rotating disc were closer than that obtained in the flow circulating system tested here. The fixing reagent, purchased from Ilford (UK) ref. Hypam, was based on aqueous ammonium thiosulphate and, as suggested by the manufacturer, it was 1/5 v/v diluted. AgNO In a previous work on zirconium electrodes we have shown that oxide forms instantaneously in air after abrasion, and we estimated the minimum layer thickness to be 1.9 nm In order to avoid any uncontrolled electrochemical oxidation of zirconium by starting cyclic voltammetry from too high potentials, it was necessary to know the instantaneous rest potentials of polished and natural zirconium in the various solutions. Measurements were done in the diluted fixing solution (1/5 v/v) and in the same solution after 7 g l Results are reported in Because during silver electrowinning the cathode became progressively a silver electrode, the fixing solution reduction was studied on both zirconium and silver. All the experiments were done with a sweep rate of 500 mV min The voltammograms, reported on The voltammogram of freshly polished zirconium in the fixing solution containing 7 g l On In a few minutes, i.e., three to four cycles (6 min) the role of the oxide layer disappeared because the silver deposit became more important and the nature of the electrode changed from zirconium to silver. Consequently, the performances of this electrode would be strongly influenced by the deposit adherence to the electrode surface. Since the reduction of the fixing solution occurred on the silver electrode for potentials lower than −0.55 V vs. SCE, the deposition potential must be chosen between −0.43 and −0.55 V vs. SCE to obtain pure silver with a high current efficiency. Depositions were performed using the rotating disc electrode for 22 h in 75 cm Influences of surface oxide thickness, deposition potential and electrode rotation speed were studied. Freshly polished (2 nm oxide-covered) and “natural oxidized” zirconium electrodes (6 nm oxide layer) were tested, rotation speed was 2000 or 500 min According to deposition conditions, silver deposits appeared powdery or as pellets more or less compact. On After 22 h of deposition, all pellets fell in the cell due to an insufficient adherence. Silver powder was recovered by filtration, total deposit was rinsed, dried and then weighed in order to determine the percents of silver recovered from the initial solution. The electrical efficiency was calculated from the electrical charges computed by integration of the Rotation speed could be related to a linear flow rate by the relation: Applied to a 5-mm diameter electrode with 2000 min This study was done using the flow circuit cell ( The discharge of the pump was calculated as follows: A typical experiment was run as follows. (a) A 0.9l unknown spent solution was placed in the holder. Previous determination by ICP indicated that silver concentration was 3.2 g l (b) The anode, a large plate of graphite (about 30 cm (c) The reference electrode was located between anode and cathode. (d) Temperature was 25°C and an increase of 1°C in the spent solution was observed during electrolysis. (e) The cathode was raised to −0.600 V vs. SCE during 1/2 h to start the deposition process and then the potential was fixed at −0.500 V vs. SCE. The time variations of the reduction current and of the potential difference between anode and cathode during deposition with −0.5 V vs. SCE applied, are reported on The mass transport coefficient It was found to be 0.0013 cm s Electrolysis was stopped after 128 h, when the reduction current reached a weak value, which was constant. Silver concentration in the final solution was found to be 0.020 g l Four identical experiments were run according to the same procedure. It was found that silver recovery reached 98±1%, the electrical efficiency 93±1% and that the specific weight of the silver deposit was 6.9±0.1 g cm On From these experiments it appeared that zirconium was an interesting cathode material for silver electrowinning from spent fixing solutions. The natural oxide layer, far from being a disadvantage, allowed weakly sticking and sufficiently compact silver deposits, easily removed from the electrode. Although the final silver concentration was about 20 mg l The current efficiency obtained in this work, despite a non-optimized system, was very encouraging because it certainly could be improved. It was demonstrated that a carefully chosen potential avoids any side reaction, i.e., sulphide formation, even at low silver concentration. Despite a long recovery time, 98% efficiency after 100 h, no passivation phenomenon was observed and the purity of silver remained above 99%. The high cost is certainly a serious handicap for using zirconium, but it could be warranted by its great resistance to corrosion especially when chloride or bromide ions are present, as occurs in spent fixing solution.