Au nanoparticles and Au, Ag bimetal nanoparticles separately dispersed Al2O3 composite films were prepared by sol-gel method. The microstructure and optical property of the films were studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ultraviolet–visible (UV/vis) absorption spectra. Gold in Au/Al2O3, and gold and silver in AuAg/Al2O3 composite films exist in the state of metal Au and Ag, and they are basically spherical nanoparticles. The optical absorption peaks of Au nanoparticles due to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in Au/Al2O3 films were observed in the range of 530–550 nm, and their absorptions intensity with the increase of Au contents. There are two SPR peaks corresponding to Au and Ag nanoparticles, which were observed in the range of 530–550 nm, 400–420 nm, respectively. The intensities of two SPR peaks change with various molar ratios of Au and Ag nanoparticles. The SPR peaks of Au nanoparticles intensity, and those of Ag nanoparticles weaken with the increase of Au contents, and decrease of Ag contents. The SPR speaks of Au and Ag nanoparticles shift slightly to the longer wavelength with an increase of Au and Ag contents in AuAg/Al2O3 composite films.Composite films consisting of noble metal nanoparticles are gaining extreme attention because of their potential applications in optical switching In the past decades, much attention has been paid to the changes of volume fraction of metal nanoparticles, and the composite of nanoparticles embedded in various matrices (TiO It is very difficult to prepare Au-Ag bimetal separately dispersed composite films because of nearly identical bulk lattice constants of Au and Ag In this paper, Au nanoparticles and Au, Ag bimetal nanoparticles separately dispersed Al Aluminum trisecbutoxide ((C HAuCl The Au/Al The crystalline phases of the films were characterized by XRD (Cu Ka radiation with a wavelength of λ = 0.15418 nm). The microstructures of the films were observed by TEM (JEM-100CG). The XPS spectra were measured using monochromatic Al Ka radiation (1486.6 eV) as the X-ray source (PHI-5300 ESCA). The absorption spectra of thin films were measured at room temperature in air by a UV–visible spectrophotometer (LAMBDA 950).   In order to verify the chemical state of gold and silver, Au    The SPR peaks of Au/Al  Au nanoparticles and Au, Ag bimetal nanoparticles dispersed Al This research was supported by