Reductive leaching of LiCoO2 from spent lithium ion battery was investigated in terms of reaction variables. The leaching efficiency of LiCoO2 increased with increasing temperature, and concentration of HNO3, but with decreasing solid/liquid (S/L) ratio. Li and Co from LiCoO2 were leached over 95% with the addition of 1.7 vol.% H2O2 as a reducing agent. This is due to the reduction of Co3+ to Co2+ which can be readily dissolved. The dissolution rates of Co and Li were inversely proportional to their respective concentrations in the solution. Apparent activation energies of 12.5 and 11.4 kcal/mol were obtained for Co and Li, respectively. This indicates that the dissolution of LiCoO2 is controlled by surface chemical reaction.Recycling of lithium batteries has become important because, due to their characteristics of lightness and good performance Spent lithium primary batteries cannot be disposed of unless the contained metallic lithium is properly removed, due to its explosive nature. Also, lithium cobalt oxide is adopted as cathodic active material; therefore, valuable metals such as cobalt and lithium have to be recycled In this study, acid leaching has been applied to recover cobalt and lithium from cathodic active material of spent LIB. The cathodic active material was separated by physical processes involving thermal treatment, shredding, and vibrating screening as shown in Reductive leaching of the cathodic active material with H A LIB consists of a plastic casing and several cell units. Each cell unit has a cathode, an anode, an organic separator, an organic electrolyte, and a Ni-coated steel casing. In the cathode, LiCoO Cathodic active material from lithium ion secondary battery was separated by a series of thermal treatment, high-speed shredding, calcination steps Leaching of LiCoO The concentration of various metallic ions was measured using an atomic absorption spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer M3100) and inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (JY-38). The solid phases in the cathodic active material were identified using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Cu-Kα).  To obtain the optimum conditions for the reductive leaching of LiCoO The leaching behavior with different S/L ratios is presented in   Assuming that leaching of Co and Li has no interdependence and the dissolution rate is inversely proportional to their respective ionic concentrations ( An investigation of leaching of LiCoO By reductive leaching with the addition of hydrogen peroxide as a reducing agent, the leaching efficiency increased by 45% for Co and 10% for Li compared with that in only nitric acid leaching. This behavior seems to be due to the reduction of Co From the kinetic study, the dissolution rates of Co and Li were found to be inversely proportional to their respective ionic concentrations. The apparent activation energy was obtained as 12.5 and 11.4 kcal/mol for Co and Li, respectively. This indicates that the dissolution of LiCoO