Microbially induced calcium carbonate precipitation (MICP) is emerging as a sustainable technology for improved construction materials. In this technique, calcium carbonate is deposited in the pores of substrates such as sand and concrete. As the technology moves from laboratory to field new metrics and field measurement techniques are required to ensure that the results achieved at the laboratory are replicated. In the scaled up technique it is not possible to collect samples from deep inside the substrate for direct measurement. This paper explores some indirect indicators of MICP that can be easily monitored in large scale applications. Bacterial fluid has been passed through sand columns of varying grain sizes. The rate of flow is monitored for ten days. The effluent has been tested for pH and electrical conductivity to evaluate their potential for ensuring MICP. The residual urea and calcium in the effluent has been monitored to have a quantitative estimate of MICP. At the end of the tests the quantity of carbonate deposited in the sand columns is measured. A correlation between the residual reactants and the carbonate deposition is developed. An approximate expression for different grain sizes has been developed. This study demonstrates the utility of indirect measurement techniques as flow rate, pH, conductivity, urea and calcium consumption as potential indicators of efficient MICP in sand media.Research on microbially induced calcium carbonate precipitation (MICP) is gaining momentum in civil engineering. Taking inspiration from examples in related areas such as geological formations In case of porous monolithic materials such as limestone, mortar and concrete, MICP is performed either immersing the substrate in the bacterial fluid or the fluid is sprayed on the surface. Understandably, MICP remains restricted within a few millimetres from the surface. Several experiments have reported that MICP has reduced water absorption After the success of laboratory scale experiments in-situ soil strengthening at the field (bio-grouting) has been attempted where the biological fluid is injected in the soil. It has been observed that although the technique works well for surface treatments, coarse grained materials and mixed-in-place applications, but in case of fine grained materials the injection well clogs rapidly In field applications it is imperative to ensure that MICP happens in the desired depths of the granular material. However, it is not feasible to collect samples from deeper areas and test the amount of deposition. Thus, laboratory experiments must identify reliable indirect measurement techniques. This paper explores a few indicators of MICP in a granular substrate. It is already mentioned that the bacterial fluid is passed through the granular material for MICP. When the fluid has passed through the grains and leaves the media it can be collected easily. The effluent can be analysed for estimating MICP inside the media. This paper attempts to arrive at two indicators from the analysis, (a) confirmation of MICP happening and (b) quantity of deposition. For both goals simple chemical analyses that can be easily performed at site have been adopted. To understand the principle a brief description of the process of MICP is included. Although there are a few variations, the popular process in MICP needs an ureolytic bacterium, urea, calcium chloride and nutrients. In the presence of ureolytic bacteria, 1 These products equilibrate in water to form bicarbonate, 1 In the presence of calcium ions this results in calcium carbonate precipitation (Eq. Deposition of calcium carbonate can happen in the inter-granular spaces or in the pores. Justifiably, the bacterial media must have access to the site for a successful deposition at the desired location. The dichotomy is that the solution that is supposed to block the gap must use the same gap to reach the site of deposition. Due to deposition, the gaps are likely to get progressively narrower. As a result, flow through them will reduce. Clearly, the topological distribution of grains plays a very important role. This paper investigates the rate of deposition in a sand media of varying grain sizes. It also demonstrates the efficacy of indirect indicators such as consumption of urea (Eq. Alkaliphilic strain of urease producing bacteria Locally available clean, dry, well graded, natural river sand was used in the present study ( For preparation of sand columns, slurry of sand of different grain sizes was filled into a plastic tube (height 7.6 Flow rate of the effluent from different columns was estimated by measuring the volume of fluid that was collected at the bottom of the columns at regular time intervals and dividing them by the corresponding time period. The effluent was removed and collected at the end of 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 After 10 The sand columns consolidated with carbonate crystals were analysed using Scanning Electron Microscopy (ZEISS EVO 50) equipped with EDX. The SEM observation was done under the following analytical condition: EHT All the experiments were performed in triplicates. The data were analysed by Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and the means were compared with Tukey’s test. All the analyses were performed using Graph Pad Prism software version 5.0. In order to investigate the effect of bio-calcification on various grain sized sand columns, the flow rate of the effluent was measured regularly up to ten days ( In case of sand columns of higher grain sizes, the flow reduced at a slower rate at the initial stages but the rate of reduction increased in later stages. This demonstrates that columns of higher grain sizes get restricted due to MICP and behave like to columns of lower gran sizes after some time. From the intersection of the bacterial column curves of higher a grain size with the control column curves of a lower grain size interesting conclusion of the effective grain size can be drawn. For example, bacterial column of 1.5 The effluent that came out of the columns was also investigated for change in pH ( The electrical conductivity of the effluent from both control and bacterial samples is presented in In an attempt to indirectly estimate the amount of carbonate precipitation, urea remaining in the effluent was also measured ( Soluble Ca The survival of bacterial cells in the effluent was checked by cfu/ml as well as CTC fluorescent dye ( Urease activity of bacterial cells in the effluent was also investigated in order to estimate urea hydrolysis efficacy in different columns at different time intervals ( The layer of white precipitates on the surface of bacterial treated columns was also characterized for SEM EDX and XRD analysis. SEM analysis clearly depicted the formation of carbonate crystals within the sand grains ( Mineral constituents of the upper layer of bacterial columns and control columns upon characterization with EDX showed high amounts of calcium in bacterial columns and not in case of control columns ( At the end of the exposure period all columns were cut open and the CaCO In the graphs, the The amount of urea and Ca The coefficients of the relationship have been found from the experimental results presented in The present paper identifies the need for development of indirect quantification of MICP for site measurements. This study explores development of indirect indicators that detect onset and progression of MICP in granular materials at different depths. The indicators used in this paper can be easily evaluated at site through chemical analysis. The flow in the small grain size columns slow down rapidly due to MICP. The larger grain size columns allow higher initial flow; but they too get eventually plugged. It is observed that it is possible to indirectly determine both onset and progression of MICP through chemical analysis of the effluents. The pH and the electrical conductivity of the columns with bacteria were clearly higher than the control columns. Thus, they are very good indicators of onset of MICP. However, they do not indicate the rate of MICP. Urea consumed by the columns is a very good indicator of the rate of MICP. By analysing the effluent for residual urea, a good insight of the state of MICP can be gained. The efficacy of MICP has been found to decrease with depth indicating higher potential of aerobic bacteria for surface deposition irrespective of the grain sizes. The non-dimensional relation of the ratio of urea and calcium chloride consumed in the columns has a linear relationship with the percentage of deposition of calcium carbonate. This is true for all grain sizes. A relationship between these two parameters for any grain size has been developed. The relationship should be useful for indirect estimation of MICP for any grain size ranging between 0.2 Further experimentation is necessary to determine the effect of mixed grain sizes on MICP and possible extension of the approximate formula.