Heterocoagulation between various fine mineral particles contained within a mineral suspension with different structural and surface chemistry can interfere with the ability of the flotation processes to selectively separate the minerals involved. This paper examines the interactions between chalcopyrite (a copper mineral) and pyrite (an iron mineral often bearing gold) as they approach each other in suspensions with added chemicals, and relates the results to the experimental data for the flotation recovery and selectivity. The heterocoagulation was experimentally studied using the electrophoretic light scattering (ELS) technique and was modelled by incorporating colloidal forces, including the van der Waals, electrostatic double layer and hydrophobic forces. The ELS results indicated that pyrite has a positive zeta potential (ζ) up to its isoelectric point (IEP) at ∼ pH 2.2, while chalcopyrite has a positive ζ up to its IEP at ∼pH 5.5. This produces heterocoagulation of chalcopyrite with pyrite between pH 2.2 and pH 5.5. The heterocoagulation was confirmed by the ELS spectra measured with a ZetaPlus instrument from Brookhaven and by small-scale flotation experiments.Flotation is a process for separation of particles according to their surface properties and is widely used in the recovery of valuable minerals, in the wastewater treatment and in the de-inking of wastepaper. In the flotation process used in the mineral processing industry, the ore is crushed and ground to less than about 200 μm to liberate the minerals, before reagents are added to alter the mineral surface properties. The surface of the wanted minerals is rendered hydrophobic, which allows the particles to attach themselves to air bubbles, while leaving the surface of the unwanted particles not attachable to air bubbles. The attached particles are separated from the suspension of unwanted particles by the bubble rise. The interactions between particles, and between a particle and an air bubble control the flotation separation process. The bubble–particle interaction determines the flotation kinetics and recovery, and is now investigated with technologies such as atomic force microscopy In the study of colloidal dispersions, an important area is the study of the stability of particulate material when dispersed within an aqueous media. Suspended in a medium, particles are subject to random collisions as a result of intrinsic Brownian motion Interactions which exist within a colloidal system include those due to the electrical double layers (EDL) and electrodynamic waves from various dipoles. These interactions form the basis for the noted DLVO theory. Hydrophobic forces were found to also play a role in the interaction between particles in colloidal systems Many researchers have studied the interactions between particles and bubbles in flotation, e.g. Heterocoagulation is usually described by the extended framework of the DLVO theory The model used to describe the EDL interaction energy, The ionic strength is measured in mol/L, and κ is measured in nm The van der Waals interaction energy, The most significant non-DLVO force for flotation systems is the so-called hydrophobic force. This force has been determined to be strongly attractive, increasing with the contact angle. Numerous researchers have used the surface force apparatus, e.g. The summation of the double-layer, van der Waals and hydrophobic interaction energies gives an good approximation of the total energy, From Eq. In the case of The surface charge on colloidal particles can arise from a number of mechanisms, including dissociation of acidic or basic groups on the particle surface, or adsorption of a charged species from solution. For most common mineral systems, the The samples of pyrite and chalcopyrite were purchased from Geological Specimen Supplies, Turramurra South (Sydney, NSW, Australia). The pyrite samples contain more than 95% pyrite, while the chalcopyrite specimens contain about 65% chalcopyrite, 32% covellite and 3% quartz. High purity de-ionised water was obtained from a ‘Milli-Q’ system and used in all experiments. pH control was achieved using dilute HCl and NaOH, not in combination, as the addition of salts compresses the EDL and alters Sodium isobutyl dithiophosphate (abbreviated to DTP), and isopropyl ethyl thionocarbamate (abbreviated to TC) were the reagents used in the experiments. These two surfactants are often employed as the collectors in the flotation separation of sulphide minerals. Both DTP and TC were supplied by Orica (Mining Chemicals) Pty Ltd (Australia) and were used without further purification. A Hamilton digital syringe was required to accurately dose the minerals with either of two surfactants. Grinding of the minerals was carried out using a Fritsch pulverisette mechanical mortar and pestle with zirconia balls for testing of the For the experimental determination of heterocoagulation using the electrophoretic light scattering technique and the measurements of the For the small-scale flotation experiments, a modified Hallimond tube was utilized. It had a chamber at the bottom with a magnetic stirrer to stop settlement of particles out of the bubble zone. The Hallimond tube was connected to a nitrogen flask. Single bubbles with a diameter of about 1.5 mm were produced through a nozzle at the gas flow rate at about 30 cm The experimental procedure involves grinding the minerals separately in a mortar and pestle. 2.5 g of each mineral sample was placed in the ceramic mortar with 100 ml of de-ionised water and agitated with the zirconia balls for 90 minutes. The slurry was then removed, screened to 100%–38 μm and made up to 500 ml, giving a slurry of 0.5% solids approximately (0.02 g of pyrite and 0.017 g of chalcopyrite was retained in the screen). 50 ml lots of these slurries were then utilised for the pH adjustments, ensuring that the acid and the base were never used together. If the pH adjustment exceeded the desired value, the sample was discarded (or more of the freshly ground slurry was added) to ensure that no electrolyte was formed. When the desired pH had been achieved a 12 ml sample of the solution was removed using a syringe and 4 ml of each mineral's slurry (total 8 ml) was used for the measurements of the ELS spectra for mineral mixtures, leaving 8 ml of each for the determinations for individual minerals, allowing five sets of runs for each sample. The ELS spectra and the zeta-potential at the peaks were recorded. For the A sample of chalcopyrite was ground by hand in a ceramic mortar and pestle and screened until one gram of the material was retained in a 53 μm screen after passing through a 150 μm screen. This gram was made up to 100 ml (1 wt.%) using de-ionised water. This slurry was made up to the required pH using sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or hydrochloric acid (HCl), but not the two together. A 30 ml sample of this was inserted into the stirred lower attachment for the modified Hallimond tube and a surfactant added at dose rates of 15, 25, and 35 g/t for sodium isobutyl dithiophosphate (DTP) and 1, 5, 15, 25, and 35 g/t for isopropyl ethyl thionocarbamate (TC). This was allowed to condition by stirring for 10 min, while nitrogen bubbles were moving through the slurry, before the top section of the cell was attached and filled to 250 ml (total volume) using de-ionised water at the required pH. A timer was started and the flotation was allowed to continue for 10 min. Early in the flotation and again prior to finishing, a measure of the rate of bubble formation was taken using a transducer, which measures the pressure variation in the gas line with the LabView software program. This program provides a graphical representation of the number of bubbles over a specified time, allowing a total number of bubbles used to be calculated. (The second measurement is to ensure that the rate of bubble formation has been constant over the entire 10 min of the experiment). Gas flow rate has been controlled using a flow rate meter set at 30 cm The same method was used for the flotation of pyrite, ensuring that the same amount of time passed between grinding and surfactant addition, to ensure a similar amount of oxidation had occurred on the pyrite surface in each experiment. Separate mineral samples were then made in the same manner mentioned above, which were mixed together in the Hallimond tube and allowed to stir for 5 min so that any interaction which might occur between the minerals had occurred before the addition of surfactant. Five minutes was again allowed for surfactant conditioning, and the procedure described for small-scale chalcopyrite flotation was followed. For the chemical analysis, the flotation products (concentrate and tailings) were dissolved with nitric acid at 70 °C. A stirring with a constant speed was applied until the samples were completely dissolved. The solutions were then filtered and utilised in the AAS. The major advantage of the employed ELS technique is that the measured Doppler frequency shift provides highly sensitive light scattering signals from all of the particles in the suspension, which show a distribution of electrophoretic mobilities for all the particles. For suspensions consisting of particles of one type, a monomodal (single-peak) electrophoretic spectrum is obtained and the median (peak) position of the spectrum gives the representative electrophoretic mobility of the particles. For suspensions consisting of two different types of minerals, the electropheretic spectra can be monomodal or bimodal, depending on whether or not the particles heterocoagulate. If the heterocoagulation of particles does not take place, the bimodal (double-peak) zeta-potential distributions appear, with one peak for one type of particles and the other peak for the second type of particles. The relative positions and heights of the double peaks can provide information on the degree of heterocoagulation and dispersion of particles in the binary mixtures. If the particles in the binary mixture heterocoagulate, the two characteristic peaks for single minerals merge into one, producing a single-peak spectrum characteristic for the heterocoagulated aggregates. An example of the heterocoagulation is shown in  The experimental observations described above can be explained theoretically by the colloidal interactions between particles. The total interaction energy In acidic medium (pH<5.5), the addition of surfactant has the effect of raising the The total interaction energy The experimental results for flotation are shown in It was shown in this paper that the monomodal and bimodal electrophoretic spectra could be effectively used to determine the heterocoagulation and dispersion interactions of chalcopyrite and pyrite minerals. The results of the electrophoretic light scattering studies were also confirmed by the flotation experiments, as well as by the colloidal force modelling: Chalcopyrite and pyrite heterocoagulate in the acidic medium, i.e. at pH<5.5, but do not coagulate in the alkaline medium in either the absence or the presence of DTP and TC flotation collectors. Selective flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite is possible at pH=10 and is impossible at pH=4. Recovery of the selective flotation for chalcopyrite with TC is significantly higher than with DTP. Electrophoretic light scattering is a useful technique to study heterocoagulation, non-coagulation interactions and to diagnose flotation selectivity. The authors wish to thank Orica (Mining Chemicals) Pty Ltd (Australia) for their support of this project.