The modeling of high velocity impact into brittle or quasibrittle solids is hampered by the unavailability of a constitutive model capturing the effects of material comminution into very fine particles. The present objective is to develop such a model, usable in finite element programs. The comminution at very high strain rates can dissipate a large portion of the kinetic energy of an impacting missile. The spatial derivative of the energy dissipated by comminution gives a force resisting the penetration, which is superposed on the nodal forces obtained from the static constitutive model in a finite element program. The present theory is inspired partly by Grady's model for expansive comminution due to explosion inside a hollow sphere, and partly by analogy with turbulence. In high velocity turbulent flow, the energy dissipation rate gets enhanced by the formation of micro-vortices (eddies) which dissipate energy by viscous shear stress. Similarly, here it is assumed that the energy dissipation at fast deformation of a confined solid gets enhanced by the release of kinetic energy of the motion associated with a high-rate shear strain of forming particles. For simplicity, the shape of these particles in the plane of maximum shear rate is considered to be regular hexagons. The particle sizes are assumed to be distributed according to the Schuhmann power law. The condition that the rate of release of the local kinetic energy must be equal to the interface fracture energy yields a relation between the particle size, the shear strain rate, the fracture energy and the mass density. As one experimental justification, the present theory agrees with Grady's empirical observation that, in impact events, the average particle size is proportional to the (−2/3) power of the shear strain rate. The main characteristic of the comminution process is a dimensionless number B
                     
                        a
                      (Eq. (37)) representing the ratio of the local kinetic energy of shear strain rate to the maximum possible strain energy that can be stored in the same volume of material. It is shown that the kinetic energy release is proportional to the (2/3)-power of the shear strain rate, and that the dynamic comminution creates an apparent material viscosity inversely proportional to the (1/3)-power of that rate. After comminution, the interface fracture energy takes the role of interface friction, and it is pointed out that if the friction depends on the slip rate the aforementioned exponents would change. The effect of dynamic comminution can simply be taken into account by introducing the apparent viscosity into the material constitutive model, which is what is implemented in the paper that follows.In spite of the recent advances in the constitutive modeling of concrete, the finite element models for impact of missiles onto the walls of concrete structures often severely overestimate the depth of penetration and, in the case of perforation, the exit velocity. By contrast with impact on thin walls ( The macroscopic constitutive equation with softening damage, calibrated by standard laboratory tests at low strain rates, cannot describe material comminution into sub-mesoscale particles. It can capture only the energy dissipation by mesoscale fragmentation, i.e., the creation of fragments of the same order of magnitude as the dominant mesoscale material inhomogeneities, such as the largest aggregate pieces in concrete. This is the only kind of comminution that occurs in the standard laboratory tests of damage behavior. This limitation applies even if the constitutive equation is enhanced by the material rate effects, which include viscoelasticity and the rate dependence of mesoscale crack growth. The purpose of the present paper is to show how a constitutive model can take into account the energy dissipated by material comminution at very high strain rates (see The literature on the analysis of impact is vast and great progress has been achieved in many directions ( In the community of computational missile impact simulation, the recent work of The theory proposed here is partly inspired by analogy with turbulence. In high velocity turbulent flow, the energy dissipation rate is greatly enhanced by the formation of micro-vortices (eddies) which dissipate energy by viscous shear stress. By analogy, it is assumed that the energy dissipation at fast deformation of a confined solid gets greatly enhanced by the release of kinetic energy of high shear strain rate of forming particles. Another inspiration for the present model is Grady's model for explosion in a hollow sphere ( The presently proposed formulation is a continuum model that smears the sub-scale cracking. A number of continuum models that homogenize the sub-scale cracking of concrete, sea ice and other brittle heterogeneous materials have been proposed in the past (e.g. This paper presents the theory. The following paper ( Consider first a simple idealized comminution process in which the material is comminuted to identical particles ( For graphical two-dimensional visualization, it is more instructive to begin discussion with a subdivision into squares (or cubes), as depicted in At a certain moment, the strain rate becomes high enough for the kinetic energy of deforming material to suffice for creating the fractures that rapidly comminute the material into separate identical square particles shown in As the particles return to their near-original shape, they release their kinetic energy The global kinetic energy, which excludes the kinetic energy of shear strain rate of the particles, is in two dimensions, defined as For the subdivision of a plane into regular hexagons ( Let the Cartesian coordinates At first the hexagonal cells, not yet separated and of a size not yet known ( It is considered that, during this whole process, the particle centers move so as to follow the field of macroscopic pure shear strain Before comminution, the displacement velocities Note that, if the global motion is characterized by the velocities of particle centroids, the second integral in Eq. In three dimensions, the axial vector of local rotation rate, The third integral in Eq. It is interesting that the kinetic energy This observation reveals a partial analogy with turbulence ( When the local motion of a shear strain field continues after the break of the interface, interface slips (like those from (b) to (c) in Limiting consideration to micro-particles of one size would be an oversimplification. It is well-known that, in all sorts of dynamic comminution, the particle sizes vary randomly. The frequency distribution of particle sizes may approximately be described by Schuhmann's power law ( Within the size interval Since, for size Note that, in this calculation, we did not address the fact that particles of unequal sizes cannot all be hexagonal prisms. This means that their closest packing may leave some empty interparticle spaces and would thus require a certain volume dilation, and also that particles of diverse shapes will be created. For simplicity, we do not analyze this dilation and shape diversity. To calculate the kinetic energy loss, we introduce the simplifying hypothesis that it is possible to superpose the contributions calculated for various uniform particle sizes as if the particles of each size were distributed regularly. The loss of kinetic energy of the particles of all the sizes per unit volume (dimension J/m The total energy of the comminuted particles per unit volume is Note that Eq. Eq. Substitution of Eqs. The maximum particle size Eq. Substitution of Eq. What is the critical strain rate beyond which the fracturing driven by the release of kinetic energy of strain rate, In the flow of fluids, the dimensionless Reynolds number gives the threshold beyond which the local kinetic energy due to eddies begins to control the resistance to flow. Likewise, Expressing Let us now estimate the dimensionless number Let us now estimate the particle size. We assume the same values of Under high confining hydrostatic pressure Another point to note is that the release of strain energy Energy conservation requires that Either as a distributed body force Or as an additional stress, Since one may write To ensure tensorial invariance, powers of the tensorial components are inadmissible. Only a tensorial invariant can be raised to a power. So we use again the effective deviatoric strain rate given by Eq. This analysis shows that the energy sink due to the comminution process may be modeled by equivalent apparent viscosity The enhancement of the dissipative viscous resistance to shearing is a similar feature as the enhancement of viscous resistance caused by eddies in turbulent flow. This is another aspect of analogy with turbulence. A stress increase proportional to In some situations, the rate of volumetric strain Numerical simulations nevertheless show that the generalization for Eq. To deduce this transition, we must replace function The foregoing equation is the final expression for the kinetic viscosity, with corrected low-rate asymptotics. It is identical to Eqs. When a high shear strain rate continues after the initial comminution by interface fracture, Since friction decreases with increasing slip rate, the frictional work may be decreasing with increasing strain rate. This effect could be approximately captured by setting Note that exponent −1/3 in Eq. When the high-rate shearing occurs under high hydrostatic pressure It may be noted that a different fracture energy and particle size effects have been observed in the case of dynamic erosion of a solid surface by impinging hard particles (  The local kinetic energy of motion associated with high shear strain rates ( At very high strain rates, kinetic energy of strain rate is orders of magnitude higher than the strain energy. Hence, the classical fracture mechanics does not apply. The dissipated energy depends on the particle size distribution, which is here assumed to follow the Schuhmann power law. The minimum or average particle size follows from the condition that the rate of release of kinetic energy of shear strain rate must be equal to the rate of energy dissipation due to growing area of interparticle fractures. The minimum particle size predicted for missile impact at 310 The main characteristic of the comminution effect is a dimensionless number The present theory indicates that the density of kinetic energy available for comminution is proportional to the (2/3) power of the shear strain rate, the particle size or crack spacing is proportional to the (−2/3) power of that rate, and the energy dissipation by comminution is equivalent to a shear viscosity decreasing as the (−1/3) power of that rate. For a strain rate increase from 1/s to 10 After comminution, the role of interface fracture energy changes to the work of interface frictional slip per unit relative displacement. If the interface friction depends on the slip rate, the exponent of strain rate giving the effective viscosity can change. As one experimental justification, the present theory agrees with Grady's empirical observation that, in impact events, the average particle size is inversely proportional to the (2/3) power of the shear strain rate (Eq. The theory can be extended in a similar way by including particle comminution due to kinetic energy of volumetric strain rate, although, for missile impact, the volume expansion is not important. The theory leads to a rate-dependent modification of constitutive equation calibrated only for static strain rate effects. The initial microplane modeling was supported under Grant Since the energy per unit volume (dimension J/m Modeling of the enhanced resistance to high-velocity missile penetration by raising of the boundaries on the microplanes was attempted by However, in the microplane model there are many boundaries and each has a different and complicated shape controlling the triaxial behavior. Thus different boundaries and different parts of each boundary would have to be raised by different ratios, which would reshape the boundaries. Unfortunately, it appears to be next to impossible to do that without loosing the foundation of the microplane model in the static triaxial test data. This is a serious objection to this kind of empirical approach.