A novel process for the preparation of an ultra-clean superfine coal–oil slurry is presented. The process uses a high-pressure water-jet mill and a pumping slurry jet mill for coal superfine comminution. The mean diameter of coal particles in the slurry is 2.71μm, and the ash content is 1.05%. The stability, rheological behavior, and heat value of the slurry are investigated. The results show that the ultra-clean superfine coal–oil slurry has a high heat value, a high level of stability, and low viscosity. The slurry can be used as fuel in a high-speed diesel engine. The total energy consumption of comminution of the coal particles to reduce the mean diameter from 3mm to about 2.71μm is 124kWh per ton, which is lower than the total energy consumption by traditional ball mills by about 50–70%.ash content heat value of per kilogram coal heat value of per kilogram COS heat value of per kilogram oil model parameter model parameter operating pressure of slurry pump operating pressure of water pump flow rate of slurry flow rate of water coefficient of determination initial volume of the suspensions velocity of slurry initial volume of the clear liquid total power of water and slurry mills coal weight concentration slurries with 55%, 50%, and 45% solids loadings by weight coefficient of efficiency shear rate particle velocity coefficient shear stress parameter of yield stress slurry density Stimulated by high oil prices, the technology of coal slurry fuel was developed to replace oil combustion in diesel engines in 1980s After beneficiation and comminution, the ash and sulfur contents of the micronized coal particles used to prepare the coal slurry are reduced to a very low level. In general, the ash content is less than 1.5%, and the sulfur content is less than 0.5%. The mean diameter of the coal particles contained in coal slurries is about 10 The experimental results obtained by Kakwan et al. of the Detroit Diesel Corporation indicated that an average droplet size of less than 20 Coal is ground in a conventional ball mill in the traditional preparation of a coal slurry for combustion in a diesel engine. This type of mill can easily reduce the particle diameter to between 20 High-pressure water-jet comminution was first used to disintegrate organic and non-organic materials by Mazurkiewicz in 1984 The present work was carried out in an attempt to establish an economical and feasible process for the preparation of an ultra-clean superfine coal–oil slurry (UCSFCOS), and to study the properties of UCSFCOS, including rheology, stability, and the heat value. In the new preparation process, a high-pressure water-jet mill was used to grind the coal, and then froth flotation was used to obtain ultra-clean fine coal particles The 150 We describe the preparation of a UCSPCOS, and a flow-chart of the process is given in To further reduce the size of the fine coal particles, these ultra-clean fine coal–oil slurries were comminuted by a high-pressure slurry jet mill from Abrasive Suspension Jet Cutting Equipment A Haake NXB-11A concentric cylinder viscometer was used for measuring the rheological behavior of UCSFCOS with different concentrations of solids. The cylindrical cup-bob system with a radius ratio of 1.04 and an annular gap of 0.077 In the second grinding stage of this novel process, the effects of solid loadings ranging from 45% to 55% on the comminution performance can be ignored. The results show that the mean diameter of superfine particles in The piston ring/cylinder wear resulting from the incomplete combustion of coal particles depends greatly on the size of the coal particles in the slurry Pseudo-plasticity is required to ensure the desired slurry spray pattern from the high-pressure accumulator-type injection system The test results for The sedimentation experiment results are shown in After sedimentation for 70 days, the slurries were agitated, and then the rheology was measured again. The results showed that the changes of the rheology were small. Before and after sedimentation for 70 days, a comparison of the apparent viscosity of the slurries at a shear rate of 100 The UCSFCOSs prepared in this study are composed of superfine coal particles and #0 diesel oil. The heat value per kilogram of UCSPCOS is the sum of the coal and diesel oil heat values, and can be obtained by the following equation: In this new process for preparation of UCSFCOS, most of the energy consumption is used in reduction of the coal particle size by the high-pressure water-jet mill and the high-pressure slurry jet mill. The energy consumption was calculated for each test. The methods for calculating the energy consumption of these two types of jet mill are the same. The calculation is derived from measurement of the volume of water (slurry) for a given nozzle diameter, as a function of operating high-pressure water (slurry) pump pressure from the following equation: To obtain superfine particles of Datong coal with a mean diameter of ∼3 A new process for the preparation of UCSFCOS has been developed on the basis of the high-pressure jet comminution technique. The size of coal particles contained in UCSFCOS is very small, with a mean diameter of ∼2.71 This work was supported by the National 973 Foundation of China (2005cb221502). The authors express sincere thanks to Professor Fu Xiaoheng, School of Chemical and Environment Engineering, CUMTB, for support in experiments and constructive suggestions.