Lightweight bricks can be produced by mixing the expanded perlite, CMC, coal dust and water. However, it may not achieve some of the physicomechanical properties. Therefore, colemanite is chosen in the present study to obtain lightweight bricks with high strength, heat and sound insulating and neutron shielding properties in the field of construction. The bricks were prepared by using different amount of colemanite (0–20% by weight) at different temperatures (200–400°C). Optimum physicomechanical property of the brick was obtained after the heat treatment at 400°C when 10% colemanite was added into the brick. Its physicomechanical properties (compressive strength, point loading index, unit weight, ultrasonic transit speed, water adsorption, porosity, heat and sound conductivity and sound insulation and neutron shielding effectiveness) were compared with the commercial lightweight construction bricks (normal brick, sandwich brick, gas concrete and pumice block). Our results indicated that brick studied in this article had better physical properties than the other construction bricks.In Turkey, producing building bricks with lightweight, high strength and improved heat and noise retention properties has been an important issue for the last two decades because catastrophic earthquakes (Mw In Turkey, heat insulation materials such as fiberglass, rock wool, expanded polystyrene and perlite, expanded polyurethane, phenol foam and construction materials such as gas concrete, pumice block, normal brick having different technical and engineering features have been used. In addition, these construction materials should have sufficient hardness and compressive strength with a minimum value of 0.8–1.0 Perlite, due to the unique properties, is used as an additive and aggregate to produce lightweight bricks. Brick is one of the lightweight construction materials and in conventional brick production, expanded perlite is added into clay to gain sound and thermal insulation properties and light-weightiness when compared to ordinary bricks Colemanite, Ca Published literature contains no information regarding the studies on the production of light-weight brick using perlite as a main raw material and colemanite as an additive. This was produced for the first time in the present study. The aim of this research is to produce a low-density, high-strength heat and sound insulating and neutron shielding boron-added perlite brick which may be used in construction industry. As main raw material, expanded perlite was selected to obtain light-weight and heat resistance brick due to it is readily availability, low unit volume, high ability of heat and sound retention and low cost. In addition, different amounts of colemanite as a binder were added to the brick mixture to increase fire resistance and strength. As a result, physicomechanical properties of the obtained colemanite-added perlite bricks were evaluated and compared with some other lightweight construction materials to find their usability and suitability for construction area. The expanded perlite (0.2–2 The main raw material (the expanded perlite) and the additives (colemanite (0%, 10%, 15%, 20% by weight), CMC (5%) and coal dust (2%) were mixed with a mechanical mixer at determined mixing ratios over a period of 10–30 Chemical properties of the raw materials were determined using XRF (Siemens SRS 300 X-ray Fluoresans Spectrometer) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was used to characterize and identify the phase compositions and crystallinity of the samples using Rigaku Geigerflex XRD equipment with Cu Kα (30 In the present study, the expanded perlite (main material) and colemanite (additive) are used to produce lightweight brick. Before the brick production experiments, these materials should be characterized. Aforementioned, the physicochemical properties of the expanded perlite and the colemanite are determined using XRF, XRD, DTA/TG, thin section, SEM, Mercury porosimeter, BET, unit weight and specific gravity methods. In addition, the suitability of the expanded perlite for the production of brick is investigated by determining with sieve analysis, organic matter content and loss ignition. Chemical analysis of the expanded perlite and colemanite samples is given in X-ray diffraction data (not provided in text) indicates that perlite has mainly amorphous structure with some little crystalline mineral phases, hornblend (JCPDS Card File No. 71-1062) and crystalline quartz (JCPDS Card File No. 76-0823). XRD pattern of colemanite indicates that main structure is colemanite (80–85%) and little amount of simectite and clorite are detected in the matrix. In the brick production process, after mixing and molding of all starting materials, heat treatment is applied to harden the bricks. Therefore, thermal behavior of the samples as well as their chemical stability at different temperature should be assessed. DTA/TGA curves (not given in the text) show that the perlite gives an exothermic reaction and its phase change starts between 500 and 600 Thin sections, which were randomly selected from the images, are given in SEM images of the expanded perlite and the colemanite are given in Porosity and surface area of the expanded perlite and the colemanite samples depending on the temperature (200–600 In the present study, the expanded perlite is used as a main material and its suitability for the production of brick was investigated. For this purposes, sieve analysis, fine materials, organic matter content and loss of ignition of the perlite aggregate were determined using TS 1114, TS EN 1744-1 and TS 706 standards Compressive strengths of the perlite bricks depending upon replacement ratios of colemanite at different temperatures are shown in The compressive strength of the control bricks is very low because of the expanded perlite structure. As known that higher porosity reduces the unit weight and compressive strength of the brick in response to the reduction in the effective cross-section of the material  The unit weight change depending on various temperatures and colemanite ratio on the perlite brick is given in Unit weight results show that the best and lowest unit weight is obtained for 5% colemanite added perlite brick at 400 The drop in the water adsorption of the bricks is mainly related with porous structure of perlite ( Effect of temperature and colemanite ratio on porosity (  The experimental results indicate that the best obtained boron-added perlite brick comprises by weight of 80–85% perlite, 10–15% colemanite, 5% CMC (carboxy methyl cellulose), 2% coal dust and water at l/s (liquid/solid) ratio of 0.85 added after the production. Therefore, 10% of the colemanite added perlite brick (50 The sound and thermal conductivity of the lightweight bricks are the most important parameters due to the energy-saving and energy and sound contamination point of view The main point is the present study to produce the lightweight bricks to search the applicability in ordinary buildings. However, nowadays, radioactive threats have increased enormously and have become widespread health problems. The last decade, with the rising awareness of radioactive consciousness and growing fear because of its extremely dangerous character, protection from radioactivity has become a matter of considerable debates in Turkey where nuclear power plant is considered to be built. Besides, construction materials with neutron shielding properties have been desired recently in the buildings such as schools, hospitals, patient rooms, base station buildings where radioactive effects were avoided. Literature data shows that addition of boron into concretes increase the neutron shielding effectiveness and colemanite can be used for shielding fast and thermal neutrons due to the chemical structure which include hydrate and boron In this study, a low-density, high-strength heat and sound insulating and neutron shielding colemanite added perlite brick was produced. In the production process, the expanded perlite was used as a main material. Characterization studies indicate that the expanded perlite has a glass silica structure with gas gaps and porous structure. SiO In the beginning of the present study, lightweight bricks were produced only mixing the expanded perlite, CMC, coal dust and water, however it could not attain some of the physicomechanical properties. To increase the strength, heat-insulating and neutron shielding property, colemanite was added into bricks. Bricks were prepared by using different amounts of colemanite (0–20% by weight) at different temperatures (200–400 This work is supported by