Hollow microspheres have aroused considerable interests in the materials community owing to their numerous potential applications; however, scalable, facile, low-cost production of hollow microspheres has not yet been demonstrated. Here, inspired by the idea that a hydrophilic surface allows the rapid detachment of gas bubbles to reduce the bubble size significantly, a novel and feasible approach to preparing gas-in-oil-in-water (G/O/W) emulsions on a large scale using Janus membrane emulsification is presented. A Janus membrane with asymmetric wettability, rather than a fully hydrophilic or a fully hydrophobic membrane, is employed in the emulsification system, in which the hydrophobic side allows gas/oil permeation and the hydrophilic side achieves fast release of oily bubbles. The wetting and chemical properties of each side of the membrane were investigated by contact angle and spectroscopy measurement. It was observed that the stability of the emulsions increased with increasing solution pH values. The variation of droplet size and distribution with the gas flow rate was also studied. The outer diameters of double emulsion drops are in the order of 100–300 μm. These droplets are further exposed to UV light to obtain hollow polymeric microspheres through solidification of the oil layers. Hollow structures of the microspheres were verified by HIM observations. This simple strategy opens a new avenue for generating double emulsions and hollow microspheres at scale with relatively narrow polydispersity.Double emulsions are emulsions within the emulsions which have been attracting great research interest because they hold tremendous promise in food products, material science, wastewater treatment, mineral processing, and pharmaceuticals [ There are a variety of methods that have been studied to produce G/O/W double emulsions, such as ultrasonication, high shear mixing, and mechanical agitation [ Janus membranes are referred to as the membranes with opposing physicochemical properties on each membrane surface (e.g. asymmetric chemical composition, morphology, surface wettability, charge, etc.) [ In this study, low-polydispersity G/O/W double emulsions were prepared using a porous polymeric membrane in a one-step membrane emulsification process. Previously, we have developed a single-step coating method to fabricate superhydrophilic/underwater superoleophobic PVDF membranes using oxidant-induced catechol (CA) surface chemistry. We have also shown that the membranes exhibited little change in pore size and porosity after superhydrophilic modification. Herein, we expand the previous coating technique, demonstrating simple fabrication of Janus membrane, via floating a hydrophobic membrane on a modification solution, thus enabling its bottom side to be modified by a hydrophilic layer [ Polyvinylidene fluoride microporous membranes (PVDF, 70 mm, pore size is ~2 μm) were purchased from Yibo Co., Ltd (China). 2-Hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone, catechol, ethanol, and oleic acid were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. 1, 6-Hexanediol diacrylate (HDDA), anhydrous sodium acetate, glacial acid, Nile Red and sodium periodate (SP) were bought from Fisher Scientific. All reagents were analytical grade and used as received. Water used throughout the experiments was purified in a Milli-Q (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) system. The superhydrophilic PVDF membranes were fabricated via a 2-h immersion in the catechol/sodium periodate solution, adapting the procedure reported in our previous work [ The surface morphology variation of membrane before and after modification was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Quanta 250) after coating with gold. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Kratos, AXIS 165) was performed to characterize elemental compositions of the membrane surfaces. Characteristic peaks of the membranes were analyzed by attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy spectra (ATR-FTIR, Agilent, Cary 600 Series). The surface wettability of membrane was evaluated in terms of water contact angle (WCA) and oil contact angle (OCA). The WCA in air and the OCA underwater were detected using a theta optical tensiometer at room temperature (Attension, Biolin Scientific T200). A custom-built device ( For the fabrication of hollow polymeric microspheres, the reactive oil droplets encapsulating microbubble were polymerized by activating the photo-initiator through a UV spot light source for 30 s (X-cite 120Q, Photonic Solution Inc.). Optical microscope and fluorescence images were captured with an inverted microscope (Carl Zeiss Axiovert 200 M) equipped with a CCD camera (Photron fastcam mini AX200). The average droplet diameter and droplet distribution were measured using Image J software. Surface morphology of the hollow microspheres was viewed by a helium ion microscope (HIM, Zeiss Orion). Our Janus membrane was obtained after the asymmetric deposition by floating the nascent PVDF membrane on the CA/SP solution surface for 20 min. In this process, since the membrane surface was wettable (after being prewetted by ethanol), the modification solution would gradually penetrate through the membrane pores under the capillary effect, and eventually lead to the formation of a hydrophilic coating on the immersed membrane surface via oxidant-induced CA cross-linking. It should be noted that there were also a few amounts of catechol being deposited on the outer membrane surface. The top view SEM images of the nascent side of the Janus membrane (superhydrophobic) and the superhydrophilic side are shown in The surface wettability is a crucial factor in membrane emulsification performance. Therefore, the WCA on each type of surface was measured ( The formation of the oil-coated gas bubbles depends on the successful spreading of oil droplets over the gas bubbles, which is governed by the balance between the surface tensions (γ) at the contact line of the air (A), oil (O) and water (W) interfaces [ As an experimental proof of concept, the as-fabricated membranes were used to generate G/O/W emulsions through membrane emulsification. The emulsification process is illustrated in To verify the advantages of Janus membranes, the nascent and superhydrophilic membranes were tested for comparison. A gas flow rate of 300 mL min To achieve the controllable generation of the G/O/W emulsions, it is critically important to determine the optimal parameters that provided the best control over drop size and particularly the size distribution. Therefore, the influence of water pH on droplet size was investigated by generating G/O/W emulsions in water with different pH values (3, 7 and 9), and the results were shown in The effects of the gas flow rates on the size of the droplets and size distribution were further studied. For the production of hollow microspheres, the G/O/W emulsions were exposed to a mercury UV source for 30 s. Upon UV illumination, the monomer polymerized immediately and hard-shelled microcapsules were produced. Owing to the simplicity and feasibility of this approach, nearly monodispersed hollow polymeric microspheres with desired functionalities, for instance, catalytic, charge, magnetic property and stimuli-responsibility, could be prepared for specific applications. This could be achieved by modifying the surface with polymers or encapsulating particles within the microspheres [ In this study, we facilely prepared a hydrophilic/hydrophobic Janus membrane via single-sided CA/SP deposition. Narrowly distributed G/O/W double emulsions were successfully fabricated by a one-step membrane emulsification process for the first time. Such a method was demonstrated as a successful one-step preparation of double emulsions and a precursor for hollow microspheres. The hollow structured microspheres may find potential applications in catalysis, drug delivery, cosmetics, and modern electronics. We believe that our approach, which only needs one dispersion step as compared to the common complicated micro fabrication with multiple-step emulsification processes, is promising in a high throughput production of double emulsions at a low cost. This work provides a new opportunity in the preparation of double emulsions and the fabrication of hollow microspheres for many applications in enhanced oil and mineral recovery, drug delivery vehicles, and water treatment. More research on the mechanism and control of the formation of double emulsions need to be conducted in the future. None. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: The following files are available free of charge.Digital photograph of the emulsification device; C1s XPS spectra, elemental composition of the as-prepared PVDF membranes; the HDDA–water interfacial tension and the spreading coefficient. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at