In this paper a new magnetostrictive delay line set-up for sensor applications is proposed. The tri-layer set-up consists of an inner cylindrical copper core, an intermediate thin insulating layer and an outer circumferential magnetoelastic thin film. Packaging reasons require a coating-insulating layer on top of the set-up. Different Fe–Ni compositions have been tested for the magnetostrictive film. Characterization of the devices showed that negative magnetostrictive film operates as a magnetostrictive delay line set-up, even without magnetic and heat treatment. Concerning positive magnetostrictive films, heat treatment was necessary to allow the propagation and detection of the elastic pulses.The magnetoelastic devices have been used for many sensing applications In order to increase the manufacturing scale and the repeatability of properties, the human factor in production ought to be minimized. One way to obtain that is the development of devices, able to be produced in automated production lines. For the case of MDLs, the thin film technology is a promising way of obtaining this target. Having as motivation the above mentioned targets, a magnetoelastic device has been conceived, which is able to operate as MDL. In the following text, the device is described as well as the manufacturing process is analyzed taking into account its microstructure and its ability or disability to operate as MDL. Finally, the basic MDL characteristics are illustrated and discussed. The schematic of the magnetoelastic element is illustrated in Local break of the magnetic symmetry results in a local break of the symmetry of the dynamic micro-strains, as depicted in The realization of such a device took place in three steps. The first step was the development of the insulating interface layer between the conductor core and the magnetoelastic film. Although at the beginning this has been obtained by using a 0.1 Next step was the deposition of the magnetostrictive circumferential thin film, using the same magnetron sputtering facility. The first experiments were realised by depositing Fe–Ni alloys. The geometrical uniformity of the cross section of the films was also determined by cross section metallographic microscopy and was found to be 1 The third and final manufacturing procedure was the coating of the magnetic films with a protective-insulating layer for packaging purposes. Trials for such deposition were realized by depositing SiO The magnetoelastic measurements were obtained as illustrated in The MDL voltage output dependence on the pulsed excitation field is illustrated in The response of the same magnetoelastic films after coating changes significantly. Some films, those with negative magnetostrictive behavior, as above mentioned, operate even without heat and magnetic annealing. This is attributed to the different dependence of the positive and negative magnetostrictive elements on the tensile stress. Positive magnetostrictive elements, tends to orient their magnetic moments towards the applied stress, while the opposite happens for the case of the negative magnetostrictive elements. The coating insulating layer of SiO The MDL voltage output dependence on the pulsed excitation field for coated Fe, Ni and Fe Parametric control of the other MDL properties has also been performed. From all these results, it is clear that taking into account the obtained results negative magnetostrictive films are better for the presented device. Bearing in mind to solve the problem of the hysteretic behavior of this device, the Barkuasen noise of these elements was analyzed. It is believed that Barkhausen jumps are responsible for the most important part of the hysteretic behavior of these films. Such a magnetic noise could be decreased if the size of the magnetic domains or grains decreases, keeping in mind that this is desirable for the case of negative magnetostrictive elements. Therefore, following the same manufacturing procedure, we have developed Co Having finalized the determination of the most crucial parameters in manufacturing and developing such a magnetoelastic element, research work is underway targeting the realization of new sensing elements like position and displacement sensors as well as non-destructive testing sensors for magnetic anomaly detection. Acknowledgments are due to the PENED 01ED93 of the Hellenic GSRT.