The effect of large pores on electrical properties of SnO2 gas sensors has been investigated. Large intergranular pores of 10–20μm diameter were created in SnO2 gas sensors by adding starch powder in concentrations from 0 to 15wt.%. Addition of starch powder did not change sintering behavior and resultant microstructure except for the formation of large pores. Gas sensitivity increased with starch addition. This result was attributed to enhanced diffusion of gases into the bulk SnO2 through the created large pores. Introduction of large pores in a bulk SnO2 matrix by adding starch can be a simple and useful way of microstructure control and sensitivity enhancement.A number of semiconductor type oxide gas sensors have been developed using the understanding that the electrical conductivity of a ceramic semiconductor varies when it is exposed to a reducing gas like H Contrary to the simple sensing mechanism, real devices show complex sensing behavior. This is because of not only the differences in surface chemistry and microstructure, but also the electrode and filter The effect of microstructure on the performance of gas sensors has been studied in various ways. Xu et al. reported that the sensitivity increased steeply as the particle size of SnO In this study the effect of macroscopic pores on sensitivity has been investigated. Macroscopic pores were introduced by adding an organic powder, in this case starch, and burning it out. Microstructural change was observed and the electrical conductivity and the sensitivity of the samples were measured. Samples were prepared from mixtures of commercial SnO In order to remove the starch without cracking the pellets, the pellets were slowly heated to 450 The resistance of the samples was measured using a high voltage source measure unit (Model 237, Keithley, Cleveland, OH, USA). The samples were placed in a quartz tube furnace for the measurement. The measuring instrument and mass flow controller were controlled automatically by a Personal Computer via an IEEE488 interface. The gases for measuring the sensitivity of the samples were dry air and 1 The microstructure of the samples was observed on a fracture surface using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The sintered density of the samples was measured by the Archimedes method. For the measurement the sample surface was coated with varnish (Zaponlack, Carl Roth, Germany). This method is known to be useful for measuring the apparent density of samples with high porosities. The density of samples is expressed as: The sintered density was measured at least three times for each sample.   The electrical conductivity of the samples was measured during cooling from 520 to 320  Various factors can be considered as the mechanism of sensitivity improvement by starch addition.     It has been shown that it is possible to enhance the sensitivity of SnO This work was supported by the Halla Energy and Environment Co. Ltd. and the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy in Republic of Korea.