An important problem associated with the development of continuous process for the extraction and separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) is the decrease in the pH of the aqueous phase after its equilibration with organic solvent containing cationic extractants such as Cyanex 272, LIX 860, etc. An improvement in the solvent extraction and separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) from neutral chloride solutions is obtained using ionic liquid extractant tertiary alkyl (C16–C22) primary ammonium bis 2,4,4-(trimethylpentyl) phosphinate (HJMT+–Cy272−) generated by reacting primary amine, Primene®JMT (JMT) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid, Cyanex 272 (Cy272) in the organic phase. The presence of JMT allows to control the pH of the equilibrated aqueous phase during the extractions of Co(II) and Ni(II). This has facilitated the application of continuous counter current liquid–liquid extraction in the given metal extraction system without applying any in-between acid neutralization process. The liquid–liquid extractions were carried out under different experimental conditions such as concentration of JMT and Cy272 in the organic phase, and concentration of metal ions in the aqueous phase. The optimized composition of the organic phase to obtain better recovery and separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) is 10% Cy272+10% JMT in D100. The equal percentage of Cy272 and JMT in the organic phase gave minimum change in the pH of the aqueous phase before and after its equilibration. The McCabe–Thiele plot suggested three theoretical stages of counter current operation for obtaining greater than 99% extraction of Co(II) from its 1g/L solution. For two metal system, four stage counter current extraction was carried out using bench scale mixer–settler equipment which gave >99% extraction of Co(II) along with 11% of Ni in the organic phase whereas about 89% of Ni(II) with about 0.3% of Co(II) remained in the aqueous phase. The loaded organic phase was treated with 0.02M EDTA to strip metal ions and the same was used successfully for the second run of the extraction and stripping process.Solvent extraction, a hydrometallurgical separation and purification technique is a selective, cost efficient and simpler chemical process. In metal recovery and refining activities this technique is proving to be a powerful tool, providing new opportunities to exploit low value metal ores and metal recycling. The very good success of hydrometallurgical separation of copper and uranium over a wide range of throughput by solvent extraction made its wider acceptance in the nickel industries. Even though solvent extraction has been employed in the refining of nickel and cobalt since the early 1970, its commercial applications have been largely restricted to process relatively small flows of concentrated Ni/Co solutions. In the present scenario, treatment of low value ores and recycling returns of these metals are not attractive enough to spend more money on the development of new extractant with high selectivity and efficiency. Hence development in the solvent extraction of these metals is basically resorted on the utilization of existing commonly available commercial extractants. Step wise approach or the use of more than one extractant type as an integrated solvent extraction circuit is often adopted ( Recent review of the research reveals that cobalt/nickel recovery and separation is a major hydrometallurgical problem due to some practical difficulties. The main problem is associated with the change of pH of the aqueous phase after equilibration with organic phase when cationic types of extractants such as Cy272, LIX 860, etc. are used. For a single stage process, the pH control is usually solved by the addition of appropriate quantities of alkali. The real problem appears in the multi step counter current processes, especially when an extraction column is used. The typical solution in this case is to add NaOH or NH Ionic liquids also called as “green solvents” due to their almost zero volatility are group of organic salts that exist as liquid over a wide range of temperatures. These solvents are proving to be useful in the field of metal ion separations ( Primene®JMT (JMT), a tertiary alky(C Ten mililiter of aqueous phase containing 250–5000 The extraction of metal ions is reported as percentage extraction (%E) which was calculated as: Where [Me The results reported are within ± Locally fabricated mixer–settler made of acrylic material which is having four stages of mixing (30 The simplest mechanism for the extraction of metals with cationic type of extractants can be given as: To optimize process conditions for the recovery and separation of Co(II) and Ni(II), extraction experiments were conducted under the following different conditions. The effect of the concentration of JMT in the organic phase containing 10% Cy272/D100 on the extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) is shown in In the same experiments, pH of the equilibrated aqueous phase increases with increasing concentration of JMT while maintaining 10% Cy272/D100 in the organic phase ( Extractions of Co(II) were carried out with different percentages of JMT–Cy272 ionic liquid. An easy and quantitative stripping of both Co(II) and Ni(II) is obtained by taking 1 About 95% of Co(II) and 83% of Ni could be back extracted by equilibrating metal loaded organic phase with equal volume of 1 To avoid this inconvenience, 0.02 The organic phase obtained after stripping of Co(II) and Ni(II) using 0.02 Different commercially available diluents such as Kerosene (mixture of alkanes), Solvesso 200 (mixture of alkyl(C The extraction isotherms for the extraction of individual metal ions as well as the extraction from their 1:1 mixture (concentrations 0–5 A four stage bench scale mixer–settler system was used for the counter-current extraction studies. The layout of the cascades of the extraction cum settling chambers with the sequence numbers is shown in An improved solvent extraction and separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) from chloride solutions is achieved using ionic liquid extractant HJMT