The microstructural characteristics, mechanical and wear behaviour of Aluminium matrix hybrid composites reinforced with alumina, rice husk ash (RHA) and graphite were investigated. Alumina, RHA and graphite mixed in varied weight ratios were utilized to prepare 10 wt% hybrid reinforced Al-Mg-Si alloy based composites using two-step stir casting. Hardness, tensile properties, scanning electron microscopy, and wear tests were used to characterize the composites produced. The results show that Hardness decreases with increase in the weight ratio of RHA and graphite in the composites; and with RHA content greater than 50%, the effect of graphite on the hardness becomes less significant. The tensile strength for the composites containing o.5wt% graphite and up to 50% RHA was observed to be higher than that of the composites without graphite. The toughness values for the composites containing 0.5wt% graphite were in all cases higher than that of the composites without graphite. The % Elongation for all composites produced was within the range of 10–13% and the values were invariant to the RHA and graphite content. The tensile fracture surface morphology in all the composites produced was identical characterized with the presence of reinforcing particles housed in ductile dimples. The composites without graphite exhibited greater wear susceptibility in comparison to the composite grades containing graphite. However the wear resistance decreased with increase in the graphite content from 0.5 to 1.5 wt%.The development of Aluminium matrix composites (AMCs) reinforced with agro and industrial waste derivatives have gathered a lot of interest in recent years Al-Mg-Si alloy (AA 6063) with chemical composition presented in Liquid metallurgy route using two step stir casting process was adopted for the production of the composites. The process commenced with the determination of the quantities of rice husk ash (RHA), alumina and graphite required to produce 10wt% particle reinforced composites having weight ratios of the reinforcing materials as presented in The hardness values of the composites were evaluated on a hardness testing machine using the Vickers hardness scale. The sample preparation and testing procedure was performed in accordance with ASTM E-92 standard The tensile properties of the composites produced were evaluated by tensile testing using an Instron universal testing machine. Specimens for the test were machined from the as-cast composite cylindrical rods of 15 mm diameter and 15 cm length to tensile test specifications of 5 mm diameter and 30 mm gauge length. The specimens were mounted on the testing platform and pulled monotonically at a strain rate of 10 The microstructures, fracture surface morphologies, and elemental compositions of the composites were examined using a JSM Jeol ultra-high resolution field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM) equipped with an EDS. The surfaces of the specimens for microstructural examination were metallographically prepared following a series of grinding and polishing steps to achieve a mirror like surface finish. The samples were subsequently etched using Keller's reagent (95 ml water, 2.5 ml HNO The wear characteristics of the composites were studied using a Taber abrasion wear testing machine. The wear test was conducted using samples prepared in form of discs 200 mm diameter and 5 mm thick. The samples were placed on the turntable platform of the wear machine and gripped at a constant pressure by two abrasive wheels lowered onto the sample surface. In operation, the turntable rotates with the samples which drive the abrasive wheels in contact with its surface. The rubbing action between the sample and the abrasive wheel during the rotating motion of the machine, results in the generation of loose composite debris from the sample surface. The test was conducted for 15 min; and the sample weights before and after the tests are recorded. The Taber Wear Index is evaluated using the relation Representative SEM micrographs and EDS analysis of composites produced are presented in The mechanical properties of the composites produced are presented in The tensile strength and yield strength values ( For the % Elongation ( In the case of toughness ( The tensile fracture surface morphology in all the composites produced are essentially identical, with ductile dimple fracture features dominant as observed in the representative SEM micrograph in The wear rates of all the composites produced are presented in The microstructural characteristics, mechanical and wear behaviour of Aluminium matrix hybrid composites reinforced with alumina, rice husk ash and graphite was investigated in this research. The results show that: Hardness decreases with increase in the weight ratio of RHA and graphite in the composites; and with RHA content greater than 50%, the effect of graphite on the hardness becomes less significant. The tensile strength for the composites containing o.5wt% graphite and up to 50% RHA was observed to be higher than that of the composites without graphite. The toughness values for the composites containing 0.5wt% graphite were in all cases higher than that of the composites without graphite. The % Elongation for all composites produced was within the range of 10–13% and the values were invariant to the RHA and graphite content. The tensile fracture surface morphology in all the composites produced was identical characterized with the presence of reinforcing particles housed in ductile dimples. The composites without graphite exhibited greater wear susceptibility in comparison to the composite grades containing graphite. However the wear resistance decreased with increase in the graphite content from 0.5 to 1.5 wt%.