Background
                  The purpose of this study is to compare open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) to distal femoral replacement (DFR) for treatment of displaced periprosthetic distal femur fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  We identified 72 patients with minimum 2-year follow-up following a displaced periprosthetic distal femur fracture: 50 were treated with ORIF and 22 with DFR. Outcomes were assessed with multivariate regression analysis and include Knee Society Scores (KSS), infection rates, revision incidence, and mortality.
               
                  Results
                  Patients treated with DFR had a higher Charlson comorbidity index (5.2 vs 3.8; P = .006). The mean postoperative KSS were similar between groups, but the Knee Society Functional Scores were higher in the ORIF group (P = .01). Six ORIF patients (12%) and 3 DFR patients (14%) underwent a revision surgery (P = .1). In the ORIF group, 3 revisions were associated with periprosthetic infection, and 3 revisions occurred for aseptic nonunion. In the DFR group, 1 infection was treated with irrigation and debridement, and 2 cases of patellar maltracking resulted in 1 liner exchange with soft tissue release and 1 femoral revision for malrotation. More patients in the ORIF group required repeat revisions, with twice as many total revisions (P < .001). Six ORIF patients and 7 DFR patients died within 2 years (P = .26).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The Knee Society Functional Score favored ORIF, but the total incidence of revision was higher in the ORIF cohort. Given the high mortality and the substantial risk of reoperation in both groups, additional studies are needed regarding the prevention of and optimal treatment for patients with periprosthetic distal femur fractures.Periprosthetic distal femur fractures above a total knee arthroplasty (TKA) can be a devastating complication for the patient and a complex problem for surgeons [ Rorabeck type II fractures (displaced fracture with well-fixed components) are the most common periprosthetic distal femur fracture [ Following institutional review board approval, we retrospectively reviewed patients from a single orthopedic practice between the years 1999 and 2014. We identified 76 patients who had surgical management for a Rorabeck type II fracture (displaced, components well fixed [ Baseline demographics collected include age at the time of surgery, gender, Charlson comorbidity index (CCI), American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, and time elapsed since primary TKA. Perioperative data reviewed include the number of days between admission for distal femur fracture and the revision surgery, ORIF subtype (IM nails vs locking plates vs nonlocking plate), specific implant model, estimated blood loss, operative time, and postoperative length of stay (LOS). Follow-up data obtained in clinic included postoperative Knee Society Score (KSS), Knee Society Functional Score (KSFS), radiographic assessment of fracture union and implant loosening, and any clinical evidence of infection. Phone calls were used to obtain reoperation and mortality data for those patients who did not have a 2-year postoperative clinic visit. Statistical analyses were conducted using Stata version 13.1 (StataCorp LLC, College Station, TX). Because of the heterogeneity of implant types in the ORIF group, all analyses comparing treatment cohorts were conducted twice, initially with all 50 patients included in the DFR group and then with only the 44 patients with periarticular locking plates included in the ORIF group. First, baseline characteristics were compared between patient cohorts using Student The gender distribution was predominantly female in both groups, 88% and 86% for ORIF and DFR, respectively. There was a statistically insignificant trend toward an older mean age in the DFR group (75.8 vs 71.8 years; When comparing the ORIF and DFR cohorts, there was no appreciable difference in estimated blood loss (438 vs 363 mL) or postoperative LOS (8.2 vs 7.8 days, respectively). Likewise, the KSS obtained at the postoperative clinic visits were similar between the ORIF and DFR cohorts, with mean scores of 84 and 85 ( At a mean follow-up of 5.6 years (range, 2.0-17.4), the incidence of periprosthetic infection was 4.6% (1 of 22) in the DFR cohort and 6.0% (3 of 50) in the ORIF cohort ( The incidence of revision surgery (including infected and aseptic cases) was 12% (6/50) in the ORIF group and 14% (3/22) in the DFR group ( For those patients who had at least 1 revision, the overall incidence of revision procedures in the ORIF group was 2.2 revisions per patient vs 1 revision per patient in the DFR group ( The mortality rates were high in both groups, with 6 ORIF patients (12% and 7 DFR patients (32%) dying within the initial 2 years of surgery ( One of the deaths in the ORIF group occurred during the surgical admission 2 weeks postoperatively, and 2 of the deaths in the DFR group occurred on the day of surgery, secondary to cardiopulmonary complications in patients with a history of cardiopulmonary disease. The other 10 mortalities occurred after discharge and were confirmed by the patients’ family members, but the causes of death could not be determined. Periprosthetic distal femur fractures above a TKA have a wide range of treatment options, without a single method definitively known to be superior. In the current retrospective cohort study comparing the outcomes of ORIF vs DFR for Rorabeck type II fractures, we found similar functional outcomes between cohorts as measured by the KSS. We also identified a high risk of complications and mortality within the first 2 years postoperatively. ORIF was used most commonly at our center, and it is also most commonly used with stable implants at many centers in North America. Prior investigations of ORIF in the setting of periprosthetic supracondylar femur fracture have reported outcomes similar to ours. Although the KSS were similar in the unadjusted bivariate analyses, the multivariate analysis showed that patients in the ORIF group had significantly higher KSFS. The mean KSS from the DFR cohort in the present study are nearly identical to those reported by Matlovich et al [ DFR is an alternative to ORIF with the potential benefits of immediate weight-bearing without risk of nonunion, as there is no fracture to heal. The operation, however, is larger and some orthopedic surgeons may not be familiar with the surgical technique. Furthermore, if complications occur, managing them may be more complex with fewer treatment options for limb-salvage before amputation. Previous publications have suggested reasonable outcomes when DFRs are used in the setting of periprosthetic supracondylar femur fracture [ The mortality rate within 2 years was high in our study, particularly among the patients who underwent DFR, which is not unexpected given their higher Charlson indices which was the strongest predictor of mortality in our present study. A prior study of 48 patients treated with locked plating for periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures reported a 1-year mortality risk of 26.8% and found that CCI was an independent predictor of mortality after surgery for distal femur fracture [ There are limitations to the present study, which the reader should consider when interpreting our results. The retrospective nature of the study inherently limits the strength of the evidence presented herein, and a randomized study, although challenging to perform, would be far better to demonstrate the risks and benefits of ORIF vs DFR. With the retrospective data available, we are also unable to analyze the risk factors for periprosthetic distal femur fracture. Prospective data collection for a large cohort of TKA patients would allow for identification of independent risk factors for periprosthetic fracture and could support the development of much-needed prevention strategies. The 15-year time period of the index procedures, the inability to control for case-specific variations in postoperative therapy and weight-bearing protocols, and the heterogeneity of the cohorts, especially with respect to the year of surgery and the variety of implant types in the ORIF group, limits the conclusions drawn. However, the multivariate analyses included the year of surgery, implant type, and patient-specific demographics to adjust for any effects of these variables. Moreover, the subanalysis included only locking plates in the ORIF group to better control for the heterogeneity of the ORIF implants. Also, the incidence of infections and multiple revisions makes interpretation of the revision data difficult, but the difference in total revision incidence between groups is clinically and statistically significant in both the unadjusted and adjusted analyses, and this difference is an important consideration when considering the surgical options for the treatment of Rorabeck type-2 fractures and counseling patients preoperatively. Finally, the available sample size also limits our ability to show statistical significance for the relatively small differences in outcomes that were observed. That being said, this is the largest single-center study to compare ORIF and DFR for periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures. In the present study, 72 Rorabeck type II periprosthetic femur fractures were treated with either DFR or ORIF. Given that higher KSFS were found in the ORIF group, further study including baseline, prefracture functional scores are needed to better understand this difference in postoperative scores. Both of the cohorts had similar outcomes with regard to the clinical component of the KSS, infection rates, revision prevalence, and mortality, with the sample size available for study. However, the increased incidence of additional revisions in the ORIF group should be considered when counseling patients regarding treatment options for periprosthetic distal femur fractures. Given the high mortality and the substantial risk of revision and complications in both groups, additional studies are needed to determine optimal treatment options for patients with periprosthetic fractures of the distal femur. The authors thank Craig J. Della Valle, MD, for contributing cases and providing feedback during manuscript preparation. 