Osteoblastic activity is severely impaired in active myeloma, contributing to the development of myeloma bone disease. Although several drugs reducing osteoclast-mediated bone degradation are in clinical use, approaches to specifically augment bone formation are at an early stage of development. Novel antimyeloma drugs not only directly act on myeloma cells, but impact on the microenvironment as well. Proteasome inhibitors were previously shown to have bone anabolic properties. Here we investigated the impact of immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) on bone formation. Treatment with thalidomide and lenalidomide significantly inhibited osteoblast development in vitro, as reflected by a reduction of alkaline phosphatase activity and matrix mineralization. The effects were upheld in combination with bortezomib. The IMiDs upregulated Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) and inhibin beta A, but blocking these molecules was not able to restore regular osteoblast development. We therefore performed gene expression profiling to reveal other osteoblast regulatory factors that might be involved in the IMiD-mediated effect on osteoblast development. Our data indicate that osteoblast inhibition is possibly an IMiD-class effect mediated by downregulation of major osteoblast regulators (e.g., runt-related transcription factor 2, distal-less homeobox 5, pleiotrophin) and concurrent induction of secreted inhibitors of osteoblast formation (e.g. DKK1, activin A, gremlin 1). Our results highlight the need for bone anabolic therapeutics in myeloma, counteracting the negative impact of prolonged IMiD exposure on bone metabolism.Osteolytic bone disease is a characteristic clinical feature of multiple myeloma, detectable in up to 90% of patients with active disease Although newer treatment regimens employing novel anti-myeloma agents result in higher rates and better quality of response, osteolytic lesions frequently persist despite significant tumor reduction Among the so-called “novel” drugs for myeloma treatment, bortezomib has been shown to upregulate runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and osterix It was shown that IMiDs influence the fate of various cell types in the bone marrow. Thalidomide and its derivatives were reported to modulate the activity of T and NK cells Bortezomib (provided by Janssen-Cilag, Vienna, Austria) was dissolved in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.1% DMSO. Lenalidomide (provided by Celgene, San Diego, CA) and thalidomide (Sigma, St Louis, MO) were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). All therapeutic agents were stored at ≤ −20°C. The final concentration of DMSO in all experiments was ≤0.1%. Goat polyclonal anti-DKK1 and mouse monoclonal anti–activin A antibodies were purchased from R&D Systems (Abingdon, United Kingdom). Recombinant human fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) was purchased from Peprotech (Hamburg, Germany). A human bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cell line immortalized by enforced expression of telomerase (BMSC TERT To evaluate the cytotoxic effects of bortezomib (1–10 nmol/L) and IMiDs (1–10 μmol/L) on BMSC TERT BMSC TERT+ cells (25,000 per cm Bortezomib (1–10 nmol/L) was added every 3–4 days, and thalidomide (1–10 μmol/L) and lenalidomide (1–10 μmol/L) were added daily. Cells treated with 0.1% DMSO served as control. For blocking experiments, IMiD-treated BMSCs were cultured in the presence or absence of anti-DKK1 (1 μg/mL) or anti–activin A (10 μg/mL) antibodies during osteogenesis. Treatment with polyclonal goat immunoglobulin G and mouse immunoglobulin G isotype antibodies served as control. Total RNA was isolated at day 14 of osteogenic differentiation using RNeasy kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), and cDNA synthesis was performed with M-MuLV reverse transcriptase (New England Biolabs, Frankfurt, Germany). We analyzed Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was determined using the AttoPhos® AP Fluorescent Substrate System (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) following the manual. In brief, samples were diluted in 1x passive lysis buffer and transferred into a microtiter plate. Attophos Substrated (150 μl per well) was added, and the plate was incubated for 15 min at room temperature protected from light. Fluorescence was measured at 595 nm with excitation at 430 nm. A standard curve was obtained by diluting the supplied Calibrator solution (500 ng 2'-[2-benzothiazoyl]-6'-hydroxybenzothiazole (BBT)/mL) in AttoPhos buffer. Nuclear extraction was performed at day 14 of osteogenesis with a Nuclear Extract Kit (Active Motif, La Hulpe, Belgium) following the manufacturer's directives. RUNX2 DNA-binding activity was assessed by using an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based RUNX2 transcription factor assay (TransAM Human BMSC TERT Destaining of the plates was performed according to Standal et al. Gene expression profiling was performed as previously published by the Heidelberg-Montpellier group Gene expression analyses were performed on gene chip - robust multiarray average (GC-RMA) preprocessed data sets To test the robustness of our in vitro system, the viability of BMSC TERT Alkaline phosphatase activity served as an early osteoblast marker. At day 14 of osteogenesis, lenalidomide and thalidomide significantly inhibited ALP activity in BMSC TERT We next analyzed the impact of antimyeloma drugs on matrix mineralization. Daily treatment with IMiDs at 1 μmol/L (alone and in combination with bortezomib) significantly inhibited late stage osteogenesis, resulting in a reduced matrix mineralization ( In osteoblast development, RUNX2 and DLX-5 are central transcription factors. We therefore investigated whether IMiDs alter their expression levels. Both IMiDs (alone or in combination with bortezomib) inhibited the expression of Both IMiDs upregulated We next performed gene expression profiling of BMSCs (BMSC TERT Immunomodulatory drugs have pleiotropic effects and have been shown to modify the fate and function of various cell types, including T cells, NK cells, and osteoclasts Contrary to our results, a previous study The effects of IMiDs we have observed in vitro are mirrored by clinical data, showing a reduction in bone formation markers such as bone-specific alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin when patients are treated with thalidomide, dexamethasone, and zoledronic acid Lenalidomide and thalidomide were previously shown to upregulate DKK1 expression in myeloma cells by inducing an oxidative stress response and activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling cascade We next aimed to identify possible osteoblast regulatory genes affected by lenalidomide using microarray analysis. Treatment with lenalidomide impacted on the regulation of several genes involved in the differentiation of BMSCs, such as extracellular matrix proteins ( Subanalysis of samples treated with lenalidomide at 1 and 10 μmol/L revealed alterations of additional factors with a presumed role in osteogenesis. Lenalidomide was found to induce Our in vitro model clearly cannot recapitulate all relevant biological drug effects on osteogenesis that manifest in vivo. The reduction of the myeloma cell mass by successful antitumor treatment conceivably relieves the suppressive effects of active disease on osteoblasts. Studying the impact of different drug classes on osteogenesis in a simplified model may, however, prove useful to dissect potential consequences of prolonged drug exposure on bone metabolism. So far, serial bone mineral density measurements in patients with well controlled disease during long-term therapy with lenalidomide or thalidomide are not available. According to our data, combination of IMiDs with bortezomib or antibodies against DKK1 or activin A is not able to restore osteogenesis. Our results imply that IMiDs affect osteogenesis via downregulation of major osteoblast regulators (RUNX2, DLX-5, PTN, OMD) and concurrent induction of osteoblast inhibitory proteins (DKK1, activin A, FGF-1, GREM1). Evaluation of bone formation and degradation in patients under therapy with IMiDs might be needed for a better understanding of the clinical impact of our in vitro findings. This work was supported by the No financial interest/relationships with financial interest relating to the topic of this article have been declared.