The effect of polyether on the separation of pentlandite from serpentine has been studied. In addition to flotation and sedimentation tests, electrophoresis and adsorption tests have been conducted. The flotation and sedimentation results show that serpentine impairs flotation performance of pentlandite, by adhering to the pentlandite particles. Addition of the polyether could promote the dispersion of the mixed sample of pentlandite and serpentine in alkaline conditions and significantly reduce adverse effects of serpentine on the pentlandite flotation. The electrophoresis and adsorption tests show that polyether can selectively adsorb onto pentlandite surface through hydrophobic reaction and remove serpentine slime particles from pentlandite surfaces by steric hindrance effect.Serpentine is a magnesium-rich phyllosilicate mineral occurring in complex sulphide ores In this investigation, the effect of polyether on the separation of pentlandite from serpentine has been studied. The aim of this study is to find a new reagent that can disperse serpentine slime from sulfide surface by react with pentlandite. The serpentine used for all experiments was obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province, China. The mineral composition of the serpentine selected for experiments as determined by XRD was as follows: serpentine 98%, chlorite 2%. The sample was dry ground and screened. The particle size distribution determined using a Malvern Instruments Master sizer was 100% – 10 The pentlandite sample was prepared using “pentlandite rocks” from Jinchuan, Gansu Province, China. This sample was passed through a magnetic separator three times to remove the magnetic pyrrhotite fraction. The non-magnetic fraction containing the pentlandite was dry ground and screened. The −150 The polyether was purchased from BASF Company. The molecular formula of the polyether is HO·(C Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine. The impeller speed was fixed at 1800 Coagulation and dispersion between serpentine and pentlandite were studied using the sedimentation tests. For the sedimentation tests, 0.1 Zeta potential measurements on pentlandite and serpentine were carried out using a zeta potential meter. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength at 10 For the adsorption tests, 1  In The effect of polyether concentration on the flotation performance of pentlandite that has been depressed by serpentine is shown in The effect of pH on the floatability of pentlandite in the absence and presence of polyether is shown in The attachment of serpentine slimes to the valuable minerals as “slime coatings” is the main reason that serpentine slimes interfere with pentlandite flotation. The effect of polyether on the aggregation and dispersion behavior of pentlandite and serpentine is studied by sedimentation tests. Turbidity technique has been widely used for studies of colloidal suspensions due to its non-invasive and non-contact properties. The turbidity value of suspensions reflects the particle numbers of colloidal suspensions. A decrease of turbidity value indicates a decrease in particle number, resulting from particle aggregation. The turbidity of mixed ores as a function of pH in the absence and presence of polyether is shown in The adsorption of polyether on mineral surfaces was studied and the result is shown in The adsorption of polyether on serpentine surface may change the surface characteristic of serpentine. As a direct surface chemistry investigation of the different minerals, individual electro-kinetic studies were conducted for pentlandite and serpentine particles as a function of pH in 0.001 Thus, the dispersion effect of polyether is different from the other reagents, which disperse serpentine slime particles from sulfide surfaces through reacting with serpentine. The hydrophobic component of polyether will approach the hydrophobic sites on pentlandite surface and push the slimes particles away from the surfaces due to steric hindrance. From the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn: Polyether can effectively disperse the serpentine and pentlandite, reducing the coverage of serpentine on pentlandite and improving the flotation performance of the pentlandite. The adsorption density of polyether on pentlandite particle surfaces is about 10–20 times greater than that on serpentine particle surfaces. Hydrophobic bonding is the dominant interaction for polyether adsorption on to pentlandite surfaces. Polyether may adsorb onto pentlandite surface sites, significantly increase the adsorption layer thickness between the slime particles and the pentlandite surface, and consequently reduce the attractive force between the slime particles and pentlandite surface by steric hindrance. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors acknowledge the support of the