This study investigated heavy metals separation, recovery reuse from hazardous air pollution control (APC) residues from a municipal solid waste (MSW) incinerator using a combination of flue gas neutralization and acid extraction (FGN/AE). These experiments were conducted using CO2 as a reagent for neutralizing an initially alkaline APC residue. The neutralization and heavy metals separation was enhanced by adjusting the pH values using hydrochloric acid from 3 to 7.5. The effect of particle sizes on heavy metals separation was also evaluated. The results indicate that a decrease in the pH value enhances the heavy metals separation and recovery efficiency from MSW incinerator APC residues, especially for Cd, Zn and Cu. The results also show that the metals extraction percent was not significantly influenced by variations in the tested particle size range. The valuable metals Cd and Zn recovered from the extraction liquid formed metal hydroxide precipitates using the chemical precipitation method. The quantities of metal precipitates were determined by weight on the dry basis, ranging from 0.5% to 1.0% of the original APC residues. All tested metal concentrations in the effluent complied with current Taiwan regulation thresholds. The treated APC residues after the FGN/AE process were classified as non-hazardous waste with the potential to significantly increase APC residue reuse. These findings provide important information about the separation and recovery of heavy metals from toxic MSW incinerator APC residue and provide strategies for the reduction of greenhouse gas (CO2) emissions from MSW incineration plants and waste acid stockpiling.The decreasing availability of sanitary landfill sites, rising waste disposal costs and ever increasing amounts of MSW have hastened efforts to adopt incineration technologies and energy recovery strategies for managing MSW in Taiwan. By the end of 2008, there will be 27 MSW incinerators on this island, including 21 supported by the Environmental Protection Administration (EPA) and an additional 6 adopting build–operate–own (BOO) or build–operate–transfer (BOT) strategies. These incinerators are capable of processing an estimated 9.6 million tons per year of the island's MSW. Meanwhile, it was estimated that the quantities of air pollution control (APC) residues and bottom ash produced annually are approximately 0.3 million and 1.44 million tons, respectively ( Solidification/stabilization and sanitary landfills are normally used for APC residues and bottom ash disposal. The Taiwan Government has a waste management strategy that aims to reduce landfill disposal and increase beneficial APC residues or bottom ash reuse. Waste treatment, disposal and reuse have recently become important public concerns and environmental issues. The Taiwan government has established many strategies for waste recovery and recycling to meet the goal of zero waste. Among these strategies, metal leachability reduction or heavy metals recovery from incinerator bottom ash or toxic APC residues are becoming more attractive as an alternative method for the recovery and recycling of these residues or ashes in Taiwan. In the treatment and reuse of heavy metals from MSW incinerator APC residues, the following technologies are currently in use: solidification in cement or cement-like material, chemical stabilization, thermal treatment using sintering or melting and extraction methods involving acidic solutions, ion exchange, or electrochemical processes ( Representative APC residue samples were collected from a MSWI plant in Taipei City, Taiwan. This plant is a typical mass-burning system capable of processing 1500 tons of MSW per day through four parallel furnaces and flue gas treatment devices. The air pollution control devices (APCDs) consist of an electrostatic precipitator (ESP) for particulate removal and a wet scrubber for acid gas control. All APC residue samples were collected from the ESP under regular operation. Data on the APC residue properties obtained from 10 samples collected over a six-month period are shown in The moisture content of the APC residue samples were determined by heating to 105 °C for 48 h. The pH was determined in triplicate using aqueous extracts from dried samples at a 1:10 ratio of solid: distilled water (w/v). The concentration of Pb, Cd, Cu, Cr, and Zn were determined using nitric acid (HNO The experimental apparatus consists of a stirring reactor and a flue gas absorbing train (as shown in The pH level and particle size effects on heavy metals separation and recovery during the carbon dioxide extraction process were investigated by performing a series of experiments at different particle sizes (> Normalized metal separation and recovery The extraction liquid was collected and adjusted to the optimum pH range at 10 by adding 1 N NaOH. The tested metal hydroxide precipitates were formed immediately because the metals reacted with the alkalinity. The precipitate and effluent were also used to determine the metal content. To further confirm the non-hazardous characteristics of APC residues, the APC residue samples after FGN/AE method (called as treated APC residues) were analyzed for their TCLP concentrations using standard analytical techniques. The leachates were measured using flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (FAAS).  Leachability studies on heavy metals from MSWI ashes were presented in the previous literature. Metal leachability from these ashes appears to be dependent upon the pH of the leaching medium, pH after extraction, ash particle size, metal speciation, liquid solid ratio, chemical composition of the ashes and wastes, and flue gas cleaning system, etc. These results also investigated the pH effect on metal leaching characteristics and pointed out that the pH of the resulting leachate was the greatest factor governing the concentration of metals in solution ( The effects of varying the pH levels on the extraction of Zn, Cu, Pb and Cr were also examined. Similarly, as Knowledge of the heavy metals content within ash particle size fractions is important for assessing extraction effectiveness and management approaches. The surface area of each particle size range was also an important factor for heavy metal leaching because an increased amount of surface area is available for extraction as the particle size decreased. To compare ash particle size effects on heavy metal separation changes, experiments designed to separate bulk APC residues into three particle size ranges > To assess the stabilization of the treated APC residues, experiments compared the concentrations of the heavy metals in the original APC residues with those in the treated APC residues using the Toxicity Characteristics Leaching Procedure (TCLP). The TCLP analysis results for the original and treated APC residues are listed in According to previous study, after the FGN/AE process, the APC residues were conducted to satisfy environmental regulations. However, the large amounts of tested metals extracted and remained in the extracted liquid. Therefore, in this study, the authors attempted to further recover the valuable metals Cd and Zn from the extraction liquid. As shown in The amounts of recycled metal hydroxides precipitates were indicated in To maximize the reutilization of treated APC residues, this study demonstrated the extraction percent of APC residues for non-toxic materials via a combination of acid extraction and neutralization processes. The major conclusions that may be derived from this study are: The results indicate that a decrease in the pH value enhances the separation and recovery efficiency for heavy metals Cd, Zn and Cu in the APC residues. High extractability for Cd and Zn at low pH values (pH 3–4) was evident. In cases with a pH value of 3 and the smallest particle size (53 μm–150 μm), the extraction percent of Cd, Zn, and Cu were 89.0 The TCLP leachate concentration for Pb, Cd, Cu, and Zn in the treated APC residues denotes a decreasing leaching tendency with decreasing pH level and particle size. All concentrations for the evaluated heavy metals in the TCLP leachate complied with Taiwan EPA regulation limits. The treated APC residues were classified as non-hazardous waste and further considered as a raw materials resource. The valuable metals Cd and Zn were recovered from the extraction liquid using chemical precipitation. According to the mass balance closure for the metals Zn and Cd contents during FGN/AE process, in cases with pH The amounts of recycled metal hydroxide precipitates were approximately 1% of the original APC residues. The tested metal (Cd and Zn) concentrations in the precipitates were above 1.3% and 54.8%, respectively. The quantities of metal precipitates weighed on a dry basis ranged from 0.5% to 1.0% of the original APC residues. It is recommended that precipitates containing high metal content be used as raw materials for relevant steel manufacturing. The results indicate the feasibility of reducing for CO The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the Republic of China for financially supporting this study under Contract No. NSC-89-2211-E-035-034.