A field study was performed in a building complex to investigate the extent and sources of lead (Pb) release in tap water and brass material was found to be the main contributor in the very first draw (250 mL). Based on these results, a pilot installation was built to study Pb leaching from old and new faucets in the presence and absence of a connection to Cu piping. Four water quality conditions were tested: i) no treatment; ii) addition of 0.8 mg P/L of orthophosphate; iii) pH adjustment to 8.4; and iv) adjustment to a higher chloride to sulfate mass ratio (CSMR; ratio from 0.3 to 2.9). Pb concentrations in samples taken from the faucets without treatment ranged from 1 to 52 μg/L, with a mean of 11 μg/L. The addition of orthophosphate @ 0.8 mg P/L (OrthoP) was the most effective treatment for all types of faucets tested. On average, OrthoP reduced mean Pb leaching by 41%, and was especially effective for new double faucets (70%). In the presence of orthophosphates, the relative proportion of particulate Pb (Pbpart) (>0.45 μm) increased from 31% to 54%. However, OrthoP was not efficient to reduce Zn release. The higher CSMR condition was associated with greater dezincification of yellow brass but not of red brass. Corrosion control treatment influenced Pb concentration equilibrium, directly impacting maximal exposure. Significantly higher Pb release (3 fold) was observed for 1 of the 8 faucets connected to Cu exposed to high CSMR water, suggesting the presence of galvanic corrosion.Plumbing containing brass devices or Pb solders may cause Pb concentrations at the tap to significantly exceed established standards ( The main elements of brass, zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu), can both be affected by corrosion, although Zn can be preferentially released. This type of corrosion, called “dezincification” ( Elevated concentrations of chloride (>200 mg/L) ( Galvanic corrosion occurs when a less noble metal is in contact with a nobler one ( Orthophosphate (OrthoP) addition has been demonstrated to be an effective remedy for the release of Pb from Pb pipes ( Adjusting pH and increasing alkalinity, either alone or together, are other commonly used methods for controlling corrosion. The optimal pH for reducing Cu and Pb corrosion varies between 7.5 and 9.5 ( There is no clear consensus on the effectiveness of corrosion control treatments to reduce Pb release from brass devices. This study aims to investigate Pb release from both old and new faucets connected to Cu pipes using configurations that can generate galvanic effects in typical premise plumbing. These faucets were subjected to various water qualities, including corrosion control treatments and increased chloride concentrations, in order to generate galvanic corrosion and dezincification. The study was designed to bridge results from previous laboratory studies ( Lead occurrence was investigated in the water distribution system of a federal penitentiary complex consisting of 15 buildings built in the 1930s and later expanded and partially renovated. This federal system provides water to 236 permanent residents (inmates) and 189 non residents. First, a tap survey was performed on 35 taps at various points of use in the buildings. Dissolved and total metal concentrations were measured (250 mL first draw after >8–24 h of stagnation). Sequential concentration profiling was then performed at fountains ( Two types of faucets were tested at pilot scale: Old faucets from the building complex, used for more than 20 years (24 single and 16 double); New faucets (16 single and 16 double) complying with the current NSF 61 (Section 9) certification. Tests were performed in duplicate on nine configurations of each of the four water quality studied (detailed below), for a total of 72 taps ( A profiling protocol was also used to determine Pb concentrations as a function of stagnation time, in order to estimate the rate of mass transfer in two new double faucets treated with orthophosphates and the application of a pH adjustment. Samples were taken after stagnation periods ranging from 0 to 100 h. These profiling tests were repeated for the same 4 taps before and after treatment. The characteristics of the municipal water feeding the pilot system were the following: mean alkalinity of 25 mg of CaCO Metal analysis was performed on all the liquid samples using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (Elan 6100, Perkin Elmer, QC), following digestion with 0.15% nitric acid (pH < 2) for 24 h at 4 °C based on The composition of each device (faucet and nipple) was determined from cut sections. The internal surface of each device component was scraped, then digested with 5% nitric acid (EMD, Omni Trace) at 105 °C using a protocol adapted from method 3030E ( Surface analysis was performed directly on pieces cut from the devices studied using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). XPS Analyzer (VG, Escalab 3 MKII) was used with the Wagner factor to evaluate the composition of brass deposits at the nipple and the Cu pipe junction (5 samples). Finally, TOF-SIMS (Ion-TOF SIMS IVc) was used to evaluate the composition of deposits formed on new brass exposed to the control water and orthophosphate (3 scans on 2 samples). General regression analyses were performed on log transformed data using the software Statistica (Version 10.0, StatSoft). Nonparametric Mann–Whitney The tap survey results showed that tap metal concentrations were amplified by up to 1000 times for Pb and 1600 times for Zn, as compared to the incoming municipal distributed water results ( Sequential sampling profiling was conducted at two types of taps to determine the impact of flushing on Pb concentrations in the premise plumbing. A source contribution sampling investigation was carried out to identify the location and relative contribution of Pb sources upstream of a double faucet. Sampling volumes were estimated from measurements taken in successive sections of the internal distribution system upstream of this tap. Corresponding samples were then taken directly from the tap and upstream of the premise plumbing (first draw), from the Cu riser distribution pipes with Pb/Sn solder (25 mm Ø) (same tap as first draw but after flushing 1 L from the tap), from secondary gray iron distribution pipes (51 mm Ø) after flushing 1 L from the tap, and from the service line pipes (76 mm Ø) after flushing 1 L from the tap. Various types of brass were used to fabricate the plumbing devices studied, reflecting manufacturing constraints of malleability and resistance to corrosion ( Results presented in  For the old single faucets, OrthoP seemed to decrease Pb concentrations, but not significantly, and pH adjustment was not effective. When connected to a nipple, this decrease was higher and significant ( The impact of greater chloride content on Pb release in the 250 mL tap samples is not evident when considering the combined results of faucets with and without copper pipe connections ( Finally, considering yellow brass faucets and all conditions, adding a connection to a Cu pipe resulted in a non-significant decrease in Pb concentrations within faucets from a mean of 141–134 μg/L ( The fractions of particulate Pb before and after treatment are summarized in The impact of all treatments investigated for regulatory compliance can be assessed by comparing the frequency of exceedances of the 10 μg/L guideline in tap water after extended stagnation ( Stagnation models were built for the new double faucets without Cu piping. The Pb release rate was estimated considering the concentration of Pb in the tap water, the surface area of the faucet in contact with water, the volume of water and neglecting diffusion ( Most devices made of yellow brass showed visible evidence of dezincification in the form of “orange deposits” over their internal surfaces ( Results from sequential profiling and the source contribution investigation indicate that faucets and fountains and their immediate upstream plumbing, were the dominant sources of Pb release in the buildings studied. Considering the low flow rate (1.3 L/min) and the estimated fountain plumbing volume of 1 L, it is not surprising that the Pb concentrations were higher for fountains, ranging from 3.1 to 9.1 μg/L, even after 10 min of flushing. The high variability in metal concentrations observed during the field survey points to multiple sources contributing to particulate and dissolved Pb at the tap. The association between Pb release and that of other metals in both particulate and dissolved forms has been used successfully to identify Pb sources in residential buildings ( Interestingly, Fe concentrations decreased as water progressed through premise plumbing ( Regulatory compliance at the tap is based on Pb concentrations found in a fixed volume at the tap after stagnation, rather than on the mass contributions. When considering concentrations, results from the tap sampling survey, sequential profiling, and the source contribution investigation all suggest focusing on the faucets and the premise plumbing immediately upstream as the main sources of Pb at the tap. Although this section of the plumbing is important to consider, mass contributions from other sections in which greater dilution is available, mostly due to larger pipe diameter downstream in the system, appear more relevant in terms of cumulative exposure and of higher priority for intervention. However, in terms of concentrations at the consumption taps (as observed in Old and new double faucets differed considerably in design, inner volume and somewhat in materials ( Regardless of their potential for lead release, faucets may simply comply with standards because of: (1) their reduced volume of water in contact with the brass during stagnation; and/or (2) the application of a mass based standard. Compared to the Pb concentrations obtained in the pilot faucets, the concentrations at the building taps are orders of magnitudes higher ( The effectiveness of the various treatments tested to reduce Pb after a 24 h stagnation was significant for most faucets, especially in the case of OrthoP. However, an apparent higher particulate Pb fraction was observed following OrthoP treatment. This is the result of OrthoP decreasing dissolved Pb release without affecting particulate Pb release, which is consistent with previous observations for Pb pipes ( The dezincification index proposed by Overall, OrthoP and pH adjustment did not influence Zn release as shown on The impacts of a connection to a Cu pipe in terms of lead and zinc release vary from one type of faucet to another. The contact between a brass faucet and a Cu pipe can generate localized galvanic corrosion and increase Pb release, as we observed for old single faucets connected to a brass nipple and a Cu pipe and exposed to high CSMR ( A number of conclusions can be drawn from the results of this project: Brass elements are a significant source of Pb in the building complex studied. The specific contribution of the faucets to the lead concentrations in 250 mL samples after extended stagnation in the building complex studied was modest in light of the overall release from other sources (eg connecting nipples). However, concentrations of lead released solely from faucets are large enough to exceed the WHO 10 μg/L standard in the first draw sample after 24 h of stagnation for 43% of the control faucets tested. In the field study, the first 250 mL was associated with the higher concentrations at the tap. Using a larger volume of 1 L (as in some regulations) would dilute the high lead concentration in the first 250 mL (including the faucet) and may change the outcome regarding the compliance for those taps depending of the regulatory threshold concentration. Lead leaching results were generally stable, with no unexpected trend in lead release demonstrating the relevance of such experiments. Although testing those faucets connected to a copper pipe with a dump-and-fill may have provided similar results, those experiments have other limitations. In dump-and-fill protocols, devices are in contact with air during the process, are exposed to less water flushing, and diffusion mechanism is constrained by stoppers as well as other factors that do not occur in real plumbing system. pH adjustment and orthophosphate addition both reduce the amount of Pb released from faucets, even from old faucets with corrosion deposits and those connected to Cu piping. Orthophosphate addition was overall the most effective treatment for the entire set of faucets tested, as it reduced the mean amount of Pb released by 41%. Orthophosphate treatment will decrease exposure because of a quick decrease of lead release after 24 h of stagnation and lower equilibrium concentrations even after very long stagnation periods (100 h). Although brass corrosion affects both Zn and Pb release, water quality changes affecting Zn release does not necessarily translate directly to changes in Pb release. Based on our observations, the reduction in Pb release associated with OrthoP treatment occurs while Zn release remains constant and a protective scale containing Zn phosphate is formed. Additional research is needed to better understand the action of OrthoP treatment to reduce Pb release from brass, especially in the long term. Significant Pb release was observed from an old faucet connected to a brass nipple and Cu piping when exposed to high chloride. High Zn release was observed for all new single faucets connected to Cu. This result suggests the impact of galvanic corrosion. Regulatory compliance is based on concentration at the tap after stagnation, rather than on the overall mass contribution. In this study, regulatory monitoring would identify faucets as contributing to Pb exceedances, when in fact overall and sustained release from solder in the riser section may constitute a more significant exposure to address. The study was funded by the  Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at