The study analyzed the performance of a mobile screening device for upgrading coarse wood chips to residential user standards, by removing oversize particles and fines. The machine was designed for transportation to forest landings, logistic terminals and plant chip yards. Average productivity was 1.9 oven-dry tons (odt) h−1, corresponding to a screening cost of 28.5€odt−1. This figure was lower than the price increase obtained by upgrading industrial chips to residential user standards. Hence, screening offered a profit of 4.7€odt−1, or 16% of the original screening cost. The screening process was capable of upgrading chips from industrial to residential specifications, by reducing the incidence of oversize particles below the 1% critical threshold. Screening also allowed a substantial reduction in the content of fines. A similar effect was not verified for crushed wood, which failed to meet the specifications for residential fuel.The quality of wood chips used for energy generation is defined by such parameters as moisture content, ash content, and particle-size distribution ( Particle size distribution is crucial to fuel handling efficiency ( The incidence of both fine and oversize particles depends on a number of different factors, and especially tree part and species ( That explains why several operators are exploring the potential of wood chip screening, after comminution ( The goal of this paper is to analyse the performance of a mechanical screening device specifically designed for removing oversize particles from fuel chips. In particular, our experiment aimed to determine: (a) the productivity and the cost of the mechanical screening device and (b) its actual capacity to remove oversize particles and obtain a high-quality chip, suitable for the feeding of small-size domestic and residential boilers. The authors tested a mobile chip screening device, designed for transportation to forest landings, logistic terminals and plant chip yards. Screening is obtained by pouring the chips on a vibrating bench consisting of four corrugated steel panes tiled upon each other. Oversize particles make it all the way to the end of the bench, whereas commercial chips fall in the space between the tiled panes. The distance between the panes can be adjusted between 2 and 7 Productivity was estimated with a time-motion study, conducted during commercial operation by one of Fontana’s customers, near Turin, in Northern Italy ( The potential profit accrued by screening was calculated by deducting the cost of the operation from the potential price increment, corrected for screening losses. The potential price increment was estimated by collecting delivered price data from six industrial users, and six residential users. If screening allows upgrading industrial fuel to residential boiler standards, then the price difference between the two product grades represents the additional revenue accrued by screening. The actual capacity to remove oversize particles from the chips was estimated in a separate experiment conducted with smaller batches at a forestry Demo, where the screening machine and a number of different comminution devices were exceptionally available at the same place and time. This way one could alternate individual batches from three different chip types in a random pattern. Each batch was represented by a single bucket-load, collected with a front-end loader. The weight of the individual batch varied between 100 and 200  Residential users offer better prices than industrial users, which may justify the effort to upgrade chip quality and raise it to residential standards. However, the market potential of residential users must be put into its specific context. First of all, quality specifications are not limited to particle size distribution, but place a main emphasis on moisture content as well. Hence, screening is not the only measure to be taken for quality upgrading. In fact, screening should only be applied to dry chips or to chips that are going to be dried. Otherwise, the screened product will fail to meet the quality specifications for moisture content and will be diverted to an industrial plant, obtaining no price increase. Secondly, the current demand of the residential sector is substantially smaller than that of the industrial sector (  The productivity study shows that the cost of screening is lower than the price increase obtained through it. In fact, screening may offer a profit of 4.7  Screening does improve particle size distribution, reducing the incidence of both fines and oversize particles. However, the dramatic effect on oversize particles is not statistically significant. The most likely explanation lays in the fact that the proportion of oversize particles is generally a very small one, and is represented by a relatively small number of fragments in each given sample. Hence the very large variability in the proportion of oversize particles, which makes differences difficult to prove statistically with the limited number of samples collected in our study. Further variability is introduced by the relative inaccuracy of the standard method based on the use of horizontal screening devices ( Readers should also notice that both the productivity and the quality studies were conducted with wet chips (except for the crusher product), and that different results may be obtained with dry chips, also due to their different weight and friction qualities. In fact, one may wonder if it would not be best to let chips dry before screening, considering that screened material is destined to residential users, requiring dry fuel. However, wet screening prevents drying the reject fraction, which does not need to be dried and could be diverted to the industrial fuel stream without further processing. Wet screening would also fit very well in modern integrated plants, where part of the fuel is sent to an industrial boiler and used for the active drying of the other part ( Nevertheless, readers must be aware that the study tested only one of the many machines that can be applied to chip size sorting. Many other machines exist, which are used or could be used for chip refining. These include rotary screens ( Screening offers a cost-effective solution to the quality management of wood chips obtained from low-quality wood and wood residues. Screening allows upgrading wood chips to a higher commercial standard, generating additional revenue at a small cost. The simple and inexpensive screening device may facilitate the development of local business, with the highest economic impact on rural communities. This study is a part of the project BIOMASFOR co-funded by