A convenient approach to performing stability analysis of concrete gravity dams is the so-called two-dimensional “gravity method.” However, concrete gravity dams located in valleys with sloped rock foundation abutments behave as three-dimensional (3D) structures and are often able to share compressive and shear loads between adjacent monoliths, especially when shear keys are present. A general 3D limit equilibrium method was developed in this study to compute global sliding safety factors (SSFg
                     ) by considering sequential load redistribution among adjacent monoliths when individual monoliths have mobilized their sliding strength. Two validation examples of the sliding safety assessment of existing dams are presented to illustrate the accuracy and efficiency of the proposed approach compared to that of the full 3D numerical analyses conducted using the distinct element method. It is shown that gravity dams may be formed by individual monoliths on sloped rock foundations that will slide if considered as isolated structures but will constitute a stable assembly when the load-sharing capabilities of monoliths are recognized in the analysis.Two-dimensional structural models are currently widely used for the sliding stability analysis of straight gravity dams. The tallest section, usually located on the valley bottom, is typically selected for evaluation because it is usually the most critical part of the structure. The sliding failure mechanism considers motion only in the upstream–downstream direction In some cases, the conventional 2D analysis method, also known as the gravity method, is not the most adequate analysis method. Three dimensional behavior is most often the case of dams in narrow valleys, in which the height of the blocks can vary significantly, even between adjacent blocks that will experience different displacements. The blocks are subject to different hydrostatic pressures and have different stiffnesses. This is true, for example, when the blocks of the dam possess significant geometric variations that could induce torsional moments across the contraction joint due to the interaction between the concrete monoliths. A change of cross section may occur not only in dams constructed in sloping valleys, but they may also occur in dams constructed in planar valleys, such as in the transition from a non-overflow section to a discharge profile. If vertical joints are provided with shear keys, regardless of whether or not they are grouted, consecutive blocks will probably share some of the load. Some reports of gravity dam failures demonstrate the appropriateness of considering the dam as a three-dimensional body The three-dimensional behavior of gravity dams is well described and documented in the technical literature related to their sliding safety assessment For example, Osterle et al. Lombardi This paper presents a simplified limit equilibrium method for performing a 3D structural safety assessment for straight or slightly curved gravity dams on sloped rock foundations. This method takes into account the interaction between monolith blocks through contraction joints. The results were validated using the discrete element code 3DEC An important issue related to the effective contact between blocks leading to three-dimensional behavior is the individual sliding trajectory induced by a loading scenario. The sliding trajectory could be unfavorable to this interaction, whereby the base-plane geometry of each block, faults and superficial irregularities on the foundation play an important role. Goodman and Bro As a simple illustration of the problem under consideration, Another important issue in stability assessment is the arching effect that takes place, even in the case of straight gravity dams Another issue that should be addressed is the resistance of shear keys and their capacity to overcome high concentrated stresses. Curtis and Lum Finally, for dams located in northern regions where seasonal temperature variations are important, contraction joints might be tightly closed in the summer, corresponding to a monolithic 3D behavior. However, contraction joint opening in winter may limit the ability to transfer forces from one block to another The 3D limit equilibrium method proposed in this paper follows a sequential scheme through the analysis of each block as an individual element. The interaction between blocks in each step is established on the basis of the potential sliding failure mechanism that is accepted as the most probable. This method is somewhat similar to the method devised by Lombardi To properly explain the principles adopted in this study, a simple example in a 2D plane ( A sliding safety factor ( Consider now the case where Because block 1 does not withstand the load Each block, assumed to behave as a rigid body, is geometrically defined by 12 points ( The loads are then computed using a local coordinate system ( Following this scheme, two safety factors can be determined. The first (Eq. The effects of the foundation surface orientation, defined by the parameters The friction angle and cohesion at the concrete–rock interface are indicated in To conduct a global analysis of a set of blocks, an iterative computation scheme was implemented, similar to the wedge method proposed in For each block, the applied forces are compared to the resistance capacity of the dam-foundation interface. When the capacity is greater than the driving loads, the block is considered stable by itself, and no load is transmitted to the adjacent block. Otherwise, if the driving loads reach the dam-foundation strength capacity, the unbalanced force ( The calculation cycle is shown in Some comments related to the method described are given below: The foundation reaction force at the base of the block is assumed to be in the same direction as the resultant of the applied loads to the block such that the unbalanced force is computed as the difference between them. The vertical component of the unbalanced force is not transmitted to the adjacent block and is assumed to be transmitted to the foundation. Otherwise, this component would contribute to the sliding safety factor of the adjacent block. It is assumed that the unbalanced load could be transferred between the blocks either through friction or through the presence of shear keys. This limitation should be verified for the particular dam analyzed. The method described above was applied to dam A in As a reference method, a 3DEC ( Using the proposed methodology, the safety factors for individual blocks were first determined in the absence of any interaction between blocks using a dam-foundation interface friction angle of 45°. The values obtained are shown in  An existing concrete gravity dam (dam B, A numerical analysis was carried out with a 3DEC model ( The results of the proposed method and the load transfer sequence are shown in Safety factors ( This paper presents a general 3D limit equilibrium method for conducting a sliding safety assessment of concrete gravity dams subjected to hydrostatic loads with monoliths resting on sloped rock foundations. The method is able to take into account arbitrary three-dimensional variations in cross-sections, with the dam-foundation contact plane sloping in the upstream–downstream and abutment-valley directions. The classical no-tension Mohr–Coulomb model was adopted to compute the shear strength that could be mobilized along the dam foundation interface. In its present form, the method assumes that compressive and unbalanced shear loads could be transferred between adjacent monoliths. The sliding responses of two existing gravity dams were computed using the proposed method, leading to the computation of global sliding safety factors ( The proposed method is simple to implement, and comparisons with results from 3D numerical analyses indicate that it produces accurate results. It is a powerful tool with which practicing engineers can perform preliminary analyses prior to conducting 3D numerical (FE or DE) analyses that require significant resources and expertise. For the two existing dams analyzed, the sequence of load transfer to adjacent monoliths is initiated from the monolith resting on the plane with the largest abutment-valley inclination angle. A dam composed of individual monoliths that do not possess sufficient strength when considered as isolated structures can be shown to be a stable assembly when load-sharing capabilities of the monoliths are considered in the stability analysis. A limitation of the proposed method is that it assumed the presence of compressive and shear load transfer capabilities of the monoliths. 3D studies that consider different initial contraction joint openings are the next step in assessing the effect of kinematic interactions among sliding blocks, which produce a potential wedge effect that creates a new state of static equilibrium. The financial support provided by