Background and purpose
                  Long term outcome of the treatment of displaced complex fractures of humeral head is rare in the literature especially in greater cohorts. Main purpose of our study was the assessment of long term results of intramedullary nailing of 3–4 part fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  137 patients with 137 three or four-part fractures of the humeral head treated by intramedullary nailing were reassessed after an average follow-up time of 57 (27–93) months. The whole cohort consisted of 85 three-part fractures, 38 four-part fractures and 14 fracture-dislocations. Radiographic and clinical outcome – absolute Constant score (CSabs) and relative Constant score (compared to the contralateral side – CSrel) were evaluated. The rate of complications was recorded. Analysis of the influence of quality of achieved reduction on final functional result and on the development of complications was performed.
               
                  Results
                  125 fractures healed uneventfully. Mean long term CSrel was 81% of the unaffected side. Mean CSrel was 85% in 3-part fractures, 73% in four-part fractures, 80% in three-part fracture-dislocations and 70% in four-part fracture-dislocations. 96 (70%) patients achieved excellent or good results (CSrel higher than 80%), 17 (12.4%) satisfactory results and 24 (17.5%) poor results (CSrel less than 60%). No significant difference was observed in functional results between different age groups. No incidence of non-union was observed, 4 losses of reduction were encountered. We observed 17 cases of complete humeral head necrosis, 14 of them in the group of 4-part fractures. Reduction quality strongly influenced functional result and development of head necrosis. In the group of excellent reduction mean CSrel was 88% and the rate of necrosis was 2%. Moderate reduction quality deteriorated CSrel to 70% and head necrosis rate rose up to 28%. If reduction was poor, mean CSrel was 52% and the rate of complete necrosis rose to 60%.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Long term results confirmed nailing as appropriate treatment strategy for all types of humeral head fractures with limitation of excellent reduction in every age group. Moderate or even poor reduction significantly deteriorates functional results and increases rate of complete necrosis of the humeral head. If good reduction cannot be achieved, treatment strategy should be changed.Treatment of displaced 3–4 part fractures of the humeral head is challenging. Due to a rise in life expectancy, increasing frequency of these fractures can be seen Different techniques of stabilisation like mini-invasive K-wire fixation Single centre cohort study with retrospective part consisted of analysis of documentation and prospectively planned clinical evaluation with structured interview. All patients with displaced three or four part fractures of the humeral head were treated with a proximal humeral nail (Targon PH Original study cohort included 251 patients with 256 fractures. 142 patients with 146 fractures accepted our invitation and were clinically evaluated. 20 patients of the original cohort died, 16 could not be reached or had moved to another address, 12 felt o.k. and rejected further examination, 14 were not able to participate in clinical evaluation (either mentally ill or immobile). The rest (47) received our invitation, but did not reply. Since we used the relative Constant score for data analysis, 4 patients with bilateral fractures and one patient with congenital defect of opposite upper extremity were excluded from our study. The definitive cohort consisted of 137 patients (103 F; 34 M) and re-examination took place at a mean of 58 months (range 27–93) after surgery. Evaluation of patients consisted of retrospective analysis of documentation and prospectively planned clinical examination with interview. In the retrospective part, age, mechanism of injury, time from injury to operation, duration of surgery, quality of achieved reduction and time to healing were assessed. The radiographic findings, the documented operative reports, and all the charts were reviewed. Complications were analysed. Patients were operated in 45-degree beach chair position. Care for sufficient retroversion of the upper arm was taken. Deltoid split approach was performed with skin incision placed according to the patterns of the fracture Early functional after treatment consisted of passive exercises for 6 weeks followed by active exercises for up to 1 year. Reduction strategy in different fracture types is shown in Injury, intraoperative, postoperative and follow up radiographs after 4, 8, 12, 16 and 24 weeks with true antero-posterior (AP) and trans-scapular lateral view (Y-view) of the shoulder were evaluated. If available, complementary to standard plain radiographs CT scans were interpreted. Further X-ray documentation was analysed. Actual X rays were added in the time of definitive follow up. Classification of the fracture type according to Neer Quality of achieved reduction of the fracture was evaluated by two experienced surgeons as measurement of residual distance and angle between main fragments of the fracture from intraoperative and early postoperative X-rays. For measurement the DICOM viewing software was used. According to achieved quality of reduction patients were divided into 3 groups, rated as 1 Follow-up X-rays were used for evaluation of the healing status, signs of head necrosis, complete or partial, or resorption of the greater tuberosity. Cases with resorption and collapse of the head followed by protrusion of the implant into the glenohumeral joint were rated as complete osteonecrosis. Cases with partial resorption of the head which did not lead to head collapse and in which the proximal end of the nail remained underneath the cartilage were rated as partial necrosis. All patients were evaluated using a detailed questionnaire. Functional evaluation was assessed using the Constant Murley scoring system (CS) Measurements of the isometric power (in pounds) of the shoulder muscles were obtained by validated isometric strength dynamometer. Special focus was concentrated on shoulder pain – 15 points on the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for subjective rating of pain was used, with 0 for no pain and 15 for maximum pain. Clinical evaluation of the patients was performed by 3 cooperated shoulder surgeons. Length and history of physiotherapy was discussed. Continuous variables were described using means and standard deviations. Categorical variables were tabulated with absolute and relative frequencies. Pearson's correlation was used to compute associations between variables. The matched numerical outcome was measured using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for functional outcome in multiple groups. Chi square test was used for analysis of relationship between reduction quality and head necrosis development. 137 patients were evaluated (female:male Excellent reduction was primarily achieved in 95 fractures, moderate in 32 fractures and poor in 10 fractures. 121 (of 137) fractures healed without loss of reduction after a mean of 8.9 Follow up was performed on average after 58.3 Eighty one complications were noted in the whole cohort of 137 patients. The most common complication was osteonecrosis: 50 cases. Moreover, 17 cases of complete head necrosis, 12 cases of partial head necrosis and 21 cases of greater tuberosity necrosis were observed. 8 of 17 complete head necrosis developed in the 1st year, 7 in the 2nd year and 2 in the 3rd year. Development of head necrosis was associated with deterioration of CS Our study revealed the following findings: antegrade nailing can be used for the treatment of 3–4 part humeral fractures; functional outcome is strongly influenced by the grade of achieved reduction; development of complete humeral head necrosis abolishes the possibility of good functional result; poor reduction is significantly related with complete head necrosis development. Results of long term of antegrade proximal humeral nailing have been sparse. Even for plating long term studies are rare. Two studies of plating with similar length of follow up were found Hirschmann Functional results of 10-year age groups in our study display suitability of reconstruction strategy at any age ( In our study, three-part fractures were associated with the best outcome, followed by three-part fracture dislocations, 4-part fractures whereas the worst outcome was observed in four-part fracture-dislocations. The majority of studies and reviews presented similar findings The mean outcome of different groups of fractures is influenced by the incidence of complete head necrosis in each group. In our study, the incidence of complete head necrosis was 3% in group of 3-part fractures and 26% in the group of four-part fractures. Nevertheless, the number of head necrosis can rise during the postoperative period and definitive number cannot be known before 3–4 years after the operation, as reported Greiner The mean CS of four-part fractures was in our study 64 points (CS Influence of reduction quality on the functional result was already observed and most studies report worsening of outcome in malreduced or malunited fractures If a nearly anatomic reduction is achieved, good or excellent result can be expected independent of the fracture type, as listed in The overall rate of complications was 81 in 137 patients (59%). 26 patients (19%) underwent additional treatment. Cases with any type of necrosis created the majority of complications (50). The development of head necrosis has a great impact on the patients’ quality of life. In our study, the overall rate of avascular necrosis of the humeral head was 21.0% (12.4% complete and 8.6% partial). Previous nailing studies reported a lower incidence of complete head necrosis (1–3%) In 4-part fractures treated with locking plates, the rate of complete head necrosis has been reported to range between 18 and 55% Factors reported to increase the risk of development of complete avascular necrosis have been the type of fracture, the grade of displacement of medial hinge and the type of procedure It is difficult to differentiate problems coming from the injury itself and those deriving from additional trauma of the cuff during the operative procedure. One advantage of straight nail is that the incision of the cuff corresponds better with its well vascularised part. Healing is less disturbed as in bent nails Our study has some limitations. First, just about half of the 251 treated patients were included. Yet this can be balanced by the fact, that the number of patients is still high and distribution of the fractures is typical. Second, the exactness of division of fracture reduction into different groups of reduction quality may be questioned. The authors tried to decrease this problem by observation of the X-rays together by two experienced surgeons. In rare cases, overlapping of fragments may have led to attribution into ‘poor reduction quality’ group. However, difference in functional result between the better two groups of reduction (moderate and excellent) is not as big as between the group of poor reduction and the other two groups. Poor reduction was in each of our cases obvious. More detailed analysis of location and type of malreduction could add additional findings. In conclusion antegrade nailing can be used for successful treatment of displaced complex fractures of the humeral head including fracture-dislocations. The technique is suitable for all age groups including elderly patients. Appropriate reduction of the fracture is a key for a good or excellent result, influencing the functional result and the development of complete necrosis of the head. If during the operation appropriate reduction and fixation of the fracture is not possible, consideration to arthroplasty should be given in order to avoid the high risk of a poor and painful outcome. No conflicts of interests declared by any of the authors.