The leaching of low-grade oxide zinc ore and simultaneous integrated selective extraction of zinc were investigated using a small-scale leaching column and laboratory scale box mixer-settlers. Di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) dissolved in kerosene was used as an extractant. The results showed that it was possible to selectively leach zinc from the ores by heap leaching. The zinc concentration of the leach liquor in the first leaching–extraction circuit was 32.57g/L, and in the 16th cycle the zinc concentration was 8.27g/L after the solvent extraction. The leach liquor was subjected to solvent extraction, scrubbing and selective stripping for the enrichment of zinc and the removal of impurities. The pregnant zinc sulfate solution produced from the stripping cycle was suitable for zinc electrowinning.Zinc oxide ore is an important source of zinc metal after zinc sulfide ores. With the escalating depletion of zinc sulfide ores, the zinc-bearing minerals such as willemite (Zn Many studies have been done on concentration of zinc oxide ores, yet very little progress has been made. Usually zinc oxide ores are concentrated by flotation or gravity, where the metal recovery is low and the operating cost is high ( Zinc oxide ores can also be treated by pyrometallurgical process ( Solvent extraction is regarded as a highly effective technique of separation and purification, which has been used in the extraction of gold, copper, cobalt and nickel, etc. ( Kongolo efficiently performed the removal of zinc and manganese from industrial cobalt sulphate solutions by solvent extraction and they also investigated the recovery of Cobalt and zinc from copper sulphate solution by solvent extraction with D2EHPA, which has been successfully used to separate cobalt and zinc into their respective solutions ( The solvent extraction of zinc and cadmium from phosphoric acid solutions using di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) in treated kerosene as diluent has been investigated by The mechanism of extraction by the D2EHPA and the nature of the formed metal complexes depend on several factors such as concentration of the metal cations, the nature of organic solvent, the acidity of the aqueous phase and the type of extracted cations ( For zinc extraction with di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) as extractant dissolved in aliphatic diluents, the equilibrium is given by the following scheme reactions ( Solvent extraction may be used for the selective extraction of impurities or valuable metal from process streams into an organic phase. The loaded organic is often stripped with an acid (aqueous) solution to back extract the Zn In this paper, the solvent extraction of zinc from leach liquor using D2EHPA in treated kerosene as diluent has been investigated. It presents the results of a study carried out to determine if solvent extraction could be used to selectively extract zinc from the leach liquor of low-grade zinc oxide ore, which was treated in a large diameter column (4 The zinc oxide ore was obtained from Gaofeng mine in Guangxi province in China, whose chemical composition is given in Leaching of zinc oxide ore by sulfuric acid can be illustrated as With high acidity both the zinc leach rate and the zinc extraction rate increases. However, iron and silica are also dissolved in large quantities ( The size distribution of the zinc oxide ore was 90% passing 20 The experiments were carried out in a column reactor that was fabricated from 5 Support rock selection for use in column leaching process requires the rock be competent, low in carbonate and other acid-consuming minerals, and sized at −30  The original concentration of H Ore was coated onto the support rock by tumbling weighed batches. A layer of uncoated support rock, 100 Solution and raffinate were fed to the top of the column from a feed container by means of a peristaltic pump at a rate of approximately 0.5 The zinc from the PLS was recovered by solvent extraction with D2EHPA. Evaporation losses and sample removal were made up with water (pH 1.2) to a total circulation volume of 80 Di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid was obtained from Tianjing Chemistry Reagent Factory in China. It had a purity of 95%. Kerosene (260#) was obtained from Sinopec Shanghai Gpc Oil Refinery in China and distilled to collect the fraction distilling over 260  The D2EHPA concentration was about 30% v/v diluted in a kerosene-type diluents, the phase ratio ( The mixer-settler cascade used in this work was composed of box-type mixer-settlers made of Teflon with similar internal arrangement and dimension (width When the zinc loaded organic was stripped by sulfuric acid, zinc transfers from organic phase to aqueous phase and iron(III) remains in the organic phase, which is directly stripped by concentrated hydrochloric acid in two-stages. After the iron(III) is removed, the organic phase is again stripped by sulfuric acid in two-stages. A similar mixer-settler cascade was used for stripping. It was composed of box-type mixer-settlers that were connected into two sections of two stages each, one for hydrochloric acid stripping and other for sulfuric acid stripping. The active volume of one mixer-settler was 6.0 In these experiments, the column was set up initially with pH 1.2 medium, but no pH control was exercised during the experiment. And the leach liquor was recycled without adding compensating acid after the solvent extraction process. After about 16 days, solution pH level for the experiment was typically about pH 1.6. Zinc extraction from the column was determined from solution assays, mass of concentrate filled and the initial head grade, as well as on the basis of assays of the residual solids. The extractions of zinc, iron and silica as a function of time are shown in It can be seen in the 16-cycle closed circuit leaching, that the pH of solution where less iron and silica were extracted was from pH 1 to 2. The recovery of iron and silica were 0.6% and 2.4%, respectively. From Compared with agitation leaching, the leaching time of column (heap) leaching is longer. In this case the optimum recovery of zinc was observed after 10 days. The reasons are, the particle size of ores is relatively larger and the acidity of lixiviant is moderate, which decreases the speed of leaching. However, heap leaching of zinc oxide ores has some advantages, such as low acid consumption and low dissolved impurities. Above all, the filtration process is not needed in heap leaching, which is free from the negative effect of silica on solid liquid separation. In the leaching circuit, the accumulation of iron, silica and other impurities was not observed. This is probably because of the absorption in the accumulated ores. In fact, the pH value of the solution soaked into the ores particles increases while the leaching reaction occurs, which results in iron and silica precipitating in the residues. The results for the extraction of various metals with 10% D2EHPA are shown in At the equilibrium pH values about 2.0, the %zinc and calcium extraction were 90% and 70%, respectively, while both of the %copper and cadmium extraction were less than 5%, and the %cobalt and nickel extraction were negligible. Therefore, it may be seen that zinc is easily separated from copper, cadmium, cobalt and nickel at an equilibrium pH value of 2.0. However, zinc cannot be easily separated from calcium. At an equilibrium pH value of low than 1.5, Ca concentration will be around its saturation value under the conditions in the liquor owing to precipitation of gypsum on the bed. Low calcium was extracted than zinc. Fortunately, calcium at less concentration has no effect on zinc electrowinning. The solvent extraction process is shown in The zinc concentration of the leach liquor in the first leaching cycle was 32.57 The co-extraction of impurity metals with D2EHPA is inevitable particularly at high concentrations. Therefore to obtain a pregnant solution with low contamination the loaded organic phase must be scrubbed to remove impurities. The scrubbing solution was zinc sulfate solution at a pH value of 1.5. To maintain the water balance, a high phase ratio (O/A) was necessary. It was found that the co-extracted calcium and the entrainment of silica in loaded organic can be removed by scrubbing, and a phase ratio (O/A) of 10:1 was acceptable. Iron cannot be removed by scrubbing. Hence, zinc was separated from iron by selective stripping. The stripping is the reverse process of extraction, in which zinc transfers from organic phase to aqueous phase, the equation is as follow: Hence the aqueous phase in stripping must be of high acidity to keep the equilibrium move rightwards. The zinc loaded organic phase contained iron(III), and minim of calcium and silica. The percentage stripping increased with the increase of acidity. It was found the iron in the loaded organic phase was hardly stripped by 1.53 Though the iron concentration in the leach liquor was low, it accumulated in the recycle organic, which decreased the loading capacity of the extractant. Hence the recycle organic must be treated periodically to remove the iron(III). The conventional method is that the Fe The long run test indicated that the performance of organic phase is stable in the recycle process and neither emulsion nor third phase formation was observed in the solvent extraction process. The chemical analysis of the pregnant zinc sulfate produced from solvent extraction is shown in This leaching-solvent extraction study has indicated the potential to selectively extract Zn from a low-grade zinc oxide ore. The zinc concentration in leach liquor in the first leaching–extraction circuit was 32.57 This work was aided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 50321402) and National Basic Research Program of China (2004CB619205).