In patients affected by calcium nephrolithiasis, primary hypercalciuria is frequently accompanied by bone demineralisation and increased susceptibility to fragility fractures. The relationship between bone loss and primary hypercalciuria is multifactorial. Organs and tissues which control calcium and phosphate metabolism – bone, intestine, and kidney – are actively involved in the pathogenesis of bone alterations which together form a multi-factorial metabolic disorder. We conducted a comprehensive evaluation of the published data concerning hypercalciuria and nephrolithiasis included in Medline from 1985 and 2005.Hypercalciuria is a well-recognized condition found in 50%-60% of patients with kidney stones. Two consecutive 24-hour samples of urine calcium excretion are generally recommended to minimize potential errors in urine collection and conservation, which could result in an underestimation of calcium excretion. Urine collection should be done with patients consuming their usual diet. Several factors influence urinary calcium excretion in humans. The most important factors are sex, body weight, and nutrient intake, such as sodium, potassium, phosphate, proteins, carbohydrates, and alcohol. Healthy subjects eliminate about 6%-7% of dietary calcium in their urine daily. Consequently, depending on age, excessive dietary calcium (>1500 mg/d) can be associated with the development of hypercalciuria. Dietary sodium intake can increase calcium excretion by about 20-40 mg/d for every 2.3-g increase in sodium. Phosphate metabolism also largely influences urine calcium excretion. Phosphate leakage and consequent hypophosphatemia stimulate the renal production of 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D, which, in turn, increases intestinal calcium absorption and can lead to hypercalciuria. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that dietary proteins are very important regulators of urinary calcium, more so than dietary calcium intake. Hypercalciuria is commonly divided into primary and secondary forms ( Albright et al. More recently, however, it has been suggested that dietetic disturbances should also be eliminated by keeping patients on a daily diet of 1000-1200 mg of calcium and no more than 1-1.5 g protein/kg body weight. In an early classification system of primary hypercalciuria in patients with recurrent calcium stone formation by Pak et al., Pak et al. During the past 20 years, this classification scheme has been revised. Currently, it is believed that 3 different mechanisms, which possibly overlap and operate together, are involved in the pathogenesis of hypercalciuria: increased intestinal absorption of calcium, primary excessive calcium release from bone, and altered renal calcium handling. Recent studies have confirmed that calcium absorption is almost invariably increased in patients with primary hypercalcuria. When present, altered renal handling of phosphate, leading to excessive phosphaturia and hypophosphatemia, might be responsible for overproduction of 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D and secondary intestinal calcium hyperabsorption. A defect in renal tubular calcium reabsorption can be demonstrated in both humans and genetic hypercalciuric stone-forming rats as a cause of idiopathic hypercalciuria. Most patients with primary hypercalciuria have persistently elevated urine calcium, even after a low calcium diet or in fasting conditions, without any secondary parathyroid hyperfunction. This metabolic pattern tends to exclude a major role for both intestinal calcium hyperabsorption and renal calcium leak. The term “fasting hypercalciuria” was given to this condition, which presumably is dependent on a primary excess of calcium output from bone. Once the diagnosis of hypercalciuria has been correctly made, it is necessary to exclude any secondary causes of hypercalciuria ( Because idiopathic hypercalciuria is one of the most common phenotypes in patients with kidney stones, most studies undertaken to assess bone status in patients with hypercalciuria have been conducted in patients with calcium nephrolithiasis. These studies demonstrated that although the bone density is substantially normal or only slightly reduced in patients with calcium nephrolithiasis without hypercalciuria, significant bone loss is present in patients with kidney stones and primary hypercalciuria ( Although most investigators observed significant bone loss in patients with fasting hypercalciuria but not in those with the absorptive form, It has also been suggested that the absorptive and fasting types of hypercalciuria might not in fact be 2 distinct forms of defect, but rather 1 unique disorder. Support for this view has come from a recent study that found that patients with hypercalciuria with the largest proportion of bone loss also presented with the greatest levels of intestinal calcium absorption. Whatever the pathophysiologic mechanism, that primary hypercalciuria, calcium nephrolithiasis, and bone diseases are strictly linked is well established. In particular, the rate of urine calcium excretion correlates with bone loss Thus, to better understand the relationships between primary hypercalciuria and bone loss and the pathogenetic factors shared by these 2 conditions, the roles of bone, kidney, and intestine must be considered. Since the reclassification of the types of primary hypercalciuria in patients with calcium nephrolithiasis proposed by Levy et al., Cytokines are included among these factors because they regulate bone resorption and might be involved in the pathogenesis of bone alterations in patients with primary hypercalciuria. Furthermore, the production and mRNA expression of IL-1 from unstimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells has correlated with spinal bone loss in patients with primary hypercalciuria and nephrolithiasis. Excessive protein intake, especially of animal origin, was found to sharply increase urine calcium excretion and bone resorption and lead to bone loss. Accordingly, sulfate excretion and markers of protein intake, such as urinary or serum urea, also appear to correlate with bone turnover markers and density. No consistent data currently support a substantial role for calciotropic hormones in the pathogenesis of bone loss in primary hypercalciuria. Vitamin D-1,25(OH)2 was reported to be greater in patients with primary hypercalciuria than in controls, and it was observed that this hormone can induce an increase in bone resorption. Although the classic distinction of primary hypercalciuria from absorptive hypercalciuria and fasting hypercalciuria is still maintained, a wide overlap seems to occur between the 2 forms in patients with hypercalciuric stone formation. Studies have reported a decrease in bone density in patients with absorptive hypercalciuria The complex relationships between intestine calcium absorption and bone in women who form stones and have primary hypercalciuria was assessed using the stable strontium method. The revision of our understanding of the pathogenetic aspects of patients with kidney stones and primary hypercalciuria led to the observation that <5% of patients with hypercalciuria have a renal form of primary hypercalciuria. However, other aspects seem to link the kidney to complex relationships occurring between hypercalciuria and bone. Increased urinary phosphate excretion was found in patients with hypercalciuria compared with normal subjects, irrespective of the presence of a true form of absorptive hypercalciuria with renal calcium leak. The bone alterations observed in patients with hypercalciuria resemble those seen in hereditary hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria in which an alteration in the bone mineralization process was observed. Primary hypercalciuria is a very common finding in patients with kidney stones and otherwise primary osteoporosis. It is now clear that the association between bone loss and primary hypercalciuria is not casual, but it is characterized by a complex relationship among intestinal absorption, bone metabolism, and urinary calcium excretion. However, the mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of bone damage in patients with hypercalciuria stone formation still remain only partially understood. The organs and tissues normally involved in the control of calcium and phosphate metabolism appear to take an active part in the pathogenesis of the skeletal alterations in patients with primary hypercalciuria. The skeletal tissue, per se, the kidney, and the intestine are responsible for the appearance, persistence, and clinical course of bone loss in patients with hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis and operate together as a multitissue metabolic disorder.