Supercritical propanol has been used to extract and remove the epoxy resin from the surface of a carbon fibre composite material. The process appeared to be effective when operating above 450°C and above 50bar. The recovered fibres were found to be virtually as strong, in terms of tensile strength, as the virgin fibres indicating that little had been done to damage their structural integrity. One advantage of this method is that the polymer, as well as the fibre material, can be recovered. The polymer was analysed to investigate what chemical transformations had occurred during treatment. It is seems likely that the amide cross-linker is broken in the polymer to release a residue with a relatively high molecular weight.In Europe, glass fibre reinforced products dominate the polymer composites market in terms of volume at 100,000 As the volume of carbon fibre usage grows towards mass production, the need for recycling these difficult materials becomes more urgent. Thermoset composites represent the majority of the market at present and these cannot be reused or recycled easily. Recycling is becoming increasingly important with manufacturers seeking to comply with new legislation Supercritical alcohols are receiving much attention as an alternative reaction media This paper presents an experimental feasibility study which indicates that supercritical propanol might be a suitable fluid for reclaiming fibres and resin from carbon fibre polymer composite materials. The carbon fibre material used a cured, unidirectional material comprising Grafil 34–700 fibres with LTM26EL resin supplied by Advanced Composite Group, Heanor, UK. The nominal fibre content was 62% by mass and essentially represents the kind of typical carbon composite used in the aerospace and automotive industry. High pressure liquid chromatograph Grade Aldrich, 99.99%, Two grams of the composite, in the form of thin sheets less than 1mm thick, was chopped up and placed in the empty reactor tube prior to assembly. The experimental apparatus was then assembled as shown schematically in The PrOH free evaporate was prepared for GPC analysis by dissolving 10 Samples of virgin and scPrOH-treated fibres were all tested using a Perkin–Elmer Pyris 1 Thermogravimetric Analyser to determine the composition on a weight loss basis and also on a mass number basis for comparison. Each sample was heated at 10 The tensile strength and tensile modulus of a single filament was determined using ISO 11566 Samples of treated and virgin fibres were analysed using a FEI-Quanta 600 to determine the physical appearance of the surface of the fibres under high vacuum and an accelerating potential of 20 The experimental procedure for scPrOH-treatment of carbon fibres is extremely simple. During the extraction of the polymer from the surface of the carbon fibres several phenomena were encountered: Above 200–250 approaching 400 the PrOH solution turned to an opaque off-white solution; at 450 after several minutes of this behaviour, the exiting PrOH suddenly became clear and the system pressure dropped suddenly back to the desired pressure. This series of events can be interpreted as an extraction process; below 450   The apparent advantage of PrOH-extraction is two fold. Firstly, the complete removal and subsequent recovery of the epoxy resin residue. Secondly, the high quality of the recovered fibres in terms of surface texture, minimal residual polymer and retained fibre strength. Microwave-assisted extraction has shown promise but requires improvement to minimise the deposition of tarry material on the fibre surface and sand packing. The recovered resin was examined by GPC to determine its molecular weight distribution. The GPC trace ( TGA data suggests that the scPrOH-treated fibres are near identical to the virgin fibres with respect to temperature profile. scPrOH pyrolysis/extraction of epoxy resin to recover fibres is clearly a viable method although much more work will be needed before the economics of the process can be calculated. scPrOH-treatment does not appear to adversely affect the tensile strength of the recovered fibres, and allows for the complete recovery and analysis of the extracted residue. The recovered fibres are largely free from residual epoxy resin, and therefore are comparable in distribution to other extraction methodologies. The method is quick and simple, and can be operated in a semi-continuous mode, which is highly desirable for this type of process. We are currently performing carefully controlled tests in static batch mode to identify the mechanical and chemical changes that are occurring in the scPrOH-fluid during the process. J.R.H thanks Dr. Dan Bratton for helpful advice.