We assessed the clinical and radiographic outcomes of posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (PITFL) release to achieve anatomic reduction of posterior malleolar fractures (PMFs). Nineteen PMFs (>25% of tibial plafond) that could not be reduced after anatomic reduction of distal fibula fractures were managed by PITFL release. The syndesmosis was stressed intraoperatively and by 2 surgeons unaware of the postoperative measurements to increase reliability. The pre- and postoperative fracture gaps and articular step-offs were measured on lateral radiographs of all patients and computed tomography (CT) scans of 12. Tibiofibular clear space and overlap measures at the final follow-up visit were used to evaluate postoperative syndesmotic stability. Postoperative function was assessed using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) scale score. The mean pre- and postoperative fracture gap and step-off of the PMFs was 4.9 mm and 0.4 mm and 2.8 mm and 0.4 mm, respectively. On CT scan, the mean pre- and postoperative fracture gap and step-off was 5.2 mm and 0.5 mm and 3.3 mm and 0.6 mm, respectively. The preoperative and final follow-up tibiofibular clear space and overlap did not differ significantly. The mean follow-up period was 26.7 months, and the mean AOFAS scale score was 90.6 points at the final follow-up. Direct visualization and reduction of PMFs through PITFL release led to satisfactory clinical and radiographic outcomes without causing ankle instability.Posterior malleolar fractures (PMFs) account for 7% to 44% of all ankle fractures and typically result from rotational ankle injury and rarely occur in isolation In most cases of PMF, the posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (PITFL) maintains its integrity and remains attached to the PMF In ankle fractures that did not result in precise reduction of the PMF after anatomic reduction of the distal fibula, we performed release of the PITFL to expose the articular surface and achieve anatomic reduction of the fragments. The purpose of the present study was to assess the clinical and radiographic outcomes and complications of this treatment option. The present study included patients who required open reduction and internal fixation for a PMF. The internal review board of Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong approved the present study. All the patients provided written informed consent. The indications for surgery were bimalleolar or trimalleolar fractures that had violated >25% of the articular surface and had a >2-mm step-off or fracture gap of the ankle joint line on the preoperative lateral radiographs. A total of 52 patients (52 ankles) underwent surgery for displaced PMFFs from March 2010 to February 2013. The mean interval from the date of injury to surgery was 8 (range 4 to 12) days. In 19 of the 52 patients, reduction of the PMFFs could not be obtained after anatomic reduction of the distal fibula and manual reduction of the PMFFs. We performed release of the PITFL through a posterolateral approach for reduction and fixation of the posterior malleolus in these 19 patients. The baseline clinical characteristics of the patients are summarized in the With the patient placed in a lateral position, a longitudinal incision was performed between the anterior border of the Achilles tendon and the fibula. The sural nerve was identified and protected. The lateral malleolar fragments were reduced first and fixed temporarily with a reduction clamp. These were not fixed with the plate because the fixed plate disturbed visualization of the articular surface under fluoroscopy. Reduction of the PMF was evaluated using fluoroscopy. If anatomic reduction had not occurred, the fracture site was exposed, and manual reduction of the posterior fragments was attempted. When reduction failed, the PITFL was released to mobilize the posterior fragments ( For 2 weeks after surgery, short leg splint immobilization was provided. Next, the patients wore a semirigid ankle brace for 6 weeks. After 2 weeks, ankle range of motion exercises were performed intermittently without the brace. Partial weightbearing and crutch ambulation were started when radiographic evidence of bony union was seen after 6 weeks. Full weightbearing and free ambulation were allowed after radiographic and clinical observation of full bony union. Radiographic measurements were performed using a picture archiving and communication system (PiView STAR; Infinitt Healthcare, Seoul, Korea) by 2 orthopedic surgeons (Y.J.K., J.H.L.), and the mean of the 2 independent values was analyzed. Both surgeons were unaware of the other's measurements, and they reviewed the measurement protocol before the study. Preoperatively, plain ankle radiographs, including anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and mortise views, and 3-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) (Brilliance 64; secondary capture device software version; Philips, Best, The Netherlands) images were obtained for all patients. Fractures were categorized using the Lauge-Hansen and Dennis-Weber classification systems on the basis of the radiographic findings and the Haraguchi classification system using the 3D-CT images To evaluate postoperative syndesmotic stability, the tibiofibular clear space and tibiofibular overlap were measured on AP and mortise radiographic views and compared with the values measured at the final follow-up visit. In the 12 patients for whom 3D-CT scans were performed, the anterior and posterior widths of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis were measured pre- and postoperatively. In the sagittal plane, the anterior and posterior widths were measured on the axial image 1 cm proximally to the distal tibial plafond using a method described previously Postoperative function was assessed using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society scale score at the final follow-up visit. All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS software, version 21 (IBM, Armonk, NY) using a paired The mean preoperative size of the articular surface of the PMFFs on the lateral radiographic view was 36% (range 27% to 50%) of the total articular surface. The mean preoperative fracture gap of the PMFFs on the lateral view was 4.9 (range 2.1 to 11.9) mm, and the mean postoperative fracture gap was 0.4 (range 0.1 to 1.2) mm. In the 12 patients who underwent CT scans before and after surgery, the mean preoperative fracture gap of the PMFFs was 5.2 (range 3.0 to 11.9) mm, and the mean postoperative fracture gap was 0.5 (range 0.1 to 1.3) mm. The mean preoperative step-off of the PMFFs was 2.8 (range 1.5 to 7.7) mm, and the mean postoperative step-off was 0.4 (range 0.1 to 0.9) mm on the lateral radiographic view. In the 12 patients who underwent CT, the mean preoperative step-off was 3.3 (range 2.0 to 8.0) mm, and the mean postoperative step-off was 0.6 (range 0.1 to 0.9) mm. On the preoperative AP view, the mean tibiofibular clear space was 4.6 (range 2.1 to 7.1) mm, and the mean tibiofibular overlap was 6.5 (range 0 to 10.5) mm. On the mortise view, the mean tibiofibular clear space was 4.4 (range 1.4 to 9.4) mm, and the mean tibiofibular overlap was 2.8 (range 0 to 5.2) mm. On the AP view at the final follow-up examination, the mean tibiofibular clear space was 4.5 (range 1.6 to 6.1) mm, and the mean tibiofibular overlap was 6.4 (range 4.0 to 10.3) mm. On the mortise view, the mean tibiofibular clear space was 3.9 (range 2.0 to 5.9) mm, and the mean tibiofibular overlap was 4.0 (range 0 to 8.1) mm. On the AP view, no significant differences were found between the preoperative and final follow-up values for the tibiofibular clear space ( The patients were followed up for a mean of 26.7 (range 24 to 38) months. The mean AOFAS scale score was 90.6 (range 61 to 100) points at the final follow-up visit. No cases showed loosening of the implants or fixation loss. At the final follow-up examination, the fractures had healed in all 19 patients. Also, nonunion, delayed union, and wound problems caused by complications were not observed during the follow-up period. In PMFs, restoring joint congruity through anatomic reduction is essential to prevent secondary OA, and a step-off >1 mm of the articular surface is a risk factor for OA In the present study, we performed direct reduction through a posterolateral approach to anatomically reduce PMFFs. The PITFL was dissected to directly expose the fracture, allowing reduction of free fragments and large PMFFs. On the postoperative radiographs, both the step-off and fracture gap were <1 mm. Moreover, the need for additional ligament release or skin incision was lower with the posterolateral approach than with the lateral transmalleolar approach. Manipulation of PMFFs is also possible after temporary reduction of the lateral malleolus. The PITFL originates from the posterior malleolus and runs obliquely and distally to its insertion on the posterior fibula. A cadaver study has reported that the PITFL provides 42% of total syndesmotic stability The present study had a few limitations. First, we had no comparison group. Our results would have been stronger if we had compared the treatment outcomes between patients who had and had not undergone release of the PITFL. Second, the outcomes were not analyzed according to the extent of articular involvement or comminution of fracture fragments. In addition, indications for release of the PITFL were not clearly defined, and CT scans were performed for only 12 cases. Also, the present study had a rather small sample size of 19 patients and relatively short follow-up period of 17 months. Therefore, further studies with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up periods are needed. In conclusion, release of the PITFL could be a new treatment option that seems to achieve anatomic reduction of PMFFs without causing ankle instability in patients with posterior malleolar fractures that persist after accurate reduction of the distal fibula.