Background
                  Supination external rotation (SER) injuries are commonly fixed with a one third tubular neutralization plate. This study investigated if a combination locked plate with additional fixation options was biomechanically superior in osteoporotic bone and comminuted fracture models.
               
                  Methods
                  Using an osteoporotic and a comminuted Sawbones model, SER injuries were fixed with a lag screw for simple oblique fibula fractures, and either a one third tubular neutralization plate or a locking plate. Samples were tested in stiffness, peak torque, displacement at failure, and torsion fatigue.
               
                  Results
                  There was no statistically significant difference in biomechanical testing for fractures treated with a lag screw and plate. For comminuted fractures, locked plating demonstrated statistically significant stiffer fixation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  A combination locked plate is biomechanically superior to a standard one third tubular plate in comminuted SER ankle fractures. There was no biomechanical superiority between locked and one third tubular plates when the fracture was amenable to a lag screw.Ankle fractures are among the most commonly sustained orthopedic injuries affecting both the young and old, with recent data suggesting an increasing frequency of ankle fractures among the elderly Supination external rotation ankle fractures account for 45–75% of all ankle fractures. These require fixation when associated with talar displacement or significant fibular displacement Ankle fractures in the elderly present a unique set of challenges. Such patients often have multiple medical comorbidities, higher likelihood of skin complications, risk of malunion and nonunion, and significant morbidity associated with casting Previous authors have evaluated locked constructs in the distal fibula demonstrating equivocal biomechanical stability using 3.5 56 osteoporotic Sawbones models were acquired from Pacific Research Laboratories (Vashon, WA). Osteoporotic Sawbones include reduced cortical thickness and open cell, cancellous foam inside. An alignment jig was created to allow an osteotomy to be made in each sawbone consistent with the oblique fracture pattern evident in SER injuries. This was standardized to simulate an AO/OTA 44-B2 fracture, translating from anterior inferior to posterior superior at an angle of 60 degrees and initiated anteriorly 2 Following creation of the fracture in the manner described above, twenty specimens were reduced and fixed with one 3.5 Following monotonic testing, torsion fatigue was then assessed in a second set of twenty sawbones fixed in the same manner. We loaded in axial torsion (external rotation) from 0 to 422 To simulate a comminuted fracture model, sixteen osteoporotic samples were treated with a one third tubular neutralization plate or a lateral locking plate with a 2 A two way analysis of variance compared the external rotation stiffness between treatment groups at each dynamic loading magnitude, with significance set to For simple oblique fractures treated with a lag screw and plated with either a one third tubular plate or a locked plate, mean peak torque (±1 SD) of samples instrumented with the one third tubular plate was 679 There was no statistically significant difference in construct stiffness between the one third tubular plate and the locking plate, with a stiffness of 25.6 For the sixteen samples simulating comminuted fracture in osteoporotic bone, samples instrumented with locked plating demonstrated statistically significantly stiffer fixation when compared to one third tubular plate fixation at magnitudes great than thirty percent of the mean peak failure torque ( Ankle fractures, particularly among the elderly, are likely to continue to increase over the ensuing decades. Currently they are the third most common fracture in the elderly, trailing only hip and wrist fractures. With this increased incidence, fixation of unstable osteoporotic ankle fractures will continue to challenge orthopedic surgeons. Goals of treatment of an ankle fracture should include restoration of the ankle mortise and return to preoperative level of function. Previous studies have demonstrated that fractures surgically repaired have less posttraumatic arthritis, shorter casting times, and increased return to preoperative level of mobility Previous biomechanical studies have been performed evaluating osteoporotic ankle fracture fixation, and it has been demonstrated that locking plates provide a superior construct to nonlocking plates in a supination external rotation ankle fracture in osteoporotic bone, when comparing peak torque to failure, angle at failure, and maximal torque This study investigated construct stiffness in an osteoporotic Sawbones model using a combination locked plate in comparison to a standard one-third tubular neutralization plate with interfragmentary screw fixation of a standard SER fracture pattern. We then further investigated comminuted distal fibula fractures occurring in a supination external rotation injury pattern where no lag screw was available and bridge plating technique was used with either a one third tubular plate or lateral locked plate. Similar to previous studies, our investigation demonstrated no significant difference between locked and standard plating in standard oblique fibula fractures treated with a lag screw and neutralization plating. No statistically significant difference was found in peak torque, stiffness, or cycles to fatigue between a locked plate and one third tubular plate and locked plates were statistically stiffer only at 50 and 100 cycles. However, this study demonstrated superior biomechanical stability using a locked plate versus a standard one third tubular plate in osteoporotic bone models with significant comminution at peak torques greater than 30 percent. A previous study demonstrated no significant difference between locked and standard plating in comminuted Weber C pronation external rotation fractures While this study failed to demonstrate a significant difference between a combination locked plate and a one third tubular plate in osteoporotic fractures without comminution, it does contribute to the current understanding of distal fibula fixation. Furthermore, locked plating with 2.7 There are several limitations to our study. First, the study was performed on synthetic bone models, which may not represent true fixation characteristics, but created a reproducible construct that allowed us to compare the fixation method without the variability of cadaveric bones. Secondly, the number of specimens tested may not have been enough to detect an actual difference between both groups. However, a difference was detected in the comminuted fracture model with the same number of samples. The variability in the number of cycles to failure in torsional fatigue testing in the noncomminuted model was likely due to the design of the dynamic test. The torque magnitude choice (65% of the monotonic mean torque value) for dynamic analysis was larger than optimal and warranted a similar probability for implant failure and survival. A smaller torsion magnitude would likely have reduced the variability with regard to the number of cycles to failure but also increased the duration of the test. To minimize this variability, the authors used a dynamic torsional ramp to failure test method for the comminuted model. This facilitated a more repeatable and less variable test that was likely of more utility. A combination locked plate appears to be biomechanically superior to a standard one third tubular plate in comminuted supination external rotation ankle fractures and should be considered for fibular fixation in the osteoporotic individual. There was, however, no biomechanical superiority between locked and one third tubular plates when the fracture pattern was a simple oblique fracture amenable to lag screw placement and thus the choice of hardware for such injuries is perhaps best dictated by surgeon preference. None. We would like to thank Synthes Inc. for use of their plates and screws for this study.