Surface roughness plays a critical role in flotation, as it has a marked impact on bubble-particle interaction, i.e., attachment and detachment. In the present study, the effect of surface roughness on the detachment between bubble and glass beads with different contact angles was investigated using a home-built system for measuring bubble-particle detachment. By applying a simple harmonic oscillation to a bubble-particle aggregate, the critical detachment force could be calculated from the critical amplitude based on Newton's second law. Smooth and rough glass beads were hydrophobized simultaneously using octadecyl trichlorosilane vapor to ensure that they have the same local contact angle in parallel experiments. The results show that the detachment force of a smooth particle was higher than that of a rough particle when the local contact angle with the particle surface was below 90° (hydrophilic). However, the detachment force of a rough particle was higher than that of a smooth particle when the local contact angle was above 90° (hydrophobic). Surface roughness rendered the hydrophilic bubble-particle aggregate less stable while hydrophobic bubble-particle aggregate more stable. The decrease in apparent contact angle and contact line length decreased the detachment force of the hydrophilic particles, while an increase in these parameters increased the detachment force of the hydrophobic particles.Flotation is widely used for the separation of fine particles in mineral processing and is based on the difference in surface hydrophobicities of the particles to be separated [ Numerous theoretical and experimental studies have been carried out to elucidate the bubble-particle detachment mechanism [ It is well known that surface roughness plays a critical role in flotation, as it has a marked impact on bubble-particle interaction, i.e., attachment and detachment [ Smooth micrometer glass beads with an average diameter of 542 μm were purchased from Cospheric LLC. (Santa Barbara, America) and used as the samples. Rough glass beads were prepared via hydrofluoric (Aladdin Industrial Corporation, Shanghai, China) acid etching. Before the etching test, the glass beads were cleaned by ultrasonication in acetone, follow by ethanol and Milli-Q water. The etching time was fixed at 2 min. Samples were immediately rinsed with Milli-Q water after etching. SEM images of smooth and rough glass beads are shown in To prepare glass beads at varying contact angles, smooth and rough glass beads were hydrophobized simultaneously via OTS (Aladdin Industrial Corporation, Shanghai, China) chemical vapor deposition for different deposition time. Abundant hydroxyl functional groups were introduced via plasma activation before OTS deposition. A flat glass slide was also placed along with the glass beads in the OTS vapor chamber to obtain the local contact angle of the glass beads. It should be noted that the apparent contact angles of smooth and rough glass beads are different owing to the effect of surface roughness [ A system for measuring bubble-particle detachment ( Therefore, the maximum vibration force Thus, the total detachment force is equal to the sum of the maximum vibration force and the apparent weight of the particle. In the present study, the density of the glass bead is 2.5 g/cm The durations of OTS deposition on glass beads were 10, 30, 60, 180, and 360 min, corresponding to local water contact angles of 41.6°, 50.5°, 60.5°, 70.2°, and 92.0°, respectively. The effect of surface roughness on the detachment between bubble and glass beads with different local contact angles are shown in For particles with contact angle <90°, it has been suggested that the surface roughness has a negative effect on the bubble-particle attachment and floatability [ From the force balance point of view, the detachment force should be equal to the maximum attachment force, i.e., the capillary force [ The effect of surface roughness on the detachment between bubble and glass beads with different contact angles was investigated using a home-built system for measuring bubble-particle detachment. It was found that the detachment force of smooth particle was always higher than that of rough particle when the local contact angle of the particle surface was below 90°. However, the detachment force of the rough particle was higher than that of smooth particle when the local contact angle was above 90°. Analysis of the attachment state of the bubble-particle aggregate suggested that the decrease in apparent contact angle and contact line length was responsible for the decreased detachment force of the hydrophilic particles, while the increase in apparent contact angle and contact line length was responsible for the increased detachment force of the hydrophobic particles. Further investigations are required to directly measure the detachment force between bubbles and particles with varying surface roughness. The authors claimed that there are no conflicts of interest to declare. This work was supported by the