In order to analyse the densification behaviour of powder compacts during hot isostatic pressing (HIP) at elevated temperatures, a power-law creep constitutive model based on the plastic deformation theory for porous materials was applied to the densification. Various densification mechanisms including interparticle boundary diffusion, grain boundary diffusion and lattice diffusion mechanisms were incorporated in the constitutive model. The power-law creep model in conjunction with various diffusion models was applied to the HIP of 316L stainless steel powder compacts under 50 and 100MPa at 1125°C. The results of the calculations were verified using literature data. It could be found that the contribution of the diffusional mechanisms are not significant under the current process conditions.The consolidation or densification of metal and ceramic powders during hot isostatic pressing (HIP) has been the subject of a number of recent experimental For the macroscopic modelling of HIP, Kim and Lee In this paper, the macroscopic constitutive model developed recently by Kim and Lee One general form of the yield function proposed by many investigators is For plasticity of pressure-dependent porous materials, Doraivelu et al. To determine the deformation of the body consistent with An effective strain rate For uniaxial tension or compression on fully dense materials, a generalised power-law relation for viscoplastic densification is given by By combining The other densification mechanisms which should be considered are boundary diffusion, lattice diffusion and interparticle boundary diffusion mechanisms The proposed power-law creep constitutive model and the other densification models are used to calculate the densification behaviour of 316L stainless steel powder compacts. Creep parameters for solid 316L stainless steel from The overall densification rate can be obtained by summing the contributions of the densification rates of power-law creep, interparticle boundary diffusion, grain boundary diffusion and lattice diffusion mechanisms.  The contribution of each relative density increase by different densification mechanisms is compared in For a pressure of 100 The container effect, which induces an inhomogeneous density distribution within the compact and retards densification during HIP, may be a source of the lower densification rate under low applied pressure. Finite element analyses incorporating the effects of container, temperature distribution and grain growth are in progress and the results will be presented separately. A power-law creep constitutive model developed recently was applied to the densification behaviour of powder compacts during HIP at elevated temperatures. The model is based on the plastic deformation theory for porous materials. In addition, interparticle boundary diffusion, grain boundary diffusion and lattice diffusion mechanisms were incorporated in the constitutive model. The effect of the evolution of relative density was considered by using mass conservation. The power-law creep and various diffusion model was applied to HIP of 316L stainless steel powder compacts under 50 and 100 This work was supported by Grant no. 2000-1-30100-007-3 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation.