Active screen plasma nitriding is a new and common method for deposition of Iron nitride. Since techniques such as Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD), Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD) and Plasma Assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition (PACVD) are usually applied in order to deposit the titanium nitride and each of these methods has its own problems, in this research active screen plasma nitriding method was introduced as a novel approach for deposition of nano sized titanium nitride. H11 tool steel samples were coated by plasma nitriding method at 550 °C for 5, 7.5 and 10 h, using three gas mixtures consisted of H2/N2 = 3, 1 and 1/3. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) were employed to investigate the coating properties such as grain size, layer thickness and chemical composition. Results showed that the proportion of H2 in the gas mixture was a crucial point in order to obtain a perfect coating. By increasing the coating time, the grain size and the layer thickness increased. XPS results showed that the coating was mainly consisted of TiN + TiN0.1 together with a small amount of TiO4.Titanium nitride, TiN In this research, Active Screen Plasma Nitriding Technology is introduced as a novel technique for deposition of nano sized TiN on several substrates such as H11 tool steel. Moreover, some properties of deposited coatings are investigated in order to determine the effect of processing conditions on the coating. In this research, H11 tool steel was used as substrate material. Chemical composition of the steel sample is shown in Disk type specimens with 20 mm diameter and 4 mm height were prepared. Then they were cut into two equal parts along their axis. Upper and lateral sides of disks were ground and mirror polished with SiC papers from 120 to 1200 grit and 0.5 μm alumina powder, respectively. For nitriding, the polished specimens were tightly fastened together and placed in a titanium screen with 0.8 mm thickness, where they were plasma nitride in a pulsed DC plasma reactor. Several experiments were employed for determining the optimum values of the parameters related to screen and the location of samples. The results are listed in Plasma nitriding chamber was evacuated up to10 Insulators used in active screen plasma nitriding technique play an important role in nitriding process. The insulator should preserve its insulation characteristics during long nitriding periods, otherwise the formation of plasma on the insulator and the sample, causes the nitriding system to change from active screen to conventional plasma nitriding. Besides, it is known that titanium nitride has a quite high electrical conductivity so that at long nitriding times, the insulator loses its insulation property and implies defects over the ASPN system. In order to identify the suitable insulator, several tests were carried out. Different materials such as cement, SiC tablet, fired and unfired china, gypsum tablet and porous chamotte were tested. Visual investigations over the insulators and coated samples at long periods of nitriding revealed that porous chamotte keeps its insulation properties better than the others. In order to investigate the coating properties such as grain size, layer thickness and chemical composition of coating SEM (VEGA П TESCAN, Czechoslovakia and Philips-XL30, Holland), XRD (Seifert, 3003 TT) and XPS (X-ray source, Twin anode, VG Microtech Using Al kα = 1486.6 ev) were employed. Optical metallography results showed that this technique is not suitable to identify the compound and diffusion layers (if presents). Images obtained from optical microscope, even at high magnifications, showed none of these layers. Most probably due to low thickness of compound layer and its poor adhesion, the TiN compound layer was detached from the substrate during the sample preparation. The standard free energy of nitride formation of several nitride forming elements present in the substrate were calculated at the processing temperature (550 °C). The results are listed in It can be concluded from the data in the TiN has a golden yellow color and the presence of the other undesirable phases such as titanium oxide changes its color X-ray diffraction method was employed for phase identification. A typical X-ray spectrum for a TiN coating deposited according to sample 103 conditions (25%N It can be concluded from In order to determine the surface chemical composition and the state of the elements in the deposited layer, X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) was utilized for sample 50. Scanning electron microscope was used to investigate the coating morphology and measurement of the grain size and layer thickness. Typical SEM images from three samples coated at 50%H It can be seen that in addition to the grain growth another phenomenon occurs. In the case of samples treated for 5 and 7.5 h at different atmospheres, the SEM results showed that the coating morphology of all samples is similar. In the other words, the coatings are consisted of small semi spherical particles which have grown and covered the substrate surface. But for 10 h-treated samples it can be seen that only the morphology of sample 103 (25%N Based on what mentioned above it can be concluded that presented EDS results can relatively approve the stated theory that the insulator becomes electrically conductive faster at 50%N In another test an untreated sample was coated for 20hr in a 25%N It can be seen that the morphology of the coating has completely changed. The coating is consisted of separated particles which are similar to coating morphology of the samples 100 and 101. So it can be concluded that by increasing the nitriding time to more than 10 h, in all studied atmospheres in this research, the coating process will have negative effect on deposited coatings. Grain sizes of the coating were measured using Clemex image analyzer software. Variations of grain size with nitriding time and H It can be seen in It can be seen that similar to the variations of grain size, by increasing nitriding time (  Applying active screen plasma nitriding method for less than 10 h causes the formation of nano sized particulate titanium nitride layer on the surface of H11 tool steel. H XPS results showed that the titanium nitride deposited coating has a chemical composition of TiN + TiN Most of the coatings deposited using ASPN technique, are less than 1micron thick, but by increasing the nitriding period both the coatings thickness and the grain size increase.