This study examines mechanical activation as the pre-treatment method for ultramafic mine waste containing olivine and serpentine. Specific surface area, microstructure and carbonation conversion in a direct aqueous carbonation process were measured to test the effects of mechanical activation. It was found that, as a result of the grinding energy input on materials, surface area was increased, crystallite size was reduced and microstrain was accumulated, carbonation conversion was enhanced. With the presence of serpentine content, the formation of new surface area was promoted and the disordering of forsterite structure was prevented. Forsterite makes up the majority of the content and contributes to CO2 sequestration under selected carbonation conditions. For the purposes of mineral carbonation, the mechanical activation of mine waste is preferable to simply grinding pure olivine.In order to mitigate the effects of climate change, a worldwide effort is being launched to use mineral carbonation with respect to the permanent storage of CO To enhance the rate of mineral carbonation at any specific ultramafic mine site, it is important to develop individualized methods for their particular waste mineralogy. Research up to now, demonstrates that various carbonation routines have been developed, including direct or indirect carbonation route at gas-solid or aqueous phase ( Mechanical activation uses mechanical force to accelerate a downstream process, through induces changes in the surface properties and crystal structures of minerals. Until recently, research on mechanical activation has focused on comparing individual mineral responses to various grinding conditions ( The aim of the present paper is to investigate the physical, structural and chemical properties of mine waste and which has been subjected to intensive dry milling. Different types of experimental techniques will be used to recognize mechanically-induced changes in mine waste. The mine waste rock (TAW) was provided by Hard Creek Nickel Corp. from their Turnagain deposit in northern British Columbia, Canada. The olivine foundry sand (TSO) was obtained from the Twin Sisters Deposit in northwest Washington State, USA. TSO samples were used as a control. The starting materials for mechanical activation have a top size of 106 The mechanical activation tests were conducted using a planetary ball mill (Micro Mill Pulverisette 7, Fitsch GmbH, Germany). In each test, 10 The carbonation tests were conducted in a 100 The specific surface area was measured using a nitrogen adsorption instrument (Autosorb-1MP, Quantachrome, Boynton Beach, USA) at 77°K and calculated using Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. X-ray diffraction data were collected using a Bruker D8 Focus Bragg-Brentano diffractometer (Bruker AXS GmbH, Germany) working at a step size of 0.03° over the two theta range of 3–80° with CoKα radiation. X-ray powder diffraction data for the sample were refined using the Rietveld program Topas 4.2 (Bruker AXS GmbH, Germany). The procedures for quantitative analysis are the same as those found in Mechanical activation of TSO and TAW was performed in the planetary mill, and the dependence of net specific milling energy The   The mechanical activation in dry condition has improved the This study examines the characteristics of initial and mechanically-activated mine waste and their performance in direct aqueous mineral carbonation. Some key findings are as follows: Much as in the mechanical activation of TSO, the mechanical activation of TAW results in an increase in the surface area, and a disorder of the crystal structure, and an enhancement in the carbonation conversion with increased grinding time. During the mechanical activation of TAW, a small amount of serpentine converts to olivine, which assists with an increase in the surface area, but mitigates the disorder in the crystal structure of forsterite and reach to a higher carbonation than mechanically-activated TSO with respect to a defined specific energy input. Forsterite is the primary mineral that is being activated and carbonated. Unreactive lizardite serves only to assist forsterite in reaching a higher level of mechanical activation during high-energy dry grinding. The research presented in this paper was supported by a