The objective of this study was to analyse the effectiveness of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) with Solar and UV radiation (UV/H2O2, UV/K2S2O8) for the degradation of hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ), a widely used diuretic drug, in aqueous solution focusing on the influence of four experimental parameters: initial concentration of HCTZ, solution pH, nature of the water matrix, and initial concentration of radicals. The obtained results showed that using both kinds of direct photolysis (UV and Solar), the percentage of degraded HCTZ was low, but there was a decrease in the degradation rate favored by the increase of the initial concentration of this pollutant. In addition, the degradation rates were higher at acid pHs. With regard to the nature of water, the degradation rate varied in the order: ultrapure > superficial > tap water. This is due to the presence of organic and inorganic matter (bicarbonates, nitrates, and chlorides) in surface and tap water, that react with the radicals generated, which reduces the availability of radical species, generating competitive kinetics. The presence of radical-promoter species increased the degradation rate of the pollutant, reaching a degradation of 100% of HCTZ after 20 min of treatment. The results obtained point out that the degradation rate was higher in the presence of HO radicals. This behavior was attributed to the higher oxidation power of HO versus 
                        
                        Image 2
                      radicals. The determination of the degradation by-products led to structures very similar to the parent compound. For example, the corresponding hydroxylated dechlorinated derivative of HCTZ was found in all the systems used. The cytotoxicity test showed that these byproducts have a lower toxicity than the original product. Finally, the economic viability study confirmed that the UV/
                        
                           
                              
                                 K
                              
                              
                                 2
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 S
                              
                              
                                 2
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 O
                              
                              
                                 8
                              
                           
                        
                      system has the lowest cost.The indiscriminate use of pharmaceutical products in developed countries has increased exponentially in recent decades and some of them are considered as emerging pollutants ( Currently, there are few studies on the degradation of HCTZ in aqueous solution and they are focused on solar photolysis ( Thus, the objectives of this study were: i) to determine the quantum yield and photochemical kinetic parameters of the degradation process of HTCZ by UV photolysis with the effect of the different operational variables (initial HTCZ concentration, medium pH and chemical composition of different types of water), ii) to investigate indirect photodegradation in the presence of radical (HO All chemical reagents used (hydrochlorothiazide, sodium nitrite, hydrogen peroxide, sodium persulfate acetonitrile, formic acid, methanol) were high-purity analytical grade and supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. Hydrochlorothiazide concentration in aqueous solution was determined by reversed phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) as described elsewhere ( Degradation by-products of HCTZ were identified for all experiments by using an Acquity ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Waters) as described elsewhere ( p-chlorobenzoic acid (pCBA) and cytarabine (CTB) concentration in aqueous solution was determined by HPLC using the above liquid chromatograph, as described in detail elsewhere ( The photodegradation experiments of HCTZ by solar radiation were carried out in the solar simulator model 1500 Solarbox, Neurtek, equipped with a Xenon lamp of 1500 W (PHILIPS XOP-15-OF, 1500 W) where the photodegradation experiments were conducted in an irradiance of 450 W m [Atz] is the o-NB concentration. ϕ is the quantum yield of o-NB, 0.410 + 0.02 mol Eins  b is the path length in cm of the light, 2.2 cm. The photon flow calculated was 2.95 × 10 The experimental system consists of a photoreactor equipped with a low-pressure mercury lamp (254 nm), Heraeus Noblelight, TNN 15/32 model, (nominal power 15 W). The photoreactor is filled with ultrapure water and has a holder system with capacity for six quartz tubes and connected to a thermostatic bath. Regarding the photoreactor dimensional characteristics, it has an internal diameter of 13 cm and a height of 45 cm and it is made of steel. The solutions, with an initial concentration of 5.0 × 10 The influence of the different operational parameters such as solution pH (3.0, 8.5, 10.0), initial HCTZ concentration (3.4 × 10 One of the critical factors to quantify the efficiency of the photochemical process is the quantum yield, which is defined as the number of molecules that have undergone a photochemical process for each photon absorbed by the system and it is calculated using Equation Once the lamp is stabilized and the temperature is controlled, the photoreactor is put into operation, the HCTZ experimental data are obtained preparing HCTZ solutions with an initial concentration of 5.0 × 10 Reaction rate constants of HCTZ with The apparent photodegradation rate constant normalized by the lamp energy ( The HCTZ elimination percentage for a radiation dose of 400 J m To determinate the concentration of Reorganizing and integrating the previous equations, the following equations are obtained: DFT calculations were performed using the GAUSSIAN09 suite of programs ( To study the cytotoxicity of the reaction by-products, a MTS assay (colorimetric method for sensitive quantification of viable cells in cell proliferation assay) was used to determine the viability (%) in the human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK-293), which was obtained from the University of Granada (CIC cell bank). This procedure was described in detail elsewhere (  Significant differences are observed when comparing the results obtained by using both type of radiations. Thus, k value from UV radiation is three times higher than that obtained using solar radiation, reaching the complete HCTZ degradation in less time (    In order to study the influence of the pH solution in HCTZ photodegradation, it is necessary to focus on the speciation diagram. Depending on this pH, HCTZ molecules are in neutral or anionic forms ( Hydrogen peroxide has a high quantum yield to decompose and generate radicals when exposed to the action of light. Theoretically, 2 mol of hydroxyl radicals are produced from 1 mol of In addition, they can also react with other species besides HCTZ (Reactions (18)–(20)) (  Peroxodisulfate is a strong oxidant with a reduction potential of E Theoretically each molecule of peroxodisulfate in the presence of UV produces two sulfate radicals as shown in the reaction (21). However, in practice it produces less than 2 mol of sulfate radicals because the quantum yield is less than one ( To determine if these recombination reactions are capable of competing with the HCTZ degradation, the reaction rate constant of the  HCTZ has been detected in waters of different chemical matrices, which contain organic and inorganic substances that can affect its degradation kinetics. For this reason, we have selected three different types of water: distilled, tap, and surface water, whose characteristics are shown in  The degradation rate constant for HCTZ varies, in general, according to the water nature in the following order: distilled > superficial > tap, except in the UV/K Regardless of the chemical composition of water, the degradation rate of HCTZ is greater when using UV/H To compare the efficiency of both systems (UV/ The study of the by-products generated after a water treatment is crucial, since, as mentioned throughout the study, it is possible that by-products formed during the reaction processes are more toxic and resistant than the original product. Mass spectra of the HCTZ matrix were obtained at different times, by low-resolution mass spectroscopy, for the different systems used. Based on the by-products identified, a degradation pathway is proposed in First, in the case of solar radiation, chromatograms at 60 min showed the disappearance of the starting material and present just small quantities of the degradation by-products. At 30 min it is possible to see maximum quantities of by-products with retention times (rt) of 1.27 and 1.51 min corresponding to masses of 251 and 278 u, respectively, both corresponding to structurally related compounds, see structures In the case of UV radiation, a faster and more complete degradation process occurs and after 20 min, no significant quantities of starting material is found and only a very small presence of degradation products could be observed. In particular, a by-product having a rt of 1.46 min could be detected with an assigned mass of 278 u, which corresponds with the already described structure For the UV/H This system operates in a similar way to the previous case, and after 2 min, the starting material has almost completely disappeared appearing traces of the already described structure The cytotoxicity of the degradation by-products of HCTZ was studied as a function of time, both for compounds from the experiments carried out by UV and Solar radiation, at the different pHs studied, as well as for compounds formed by indirect photolysis, this latter is shown in The viability of all cell cultures in the presence of HTCZ or the different degradation by-products was >75%. The comparison of the viability of by-products treated cell cultures with the viability of original product treated cell cultures (time 0) shows, in general, a greater viability of the by-product treated cells, reason why these products are considered less toxic than the original product. Similar behaviors have been found for other pharmaceutical pollutants ( The applicability of the different systems in the treatment plants depends both on its effectiveness and its cost, for this reason an economic analysis has been carried out based on the EE/O concept developed by The total cost of UV/ Based on the experimental results, direct photolysis by solar and UV irradiation achieves low percentage degradation after 1 h of treatment due to the low absorbance of HCTZ in the range of wavelengths used in this study. Thus, the direct photolysis is insufficient and, therefore, this method widely used for the disinfection of water is not adequate to remove this diuretic. Direct photolysis by UV irradiation of HCTZ is influenced by its initial concentration, thus, the lower the initial concentration of the pollutant, the higher its rate. This observation is related to the energy absorbed by each HCTZ molecule. Moreover, the degradation rate is favored at acidic pH values where the neutral form of HCTZ is present in the medium. The chemical nature of water also plays an important role in the HCTZ degradation, which, in general, decreases in the order: distilled > superficial > tap. The presence of radical promoters has a significant impact on the overall degradation process. The rate of photodegradation and mineralization varies depending on the system used, decreasing in the order: Solar radiation < UV < UV/ By-products were found in really small quantities, mainly for the UV/H Conceptualization, M.S.-P. and J.R.-U.; methodology, M.S.-P., M.F.-P. and M.R.; software, A.J.M.; validation, M.R. and M.F.-P.; formal analysis, M.F.-P., M.V.L.-R. and M.S.-P.; investigation, M.F.-P. and M.R.; resources, M.S.-P.; data curation, M.F.-P. and M.R.; writing—original draft preparation, M.F.-P. and M.R.; writing—review and editing, J.R.-U., M.V.L.-R. and A.J.M.; visualization, M.S.-P. and M.V.L.-R.; supervision, J.R.-U. and M.V.L.-R.; project administration, M.S.-P.; funding acquisition, M.S.-P. All the authors contributed to technical discussions regarding this research. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. The authors acknowledge financial support from the Spanish The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at