Rheology of slurry significantly influenced the grindability, fine grinding performance and energy consumption of industrial minerals in wet grinding. The solid concentration, particle size, temperature and the dispersant, which affected the rheological characteristics of pyrite slurry and the biooxidation process were investigated in this study. This research aimed at the wet grinding process improved by the control of slurry rheology and getting a biocompatible dispersant.
                  The results revealed that the viscosity increased with the solid concentration, which was in agreement with the Chong model. There was a critical concentration (40wt.%) that led to the flow behavior of slurry transformed from Newtonian fluids to shear-thinning non-Newtonian fluids which fitted to the Casson model. It was also found that the apparent viscosity of slurry increased with the decrease of the particle size and the temperature at high solid concentration.
                  Sodium Hexametaphosphate (SH) was selected experimentally as an effective dispersant for the mineral slurry. The appropriate concentration of SH was also determined at the range from 0.005wt.% to 0.05wt.%. The addition of dispersants could reduce the viscosity and yield stress, increase the zeta potential (ζ) of suspension pronouncedly. No negative effects on the growth rate of microorganisms and the pyrite biooxidation were observed. Therefore, dispersant separation and recovery process could be avoided.Biooxidation of sulfidic-refractory gold minerals, such as pyrite or arsenopyrite, are primarily applied for the pretreatment of refractory sulfide gold concentrates. The pretreatment processing was necessary to decrease the refractory properties of the minerals and allow cyanide penetration ( Many researchers study the rheological characterization of mineral slurry, such as laterite slurry ( Dispersants were usually used to control the rheology of slurry ( Thus, dispersants were usually used to improve efficiency of the wet grinding process by the reduction or elimination of the yield stress, excellent dispersion or decrease of viscosity. However, dispersants, as inorganic or organic compounds, might inhibit the bio-activity of In this paper, the effects of solid concentration, particle size distribution, temperature and dispersants on the rheology characters of pyrite suspensions were investigated by rheology and zeta potential measurement. And then the effects of dispersant type and dosage on bacterial cell growth and biooxidizing activities in the biooxidation process were studied. The point of our paper was getting the basis data of the slurry rheology and a biocompatible dispersant, to support for the optimization of mineral grinding processes. The low-grade refractory gold concentrate used in the experiments was kindly supplied by Tiancheng Co., Ltd., Shandong, P.R. China, and contained 24.9 The Sodium Hexametaphosphate (SH) produced by Ling Feng of the Shanghai Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), Tween-80 produced by Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), and Sodium lignosulfonate produced by Chengzheng Chemicals Co., Ltd. (Jiangsu, China), were used as dispersants. Pyrite (40 An RS600 rotational rheometer (HAAKE, Germany) was used to measure the rheological property of the pyrite suspensions. About 15 The zeta potential measurements were carried out using Zetasizer 300HS Zeta Potential Analyzer (Malvern, American). Suspensions (< The stain of In the biooxidation experiment, 100 The pH and oxidation-reduction potential (ORP) of the samples were measured by a pH/Eh meter (Mettler model FE20). The amount of free cells in solution was measured by direct microscopic counting using a Pettrof–Hauser-type cell counter. Pyrite dissolution was followed by measuring the iron concentration in solution. The concentration of ferrous iron was determined by titration with potassium dichromate in the presence of The flow curves were established with the apparent viscosity versus shear rate with a different solid concentration as shown in The flow behavior observed was typical with the suspension of micron-sized particles in which interparticle forces were predominant in controlling the suspension rheology. At low solid loading, the magnitude of interparticle forces would be small, due to the relatively large distance between mineral particles. So the viscosity of slurry and flow behavior were dependent on the suspension medium. As the distance between the particles became smaller when the solid concentration increased, the interparticle interactions became more significant. It could lead to the formation of particulate structures, which were subsequently broken down by shear stress, resulting in shear-thinning and yield stress characteristics ( The data of rheological characteristics analyzed by adopting the Casson model (Eq. Besides, the relative viscosity of pyrite slurry increased regularly with the solid concentration at certain shear rate (see By fitting the experimental data, it was found that the relationship between the relative viscosity and solid concentration at a shear rate of 100 The volume fraction ( From the results of simulation, it was showed that the maximum solid packing fraction ( The curves of the viscosity versus shear rate with different sizes were shown in At the high solid concentration, the interparticle forces were predominant in controlling the rheology of the suspension. In this suspension, the net interparticle forces were governed by the sum of the attractive van der Waals forces and the repulsive electrostatic as defined by the DLVO theory ( The flow curves of the apparent viscosity versus shear rate were shown in The flow curves of shear stress versus shear rate were established with different dispersants at low solid concentration (40  However, the viscosity of slurry with SH 0.1 The extrapolated yield stress ( The effect of dispersant SH on the pyrite particle zeta potential was examined at a pH of 2, as shown in The DLVO assumed that mainly repulsive electrostatic and attractive van der Waals forces acted on particles in a suspension. According to the literature ( Many organic compounds, such as formic acid, acetic acid and oxalic acid ( The growth curves of  However, there was no difference of the pyrite oxidation between the control and the experiments with dosage of SH from 0.005 In order to improve the wet grinding process, the influences of solid concentration, particle size, temperature and the dispersant dosage on the rheology of pyrite suspension were investigated in detail. Meanwhile, the biocompatibility of the dispersant was also studied. The rheological properties depended strongly on shear rate, solid concentration, particle size distribution, and temperature. The relative viscosity increased with solid concentration which was in agreement with the Chong model. The critical concentration which led to the flow behavior of slurry transformed from Newtonian fluids to shear-thinning non-Newtonian fluids was obtained as 40 In these study, Sodium Hexametaphosphate (SH) was found to be an effective dispersant to control the rheology of pyrite slurry when the additional dosage was from 0.005 In the pyrite biooxidation experimental process, the results indicated that SH had no negative effects on the growth rate of microorganisms and the pyrite biooxidation when the dispersant concentration was less than 0.1 This study was financially supported by the