In this study, an attempt has been made to propose a numerical model to predict grout flow and penetration length into the jointed rock mass using UDEC. The numerical model is adjusted using practical data and presence analytical methods for grouting process. Input data included geomechanical parameters along with grout properties obtained from a case study. The effect of rock mass properties as joint hydraulic aperture, roughness, spacing, trace length, dipping and grout properties as yield value, viscosity and grout pressure was considered on grout flow rate and penetration length. Barton–Bandis joint model has been used to assign joint roughness and strength (JRC and JCS) in the modeling. The results were in a good agreement with analytical and field database. A general function is defined to demonstrate the effects of rock and grout properties on penetration length of grout.Grouting is widely used to reduce water flow through rock masses and, in this regard, various injection techniques have been developed. The groutability is defined as the ability of rock to accept grout ( In discussion of the effects of rock mass properties on the grouting process, many researchers have described the rock’s behavior with emphasis on its groutability, using the various parameters both practically and theoretically ( In addition to rock mass properties, the rheological properties of the grout have important role on the groutability of a rock mass. One of the most important challenges in penetration grouting is computation of the depth of penetration in the design or analysis. Because of the sophisticated nature of rock mass due to existence of spatial fractures and inhomogeneity, determining the design depth for effective grouting sometimes is impossible using experimental and analytical methods in the field. However, numerical simulations using FEM, DEM and BEM always can resolve the complicated problems concerning rock mass by taking into account some simplifications ( Several researchers, as Grouting is mainly utilized to reduce the hydraulic conductivity but also to improve the stiffness of the ground under the dam or foundation. The main objective of this study is to find the effects of both controllable and uncontrollable parameters on the flow rate and the penetration length of the grout in rock masses using numerical, analytical and field databases. In this paper, an attempt has been made to consider the effects of rock joint parameters on rock mass groutability by means of Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC) software ( For a joint to be groutable, the grout must satisfy the conditions of penetrability and flowability. Some researchers use a limit aperture below which cementitious grout cannot penetrate into the joint ( In both the analytical solutions and the numerical models, the flow is assumed to occur in channel or disc with a constant aperture. Therefore, joint aperture is an important parameter to be considered. This aperture must reflect the physical aperture in order to correctly calculate the penetration. However, it is not possible at least in practical sense to directly measure the physical aperture. Indirectly the water flow for given pressure can be measured and the corresponding hydraulic aperture can be calculated by the cubic law. The physical aperture has been found to be larger about 1.2–3 times according to The water-bearing capacity of the rock mass can be described by the hydraulic conductivity or the transmissivity of the jointed rock. A rock joint is a 2-D structure with an aperture,  Assuming a single joint to have parallel walls ( The effective hydraulic aperture strongly depends on joint surface roughness of rocks. Most of the previous studies indicate that the grout flow is governed by Bingham fluid equations ( Analytical solutions for one and two-dimensional flows in rock joints were developed by For a preferred penetration length, They calculated relative penetration length in terms of relative grouting time through series expansion for one-dimensional flow as follows Flow rate was obtained using penetration length and assuming one-dimensional flow at a constant pressure and per unit width of the joint. In 1-D case the maximum injected volume, In this study, UDEC is employed to simulate grout flow through joints based on a fully coupled hydro-mechanical analysis. UDEC is a two-dimensional numerical program based on the distinct element method for discontinuum modeling. For coupled hydro-mechanical flow analysis, UDEC code is suitable when flow is mainly governed through a network of joints. Therefore, in this study it is assumed that grout flow takes place from a vertical borehole through interconnected joint networks and spreads in jointed media. The configuration of the computational model is schematically shown in The depth of boreholes is set to 10 In UDEC, fluid flow governing equations for steady laminar flow of a Bingham fluid was calculated based on Buckingham’s equation ( In Eq.  The Bakhtiary dam and hydroelectric power plant project includes the design and construction of a 315 Based on geophysical surveys of the dam site using the petite seismic method, the rock mass is categorized into three general classes. Slightly deformed limestones of Sv2 unit form the most competent class with Young’s modulus of Systematic discontinuities at the dam site consist of two joint sets that intersect at almost right angles and form a conjugate perpendicular system. A further joint set is observed at a few locations but its occurrence is not common throughout the site. Joints surfaces are characterized as planar and persistent with average spacing of 60–600 To determine shear and normal stiffness of discontinuities three normal loading–unloading cycles were subjected on test specimens and corresponding shear and normal displacements were recorded. Substituting obtained Joint aperture is the key parameter for determining the flow characteristics of jointed rock media. However, measuring the joint aperture distribution is an extremely difficult task. In this case study, WPTs have been carried out to assess hydrogeological properties of the dam foundation. The analysis includes 26 tests done in 12 boreholes. The tests were carried out with a single packer system. The borehole was drilled to the final depth and the sections were tested from top to bottom. The packer was removed in stages from each position to the next lower position. The distance from ground level to the instrument manometer is 1 In UDEC when Barton–Bandis joint model is coupled with fluid flow, in addition to, joint strength parameters i.e. In this study, the same procedure has been used to obtain The most common grout mixture to seal the rock and soil is cement-based material. In rock grouting the most important factors of penetration grouting includes water to cement ratio Trial grouting has been conducted at Bakhtiary dam site for the aim of sealing joints and fissures by decreasing rock mass permeability and improvement of foundation rock strength. It was performed at the left abutment of dam in a cavern in King Band weak zone ( Grouting pattern performed in an equilateral triangle. The lowest amount of lugeon values were reported ( To obtain penetration length of grout material around a vertical borehole, numerical models have been built in UDEC. To compare and validate numerical model, results of water pressure tests were simulated in the boreholes 10-m depth. Boundary stresses were used to affect in situ stresses in the models. According to the rock density (2.8–2.9 Before conducting lugeon tests, core recovery has been carried out and RQD was obtained for each section. As it can be observed, RQD will improve by increasing depth, on the other hand, the flow rate decreases. The results were roughly consistence with Interpreting the results of lugeon tests obtained from dam site with As stated by increasing normal stress the hydraulic aperture will decrease that leads to decreasing of flow rate. In Moreover, in the grouting process the grout take will first fill the borehole and after that the jointed medium. This will give a reduction trend in flow gradually with time ( Utilizing rock material, grout and joint properties ( It can be understood that by increasing hydraulic aperture of rock joints from 0.085 to 0.5 It can be seen that numerical results agree fairly well with the analytical ones. Error bars with standard lower and upper errors are shown for numerical and field data. The overlap between upper amounts of numerical results with lower amounts of field data shows that the difference is statistically significant. Therefore, by increasing effective hydraulic aperture flow rate will increase. However, grout flow rate in the field increases by hydraulic aperture in a same trend but it shows little differences with calculated data. This result can be raised from many reasons. As displayed in Laboratory experiments have shown that the roughness and aperture of a rock joint are the most important factors governing fluid flow through the joint. Roughness is an important factor in both the mechanical and hydraulic behavior (  As grout will be flowing along the joints, the direction of the joints is also an important parameter. Since the most frequent discontinuity running through the dam site is J  Grout pressure as one of the controllable parameters in grouting process is another factor that affects the penetration length. The results of the numerical and analytical solutions are in the same range but field data. The range of depths that the pressures and flow rates have been recorded was from 0 to 90 To calculate flow rate in numerical analysis as well as analytical method effective hydraulic apertures were set to 0.1 As given in As shown in One of the most significant parameters in measuring the usefulness of grouting is the penetration length of grout during the grouting process. However, the pre/post packer tests are not capable of precise estimations of this vital parameter ( In this study, as shown in It can be found that, penetration length of grout will increase when joint aperture increases ( By increasing joint spacing the penetration length, will increases because of creation of large block size and covering much area by joints (  Finally, it can be concluded that the penetration length is a function of different rock mass and grout properties where it may be expressed as In this study, one-dimensional flow was modeled in a two-dimensional geomechanical model. In comparison with filed data, obtained results were nearly in a good agreement. However, in practice two-dimensional flow (corresponds to the radial flow) as well as one-dimensional flow (corresponds to the channel flow) in rock joints would occur in a three-dimensional structure of the rock masses. Joint infilling, an important parameter in a jointed rock mass is the critical factor, which results in washout of the joints under grout pressure, has not been considered in these analyses. Proposed models in this study are applicable only in Bakhtiary dam formations. When the models are applied to rock masses other than limestone, special attention must be paid due to the singularity of the original data of the prediction models. Also underground water flow and pore water pressure were neglected during modeling because of the dry area of grouting in dam site. Since grouting in rock masses is a three-dimensional problem, simulation using 3DEC software is recommended to obtain real sense of the grouted media. Predicting the grout penetration in jointed rocks is of interest because of its significance in engineering and scientific applications. Presuming one-dimensional flow with grout material as a Bingham fluid, a 2-D numerical model was developed to predict the flow of grout and its penetration length in jointed rock masses by means of Universal Distinct Element Code, UDEC. The findings were compared with analytical and filed databases. In most cases, results were in a good agreement with analytical method. In addition, model has been adjusted with practical data from a case study. From the findings following consequences can be extracted: With an increase in the depth from ground surface, rock permeability and groutability will decreases because of the reducing hydraulic aperture under high in situ stresses. Grout flow rate will decrease when yield value of the grout increases. It can be understood that to increase the penetration length of grout with thick density more pressure and time is needed to achieve interest penetration length. By increasing grout viscosity flow rate and penetration length into the jointed rock mass obtained from numerical method decreased in comply with analytical results. With an increase in grout pressure flow rate and penetration length increased, significantly. By increasing effective hydraulic aperture of rock joints, the flow of grout has increased using numerical, analytical and field studies, significantly. Empirical relation was presented to relate grout flow rate into the jointed rock mass with effective hydraulic aperture of rock joints. It was found that, the relation obey power law function with high correlation coefficient. The relation can be used to predict grout flow rate in this case study. RQD as rock jointing index showed good correlation with permeability data in this case study. It was observed that, with improving RQD of rock mass the permeability will decreases. Analytical and numerical results showed that flow rate of grout will decrease when Joint sets dipping have important role in grout flow and grout penetration length and it was observed that the most effective joint dipping for easy grouting is 40–60°. By increasing joint spacing and trace length the grout flow into the rock mass increases, however when they exceed 2 Grout penetration length will strongly depend on the rock joint aperture, angle between joint sets, spacing, length of joints, yield value of the grout, grout pressure and duration time of grouting process. Some of these parameters are in direct relation with grout penetration length and others are in indirect relation. Finally, the proposed numerical models where its results were in a good conformity with analytical and field data can predict penetration length and flow rate of cement-based grout into the jointed rock mass. On the other hand, applied analytical method in this study is accurate enough to be used to evaluate the correlations. SEC and Stucky Pars companies of IWPCO are thanked for providing the facilities and databases for this project. Dr. M. Rahimi is thanked for his kind help in numerical simulation.