Chitosan has been a popular option for tissue engineering, however exhibits limited function for bone regeneration due to its low mechanical robustness and non-osteogenic inductivity. Here we hybridized chitosan with TiO2 nanoparticles to improve its bone regeneration capability. Morphology and crystallographic analysis showed that TiO2 nanoparticles in anatase-type were distributed evenly on the surface of the chitosan sponges. Degradation test showed a significant effect of TiO2 nanoparticles addition in retaining its integrity. Biomineralization assay using simulated body fluid showed apatite formation in sponges surface as denoted by PO4− band observed in FTIR results. qPCR analysis supported chitosan - TiO2 sponges in bone regeneration capability as indicated by DMP1 and OCN gene upregulation in TiO2 treated group. Finally, cytotoxicity analysis supported the fact that TiO2 nanoparticles added sponges were proved to be biocompatible. Results suggest that chitosan-50% TiO2 nanoparticles sponges could be a potential novel scaffold for bone tissue engineering.Nano Titanium dioxide (TiO Several studies have shown that nano TiO In this study, we used chitosan that has long been used in many biomedical applications as sponge, hybridized with TiO At present, most commonly used scaffolds for bone tissue engineering are hard type biomaterials including hydroxyapatite and β-tricalcium phosphate. Although relatively soft and flexible texture of chitosan is beneficial and may fit better for complex shape cavities, several studies have highlighted that chitosan scaffold could easily be degraded in the body due to insufficient mechanical properties [ Previous study by Kumar (2018) showed that chitosan scaffold doped by nano TiO All procedures of experiments using animals in this study were performed in accordance with “The guidelines laid down by the National Institute of Health (NIH) in the USA” regarding the care and use of animals for experimental procedures and approved by “Matsumoto Dental University Committee on Intramural Animal Use” (No. 289). The chitosan-nano TiO Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to study the surface morphology of the CTS. The analysis was carried out using a SEM (FEI Quanta 650) with an Oxford INCA/ENERGY-350 microanalysis system. To confirm the crystal structure of nano TiO CTS with equal weight was immersed in 1x simulated body fluid (SBF) solution and incubated in closed tube at 37 Male C57BL/6 J mice (3 weeks old, SLC Japan, Hamamatsu, Japan) were sacrificed with overdose anesthesia. The femurs and tibiae were disconnected from the trunk and soft tissues were removed from the bone surface thoroughly. Epiphyses were cut and bone marrow was flushed out using a syringe and #27 needle with a culture medium consisted with α-minimum essential medium with glutamine and phenol red (α-MEM, Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan) supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin-amphotericin B solution (Biological Industries Israel Beit Haemek Ltd., Kibbutz Beit Haemek, Israel). The mononuclear cells were separated in order to obtain pure cells homogenate, using density gradient centrifugation (Lymphoprep™, Cosmo Bio Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) as indicated by the manufacturer’s protocol. The isolated mononuclear cells were washed twice and seeded on a culture dish (Falcon®, Corning, USA) at the density of 5.5 × 10 All sponges were sterilized with UV irradiation for 30 min. When the MSCs reached 50–60% confluence, 1 × 10 qRT-PCR was performed to determine the expression of osteogenic markers (OCN gene and DMP1 gene). Briefly, total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Ambion®; Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). After quantification of total RNA with a spectrophotometer (Nano Drop® ND-1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), RNA samples were reverse-transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) using oligo (dT)12–18 primers (Life Technologies), dNTPs (Toyobo Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan) and ReverTra Ace® (Toyobo Co., Ltd.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. qRT-PCR were performed in a thermal cycler (Thermal Cycler Dice Real Time System II TP-900, Takara Bio, Japan) using SYBR Premix Ex TaqII reagent (Takara Bio, Kusatsu, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Primer sets (Sigma-Aldrich Co.) used for the PCR experiment were listed in For the cytotoxicity analysis, mouse bone marrow MSCs were prepared as described above. MSCs (2.5 × 10 Mouse bone marrow MSCs were seeded on the scaffold and cultured for 24 h. Then the cell-scaffold complexes were fixed with 4% formalin, washed in PBS, and incubated with 0.2% crystal The results were presented as means ± standard error of means. Statistical analyses were conducted using Student’s Chitosan – nano TiO All sponges showed significant number of pores and interconnectivity, as standard requirements of good scaffold in tissue engineering application. TiO XRD analysis was further carried out to confirm the existence, also the crystal structure of TiO  Biomineralization induction was confirmed in this study by FTIR spectroscopy in Moreover, to strengthen bioactivity potential from scaffold, osteogenic differentiation capability was carried out to investigate the effect of TiO Biocompatibility was also demonstrated from cell attachment on the sponge and cytotoxicity analysis using WST assay. Cytotoxicity analysis was conducted after 5 days culture and it could be depicted from In this work, we investigated the effect of TiO We further confirmed that nano TiO Biological evaluation of sponges also showed promising results. One of the problems faced by chitosan sponges is their relatively fast degradation time. Accordingly, many argued that chitosan is not a suitable candidate for tissue regeneration, especially for hard tissues. In our work, we proved that chitosan with as little as 12.5 wt% addition could maintain its integrity after 2 weeks of culture in simulated body fluid (SBF), while chitosan only sponge already collapsed in day 7. In this study, SBF was also used to evaluate biomineralization from scaffold indicated by apatite formation. SBF has ion concentration equal to human blood plasma. From FTIR results, PO Furthermore, osteogenic induction analysis of the cells seeded on the scaffolds were conducted by examining DMP1 and OCN gene expressions. Dentin Matrix Protein 1 (DMP1) is a bone-specific important marker for osteocyte formation and phosphate metabolism for maintaining mineralization of the bone extracellular matrix. Mutation on DMP1 gene could cause abnormalities in bone development, such as osteomalcia and rickets [ Hybridize chitosan with nano TiO This work was supported by