Contact angle measurements, ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy and voltammetry were used in this investigation to study the effect of various externally applied potentials on the stability of dixanthogen at synthetic and natural chalcopyrite surfaces.
                  The results of contact angle measurements indicate that synthetic and natural chalcopyrites have similar wettabilities. Their hydrophobic potential range in a 7×10−
                     
                     4 M PAX solution was +0.04 V to +0.44 V vs. NHE at pH 10 and was −0.01 V to +0.54 V at pH 7.
                  UV spectroscopic results show that dixanthogen began to form on the chalcopyrite surface at a potential of +0.04 V vs. NHE at pH 10 and −0.01 V vs. NHE at pH 7. The amount of dixanthogen formed on the chalcopyrite surface initially increased with the increase of the applied potential and then decreased with the increasing potential. The optimum potential range for dixanthogen formation on the chalcopyrite surface was from +0.14 V to +0.34 V vs. NHE at pH 10 and from +0.14 V to +0.44 V vs. NHE at pH 7. It was difficult to completely remove the dixanthogen film on the chalcopyrite surface.Chalcopyrite is the most common mineral of copper sulfide. Its flotation characteristics in xanthate solution is of both theoretical and commercial significance. Studies on the xanthate adsorption at chalcopyrite surface indicated that the process was electrochemical in nature ( Synthetic chalcopyrite (CuFeS Natural chalcopyrite samples were supplied by Ward's Natural Science Establishment, Inc. X-ray diffraction of the sample showed no impurity peaks. The chemical assay of the natural chalcopyrite sample is given in The natural chalcopyrite contained trace amount of lead, zinc and nickel. The purity of the chalcopyrite sample was assumed over 98%. Buffer solutions used in this investigation consist of boric acid, potassium chloride, sodium hydroxide (to give a pH 10); sodium and potassium phosphate (to give a pH 7). All the buffer solutions were supplied by Fisher Scientific. Nitrogen gas (Ultra high purity, 99.9999% N The sample was prepared as a mineral electrode by connecting it with copper wires and encapsulating it in epoxy resin. The electrode working area varied from 1.1 cm In order to accurately determine by contact angle measurement the potential at which the xanthate began to electrodeposit on chalcopyrite as dixanthogen, a PAX concentration of 7 For ultraviolet spectroscopic examining of the extract of the electrode surface, the electrode, which had been subjected to conditioning under a certain potential for 10 min, was taken out from the test cell and the solution attached to the surface of the epoxy resin which encapsulated the mineral electrode was wiped carefully with a paper towel before the electrode was put into 6 ml hexane in a 50-ml beaker. At most times, no solution was attached on the mineral electrode surface because of its hydrophobicity. If the electrode surface was hydrophilic under the test condition, the visible solution on the mineral surface was adsorbed away carefully by paper towel to avoid disturbing the adsorption on the surface. The UV spectra of the hexane extracts were measured by a Lambda 3 spectrophotometer. Calibration of the Lambda 3 spectrophotometer with standard dixanthogen solutions, produced through oxidation of xanthate solutions with iodine, indicates that the UV absorbance was proportional to the dixanthogen concentrations in the hexane extracts. In order to examine the stability of dixanthogen on chalcopyrite under reducing conditions, the reduction of dixanthogen on the surface of chalcopyrite was investigated using cathodic polarization along with contact angle measurements on both the synthetic and the natural chalcopyrite electrodes. The mineral electrodes were initially submitted to an anodic polarization scan at a rate of 0.1 mV/s from +  The results indicate that the open circuit potential of synthetic chalcopyrite under the test conditions was + The open circuit potential of natural chalcopyrite was +  The results show that the synthetic chalcopyrite at pH 10 was hydrophilic if it was kept at a potential lower than + Similar contact angle results were obtained at natural chalcopyrite surface as at synthetic chalcopyrite surface. The natural chalcopyrite at pH 10 became hydrophobic at + The hydrophobic film on chalcopyrite surface was identified as dixanthogen by many authors ( The restoration of contact angle from its minimum to the second maximum was due to the passivation of chalcopyrite surface and the increased formation rate of dixanthogen. As the formation rate of dixanthogen on chalcopyrite surface increased, sufficient dixanthogen was available at the mineral surface to sustain a good contact angle. The test ressults clearly illustrated that the wettability of the chalcopyrite surface depended on the balance between the hydrophobicity due to the formation of dixanthogen and the hydrophilicity due to the formation of a hydrophilic oxidation film. A very clear conclusion can be drawn from the comparison of the results in In order to identify the hydrophobic film and study its adsorption characteristic at chalcopyrite surface, UV spectrum investigation was conducted on the hexane extracts of synthetic and natural chalcopyrites electrodes that were conditioned at a preset potential in a 7 The UV investigation of the hexane extracts of the chalcopyrite electrode surface illustrated that dixanthogen was the main hydrophobic film at chalcopyrite surface. The adsorption peaks at 241 nm and 286 nm are characteristic of dixanthogen and the adsorption peak at 200 nm was due to CS The results in Dixanthogen adsorption was detected on the synthetic chalcopyrite electrode surface in the PAX solution at pH 7 over the whole potential range tested from − The main effect of pH was that chalcopyrite had a better adsorption of dixanthogen under high potential at lower pH. For example, an absorbance value of 0.15 at 285 nm was obtained for the hexane extract of the synthetic electrode surface conditioned in the pH 7 PAX solution at a potential of + In order to examine the stability of dixanthogen on chalcopyrite under reducing conditions, the reduction of dixanthogen on the surface of chalcopyrite was investigated using cathodic polarization along with contact angle measurements on both the synthetic and the natural chalcopyrite electrodes. The results for synthetic chalcopyrite are shown in   The results in The initial objectives to use both synthetic and natural chalcopyrite samples were to see if the trace amounts of impurities in the natural chalcopyrite would result in any significant wettability difference in response to applied potentials. If the effect of trace amounts of impurities is significant, the results on natural samples will be sample specific and the results from synthetic samples will be of very limited significance. The results obtained in this investigation indicate that the synthetic and natural chalcopyrites responded to applied potentials in surprisingly similarly ways. They become hydrophobic at the same potential and the contact angle on their surfaces had the same trend. The dixanthogen films also showed the same stable potential range on synthetic and natural chalcopyrite surfaces. These results indicate that the results from the synthetic sample are useful and it seems safe to predict that other natural chalcopyrite samples with trace amounts of impurities will behave in similar ways. Although no work was done to investigate the sufficient amount of dixanthogen needed to extend the hydrophobic potential range of chalcopyrite, the results in The solvent (hexane) extraction methods have their limitations for the investigation of dixanthogen at sulfide surfaces, for example chemicals such as CS Synthetic and natural chalcopyrites have similar wettability. The hydrophobic potential range of synthetic and natural chalcopyrites as indicated by contact angle measurements in a 7 Dixanthogen began to form on the chalcopyrite electrode surface at a potential of + The amount of dixanthogen formed on the chalcopyrite surface initially increased with the increase in the applied potential on the mineral electrode and then decreased with the increasing potential. The optimum potential range for dixanthogen formation on the chalcopyrite surface in the 7 The cathodic polarization voltage required to reduce the dixanthogen film on the chalcopyrite surface was as low as −