This chapter introduces the concept of carbon mineralization that involves the conversion of CO2 into solid inorganic carbonates. It starts by presenting an overall scheme of CO2 reactions with alkaline-rich materials such as minerals and industrial wastes containing calcium and magnesium. The engineered weathering of silicate minerals including olivine ((Mg,Fe)2SiO4), serpentine ((Mg,Fe)3(OH)4(Si3O5)) and wollastonite (CaSiO3) are discussed as one of the most safe and permanent carbon storage solutions. The method of using CO2 to treat industrial wastes such as fly ash, cement kiln dust, stainless steel slag and red mud is also presented in detail. The carbonated materials can be readily landfilled without the concern of contaminant leaching, or utilized in various applications such as in construction. Environmental implications and potential benefits of CO2 utilization via various carbon mineralization schemes are summarized.Introduction Engineered weathering of silicate minerals Reaction schemes Single-step carbon mineralization Two-step carbon mineralization Accelerated mineral dissolution Enhanced hydration of CO Summary of environmental implications and potential benefits Carbonation of alkaline industrial wastes Wastes from power generation Wastes from the production of cement, construction material and paper Wastes from steel and aluminium production Summary of environmental implications and potential benefits References One of the options for permanently storing CO The availability of Ca- and Mg-bearing minerals and alkaline industrial wastes for carbonation are presented in In terms of the cost of carbon mineralization processes, in situ carbon mineralization tends to be low in initial cost compared to the ex situ carbonation of silicate minerals and industrial wastes. On the other hand, ex situ carbon mineralization has unique benefits of faster reaction, straightforward quantification of stored carbon, avoidance of long-term monitoring and potential generation of value-added products. Studies have showed that about 4600 In order to optimize the carbon mineralization technology, particularly ex situ schemes, various reaction parameters have been investigated ranging from particle size, porosity, reaction temperature and CO The use of the value-added products including mineral carbonates would offset the cost of carbon sequestration and avoid the carbon emission associated with those products. However, it should also be noted that the amount of anthropogenic CO Minerals such as olivine [(Mg,Fe) Since in ex situ carbon storage, the minerals are mined and reacted with CO While mining of Ca- and Mg-rich minerals would be necessary for large scale ex situ mineral carbonation, a significant amount of these minerals are also available as industrial wastes such as mining tailings as a low hanging fruit for carbon mineralization. Serpentine has been actively mined for the extraction of nickel (<3.6 Given the abundance of silicate minerals, there has been a considerable interest over the past 20 Unfortunately, the process of carbon mineralization is often kinetically limited, particularly depending on the type of alkaline materials reacting with CO The carbonation of Ca- and Mg-bearing minerals could occur via both gas–solid and aqueous reactions. In gas–solid reactions, the alkaline materials can directly react with gaseous CO Much of the earlier work in the area of carbon mineralization was focused on the single-step carbonation of olivine, because serpentine is less reactive compared to olivine due to the presence of –OH groups. In case of a single-step carbon mineralization process, ground and prepared (with the optional pretreatments discussed earlier) minerals are converted into solid carbonates via direct aqueous carbonation. As illustrated in In order to individually optimize mineral dissolution and carbonate formation reactions, the decoupling of reactions was suggested and the two-step carbon mineralization process was developed. This decoupling was based on the differences in the pH that favour mineral dissolution (acidic) and carbonation (basic). As the individual reaction steps were accelerated, it was plausible to form mineral carbonates at lower reaction temperatures. First, the mineral preparation and pretreatment methods described for the single-step carbon mineralization process can also be used to enhance the two-step carbon mineralization process. The overall scheme, also known as a pH swing process, is represented in The formation of mineral carbonates is favoured at high pH (>9.5) because carbonate ions dominate in that pH range as dissolved CO During the early stage of the development of carbon mineralization technologies, the mineral dissolution step was considered to be the rate-limiting step. As rapid leaching of Mg from silicate mineral is achieved, continued mineral dissolution is often challenged by the formation of a silica-rich passivation layer on the surface of the mineral particle. This layer is formed as the cations (Mg and Ca) are progressively leached out over the course of the mineral dissolution process, and high surface area silica remains which acts as a mass transfer limiting layer. The process of mineral dissolution in the presence of H After significantly improving the mineral dissolution rates, some of the carbon mineralization technologies then became limited by the hydration of CO  The carbonation of Ca- and Mg-bearing silicate minerals such as olivine and serpentine leads to the formation of thermally and chemically stable mineral carbonates that can be safely stored over a geologic time scale. It is likely the only carbon storage method that does not require potentially expensive long-term monitoring of stored CO CO The ex situ mineral carbonation process allows for flexible reaction schemes and the two-step process could be used to produce various products of high value, while the single-step approach would possibly result in low-grade construction materials. The potential value-added materials include calcium and magnesium carbonates and high surface area silica. They can be used as fillers in various applications such as papers, plastics and construction materials. The commercial value of these products may be used to offset the mining and processing costs of minerals for large-scale carbon mineralization. Calcium and magnesium minerals may also contain Fe, Ni and Cr, which are commercially useful metals. Thus, the recovery of those materials during carbon mineralization would also improve the overall economics of the process. Since the amount of CO There is an increasing level of interest for utilizing CO The three major types of alkaline residues can be classified as wastes from (1) power generation (e.g. fly ash, bottom ash, air pollution control (APC) residues and oil shale waste), (2) cement, building material and paper production (e.g. cement kiln dust, asbestos and paper mill waste) and (3) steel and aluminium production (e.g. steel slag and red mud). As represented in Alkaline industrial wastes are usually more reactive compared to silicate minerals because of their inherent chemical and physical properties: often smaller particle size, greater porosity, relatively disordered structures and higher solubility. Some of the wastes such as asbestos and stainless steel slag can pose serious health and environmental hazards. Asbestos (chrysotile), which is used as building materials, are highly regulated due to their needle-shaped, fibrous structure which can puncture the lung to cause serious respiratory illnesses including lung cancer, and thus their direct landfilling is banned. The dominant method for treating industrial wastes is by single-step direct aqueous carbonation in which the alkaline wastes directly react with CO In alkaline industrial wastes containing hazardous materials such as heavy metals (e.g. Ni and Cr), the fate of those components should be carefully examined before and after the carbonation treatment. As alkaline wastes are processed in aqueous media, this may result in the increased leaching of the heavy metals into the liquid phase. The leached heavy metals may be subsequently immobilized into the carbonate matrix or leached into the liquid phase. Therefore, a new recovery or treatment step may be required downstream of the carbonation reactor for those heavy metals. Carbonation studies of alkaline industrial wastes are summarized in A number of studies have focused on the carbonation of industrial wastes from power generation to offset its own CO As shown in Another potential application for CO In addition to coal-fired power plants, steel and aluminium plants are major emitters of CO Steel slags are primarily composed of CaO (31.7–58.1 Another alkaline, but highly hazardous, industrial waste is red mud, which is a by-product of aluminium manufacturing.  Anthropogenic CO Usually, the generation locations of these alkaline industrial materials are within the CO Carbon mineralization can also be used to treat asbestos-bearing materials that are considered to be health hazard. Due to the heterogeneity of the industrial wastes, consistent production of a specific grade of material may be challenging. If the demand for heavy metals such as Ni and Cr further increases, the extraction and use of these trace metals from industrial wastes may also offset the overall