For the deep removal of silica from sodium aluminate solution with a high alkaline concentration, we propose novel ferrite desilication reagents calcium hydroferrocarbonate (CHFC; 3CaO·Fe2O3·CaCO3·12H2O) because Fe3+ cations show extremely low solubilities of ~1–3 mg/L in highly concentrated caustic solutions. The main factors affecting the synthesis of CHFC were studied, including time, temperature, liquid-to-solid mass ratio, and particle size of CaO. The results showed that CHFC is a metastable material in the alkaline solution, and the synthesis factors, time and temperature, are related to each other. The optimum synthesis conditions of CHFC were determined. The mechanisms in the synthesis of CHFC, and the desilication mechanism by CHFC, are discussed, using the desilication reaction and X-ray Diffraction analysis. In the desilication process, silica combines with CHFC to form calcium hydroferrosilicate, calcium hydroferroaluminosilicate and.calcium ferroaluminosilicate.The Bayer process is the main method for the production of alumina from bauxite worldwide. This process consists of three key steps: the dissolution of alumina-rich minerals into a hot caustic solution, solid/liquid separation of the insoluble phases, and gibbsite precipitation ( About 98% of bauxite in China is low-grade diasporic mineral with a high silica content and low mass ratio of alumina-to-silica ( Based on the enhanced oxidation property of a concentrated alkali solution ( It has been demonstrated that more than 95% alumina in Chinese diaspore can be dissolved into a concentrated alkaline solution using the sub-molten salt process at low temperatures of 140–200 °C and under pressures of 0.3–1.2 MPa. Simultaneously, the silica components in the mineral, including kaolinite, quartz, chamosite, and illite react with the alkaline medium, resulting in a 90% dissolution of silica into the liquor. The molar ratio of Na For the production of high-quality sandy alumina, a deep desilication of the sodium aluminosilicate solution, using a desilication agent, is required after a pre-desilication stage; CaO and Ca(OH) Since Fe A novel DSP hydroferrogarnet (3CaO·Fe All the chemical reagents used in this study were of analytical grade, obtained from the Chemical Co. of Beijing, and used without further purification. The water used in all the experiments was purified using a Milli-Q instrument (Millipore Corp.) The experimental apparatus used was a 2 L glass mixed tank reactor which was baffled, equipped with a two-flat-blade turbine mixer, and heated by a water jacket. The temperature was controlled with a band heater inside the reactor. Ferric hydroxide was synthesized before the synthesis of CHFC. The procedure was performed as follows: saturated NaOH solution was slowly added to a saturated Fe CHFC was prepared by adding lime milk, the newly formed wet ferric hydroxide, and sodium carbonate into water, according to chemical stoichiometry (Eq. The experimental sub-molten salt solutions containing aluminosilicate were prepared before the desilication reaction. The sub-molten salt solutions with different concentrations were prepared by dissolving predetermined amounts of NaOH in high-purity water. The sodium aluminate solutions containing silica with different concentrations were prepared by dissolving predetermined amounts of aluminum hydroxide and sodium silicate into hot sodium hydroxide solutions in a polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) vessel. Desilication experiments were conducted in a 1 L stainless steel reactor which was baffled, equipped with a two-flat-blade turbine mixer, and heated by an oil jacket. The temperature was controlled with a band heater inside the reactor. Dry desilication reagent samples were added into a certain amount of a silicate-containing sodium aluminate solution, which was heated to a pre-set temperature. The reaction was carried out for a prescribed time (Na After the reaction, the slurry was suction-filtered at 120 °C, and the liquor was analyzed to determine the final metastable silica concentration. The DSP was filtered, washed with high-purity water, dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h, and analyzed, to determine the chemical and phase compositions. The concentrations of silica in the initial and desilicated liquor were analyzed by ICP-OES (DV5300, Perkin-Elmer). The percentage of desilication from solution was calculated using Eq. It was found that there are some byproducts such as calcium ferrite and calcium carbonate in the synthesis products. The powder X-ray diffraction analysis showed that CHFC (ICDD 00-043-0480) and calcium ferrite (ICDD 01-071-2108) cannot be precisely identified because of similar diffraction peaks. It is also difficult to achieve an effective quantitative analysis of CHFC and calcium carbonate using TG-DTA. Therefore FT-IR spectroscopy (Spectro GX-I, Perkin-Elmer) was used to analyze the crystalline hydrate and hydroxyl in the synthesis products to determine the content of crystalline hydrate in CHFC. X-Ray diffraction patterns of the DSP were recorded on a powder diffractometer (X'Pert Pro, PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu K The compositions of Al The Al As shown in To further illustrate these results, the synthesis products at various times were tested by FT-IR, using the characteristics and the relative intensity of the peaks of the hydroxyl and crystalline hydrates that were influenced by the content of CHFC in the products. The results are shown in With an increase in the time, the characteristic peaks of the products, 3500 cm The desilication capacities for the synthesis products at various temperatures are shown in The relationship between the desilication efficiency and CHFC content in the product for different temperatures was studied, and the results are shown in  In order to ensure the reactivity, the raw materials used in process were the newly formed wet ferric hydroxide and water-soluble sodium carbonate; therefore, it is necessary to consider the effect of CaO particle size on the reaction. As shown in The remarkable increase in the desilication efficiency during the course of the L/S reaction is due to the effect of the contact area: the product exhibited a higher desilication capacity because the surface area increased with a decrease in the CaO particle size. The decrease in the solid particle size beyond a certain extent resulted in a very high surface area, which enhanced the synthesis process, but for the synthesis of calcium hydroferrocarbonate, and led to the production of some byproducts such as calcium ferrite (3CaO·Fe Through these analyses of the influential factors such as time, temperature, L/S ratio, and size of CaO, the synthesis process of CHFC was studied. The results show that CHFC is a metastable material in solution, and that time and temperature have an effect on the synthesis reaction. The optimum synthesis conditions of CHFC were obtained: temperature 30 °C, reaction time 12 h, L/S mass ratio 20, stirring speed 500 rpm, and CaO particle size 120–150 mesh. A representative specimen, using the optimal conditions, was produced, in order to study the CHFC desilication reaction: a 100 g/L specimen was introduced into a silicate-containing concentrated sodium aluminate solution, and the reaction was conducted for 3 h. After the desilication reaction, the concentration of SiO As shown in CHFC is a metastable compound in solution, and the reaction time and temperature have an effect on its synthesis. The optimum synthesis conditions of CHFC were obtained: temperature 30 °C, reaction time 12 h, L/S mass ratio 20, stirring speed 500 rpm, and CaO particle size 120–150 mesh. The desilication reaction of CHFC in a sub-molten salt solution was discussed, using the desilication study and XRD analysis of the DSP. In the desilication process, the silica compound reacts with CHFC form calcium hydroferrosilicate and calcium hydroferroaluminosilicate, calcium ferroaluminosilicate due to isomorphic substitution. The support of the