The reopening and propagation of natural closure fracture is one of the key causes of lost circulation in the fractured formation, which is directly related to safe and efficient drilling. In this paper, considering dip angle and dip direction of the fracture, the stress state on closed fracture surface near borehole is analyzed. Meanwhile, combining the critical mechanics condition of fracture reopening and propagation, a new model of the critical pressure for reopening and propagation of natural closure fracture is established based on rock mechanics theory and Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM), and the corresponding solution algorithm is proposed. Furthermore, the new model is utilized in investigating reopening and propagation of natural closure fracture, which intersects with the horizontal well along direction of the minimum horizontal principal stress σ
                     h, for R1 formation of HF oilfield in the Middle East. And the stress distribution on the fracture surface and critical pressure contour is presented. The result indicates that the normal stress and shear stress on the fracture surface near the wellbore are of central symmetry. Moreover, critical pressure distribution of reopening and propagation of closed fracture is symmetrical. The critical reopening pressure of natural closure fracture of R1 formation is consistent with the actual mud loss pressure, therefore the new model is reliable. This work provides a scientific foundation for drilling fluid density design for fractured formation. It can effectively avoid drilling and completion leakage, which eventually prevents drilling problems and dwindles drilling cost, as well as offer a theoretical support for fast, safe and efficient drilling.Reopening and propagation of naturally closed fractures are an important cause of well lost circulation while drilling and completion. Since reopening and propagation of natural closure fracture are caused by an exorbitant density of drilling fluid, it will result in different severity leakage while drilling and well completion ( In order to solve the lost circulation problems while drilling and well completion, the current investigations paid more attention to plugging. And the focus of research is shifted from plugging fracture and cave to wellbore strengthening (WBS). The main principle is that Well Strengthening Materials (WSM) and Loss Circulation Materials (LCM) which are mixed with drilling fluid are embedded in the fracture, which can support and bridge the induced or existing fractures to block the leakage channel. Gradually, WBS has become an important means to strengthen the wellbore and widen the safe drilling fluid density window ( The key to prevent fracture reopening and propagation in the formation is to acquire an accurate critical pressure for fracture reopening and propagation. Currently, majority of researches are conducted using experiments or mathematical models to infer critical pressure for reopening and propagation about closed fractures. As for the experimental study, the artificial core samples are utilized to inject the fluid into the prefabricated fracture, then record normal stress of the fracture opening to deduce the fracture opening pressure ( In this paper, with the fracture occurrence (dip direction and dip angle) and fracture surface stress distribution taken into consideration, the subterranean three-dimensional stress state of fracture surface and the criterion of closed fracture mouth reopening and tip propagation are analyzed. Furthermore, a new calculation model of the critical pressure for the closed fracture mouth reopening and tip propagation is set up and the corresponding numerical model calculation method is put forward. This model was applied to predict the fracture reopening and propagation pressure and regularity of fractured formation (R1) for the HF oilfield in Middle East. The mud loss problem was successfully solved and validity of the model is confirmed. Therefore, this study can offer some certain guidance to prevent well leakage in fractured formations. For the closed fracture, the interior of it does not contain fluids, to intersect the wellbore, as the wellbore pressure is gradually increased, once the internal fluid pressure of fracture surface is more than the normal stress Generally, there exists often some fillings in the fracture. But since the cementation strength of the filling material is much lower than that of the rock matrix, the cementation strength of the internal filler can be neglected. When the drilling fluid pressure When the formation is drilled through the borehole, if wellbore pressure is higher than the sum of the minimum circumferential stress Usually, fractures strike of the undisturbed formation develops along direction of maximum principal stress, the required propagation pressure is minimal under this case. When the fluid pressure surpasses the sum of the minimum principal stress The Eq.  Therefore, when the maximum stress intensity factor The fracture tip will propagate. Due to the influence of geotectonic movement, the distribution of natural fractures is extremely uneven, as shown in In geodetic coordinate system (X, Y, Z), the normal vector Assume that the stress of micro-section ABC is Then Combine Eqs. The shear stress Because the balance of the initial in-situ stresses is destroyed by borehole, it will result in a secondary distribution of stresses near the borehole wall ( To obtain the normal and tangential stress on the fracture surface, the stress state   By Eqs. Because the model involves nonlinear equations, the analytical calculation of critical pressure Obtaining the initial in-situ stresses Rock micro-unit stress distribution near wellbore in cylindrical coordinate system ( Then the maximum mode I stress intensity factor If the critical condition Eq. If the tip of R1 formation is a thick limestone reservoir of HF oilfield in the Middle East, and closure fractures are extremely developed in the formation. It is really urgent to predict the critical reopening and propagation pressure accurately to control mud loss. The carbonate cores of R1 formation in HF oil field is shown in The fracture dip direction angle The horizontal section azimuth of the production well in this district is consistent with the minimum horizontal principal stress orientation. The parameters of R1 formation applied to the model are provided by the laboratory experiment from a Research Institute. The magnitude of in-situ stress is obtained by Acoustic Emission Kaiser Test and from well logging curves. And the azimuth of in-situ stress is obtained by borehole breakout method. All the parameters of R1 are shown as The fracture dip direction angle From When value of the distance It can be observed from The horizontal section is drilled along  The horizontal section is drilled along From Combining the parameters in From  The mechanism of reopening and propagation for closed fracture surface is analyzed. As the wellbore pressure increased, when it exceeds the minimum normal stress of the fracture mouth, the fracture initially reopens at one point from a fracture mouth and mud loss occurs. With the wellbore pressure further increased, once rock fracture toughness is exceeded by the tip of a fracture intensity factor, fracture propagation and leakage will be aggravated. Based on the theory of rock mechanics and LEFM, the stress state for the closed fracture surface is revealed. Moreover, According to the critical mechanics condition of fracture mouth reopening and propagation, a new critical pressure model for closure fracture reopening and propagation is established. The critical pressure of closed fractured reopening and propagation for the formation R1 of HF oilfield in the Middle East is predicted. The critical pressure of fracture reopening is 1.82–1.96 g/cm This research is financially supported by the  borehole radius, m radial distance to the borehole axis, m wellbore pressure, MPa circumferential angle: angular position on borehole wall from x-axis,° fracture dip direction angle, ° dip angle of fracture,° borehole inclination angle, ° maximum principal stress azimuth,° borehole azimuth,° the angle between normal stress tensors in the borehole Cartesian coordinate system (X shear stress tensors in the borehole Cartesian coordinate system (X normal stress tensors in the borehole cylindrical coordinate system ( shear stress tensors in the borehole cylindrical coordinate system ( maximum horizontal principal stress, minimum horizontal principal stress, overburden pressure, MPa Poisson's ratio rock tensile strength, MPa