A UK bituminous coal has been used to study demineralization by two-stage chemical leaching. The first-stage uses hydrofluoric acid (HF) at 65°C and reduces the ash content from 5.30wt% to 1.37wt% by mainly removing Al and Si containing minerals. Subsequent leaching by ferric ions decreases the ash content further to 990ppm by removing most of the pyrite and fluorides formed during the HF leaching. Calorific value of the coal shows no change following leaching, which suggests no oxidation is occurring to the coal carbonaceous matrix. The mercury and sulfur contents after the two-stage leaching sequence decrease by 40% and 26%, respectively.Mineral matter and sulfur in coal place huge limitations on its use, and concerns over the effects of excessive burning of coal worldwide on the climate are calling for its use to be limited. Natural gas is viewed as cleaner than coal for power generation because it is easier to handle and can be burned in higher efficiency combined cycles. Mineral-free coal could also be burned more efficiently. The removal of mineral matter from coal has been practiced since coal was first extracted from the earth and studies into chemical demineralization have been studied in earnest for several decades In addition to dissolving minerals from coal in order to produce mineral-free coal, it is also possible to dissolve the coal and leave the solid minerals behind. The dissolved coal is separated by filtration and the solvent is flashed off to recover a solid mineral-free coal product, and the solvent is recycled. The latest efforts along this line are those conducted in Japan and the mineral-free coal product has been called Hyper-coal which generally contains ash less than 0.1 The University of Nottingham is developing a fluoride route for leaching minerals from coal, as fluoride chemistry offers many options, which are not yet fully realized. The first leach utilizes low concentrations of hydrofluoric acid (HF), which react with most of the minerals A UK bituminous coal, Harworth (HW) coal, was used in this study. The HW coal was air-dried and ground to particle size <52 The Harworth coal was demineralized using a two-stage chemical leaching method. In the first stage, 30 High and low temperature ashes from the HW raw coal, denoted HTA and LTA, respectively, were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) method using Ni-filtered Cu   SEM-EDX analysis of HW demineralized coal treated with 100 As mentioned above, HF leaching can remove almost all minerals but not pyrite, and some fluorides such as calcium fluoride are formed during the HF leaching. In order to remove all the minerals in HW coal, a subsequent leaching of the HF treated coal was carried out using ferric ions. The effect of the concentration of ferric ions on the ash removal is given in SEM pictures and EDX spectra of HW coal treated with HF followed by 0.23 Magnesium fluoride (MgF The effects of different reagents on ash removal during the second stage leaching are summarized in   The effect of demineralization on a UK bituminous coal has been studied using a two-stage chemical leaching method by hydrofluoric acid and ferric ions. The following conclusions are summarized: The two-stage leaching using HF followed by Fe(NO The analysis results of calorific value for the raw coal and the demineralized coal suggests that no significant oxidization to the coal organic structure occurs during leaching by HF and ferric nitrate. However, the N content does increase by approximately 0.14% and O by approximately 1.55%. This two-stage leaching method removes approximately 40% of the Hg and 26% of the sulfur, for this particular coal. The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the UK under contract EP/C532856/1. The authors also thank David Clift for his assistance with SEM-EDX and XRD analyses.