 Nonoperative management is indicated for nondisplaced calcaneal fractures or extraarticular calcaneal fractures with near-physiologic hindfoot alignment (computed tomography [CT] confirmation is recommended). Operative treatment of calcaneus fractures is indicated for displaced intraarticular and open calcaneal fractures.  When the soft tissues allow, operative treatment should be performed within 2–3 weeks from injury, before the fracture heals in a malunited position. Operative treatment should be delayed until a positive skin wrinkle test is observed (the skin should wrinkle with ankle dorsiflexion and hindfoot eversion) and pitting edema has resolved.  Relative contraindications: Peripheral vascular disease Type 1 diabetes mellitus Medical comorbidities/life-threatening injuries preventing surgery Soft-tissue compromise/massive edema Nonambulatory patients  Closed treatment Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) Minimally invasive surgery: closed reduction and internal fixation with limited skin incisions; especially applicable to tongue-type fractures (intraarticular fractures exiting the posterior calcaneal tuberosity), for which the Essex–Lopresti maneuver can be employed Closed reduction and external fixation  The soft-tissue envelope about the hindfoot must be amenable to surgery: edema and fracture blisters (at the operative site) must have resolved. Plain foot and ankle radiographs should be obtained (anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique foot; Harris axial heel view; Brodén view; and ankle series to rule out concomitant ankle fracture). The lateral foot radiograph in The mortise view of the ankle in Associated lower back pain and tenderness necessitate lumbar spine radiographs given the association of calcaneal and lumbar spine fractures. Preoperative fine-section CT is mandatory and defines the intraarticular (posterior facet) fracture pattern, as shown in the posterior facet’s intraarticular comminution in The fracture pattern is determined on the coronal images, using the Sanders classification. Sagittal and axial images provide further detail of the fracture pattern.  A lateral soft-tissue flap of hindfoot skin and subcutaneous tissue must be elevated directly from the calcaneus in the lateral extensile approach. This flap receives its blood supply from the laterally located calcaneal, malleolar, and tarsal arteries ( The commonly used extensile L-shaped incision to the calcaneus respects the vascular anatomy (angiosomes) of the flap. Relevant lateral structures to be protected in the lateral extensile approach to the calcaneus are shown in The peroneal tendons and sural nerve are both elevated with the lateral soft-tissue flap during exposure. The lateral wall includes the peroneal tubercle, which bisects a groove for the peroneus brevis and longus tendons; the brevis tendon courses anterior to the tubercle. The calcaneofibular ligament attaches posterior to the peroneal tubercle and lies deep to the tendons. Typically, the calcaneofibular ligament is elevated with the lateral soft-tissue flap from the calcaneus (despite this, ankle instability is rare following surgical management of calcaneus fractures). The sural nerve courses parallel and posterior to the peroneal tendons before passing superficially at the inferior peroneal retinaculum to course along the lateral border of the foot.  Comminuted, intraarticular fractures of the calcaneus typically fracture into four distinct fragments ( The “constant fragment” includes the sustentaculum tali and its middle facet. The medial ligamentous structures, including the interosseous talocalcaneal, medial talocalcaneal, and deltoid ligament complex, typically maintain the position of the fragment relative to the talus and ankle, hence the name  The superior surface ( The anterior surface (see The heel pad is composed of highly specialized adipose tissue with fibrous septa that may be disrupted with high-energy trauma.  ORIF using the extensile lateral L-shaped approach may be performed with the patient positioned in the prone or lateral position. We favor a full lateral decubitus position with the patient’s torso safely secured within a beanbag and the operative extremity carefully supported on a well-padded bump of folded sheets or towels. The knee is flexed, and the heel of the patient rests at the posterior corner of the operating table.  The patient may be positioned prone with the lower extremities externally rotated and supplemental armboards augmenting the operating table’s width to allow simultaneous surgical approaches to bilateral calcaneal fractures.  Scissor the legs with the operative extremity posterior to improve access to the fracture and unobstructed fluoroscopic visualization. A radiolucent operative table is recommended. An axillary roll is recommended.  Beanbag Protective padding below the contralateral limb and axilla to protect the peroneal nerve and brachial plexus, respectively Fluoroscopy (mini or standard C-arm) Thigh-level pneumatic tourniquet  The calcaneus is approached through an extensile lateral approach. The vertical limb of the incision is made approximately 2 cm proximal to the tip of the fibula and halfway between the anterior border of the Achilles tendon and the posterior border of the fibula. The corner of the incision may be rounded or fashioned at a right angle. The plantar limb of the incision is made just proximal and parallel to the demarcation between the thickened skin of the plantar heel and the thinner skin of the lateral heel. The sural nerve is protected, and subperiosteal elevation of all tissue off the lateral aspect of the calcaneus is performed. The calcaneofibular ligament is elevated with the flap, along with the peroneal tendons within their sheath. The full-thickness flap is then retracted using a “no-touch” technique with 0.062-inch Kirschner wires (K-wires) placed up the fibular shaft, in the talar neck, and in the cuboid ( A short Schanz pin is placed into the posterior aspect of the calcaneal tuberosity or the posteroinferior corner of the calcaneus to use as a joystick for the reduction of the tuberosity.  Identify the sural nerve at the most proximal and distal aspects of the wound. Once it is identified and protected, sharp dissection may be carried down to bone with the scalpel blade. Determine during the approach whether the peroneal tendons have been dislocated anteriorly from the injury (this may also be evident on the preoperative CT scan). The tendons will need to be reduced and the superior peroneal retinaculum repaired prior to wound closure.  The thin lateral wall is either reflected or removed and placed on the back table ( Irrigation of the wound and removal of organized clots will expose the fracture lines in the posterior facet. The articular surface of the posterior facet is elevated, and the depressed articular fragments are visualized and rotated out of the body of the calcaneus ( To mobilize the fracture fragments, restore calcaneal height, and initiate the correction of varus malalignment, a periosteal elevator is placed into the “primary fracture line,” that is, the fracture common to most intraarticular calcaneal fractures, between the calcaneal tuberosity and sustentacular (constant) fragment. The elevator is used to lever the tuberosity fragment down and medial to reposition it below the sustentaculum tali. Once the fragments have been mobilized, a Schanz pin may be placed in the calcaneal tuberosity to be used to lever the tuberosity into the proper position relative to the constant fragment ( One or two K-wires should then be placed from the medial tuberosity across the reduced primary fracture line into the constant fragment, without blocking subsequent reduction of the lateral articular and wall fragments. If greater support is required, the K-wires may be driven into the talar body. (However, care must be taken to avoid breaking these wires during the remainder of the procedure because they will be nearly impossible to retrieve from the talus.) Confirm tuberosity positioning and reduction of the medial wall with a Harris axial heel view. Frequently, it may take several attempts at reduction to anatomically reduce the medial calcaneal wall. Once the medial wall is reduced and the height of the calcaneus has been reestablished, the articular fragments may be reduced to the medial sustentacular fragment. These have been cleared of all clots to allow for anatomic reduction. If there is more than one superolateral articular fragment, these may be assembled on the back table with K-wires ( The lateral articular fragments should be secured to the constant fragment with a minimum of two pins to prevent rotation of the articular segment (however, these pins must be placed outside of the intended path for final screw fixation of the articular fragments). Should the lateral wall include a superolateral articular segment of the posterior facet (i.e., one with the lateral wall fragment), the articular and lateral wall reduction is performed simultaneously. Anterior reduction of the lateral articular fragment (with or without a lateral wall fragment attached) must also be confirmed with the anatomic restoration of the angle of Gissane (fracture reduction between the anterior aspect of the lateral articular fragment and the anterior process fragment). This step in the reduction reestablishes the proper relationship between the anterior and posterior calcaneal fragments. Reduction is confirmed on a lateral fluoroscopic image. Posterior facet reduction should be confirmed not only under direct visualization, but also with a Freer elevator to obtain tactile feedback of the articular congruency, as well as with intraoperative fluoroscopic Brodén views ( The articular fragments are secured to one another with a lag screw placed from the lateral fragment into the constant fragment. Alternatively, the lateral wall fragment may be reduced, a lateral plate applied, and the lag screw for the articular fragments placed through the superior plate (see  Avoid using dissection scissors other than at the proximal and distal aspects of the wound when locating the sural nerve. A sharp knife will preserve a full-thickness flap for superficial wound closure and a thick periosteal layer for deep wound closure. To restore the articular congruity of the posterior facet, do not reduce the fragments to the talar articular surface. This may lead to overreduction of the posterior facet and varus positioning of the articular fragment. The facet should be visualized and reduced to the medial (constant) articular fragment.  Use a no-touch technique to elevate the lateral flap by avoiding forceps on the lateral skin flap. A sharp two-pronged skin hook placed deep to the periosteum is useful to retract the subperiosteal flap.  Aggressively mobilize the primary fracture line before attempting reduction (particularly if the fracture is >10–14 days old). When placing a Schanz pin from a lateral direction, remember that the calcaneus has assumed a varus position, and therefore aim the Schanz pin slightly cephalad rather than perpendicular to the heel. Do not proceed with further fracture reduction until the medial calcaneal wall (primary fracture line) is anatomically reduced. If the articular reduction is difficult, occasionally the lateral wall fragments may need to be temporarily reassembled to guide the articular reduction. In simple terms, the Brodén view is a mortise view of the ankle angled into the articulating plane of the subtalar joint.  Bone graft may be packed into the fracture, into the space formerly occupied by the displaced articular fragments ( The lateral wall fragments are anatomically reduced relative to the lateral articular and anterior fragments and provisionally fixed with K-wires. Most surgeons prefer to use a multihole lateral plate designed specifically for the calcaneus ( The articular fragments may be secured with lag screw(s) either above or through the plate. For fixation of the articular fragments, 3.5-mm cortical lag screws are aimed slightly distal and plantar from the lateral cortex into the sustentacular fragment. Fully threaded screws placed in standard lag fashion may allow for better purchase in the subchondral bone of the articular fragments. Further stabilization of the calcaneus fracture is obtained with screws placed through the plate. Several screws are placed in the anterior and tuberosity fragments; typically, screws placed directly inferior to the posterior facet have poor purchase (we generally leave these holes open). Cortical screws are usually possible for the anterior process; cancellous screws may provide better purchase in the tuberosity fragment. Once the plate is secured to the anterior, sustentacular, and tuberosity fragments, the provisional K-wires may be removed (  There are studies that both support and refute the use of bone graft or bone graft substitutes. In cases of severe comminution, we typically add cancellous allograft bone with or without a platelet-rich product.  During articular fixation, direct the lag screws for the posterior facet in a slightly distal and plantar direction to capture the sustentacular (constant) fragment and avoid the articular surface of the posterior facet. (The surgeon may wish to carefully place a finger of the nondrilling hand on the medial aspect of the sustentaculum tali to serve as a guide.)  If provisional K-wires were placed across the subtalar joint, they must be avoided during drilling or screw placement. If a wire breaks, it may not be possible to retrieve it from the talus. Remember to look for potential peroneal tendon dislocation preoperatively, both clinically and on preoperative CT scanning.  Occasionally, a high-energy calcaneal fracture displaces the peroneal tendons with the lateral calcaneal wall enough to disrupt the superior peroneal tendon retinaculum, leading to peroneal tendon dislocation. Typically, peroneal tendon dislocation can be diagnosed on preoperative physical examination. When the superior peroneal retinaculum is disrupted, the tendons are subluxated or dislocated anterior to the fibula ( This can be visualized on preoperative axial ( A recommended routine is to check peroneal tendon reduction when ORIF of the calcaneal fracture is complete. Following ORIF of the calcaneal fracture into its anatomic alignment, the subfibular recess is restored, allowing for reduction of the peroneal tendons. The vertical limb of the incision is taken slightly more proximally, the sural nerve is protected, and the vacant fibular groove is visualized with the tendons dislocated anteriorly ( The tendons are carefully separated from the soft tissues, elevated for exposure without damaging the integrity of the soft-tissue flap, and reduced into the fibular groove. Retinacular tissue and periosteum are then utilized to reconstruct at least a portion of the superior peroneal retinaculum (a suture anchor may be used;  The wound is closed using 2-0 Vicryl sutures by reapproximation of the deep periosteal layer over a deep suction drain that is brought either through the lateral skin anterior to the Achilles tendon (posterior to the sural nerve) or outside the distal aspect of the foot (dorsal to the sural nerve). The deep layer is reapproximated first at the proximal and distal aspects of the wound to decrease tension at the apex of the wound ( The skin is closed with 4-0 nylon interrupted Allgöwer–Donati sutures ( A sterile dressing is placed on the wound. With the hip and knee flexed to allow the ankle to be easily positioned in a neutral position, a posterior/sugar tong splint is applied over adequate padding. With the suction drain functioning, the tourniquet is let down after wound closure.  Skin tension at the corner of the wound may be minimized by progressively closing the incision from the ends of the wound to the corner. Maintaining the tourniquet until the dressing and splint are applied and the drain is functioning reduces the potential for deleterious hematoma formation. The Allgöwer–Donati suture places the knot of the suture away from the lateral flap of skin and subcutaneous tissue, theoretically decreasing ischemic pressure from the knot (see  To prevent potential skin necrosis, the skin edges should not be pinched with the forceps and the tourniquet time should not exceed 2.5 hours (preferably <2 hours).  We routinely remove the skin sutures between 2 and 3 weeks, but may delay suture removal for up to an additional 3 weeks if necessary. If calcaneal fracture fixation was deemed stable, we recommend a removable boot so that the patient can perform range-of-motion exercises for the ankle and foot, provided the wound is healed. If there is any concern regarding the wound, immobilization in a short-leg cast is preferred and sutures remain until the 6-week follow-up appointment. Progressive weight bearing is allowed at 10–12 weeks, if radiographs suggest adequate fracture consolidation.   Wound healing is often delayed following ORIF of calcaneal fractures. Without evidence for infection, continued immobilization and protective weight bearing typically lead to progression toward satisfactory wound healing. Function may be enhanced with early range of motion of the ankle and foot while continuing strict non–weight-bearing status, provided the wound and fracture are stable.  A wound that fails to improve or exhibits signs of infection should prompt early infection workup, irrigation and débridement, and infectious disease and plastic surgery consultation in select cases. Weight bearing should be restricted until satisfactory fracture healing is suggested on postoperative radiographs. 