In the present research, a macromolecular depressant poly(acrylamide-allylthiourea) (PAM-ATU) was explored to depress galena in the flotation separation from molybdenite. Its flotation behavior was evaluated by micro-flotation tests. The micro-flotation results revealed that PAM-ATU could depress galena strongly at 4.0 mg/L within pH 6.0–12.0, while molybdenite was found sensitive to the pH. At pH around 10.5, molybdenite showed a relatively good floatability with a nearly 80.0% recovery in the presence of 4.0 mg/L PAM-ATU. The flotation separation results for artificially mixed minerals proved that 1.0 mg/L PAM-ATU could selectively depress galena well. FT-IR and XPS analysis results demonstrated that PAM-ATU was likely to adsorb on galena surface by chemisorption. This study indicated that the synthesized PAM-ATU with low molecular weight might be a promising galena depressant in the flotation separation of Mo/Pb ores.Molybdenum as a strategic metal has been widely used in the fields of alloy materials, chemical application, electronic and aerospace technology, etc. However, impurities in molybdenum could cause many problems. For instance, the lead impurity will deteriorate the quality of alloy products or reduce its application performances, moreover, it could give rise to heavy environmental pollutions due to the evaporation of lead oxide during smelting process ( Molybdenite and galena originated from Jiangxi and Hunan Province, China, respectively. These high purity minerals (greater than 90.0%) were firstly handpicked, crushed and then dry ground in a ceramic ball mill. Thereafter, the particles with the size of −74 + 38 μm were collected by dry sieving and used for micro-flotation tests, in which, PAM-ATU with an average molecular weight of 1.66 × 10 The micro-flotation tests were performed on a XFG5-35 flotation machine. 2.0 g galena or molybdenite were pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath for 3 min. Later, the samples were transferred into a 40-mL flotation cell, and the pH was adjusted to a desired value. PAM-ATU, IPETC and MIBC with a proper concentration were added by turns. For artificially mixed minerals, 1.6 g molybdenite and 0.4 g galena were mixed as the feed samples considering the low Pb grade in bulk Mo/Pb concentrate in industry. The same procedure was performed as above. Finally, the flotation was conducted for 4 min. In the single mineral micro-flotation tests, the recovery of molybdenite or galena was calculated according to the dry weight of the froth products and the tailings. While for artificially mixed minerals, the recovery of Mo or Pb was obtained by assaying chemical elements in the froth products and the tailings. Each test was repeated three times to get an average recovery with a variation of ±3%. FT-IR spectra of PAM-ATU and PAM-ATU/Pb The micro-flotation results for single minerals and artificially mixed minerals are listed in As shown in As displayed in A relatively large separation window was observed at pH around 10.5 in Herein, FT-IR spectra of PAM-ATU and PAM-ATU/Pb Clearly, two peaks at 160.70 eV and 161.95 eV assigned to S 2p of galena were very close to those in previous literature ( In this study, poly(acrylamide-allylthiourea) (PAM-ATU) was explored as a galena depressant in the flotation separation from molybdenite. The micro-flotation results revealed that PAM-ATU could both depress galena and molybdenite when over 8.0 mg/L. While below 8.0 mg/L, galena was depressed strongly and molybdenite kept a relatively good floatability. Molybdenite was found sensitive to the pH, while galena wasn’t, and was depressed well. At pH around 10.5, molybdenite was separated successfully from artificially mixed minerals. The Mo recovery could achieve nearly 88.0% with a Mo grade of almost 58.0%. FT-IR and XPS analysis results confirmed that PAM-ATU was likely to adsorb on galena surface by chemisorption. However, the interaction mechanism between PAM-ATU and molybdenite are not clear under large dosages, and further work will be implemented, including its application in practical Mo/Pb ores.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully appreciate the financial supports provided by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: