Background
                  The expression of the two types of ferritin subunits, the H-subunit and L-subunit, has been shown to be differentially regulated by cytokines. The primary aim of the present study was to quantitatively measure the expression of the H-subunit and L-subunit of ferritin in bone marrow macrophages and cells of the erythron in patients with chronic T-helper cell type-1 immune stimulation.
               
                  Methods
                  The expression of the H-subunit and L-subunit of ferritin in bone marrow macrophages and cells of the erythron was quantitatively evaluated by post-embedding immunolocalisation with immunogold transmission electron microscopy.
               
                  Results
                  The present study showed up-regulation of the H-subunit of ferritin in the bone marrow macrophage in patients with pronounced cellular immune activation (94.7±37.3counts/μm2; n=31 vs 72.4±34.0counts/μm2; n=13, p-value=0.037).
               
                  Conclusion
                  This supports a possible role for H-subunit rich ferritins in the hypoferraemia of chronic disease.Ferritin is the intracellular protein responsible for the sequestration, storage and release of iron. Ferritin can accumulate up to 4500 iron atoms as a ferrihydrite mineral in a protein shell and releases these iron atoms when there is an increase in the cell's need for bio-available iron Plasma ferritin is increased as an acute phase protein during conditions of infection, inflammation and malignancies. Its expression is also up-regulated in the cytosol of various cells in conditions of uncontrolled cellular proliferation, in any condition marked by excessive production of toxic oxygen radicals, and by infectious and inflammatory processes The expression of the H-subunit and L-subunit and the relationship between these subunits depend, not only on the type of cell, but also on the role of the cell in iron homeostasis and on various other factors that can influence the expression of the H-subunit and L-subunit of ferritin In this study the expression of the H-subunit and L-subunit of ferritin was determined in the bone marrow macrophage and in cells of the erythron in combination with the inflammatory status of patients with cellular immune activation. The study group consisted of 44 patients attending the Department of Internal Medicine, Kalafong Hospital, South Africa, for treatment of chronic diseases. Blood and bone marrow were collected from each patient. The diagnosis of the patients were diverse and included various types of infections (tuberculosis (TB), malaria, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)), cancers (lung, breast), pancytopenias as a result of bone marrow suppression or peripheral destruction of blood cells, organ failures including renal failure, heart failure and liver failure, anaemias with different etiologies and various other pathologies. This resulted in an extremely heterogeneous group of patients. For the purpose of this study the immune status based on neopterin and cytokine activity were used to group the patients. Ethical clearance for the study was obtained from the Faculty of Health Sciences Research Ethics Committee, University of Pretoria (ethical clearance number 118/2003), and all patients gave informed consent. Neopterin measurements were performed by a neopterin ELISA (DRG Diagnostics, Germany, Orb Diagnostics, Modderfontein, South Africa). Interleukin-8, interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-10, tumour necrosis factor-α and interleukin-12p70 were determined by the Human Inflammation Kit, BD™ Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) (The Scientific group, Midrand, South Africa). Interleukin-2, interleukin-4, interleukin-5, interleukin-10, tumour necrosis factor-α and interferon-γ were determined by the BD™ Cytometric Human T-helper cell type-1/T-helper cell type-2 Cytokine Kit (The Scientific group, Midrand, South Africa). With the T-helper cell type-1/T-helper cell type-2 CBA cytokine kit the interferon-γ standards were lost and the measurement of interferon-γ was done by the human interferon-γ ELISA Kit, BD OptEIA™ test (The Scientific Group, Midrand, South Africa). Transforming growth factor-β1 and granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor were determined by their respective ELISAs (DRG Diagnostics, Germany, Orb Diagnostics, Modderfontein, South Africa). Fixation of bone marrow tissue was performed as described elsewhere The sources of the reagents and antibodies were: NaJO The sections were viewed with a Philips 301 transmission electron microscope (FEI, Eindhoven, The Netherlands). With omission of the primary antibodies no non-specific binding for the secondary antibody was seen to either the resin or the tissue. With or without antigen retrieval the amount of non-specific binding of the primary antibodies to the resin was negligible. For quantification of the immunolabelling of the H-subunit and L-subunit of ferritin, the 10 For the H-subunit and L-subunit variables the Welch t-test was used as variances were large and different. Furthermore, since the groups were also relatively small, use was also made of the ranksum (Mann–Whitney) test. When these results were interpreted, preference was given to the p-value of the ranksum test when the Welch t-test was not significant. For the cytokines, which had skewed distributions, a similar analysis was done, but for the logarithmic transformed data. For summary statistics of the cytokines the geometric means and their 95% confidence intervals were reported. Testing was done at the 0.05 level of significance. The patients were subdivided according to the immunological indicator neopterin into a group with normal (< Subsequently, the expression of the subunits of ferritin was compared between the normal and elevated neopterin groups. The results are demonstrated in The functional characteristics of intracellular ferritin depend on the subunits that constitute the ferritin molecule — in other words the type of isoferritin. As isoferritins have different functional characteristics, quantitative information on the expression of the subunits in different types of cells, and in different conditions, is necessary to better understand the intracellular role of ferritin. In the bone marrow iron is metabolised in different ways by cells of the erythron on the one hand, and the bone marrow macrophage on the other. Iron is shuttled between the macrophage and cells of the erythron to support erythropoiesis, but during conditions of chronic immune stimulation, iron is retained by the macrophage resulting in an increase in storage iron and hypoferraemia (the so-called iron transfer block) accompanied by the anaemia of chronic disease In order to understand the role of ferritin and more specifically the subunits of ferritin in the handling of iron by the macrophage and cells of the erythron in the bone marrow it is necessary to have quantitative information on the expression of the two subunits of ferritin, the H-subunit and L-subunit, at the cellular level. Several The present study focused on the intracellular expression of the H-subunit and L-subunit of ferritin at the single cell level in the bone marrow macrophage and in cells of the erythron in patients with cellular immune activation. Neopterin, a macrophage product upon stimulation by interferon-γ (INF-γ), was determined in order to assess the involvement of cell-mediated (pro-inflammatory) immunity. Plasma neopterin levels are often employed to monitor the magnitude of cellular immune activation/involvement during an immune response When the validity of the subdivision according to neopterin levels was tested against the cytokine results the high neopterin group demonstrated a predominantly pro-inflammatory profile. The pro-inflammatory cytokines INF-γ, interleukin-6 (Il-6) and Il-8 were significantly higher in the group with elevated neopterin levels than in the group with normal neopterin levels. It is known that the activating signals for the classically activated macrophage (type-1 activated macrophage/pro-inflammatory macrophage) include INF-γ, tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and Il-2, and the major secretory products are TNF-α, Il-12, Il-1β, Il-6 and Il-8 Subsequently, the expression of the ferritin subunits was compared between the group with elevated and the group with normal neopterin. In the patients with elevated neopterin the expression of the H-subunit of ferritin in the bone marrow macrophage was significantly higher, p-value In the cells of the erythron, the expression of the H-subunit of ferritin was not significantly different between the patients with elevated and the patients with normal neopterin. Neither was a significant difference found between the two groups for the expression of the L-subunit of ferritin in the cells of the erythron. However, the H-subunit/L-subunit ratio in the cells of the erythron was marginally higher, p-value Although, a significant increase was shown in the macrophage H-subunits, the expression was probably even higher than observed since two processes induced by cytokines can reduce the levels of the H-subunit of ferritin. Firstly, pro-inflammatory cytokines have been shown to increase the secretion of ferritin from cells into extracellular fluids The results of this study thus showed the expression of the H-subunit of ferritin in the bone marrow macrophage to be higher and the expression of the L-subunit of ferritin in the macrophage to be unaffected in patients with increased cellular immune activity. It is feasible to accept that the higher H-subunit count reflected isoferritins containing a higher quantity of H-subunits. In contrast, the expression of both the H-subunit and the L-subunit in the cells of the erythron in the bone marrow was unaffected in the patients with a pro-inflammatory immune status. The findings of this quantitative, In view of the presumed functional characteristics of the H-subunit of ferritin