We report the effect of substitution of 10% divalent ion (Mn2+, Co2+ and Ni2+) on the magnetization of Zn ferrite thin films. M0.1Zn0.9Fe2O4 (M = Mn2+, Co2+ and Ni2+) thin films were pulse laser deposited on to fused quartz substrate at substrate temperatures (TS) ranging from room temperature (RT) to 750 °C. Some of the films deposited with substrate at room temperature were also annealed at different temperatures (TA). While the bulk samples of similar composition are paramagnetic at room temperature, the films were found to be magnetically ordered. The values of magnetization obtained were dependent on TS and TA, similar to pure Zn ferrite films. However, the magnetization values for substituted films were stable over a much larger range of substrate temperatures than pure Zn ferrite films. The thin films of Co0.1Zn0.9Fe2O4, Mn0.1Zn0.9Fe2O4 and Ni0.1Zn0.9Fe2O4 deposited at TS = 750 °C showed the 10 K magnetization values of 5.8 kG, 4.4 kG and 4.5 kG respectively and 0.1 kG, 0.3 kG and 0.2 kG at RT respectively. These values are to be compared with the reported values of ZnFe2O4 thin films deposited at TS = 750 °C, which showed magnetization value of 0.7 kG and 0.2 kG at 10 K and RT respectively. The magnetic properties of bulk and thin films of M0.1Zn0.9Fe2O4 were explained based on the cation occupancy of A and B-sites.Spinel ferrites are ferrimagnets and their net magnetic moment is given by the difference of the magnetic moments (µ In our group, we have studied thin films of various binary ferrites including CoFe In our group we have also studied pure Zn ferrite (ZnFe As a follow up of above-mentioned studies, we thought it interesting to look at the ferrite series from the zinc ferrite end and to study thin films of Zn rich ferrite. In this paper we present probably the first study on nano-crystalline Zn ferrite films where 10% of divalent Ni, Mn or Co ions replace Zn Thin films of Zn A set of films, which were deposited with substrate at RT, were annealed at various temperatures (T The X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out using PANalytical X’Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer with CuK  Non-observation of XRD peaks for the as deposited films at low substrate and low annealing temperatures is found in most ferrites thin film. When studies were carried out in some of them using transmission electron microscope (TEM), it was found that these films are actually crystalline The M–H loops of M     The coercivity of the films deposited at RT and annealed at T One of the important points to be noted from our work is that M It is interesting to compare the results of our thin films with that of pure Zn ferrite films published by Sahu et al Even though our substituted films broadly show similar behavior as a function of T It is also interesting to compare our magnetization values with x = 0.7 samples in Co-Zn and Mn-Zn ferrite systems, which was published by us earlier In pure binary ferrites like Co ferrite, magnetization is observed to show a monotonous increase with increase in either T Above discussion leads us to feel that the decrease of magnetization seen in our films at higher values of T Another remarkable point that we note from Amongst the three substitutions studied in our films, Co In case of Co Single phase M The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors thank