Diamond-like carbon (DLC) coating was used to improve the hardness and tribological importance of the plasma nitrided Astaloy Mo. In this research, pre-alloyed Astaloy Mo and graphite powders were used as starting materials. The specimens were produced by single-sided pressing and sintered at 1120 °C for 30 min in the N2/H2 atmosphere. Effect of DLC deposition on the hardness and wear behavior of nitrided Astaloy Mo as well as the effect of different conditions of the substrate was investigated. Plasma nitriding greatly improved the adhesion of DLC film on the substrate. Moreover, it was observed that the as-sintered substrates led to producing DLC films with more thickness and roughness and a higher adhesive strength. Wear results indicated that the wear performance greatly increased by DLC films applying. Adhesive and abrasive wear and pull-out of hard particles were identified as the main mechanisms of the DLC coatings deposited on the as-sintered substrate.Diamond-like carbon (DLC) coatings have been studied for over three decades because of their excellent properties such as chemical neutrality, high hardness, high wear resistance, and optical clarity. These superior properties have created special applications such as deposition of DLC coating on metal parts to increase wear resistance [ Among the important techniques achieve higher density, one can name a two-step compacting and two-step sintering method, a warm compacting, and a forging or a form rolling. Despite the high costs involved in applying these methods, using a hard carbon coating on the surface can replace with these methods and increase mechanical properties [ Among the important issues that can be considered to improve DLC coatings are the hardness of the substrate surface and the adhesion of the coating to the substrate [ Applying an intermediate layer between the DLC coating and substrate can be used to increase the adhesion strength of the coating. Various intermediate layers including metallic layers (Ti, Ta, Si, W, Cr, etc.) and compound layers with variable concentration ting (CrN, TiN, TiC, TiCN, Ti-Ti DLC coatings can be deposited using different methods of physical vapor deposition (PVD), ion beam deposition [ In this research, pre-alloyed Astaloy Mo powder (Hoganas Sweden, 20–180 μm) and graphite powder (0.8% UF4, 5.5–7 μm) were used as starting materials. Magnesium stearate (0.2%) was applied as a lubricant. The chemical analysis of the starting powder of Astaloy Mo is presented in First, Astaloy and graphite powders were fully blended and after that pressed under different pressures to achieve different densities. In the next step, samples were heat treated at 1120 °C for 30 min in a reducing atmosphere of 90/10 N The DLC coatings were deposited on nitrided substrates at 200 °C using DC PACVD technique. The deposition process was applied in an atmosphere of argon, hydrogen, and methane (CH Crystallography identification and Phase formation of nitrided and DLC films were analyzed by X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation (Philips XRD instrument, 2θ = 10–80°). Microstructure, morphology, worn surface and debris, and dominant wear mechanisms were characterized by scanning electron microscope (MIRA3 model TESCAN) equipped with EDS analysis. It was used from 2% Nital for 5–10 s in the metallographic preparation process. The Taylor Hobson Surface roughness tester was utilized to measure the roughness of specimens in accordance with the DIN EN ISO 4287 standard. Moreover, Instron Wolpert hardness tester (V-tester 4021; Germany) was used to measure microhardness of the specimens according to ASTM B933-16 standard. Since the sintered iron-based materials have a porous structure, each microhardness test was performed for five times and their average was reported. Raman spectroscopy (Upright system excited with 532 nm laser) was employed to characterize the DLC coatings at room temperature, a wavelength range of 800–1800 cm To comprehend the parameters effective on the tribological performance of the DLC films and nitrided Astaloy Mo substrate, a reciprocating sliding wear test was performed at room temperature according to ASTM G133-05 standard. The pin was tungsten carbide with a hardness of 1500 HV. The normal loading force and sliding speed were fixed at 60 N and 0.1 m/s, respectively. The wear rate of nitrided substrate and DLC deposits was measured by the following equation:  XRD results also indicate the presence of ε (Fe The SEM micrographs of the cross-section of different specimens are shown in One of the most important parameters in the coating process is the adhesion of the coating on the substrate [ To date, various methods have been used to reduce stress in DLC coatings (e.g., the use of metals and different impurities [ The adhesion strength of various coatings is created by three physical, chemical and mechanical mechanisms. Physical and chemical connections are discussed in methods such as laser cladding, plasma spray, and high-velocity oxygen fuel (HVOF). Mechanical bonding is the most important strengthening mechanism in the DLC coatings. Surface roughness and topography are the major factors effective in the connection of deposit/substrate include. Based on our results, the as-sintered sample with a density of 6.8 g/cm Raman spectroscopy was applied to characterize As6.8 and Ha6.8 samples after DLC coating ( The worn surface micrographs of various samples are presented in The variations of the friction coefficient as a function of sliding distance for nitrided samples and DLC coatings are shown in In the final stage of friction coefficient curves (more than 600 m), there are severe fluctuations that are attributed to the separation process of the DLC coating. It seems that the DLC deposit can easily be detached from the nitrided counterface and the WC pin can directly contact with the nitrided intermediate layer. The similar behavior of different curves of friction coefficients can also be related to the detachment of the DLC deposit. The average friction coefficients, mass losses, and wear rates of different samples are presented in Furthermore,  The wear profiles of hardened samples were very similar. So, it seems that the changes in substrate density have no sensible effect on the wear resistance of hardened specimens. The wear resistance of these samples was determined through the resistance of the nitrided layer, where the Ha7 sample showed the highest hardness and wear resistance among the hardened specimens. The microstructure, hardness, and wear performance of nitrided Astaloy Mo and DLC deposit were studied and the following conclusions were made: Due to the behavior of diffusion controlling of the nitridation process, the thickness of the compound layers was decreased with increasing the substrate density. With decreasing the density, the amount of surface roughness was also increased, leading to a coarse surface with nodular morphology. Adhesion results showed that plasma nitriding greatly improved the adhesion of DLC film on the substrate and also as-sintered sample with a density of 6.8 g/cm According to microstructural investigation and wear results, the wear resistance of DLC coating on the as-sintered substrates was better than hardened substrates and the dominant mechanisms were changed from cracking, pulling out, and burnishing wearing to abrasive and three-body abrasive mechanisms. However, in the case of the DLC coating, the major mechanisms of the nitrided samples were cracking and pull-out wearing. Friction coefficients greatly reduced down to 50% by applying DLC coating on various nitrided samples due to the high wear resistance of the DLC coatings. The weight losses and wear rates of all specimens were also reduced such that in the case of As6.8 sample, these values dropped about 89%. This behavior is attributed to the high adhesive strength in As6.8 specimen.