Statement of problem
                  The loss of posterior teeth has a negative effect on the masticatory efficiency and activity of mastication muscles. How these muscles are affected by partial removable dental prostheses (PRDPs) with different cusp angles is unknown.
               
                  Purpose
                  The purpose of this clinical study was to evaluate the influence of different cusp angles, with anatomic (33 degrees), semianatomic (20 degrees), and nonanatomic teeth (0 degree), on the masticatory efficiency and muscular activity of participants receiving mandibular bilateral distal PRDPs.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Fifteen participants consented to the evaluation of masticatory efficiency and electromyographic (EMG) activity with a PRDP with a unified bilateral design. The cusp angles of the artificial teeth were randomly changed from anatomic (33 degrees), semianatomic (20 degrees), and nonanatomic teeth (0 degree). Masticatory efficiency was evaluated by recording 5 parameters, including number of strokes, and time of mastication while the EMG activities of the masseter and temporalis muscles, measured using surface electromyography. The data were analyzed with 1-way ANOVA and the Tukey multiple post hoc test with statistical software (α=.05).
               
                  Results
                  With regard to masticatory efficiency, PRDPs with anatomic and semianatomic teeth exhibited higher masticatory efficiency than those with nonanatomic teeth, whereas no significant differences were found between PRDPs with anatomic and semianatomic teeth. With respect to EMG activity, the least EMG activity was observed in PRDPs with anatomic teeth, whereas the highest activity was observed with nonanatomic teeth. No significant differences were found between the effect of PRDPs with anatomic and semianatomic teeth on masseter activity.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Changing the cusp angle from 33 to 20 degrees in PRDPs did not influence the masticatory efficiency or the EMG activity of the masseters. However, it did lead to increased EMG activities of the temporalis muscle. PRDPs with nonanatomic teeth were associated with a significant decrease in masticatory efficiency accompanied by a significant increase in EMG activity. The decrease in cusp angles in distal extension PRDPs from anatomic (33 degrees) to semianatomic (20 degrees) does not affect masticatory efficiency and EMG activity differently, whereas the use of nonanatomic teeth decreases masticatory efficiency and increases EMG activity. Many different methods of evaluating masticatory efficiency have been reported, including the sieve method, which is used to measure the degree of comminution of different kinds of test foods after a specified number of masticatory strokes. Surface electromyography (EMG) provides information about muscular activity through sensitive electrodes located on the skin. Many studies have measured the masticatory efficiency and muscular activity in participants using complete removable dental prostheses with teeth with different cusp angles. This cross-over study was approved by the Research Committee for Human Studies at Aljouf University, Saudi Arabia, where the study was conducted. The sample size was selected from previous studies that stated at least 9 participants were needed to detect the differences depending on calculation with 5% alpha errors and 80% power of test. Masticatory efficiency and muscular activity were evaluated 3 months after the final adjustment of the delivered prosthesis. Masticatory efficiency was evaluated by recording 5 parameters while participants were masticating standardized pieces (1 cm EMG recordings for each right and left masseter muscle and the anterior fibers of the temporalis muscle were obtained using bipolar surface EMG (Nicolet Compass Meridian 1.2.1; Natus Medical Inc) while the participant was masticating 5 pieces of the same kind of predetermined test foods used in the masticatory efficiency tests (carrots, apples, and peanuts). After the location of the electrodes had been identified and standardized and before electrode placement, the skin was cleaned to reduce electrode impedance, and the recording was performed 5 to 6 minutes later. With carrots and peanuts, the results ( With respect to the EMG activity of the masseter muscles ( As related to the temporalis muscle, the nonanatomic teeth were also associated with higher EMG activities when masticating all kinds of test foods, followed by semianatomic teeth; the use of anatomic teeth was associated with the least EMG activity ( The purpose of this study was to clarify the influence of varying cusp angles on masticatory function and EMG activity in participants with bilateral distal extension PRDPs with an opposing natural dentition. In this study, an experimental dental prosthesis with a uniform design was used to prevent changes in prosthesis stability, which could greatly affect masticatory efficiency and activity. Masticatory efficiency was evaluated by recording 5 parameters, including the number of masticatory strokes and time taken for complete masticating and swallowing of test foods. This study demonstrated that, with hard foods, the semianatomic and nonanatomic teeth were associated with the least number of strokes until the first swallow and the least amount of time until the first swallow. The anatomic and semianatomic teeth were associated with fewest strokes until the mouth was cleared of food, the fewest swallows, and the least amount of time until the mouth was cleared of food. With soft foods, no significant differences were found among all types of teeth. Based on these data, the anatomic and semianatomic teeth provided higher masticatory efficiency than nonanatomic teeth; no changes in masticatory efficiency were noted between anatomic and semianatomic teeth. This finding supports the finding of Sueda et al, Regarding the EMG activity recording, a survey of PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane, and the Saudi Digital Library (SDL) was conducted, and no published studies were found that measured the muscular activity in participants with bilateral or even unilateral distal extension PRDPs with different cusp angles. The participants were asked to start mastication of test food with the side to be recorded. The procedure was repeated 5 times for each muscle on the right and left sides while the participants were eating the test food in a random way for each side. As the muscle activity was highest at the start of mastication of the test food and then started to decrease as the test food began to soften, the highest recording at each time of mastication was chosen, and the mean of 5 records for both the right and the left muscles was considered the reading parameter for masticating that kind of test food. Regarding the masseter muscles, the highest muscular activity was recorded with nonanatomic teeth followed by those with semianatomic and anatomic teeth; no significant differences were found between semianatomic and anatomic teeth. For the temporalis muscles, the highest muscular activity was recorded with nonanatomic teeth followed by semianatomic and anatomic teeth, which recorded the least amount of activity. Based on these results, PRDPs with nonanatomic teeth led to higher muscular activity than with semianatomic, whereas anatomic teeth were associated with the least activity. Hickey et al This study has limitations, one of which is related to the low sample size as a result of the restricted inclusion criteria and area population. Another factor is sex distribution due to custom and length of time of the study. However, the study design was conducted using the same participants who received 3 sets of prostheses, making it easier to compare the results. Within the limitations of this clinical study, the following conclusions were drawn. The assignment of cusp angles in distal extension PRDPs from anatomic to semianatomic teeth did not affect the masticatory efficiency and EMG activity of the masseter muscles. However, the use of semianatomic teeth led to an increase in the EMG activity of the temporalis muscles. The use of distal extension PRDPs with nonanatomic teeth led to a significant decrease in masticatory efficiency accompanied by an increase in the EMG activity of the muscles of mastication. The authors thank Dr Waleed Foad Mohammed for efforts in EMG analysis.