The Hilton Hotel Brisbane, Australia was the venue for the inaugural Minerals Engineering International (MEI) specialty meeting on mineralogy, In recent years there have been enormous advances in the automation of key mineral identification and quantification technologies. A total of 90 delegates representing nine countries attended the two-day conference at which 27 technical presentations plus exhibits from a number of key institutions and equipment suppliers, kept delegates busy, and informed. From the results presented it is clear that mineralogists are either now, or will in the very near future, be able to draw on a wide range of techniques to allow the automated analysis of earth resource materials. These include optical, near infra-red, X-ray beam, laser beam, electron beam (SEM, EPMA), and proton beam techniques, to name a few. Personal highlights from the conference included presentations showing the progress of key SEM-based instruments such as QEMSCAN and MLA and how the rapid uptake of both technologies by the mining and process mineralogy community has greatly assisted in planning, monitoring and controlling mining operations. The role of automated mineralogical identification methods now forms an integral part of many projects and the two techniques are intimately involved in mineralogical investigations in industries as diverse as mineral sands, coal, diamond, platinum, gold, nickel, copper and aluminium (bauxite). Other highlights included exciting developments in non SEM-based characterisation methods such as laser induced fluorescence (LIF), detection of bulk mineralogy using radio frequency (RF) techniques, on-line mid-infrared reflectance characterisation, on-line X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the use of robotic instrumentation to fully automate sample analysis procedures. Although many of these techniques have not yet reached the same level of ripeness as the SEM-based (or optical) methods they will, in the very near future, complement the current automated techniques, further adding to the available arsenal of mineralogical tools. As a last comment, MEI is to be congratulated for a wonderful two days of stimulating scientific content. To those who haven’t attended an MEI-sponsored event, the unique format of their conferences (small numbers of participants; short, concise presentations; and long tea and lunch breaks providing plenty of opportunity for discussion) works extremely well. The next Automated Mineralogy conference will again be held in Brisbane from 1 to 2 September, 2007, immediately following (From conference report published at