Three different comminution devices: crushers, mills and hybrid-mills (a synergistic combination of a mill and a crusher) are studied. To achieve the objective, benchmarking was performed for the three devices. Specifically, a computer code was developed based on the discrete element method (DEM), which is capable of capturing comminution variables such as material fracture, load motion, power consumed, and number of impacts, among others. The milled material has been modeled through a set of spheres (basic elements of DEM), joined together by beam elements similar to those used in the finite element method (FEM). The beams have mechanical properties that are defined by the type of material being ground and they can be broken through a failure criterion established by the stress level attained. The comparison is made on equal terms for the three devices, using the same size and granulometric distribution of the material to be ground. The hybrid mill has advantages over the other two particular case of operation.Copper processing depends on the type of associated material. Usually, copper is found as the oxide or sulfide, and both require size reduction of the material, which is more thorough for the sulfides, where it must reach a size smaller than 50 In each process different mechanical devices are used to achieve material fragmentation. In crushing, size reduction occurs by compressing the body between two surfaces, moving in an antagonizing and cyclic manner, pressing the material to break it. In the milling step, impact and abrasion are used as the main mechanisms of size reduction, which is achieved by increasing the relative motion between the bodies themselves and the milling means that are added to improve the process. In general, size reduction makes use of three basic mechanisms, namely impact, abrasion and attrition. Impact is directed at large ore material, which is fragmented upon impact with a surface or other objects; abrasion occurs under a compression field and the relative motion between the bodies; attrition is the weakening of the material as a result of sustained compression load which generates a large number of microcracks, which are subsequently propagated under the action of impacts and relative movements. In summary, there is comminution equipment that is classified into two large families. The first corresponds to the mills used for primary comminution through abrasion and impact; and the second family, which corresponds to the crushers, uses compression crushing to reduce the size of the material. This paper simulates the behavior of a material in a crusher, a mill and new equipment that synergistically integrates a mill and a crusher, which we will call hybrid-mill. From these simulations the equipment will be evaluated objectively, defining measurable variables like the number of impacts, the number of fractured bodies, the wear volume, and the impact energy. In general, milling equipment has been evaluated through empirical formulations that measure the energy required for milling, and computational modeling aimed mainly at describing the load motion in the unit. The main question that may arise is how to evaluate equipment that differs from that commonly described and standardized, without making direct laboratory tests on real models involving the cost of developing and building the equipment. Numerical modeling has been used to generate approximations for the evaluation of comminution equipment, implementing solution algorithm through the discrete element method (DEM) proposed by The main researchers on this field propose two main strategies for quantifying the comminution process due to material fracture, among them Subsequently, Other authors, like The present study uses the previous work and applies it directly to the study of material fracture in order to evaluate the performance of new comminution equipment, based on the computational analysis of the phenomena, through the implementation of a methodology that allows comparing the performance of the three kinds of equipment on equal terms, generating fully measurable variables which allow the evaluation and measurement of the phenomena present in comminution, depending on the characteristics of the equipment and the material to be processed. In comminution processes it has been essential to determine the relation between the energy of the fracture process and the size of the material or particles obtained as a product. In general, certain parameters and indicators are based largely on experimental relations due to the heterogeneity of the material, either because of the diversity of its components with different mechanical properties, or because of the presence of cracks and moisture that enhance or attenuate the effects of stress concentration. Currently, comminution is quantified mainly by two variables: the first is measured by the reduction ratio ( This paper addresses the problem of comminution computationally, making it possible to quantify all the variables involved in the model that captures the process, allowing to know the Lagrangian behavior of the particles, which determines the position, velocity, acceleration and contact forces as a function of time. These variables allow the comparison to be made in a three-dimensional (3D) domain, a condition that forces to generate a strategy for comparing the different comminution machines to evaluate objectively the behavior of the material in each machine (crusher, mill and hybrid-mill). The objective comparison between the three machines will be very complex because they have different natures and operate with different mechanisms to fragmentize the material. As mentioned, the crusher is mainly associated with the compression effects and the mill is associated with the impact and abrasion effects, apart from the mechanism associated with the machines movement. Considering this scenery of many comparisons arises a scenery restricted to the effect produced by each machine to a material sample that will have the same geometrical and physical properties characteristics. Therefore, the results will be valid only for the conditions used, considering that others conditions exist in which the results may change and that represent a future study material. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the methodology proposed (using DEM) allows the evaluation of variables that capture the behavior of the material in different machines. We have defined a number of factors that allow the evaluation: Equal number of particles in each machine. Equal volume in the comminution chamber of each machine. The equivalent operating conditions. An equal number of particles (5074) and the same number of links amenable to fracture (18998) have been considered in each of the evaluated machines. The particles are composed of 43 spheres interconnected by bonding elements, and all the spheres have the same volume. The size of the machines is determined by the filling level of each chamber, using a filling level of 30% of the total volume. The operating conditions are related to the speed; in mills, a percentage between 65% and 75% of the critical rotational speed is commonly used, relating this rotational speed with the alternating movement of a crusher’s jaw, which defines a full cycle of jaw opening and closing equivalent to a 360° rotation (this condition is subjected to the particles at the same time the charging cycle, that is, in a rotation of mill the material is subjected to a peak force), both in the conventional mill as well as in the new mill in the same time period. Note that this condition relates the devices univocally, since a 360° turn of the hybrid-mill is completely equivalent to a complete opening and closing cycle of the crusher. On the other hand, since the hybrid-mill’s rotating head causes the particles to rotate in a similar way as the loading motion in the conventional mill, its performance will be equivalent. Moreover, the particles have the same mechanical properties in all the devices – density, volume, inertia, etc. – completing the conditions that enable a comparison closer to reality. The devices in normal operational conditions have grilles that allow the material to flow (volume control). In this simulation it has been considered for all of them that there is no flow, for the purpose of maintaining the same amount of material in the chambers and counting in the best way possible the variables to be measured; that represent a limitation to the model. To evaluate the performance of the devices, the following variables are defined: consumed power, impact rate, wear volume, contact pressure, fracture frequency, fracture energy, wear energy, and comminution energy. They can show objectively the behavior of each of the devices, and their values will be absolute because each of them uses the same amount of material. The material has the ability to fracture because each particle is composed of a group of 43 spheres joined together. Therefore, the particle will lose spheres as the process progresses, and since the material has the same properties, this will indicate which device uses less energy, which reduces the size of the material faster, and which mechanism of comminution will predominate in each device. Also, the wear of a sphere will be determined by applying Archard’s model, and this variable is related to the abrasion of the material. Once all these variables have been calculated, a table will be made to identify which equipment, under the given operating conditions, will have better performance in terms of energy and comminution. To quantitatively determine these variables a computer program written in C++ was developed that implements an algorithm of the discrete element method. The main feature of the program is the incorporation of contact models according to the material used. The program has a graphical data output which allows knowing each variable’s results – position, velocity, acceleration, and force – qualitatively and quantitatively, and from these values work, energy, power, pressure, wear, etc., can be determined using appropriate models. The following sub-items describe the calculation of each of the variables that will be used to evaluate the equipment. The power consumed by each of the devices is determined, and although the cross product between the force and velocity is used, the calculation takes different forms depending on the device. To evaluate the power in the crusher, the reaction forces produced by all the particles that are in contact with the movable wall of the device were calculated and were added and the resultant vector is obtained. On the other hand, it is assumed that the motion of the gripper jaws is of the oscillating type in the horizontal direction, where A is the amplitude of motion of the gripper jaws and ω is the driving frequency, and the vector product of the two vectors determines the instantaneous power of the device. The instantaneous power of the mill is calculated by determining all the tangential forces which occur at the contact point of the particles with the moving cylinder, and they are multiplied by the radius of the mill, giving the total torque exerted on it by the particles. This torque is multiplied vectorially by the velocity vector of rotation – constant vector in the axial direction – and the power consumed is obtained. For the hybrid-mill the calculation is more complex, since each contact force of a particle on the rotating head is determined, which is decomposed into a normal and a tangential component, simultaneously storing the position of the contact and creating a position vector from the point of contact to the axis of rotation of the rotating head. This position vector and the tangential component are used to determine the torques generated by each contact, which are then summed to give the total torque consumed. It should be pointed out that the contact force incorporates friction and energy losses due to other effects – presence of water, sound, etc.,. Thus, the assessment of power will have an absolute comparison value for each of them. Impact frequency is the number of times that two or more bodies come in contact with each other or the bodies impact the walls. The best way to characterize what is an impact, a threshold value has been defined for the force that damages the mineral. For this study the threshold of compressive force is related to the force required to cause breakage of the sphere that makes up the surface of the material. This occurs when the maximum compression stress given by the Hertz contact is greater than the maximum compressive stress ( When the threshold value of the impact force is reached, the event is recognized as a useful event for the comminution, because it may mean the appearance of a crack that causes a brittle fracture of the sphere. Since this is a temporary process, all contacts are counted and summed in the total simulation time. It determines the wear volume Eq. This wear volume does not decrease the diameter of the spheres used in the simulation, since for the time interval studied it is negligible. Contact pressure produces a weakening of the material, generating surface microcracks, and it differs from the impact frequency in that the pressure is quasi-static and wear and tear do not necessarily occur in the material, since the velocity between the bodies is low. Pressure is calculated according to the Hertz model, indicating the known force, the material properties – elastic modulus To determine the fragmentation of the material (separation into large pieces), composite bodies were created for a fixed number of spheres (43) of the same size and arrangement, which are linked together, in this case by 161 ties. The constitutive binding form is that used by the To get an overall idea of the mechanism that generates the fracture of the bodies, the energy has been evaluated, separating it into fracture and wear energy. To determine the fracture energy, the breakdown stress is calculated considering the material that fails by brittle fracture, thus the energy is given by Simplified wear models such as Archard’s indicate that there will be wear every time there is a normal force of contact between two surfaces and a relative displacement between them. Because of this, it is estimated that the energy that can produce wear will be given by the product of force and displacement, both in tangential components, as shown in Eq. This energy reflects the behavior of the contact pressure and relative velocity simultaneously, and is related to the wear volume. Comminution energy is the sum of the fracture energy and wear energy (Eq. This energy is needed to produce the comminution of the material and will be compared to the energy used to get the performance of each equipment. The values used to simulations are in The results are presented in a comparative way for each of the measured variables. First, qualitative images of behavior are displayed as a function of time, and then quantitative graphs of the measured variables are shown. As time progresses, the dark gray particles are left, with a large number of them in the mill, but in   To evaluate the behavior, the total energy consumed in the last 10  The impacts were counted over the last 10    The crusher produces higher contact pressures (25  Since as time progresses the mill simulation decreases the fracture frequency, this indicates that there is not sufficient impact strength or high pressure to cause fragmentation and the bodies will remain with a fixed size. This simulated behavior again indicates that since they are in a force field whose magnitudes are small, pebbles are produced. The hybrid-mill’s behavior remains stable throughout the duration of the simulation and also shows some peaks at fixed frequencies. The crusher causes bond breakage periodically according to the frequency of the jaws. In brief, these results indicate that the large number of impacts produced in the mill is due to the initial condition, when the particles are large and they gain speed as they fall. The hybrid-mill and the crusher will continue producing fractures, since they are able to increase the contact force between the bodies and the walls because of the nature of the device (periodic surface approach). To evaluate the performance of the devices, the energy used in the process was calculated, and the energy produced at the time of fracture and the energy required to wear the material have been evaluated, and they will then be compared with the energy that must be provided to produce the motion of the corresponding machine.   When comparing this wear energy with the fracture energy, it is seen that the latter is more than 100 times lower, leading to the conclusion that the wear mechanism predominates in comminution. To provide a better overall idea, the total energy was evaluated and is shown in The slope in this graph represents the power that the device develops to achieve comminution of the material; for the hybrid-mill the mean slope is 757.5 The results matrix of The behavior of a granular material has been computationally simulated from the kinematic, dynamic and fragmentation standpoints of the material when it is introduced into a crusher, a mill and a new device called a hybrid-mill. Variables were evaluated that can quantify the performance of each of them, and it was found that in this particular case of operating condition the results indicate that the hybrid mill has significant advantages over the other two units. The process of material comminution can be decomposed into two subprocesses: the first is pressure, which in turn can be decomposed into impact (time below 0.1 It is concluded that the mechanism of comminution by wear is the one that consumes the largest amount of energy. From this it is seen that the hybrid-mill can generate high wear, since there still is a wide margin to make the load turn at a faster rate than the critical speed of a conventional mill. Wear is improved by increasing the relative velocity between the bodies. Therefore, the conventional mill has an asymptotic behavior on fracture, pointing at a clear inability to fragment materials – fracturing –, which is determined by the magnitude of the impact load and the sustained load. If the magnitude of the impact and sustained loads is low, there is no fragmentation of the material and abrasion predominates, producing large rounded products. If instead there is high pressure and impact load, there is increased fragmentation, reaching small sizes which can then be worn, generating larger amounts of fines. The hybrid mill can reduce the energy consumed by 62.6% compared to the mill, with a similar milling quality. The hybrid-mill has other investment and operational advantages, such as its low purchase and maintenance cost. The authors are grateful for the financial support provide by the DICYT Project