Au/SnO2 core–shell structure NPs were prepared by a precipitation method and a microwave hydrothermal synthesis method, and their CO responses were measured by a high resistance meter. It was found that the CO response of the sample prepared by the precipitation method was extremely low, 0.18, with comparison to the one by the hydrothermal synthesis method, 0.965. Microstructures achieved by two-dimensional TEM characterization showed that both samples maintained the similar core–shell structures with their sizes ranging between 30 and 50nm, as the core consists of Au NP and the shell consists of SnO2 NPs. The average grain sizes of SnO2 NPs of precipitation method and hydrothermal synthesis method were measured as 5.2nm and 8.3nm, respectively. The thickness and the porosity variation of SnO2-shell layers were characterized further by three-dimensional electron tomography, and correlated with the sensing properties. It was found that the porosity within SnO2-shell layers prepared by the precipitation method was lower than the one prepared by the hydrothermal synthesis method. Since Au NP could act as the catalyst for CO oxidation reaction, high porosity within SnO2-shell layers would have lead the accessibilities of Au NP to the CO gas molecules and resulted high CO responses.Carbon monoxide, CO, is highly toxic gas and notorious as the “invisible silent killer” since its colorless, tasteless and odorless nature. Sensors to detect CO have therefore been desired for the purpose of human safeties SnO It has been reported by several authors that the performances of gas sensors can be enhanced by increasing the specific surface area by way of achieving NPs In the present study, Au/SnO Gold was selected as the core material in this study for CO oxidation under mild conditions and for the ease of the synthesis of uniform particles. Au/SnO Sensor devices were prepared to measure the sensor response of the Au/SnO The sensor resistance was measured by a resistance meter in the mixture gas containing 1000 The resistance of the Au/SnO The samples were dispersed in toluene by ultra-sonication and then loaded on formvar coated TEM copper grids. The structural and morphological information were observed by a TEM (TECNAI-F20, FEI, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) with a scanning-TEM high angle annular dark-field (STEM-HAADF) detector and a specially designed high-tilt holder (E.A. Fischione Instruments Inc., USA). A STEM-HAADF detector collects electrons that undergo high-angle scattering, and the signal is approximately proportional to Once the acquisition of the tilt series was completed, the data were transferred to a PC for alignment and 3D reconstruction. Images were spatially aligned by a cross correlation algorithm using Inspect3D software (FEI, Einthoven), and 3D reconstructions were achieved using a simulated iterative reconstruction technique of consecutive 2D slices. Visualization was performed using AVIZO Fire 6.2 (Visualization Sciences Group). Surface images of the samples for sensor resistance measurements, after the heat treatment at 400  Both samples show typical core–shell structures with their sizes ranging between 30 and 50 In addition, both Au-core and SnO Although two-dimensional information can be achieved from TEM images, the porosities within SnO Reconstructed 3D voxels represent the presences of SnO  Two Au/SnO This work was supported in part by ‘grant-in-aid for the Global COE Program (Functional Innovation of Molecular Informatics)’ and ‘grant-in-aid for Scientific Research (no. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 