A chemimechanical (CM) pretreatment method was devised, wherein wood chips are acid-treated to weaken the physical structure then disc-refined to produce a fibrous substrate. CM pretreatment was directly compared with a common dilute acid (DA) pretreatment method, wherein wood is mechanically downsized to a powder or fiber substrate and then acid-treated. It was hypothesized that the CM pretreatment sequence would reduce the energy required for size reduction and increase enzymatic digestibility of the pretreated substrate. By treating wood chips in a dilute sulfuric acid liquor before the mechanical downsizing step, the net specific energy (NSE) of disc-refining was reduced by up to 95%. At the optimal acid treatment and disc-refining conditions determined within this work, CM pretreatment could produce a highly digestible lignocellulose substrate (95% cellulose conversion) while requiring less than 100 kWh/tonne od NSE for mechanical downsizing. A comparison of CM and DA pretreated hardwood revealed that CM pretreatment produced a significantly more digestible substrate than DA pretreatment. Differences in the digestibility of CM and DA pretreated substrates were attributed to differences in physical structure. CM pretreatment produced a substrate that consisted primarily of single fibers and small fiber bundles, while DA pretreatment produced larger fiber bundles. Furthermore, the CM pretreated substrate had a more accessible pore structure, and an altered distribution of surface lignin.Bio-ethanol produced from lignocellulosic biomass is a promising alternative fuel that has the potential to lower fossil fuel usage and CO The biochemical conversion of cellulose to ethanol includes two steps; enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose to monomeric glucose, followed by fermentation of glucose to ethanol. One major barrier to the economical use of forest biomass for ethanol production is low yields of glucose following enzyme hydrolysis. Low glucose yields can be attributed to the high recalcitrance of woody biomass. Recalcitrance is a term used to describe the natural resistance of the plant biomass to microbial or enzymatic degradation of its structural polymers In order to reduce the recalcitrance of woody biomass, a pretreatment step is employed to weaken the plant structure prior to the enzyme hydrolysis step. The pretreatment process generally utilizes chemical treatment (e.g. acidic, alkaline, solvent), comminution or a combination of the two Dilute sulfuric acid is a pretreatment method which has been tested on a variety of grass and wood feedstock The pulp and paper industry has extensive experience on the disintegration of woody biomass, by mechanical comminution (e.g. wood chip disc-refiner) or chemical fractionation (e.g. Kraft of sulphite pulping process). In recent research on biomechanical pulping, we tested the possibility of decreasing energy consumption during the disc-refining process by treating wood with enzymes In the following study, aspen wood chips were pretreated using the chemimechanical method and dilute acid method. The chemimechanical (CM) pretreatment involved acid-treatment of wood chips followed by disc-refining to a fiber substrate, while the dilute acid (DA) pretreatment involved mechanical downsizing of wood chips followed by acid treatment of the wood particles. Mechanical downsizing energy consumption during the chemimechanical pretreatment was monitored, and the enzymatic digestibility and structure of the chemimechanical pretreated substrates was investigated. The chemimechanical pretreated substrates were then compared with dilute acid pretreated substrates to determine differences in digestibility and physical structure. It was expected that changing the pretreatment sequence so that the acid treatment was done before the mechanical downsizing step would alter the physical structure and reduce mechanical downsizing energy use. Aspen chips were graciously donated by AV Nackawic, located in Nackawic, NB. Received chips were separated using a chip classifier such that chip thickness was <8 mm and chip length and width between 13 and 32 mm. After separation, fractionated chips were sealed and stored at 4 °C. Commercial enzyme mixtures Celluclast 1.5 Two pretreatment sequences were used to treat Aspen wood: chemimechanical (CM) pretreatment involved dilute acid treatment of wood chips followed by disc-refining, while dilute acid (DA) pretreatment included mechanical downsizing of wood chips followed by dilute acid treatment of the particle substrate. Either knife-milling or disc-refining was used as the mechanical downsizing step. Substrates which were knife-milled were referred to as Mill, while substrates which were disc-refined were referred to as Ref. The CM pretreatment process only used refining, thus the CM pretreated substrates are CM Ref. The DA pretreatment process used both knife-milling and disc refining, thus the respective DA pretreated substrates are DA Mill and DA Ref. Substrates which underwent mechanical downsizing without acid treatment were referred to as Ref (when refined) and Mill (when knife-milled). Aspen wood chips and wood particles were chemically treated with sulfuric acid using a rotating autoclave-type digester. Controlled treatment conditions include treatment temperature, treatment time, acid charge and consistency. Consistency is a term used to describe the dry matter content in weight percent of a wood water mixture. Due to equipment limitations, the maximum pretreatment temperature was 170 °C. The digester made use of cylindrical bombs within a rotating cage for treatment. The cage held four bombs per treatment, and each bomb had a volume of 600 ml and a typical batch weight of 50–65 g oven dried (od). At the treatment consistencies used, i.e. 10 and 20%, the liquor volume in each bomb was 500–650 ml and 250–325 ml, respectively. Max temperature ramp for the system was 2.5⁰C/min; resulting in temperature ramp times between 20 and 30 min. Treatment time was started once the digester temperature reached the set treatment temperature. At the end of the treatment time the digester was cooled by venting steam then flushing with cold water. Time for cool-down to below 100 °C was less than 10 min for all samples. Aspen chips were soaked in sulfuric acid liquor 24 h prior to treatment. This was to ensure equal penetration of acid between different samples and to minimize variation in liquor penetration due to preparation time. Differences in penetration due to substrate size (chip vs. pulp/powder) were not considered in the current study. Following treatment, acid treated mixtures were filtered using Fisher P8 filter paper and washed with warm water. Total treated chips were then weighed, and the dry matter content tested. Mass yield was calculated as the difference in dry wood weight following acid treatment. Samples were mechanically downsized using either a knife-mill or a disc-refiner. Samples were refined using a Kumagai Riki Kogyo (KRK) high-consistency disc refiner. The KRK refiner is a single-disc model with a plate size of 30.5 cm, and speed of 3000 rpm. Disc gap was set before each trial, and for the following work ranged from 0.5 to 2.5 mm for the CM Ref samples, and 0.5–1.0 mm for the DA Ref and untreated Ref samples. Wood chip moisture content was adjusted to 75% before each refining trial by the addition of boiling water. In general, moisture content of wood chips before adjustment was 68–75% for acid treated wood chips and 60–65% for untreated wood chips. Chips were transported into the refiner chamber via a screw conveyer which was hand fed at a set rate. Refining rate ranged from 50 to 52 g (od) per minute, with batch sizes ranging from 130 to 150 g od. Energy power use during refining was monitored via an Ion 7330 power meter. Energy power use values were presented in the form of Net Specific Energy (NSE), equaling the recorded specific energy consumed minus the idle energy, or Gross Specific Energy (GSE), equaling the recorded specific energy consumed. Idle energy describes the power use of the disc-refiner with no throughput. Following disc-refining, excess moisture was removed from the pulp mixture using a cloth bag for filtration. Samples were then sealed and stored at 4 °C. Knife-milling was carried out using a Thomas Scientific Model 4 Wiley Mill (800 RPM at 60 Hz or 667 rpm at 50 Hz, Swedesboro, NJ). Due to the inability of the Wiley mill to handle wet wood, samples were dried for 7 days to ensure a moisture value <10%. Samples were hand fed and had to pass a set screen to exit the milling chamber. A screen with a hole size of 2 mm was used to produce powders for acid treatment. Following knife-milling, samples were re-wetted by soaking in excess water overnight. The following day the samples were filtered to remove excess moisture, and the samples sealed and stored at 4 °C in plastic containers. Samples produced were separated into size fractions using a Bauer-McNett Fiber Classifier. This is a wet screening technique, originally designed for separating wood pulps. The equipment consists of 5 containers in series, with each container having a propeller for mixing and a removable screen. A set water flow carries the wood particles through each container and past each screen. There are five screens, including 14, 30, 50, 100 and 200 As the particle size distribution of prepared substrates will impact both enzyme digestibility and mechanical downsizing energy consumption, different methods were used to estimate the degree of size reduction. For section Light microscope images were taken using a Leica DM4000M microscope. Slides were prepared using mixtures with a consistency of less than 5%. At least 3 slides were prepared and a minimum of 30 images taken per slide. Image analysis of microscopy images was used to estimate particle size for fractionated samples. ImageJ was used to measure length and width of particles in microscope images. At least 120 particles were measured to provide an estimate of size. Overall size of particles was calculated as projected area, equal to the product of a particles length and width. A Fiber Quality Analyzer (FQA, LDA 96074, OpTest Equipment, Canada) was used to obtain detailed data on sample particle size for CM fibers in Section The combined severity parameter allows the comparison of different hydrothermal treatments by simplifying the conditions of treatment temperature, treatment time and liquor pH into a single metric. The combined severity factor was defined by Chum et al. Images of DA and CM pretreated aspen were taken using a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. Samples were dehydrated by soaking in a series of ethanol solutions, i.e. 30–100% ethanol. Samples were then dried using a Critical Point Drier, after which they were mounted on carbon tape and coated with carbon. Images of samples were then obtained digitally using a Hitachi SU-70 Field Emission Gun SEM operated at 5 kV. Compositional analysis was carried out on an extractive-free basis, with extractives removed via the TAPPI T204 standard method. Analysis included a strong acid hydrolysis of 0.3000 g of sample in 3 ml of 72% sulfuric acid at 30 °C for 1 h in a shaking water incubator at 200RPM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Model 4450, Waltham, Massachusetts). Samples were then diluted with 84 ml of water to 4% sulfuric acid and underwent dilute acid hydrolysis at 121 °C for 1 h. The mixture was suction filtered through fine glass crucibles and the filtrate analyzed by high performance anion-exchange chromatography (HPAEC) system, providing component glucose, xylose, mannose, rhamnose, galactose and arabinose. The HPAEC system used was a Dionex-300 (Dionex Corporation, Canada) with the pulsed amperometric detector (PAD) and CarboPacTM PA1 column. Total lignin was determined as the addition of Klason lignin and acid-soluble lignin. Acid-soluble lignin was determined by UV spectrometry using a wavelength of 240 nm. Klason lignin was determined as the mass remaining following acid hydrolysis, minus ash. Ash was determined as described in TAPPI standard T 413. For section In section Accessible pore volume and surface area was determined using the Solute Exclusion Technique (SET) first developed by Stone JE and Scallan AM  As The reaction conditions of dilute acid treatment are generally simplified by calculating the combined severity (CS) factor, introduced by Chum et al. Treatment of wood biomass by sulfuric acid creates a number of changes in the wood structure that can potentially decrease the energy consumed during downsizing. This has been demonstrated in previous studies using oxalic or sulfuric acid prior to thermomechanical (TMP) and chemi-thermomechanical (CTMP) pulping to decrease specific energy consumption Aspen wood chips were chemimechanically (CM) pretreated to determine which acid treatment conditions would produce the most digestible CM Ref substrate. Four acid treatment conditions were tested, with two treatment temperature levels, i.e. 150 or 170 °C, and two treatment time levels, i.e. 20 or 40 min. Acid charge and consistency were consistent at 1.2% and 20%, respectively, corresponding to a liquor pH of 1.65. The higher consistency, i.e. 20%, was chosen for these trials, as using less excess water during acid treatment is preferable for an industrial process and can reduce the heating cost to achieve the treatment temperature. Chemical compositions of the CM Ref substrates are shown in It is expected that degree of refining will impact the enzymatic digestibility of CM pretreated substrates. This impact would be due to both the overall particle size distribution as well as other structural differences such as particle morphology. To account for the effect of degree of refining on hydrolysis yields, each acid treatment condition was tested using two different size fractions, R14 and P50-R100.  Based on the data presented, a set temperature of 170 °C and treatment time of 20 min were found to result in the most digestible substrate. The differences between the 170⁰C-20 For the CM pretreatment described, it is expected that as degree of refining increases both the enzymatic digestibility of the produced substrate and the NSE of refining will increase. Investigating this cost-benefit relationship can help determine what degree of refining is ideal for the CM pretreatment process. Batches of aspen chips were treated at the optimal acid treatment conditions outlined in Section To understand the mechanism by which particle size affected enzyme digestibility and NSE of refining, four of the prepared samples were analyzed for particle size distribution. Analysis of the particle size distribution is provided in Reducing disc gap from 2.5 to 1.0 resulted in reductions in the percentage of substrate within the R14 fraction, as well as the length and coarseness of the P14 fraction. The decrease in the R14 fraction and coarseness implies that there is further fibrillation when disc gap is decreased from 2.5 to 1.0 mm disc gap. This increase in fibrillation corresponds with the largest increase in substrate digestibility. However, when disc gap is reduced from 1.0 to 0.5–0.75 mm there is a significant increase in NSE which corresponds with a different set of changes in the particle size. The larger fiber bundles that comprise the R14 fraction are thoroughly size reduced to fibers at lower disc gaps, with all of the substrate mass passing the R14 screen. This appears to be in agreement with coarseness values, which are relatively stable as disc gap decreases. However, there is a marked reduction in fiber length as disc gap decreases. Thus it appears that while smaller disc gaps can break down the residual fiber bundles, it also breaks down individual fibers. These changes are less desirable, as they result in only a small increase in substrate digestibility while greatly increasing downsizing NSE. The physical structure of pretreated wood has been implicated as a major determinant of enzyme hydrolysis yield. For instance, factors such as particle size, particle morphology, and pore accessibility, which are all physical structure features, have been shown to affect the rate and yield of enzymatic hydrolysis To determine whether chemimechanical pretreatment or dilute acid pretreatment produces a more digestible physical structure, substrates produced by each pretreatment process were compared in terms of enzyme digestibility and physical structure. Chemimechanical pretreatment uses dilute acid treatment of wood chips followed by disc refining to an appropriate particle size for enzyme hydrolysis (CM Ref). Dilute acid treatment involves downsizing wood chips to particles followed by dilute acid treatment. Specifically, wood chips were disc-refined then acid treated, i.e. DA Ref, or knife-milled then acid-treated, i.e. DA Mill. Acid treatment conditions were kept consistent to ensure that the differences in substrate digestibility could be attributed to differences in physical structure and not chemical composition. Furthermore, the effect of particle size on digestibility was minimized Initially, the comparison of chemimechanical and dilute acid pretreatment was to be limited to CM Ref and DA Mill, as most work on DA pretreatment has used dry grinding as a downsizing method. However, wood chips are dried prior to grinding resulting in hornification of the powder substrate. Hornification is defined as the irrevocable loss of pore volume due to drying, and hornification of a substrate can lower its enzymatic digestibility   Enzyme hydrolysis yields from DA Mill and DA Ref differed at 24 h, with DA Ref releasing more sugar, and differed at 48 h, with DA Mill releasing more sugar. Overall, it did not appear that there were any consistent differences in enzyme digestibility between DA powder and DA fibers. Grohmann et al. The pore structure of lignocellulosic substrates is considered important for effective enzyme hydrolysis. Surface area within the porous structure has been estimated to be on the order of 100–300 m SET makes use of dextran probes to determine the accessible pore volume to particles of different sizes Accessibility of cellulase enzymes to the pore volume is limited by pore diameter or width. A 5.1 nm dextrin has been suggested as a useful analogue to estimate the total pore volume available to the cellulase enzyme cocktail While fractionation via Bauer-McNett classification was used to limit the particle size distribution of the tested substrates, there may still be differences in particle size between the tested samples which could impact enzyme hydrolysis yields. In particular, any major differences in morphology between the CM and DA pretreated samples would affect the fractionation process, and the mean particle size of the substrates. To account for the effect of particle size, and to investigate any changes in morphology, images were taken of CM and DA pretreated substrates using light microscopy. To determine whether the particle size of CM and DA pretreated samples was correlated with substrate digestibility, size analysis of light microscopy images was performed using ImageJ. The results of these measurements are presented in Zhu et al. A common feature of high-temperature pretreatment or cooking of lignocellulose is the condensation and movement of lignin outside the cell wall, resulting in the redistribution of lignin within and on the surface of the cell wall  In the lignin relocation study by Donohoe et al. Treatment of wood chips in dilute sulfuric acid liquor was effective at reducing energy consumption in the subsequent mechanical downsizing step, with a maximum reduction in net specific energy consumption of up to 95%. The chemimechanical pretreated substrate was found to be more digestible by cellulase enzymes than a substrate pretreated by the traditional dilute acid process. The increase in enzyme digestibility was primarily attributed to differences in physical structure, as the chemimechanical pretreated substrate had increased pore accessibility and a more fibrous morphology. Chemimechanical pretreatment also resulted in a surface lignin distribution which differed from that of the dilute acid pretreated substrate. At optimal disc-refining and acid treatment conditions, refining energy was 98 kWh/tonne od and the cellulose component of the resulting substrate was 95% digestible by cellulase enzymes. By using a disc refiner, which has been used by the pulp and paper industry for decades, the chemimechanical process can be readily scaled up for industrial biofuel production. Financial support of the Strategic Project Grant of