Mg-AB5 composites are promising systems for hydrogen storage applications, due to their possibility of hydrogen cycling at relatively low temperatures. Traditionally, these composites are mainly processed by high-energy ball milling (HEBM) techniques employing longer processing times. In this study, cold rolling was applied to prepare MgH2
                     LaNi5 composites and the hydrogen storage properties were investigated. The materials were processed using a vertical rolling mill under argon atmosphere, leading to a good homogeneity and no contamination at shorter processing times. The mixture of MgH2-1.50 mol.% LaNi5 showed the best hydrogen storage properties at 200 °C and 100 °C and the lowest desorption temperature even when compared to cold rolled MgH2. The results indicate that the composite MgH2
                     LaNi5 is transformed into a mixture of three phases MgH2, Mg2NiH4 and LaH3 upon hydrogen absorption/desorption cycles. The synergetic effect among these phases when in appropriate proportion in the sample seems to play a crucial role in the acceleration of hydrogen absorption/desorption kinetics at lower temperatures in comparison to MgH2.Despite its promising hydrogen storage properties One of the major challenges corresponds to improving the hydrogen storage properties but without significant losses in the capacity, kinetics and cyclability. Among the several methods used to improve hydrogen storage properties, adding different catalysts such as transitions metal, and their oxides and fluorides have been successfully applied by means of HEBM technique Another interesting strategy for improving hydrogen storage properties of Mg-based materials involves the use of composite structures containing different phases. In this case, the synergetic effects of both phases should positively influence the absorption/desorption behavior of material. Among the different possible combinations of composites, the Mg-AB Nanocrystalline composites of Mg A lot of effort has been conducted in the preparation of Mg-based nanocomposites for hydrogen storage purposes by ball milling, however, up to now, only a few works have dealt with cold rolling on this topic. Cold rolling processing has been recognized as very useful for additives incorporation into MgH Vincent et al. In this context, a slightly different approach in the cold rolling process has been tried. Faisal et al. Based on these encouraging results, the main objective of this research work was to evaluate the effects of cold rolling in the hydrogen storage properties of MgH Commercial MgH The mixtures were processed by 35 passes of cold rolling at fixed roll rotation frequency of 50 rpm, resulting in the formation of samples in the form of small flakes. After cold rolling, the final product basically consists of small plates (or “flakes”) with final thickness of 0.1 mm obtained from the consolidation and cold welding of powder particles during the rolling passes. A homemade vertical rolling mill with a roll diameter of 6.4 cm and 8 cm of length was used. All handling of the samples, including CR process, was performed inside a glovebox under argon atmosphere (MBRAUN LAB master Pro 130 model with H Structural and microstructural characterization was carried out by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The XRD patterns were recorded by a Siemens diffractometer (Model D5005) using monochromatic CuKα radiation with an angular pass of 0.02°. The XRD data was also used to calculate the mean crystallite size through Scherrer analysis. For that, the contribution of the instrumental broadening was deconvoluted using a known pattern (Si). SEM images were obtained using a Philips XL-30-FEG microscope using the secondary electrons (SE) and back-scattered electrons (BSE) mode. Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) measurements were applied in order to investigate the desorption behavior and it was conducted using a Netzsch Jupiter 449C equipment. The measurements were carried out under argon flow at a heating rate of 10 K/min from room temperature to 500 °C (773 K). The kinetics of hydrogen absorption and desorption were measured using a homemade Sievert's type apparatus with calibrated volumes. A sample mass of approximately 150 mg was used and the heating rate of 10 K/min was applied. Before the absorption/desorption experiments, all mixtures of MgH The SEM micrographs of cold rolled samples containing different LaNi The XRD patterns of The average crystallite sizes of β-MgH Moreover, there was no evidence of MgO and Mg(OH) The first and second absorption kinetics curves for the processed samples are shown in However, considerable differences could be observed among the composites samples during the first and second absorption. In the first absorption, although the capacity of the sample containing 0.67 mol.% of LaNi On the other hand, however, for the compositions containing 0.67 and 2.54 mol.% of LaNi In the desorption behavior, To understand the phase evolution behavior in the composites, they were investigated by XRD and DSC after the absorption/desorption kinetics. Also, MgO phase was detected in the XRD patterns ( Considering that the composite containing 1.5 mol.% of LaNi In the DSC analysis, the as-received MgH With respect to the composite, there still two additional peaks which one of them located around 275 °C and the other around 405 °C. Certainly, these peaks are related to the presence of Mg Considering that LaH The effect of cycling was investigated for the composite containing 1.5 mol.% of LaNi As reported by Liang et al.  Cold rolling under an inert atmosphere was successfully applied to prepare composites of MgH The MgH The best kinetics result was achieved with the composite MgH The formation of intermediate hydrides LaH The authors would like to thank the Brazilian research funding agency