This paper presents a numerical study of natural convection cooling of a heat source horizontally attached to the left vertical wall of a cavity filled with copper-water nanofluid. The left vertical wall is kept at the constant temperature, while the other ones are kept adiabatic. The numerical approach is based on the finite volume method with a collocated grid arrangement. The SIMPLE algorithm is used for handling the pressure velocity coupling. In this study, the influence of some effective parameters such as: Rayleigh number, location and geometry of heat source and solid concentration are studied and discussed. Results are presented in the form of streamlines, isotherms, and average Nusselt number. The results show that dimension of the heat source is an important parameter affecting the flow pattern and temperature field, so that the average Nusselt number decreases with an increase in the length of the heater. It is also observed that at a given Rayleigh number and definite heat source geometry, the average Nusselt number increases linearly with the increase in the solid volume fraction of nanofluid. The increase of Rayleigh numbers strengthens the natural convection flows which leads to the decrease in heat source temperature. The algorithm and the computer code have been also compared with numerical results in order to verify and validate the model.Specific heat capacity (J/K) Grashof number, Gravitational acceleration(m/s Height of cavity (m) width of cavity (m) Height of heat source Length of heat source Thermal conductivity (W/mK) Boltzmann's constant, 1.38065 Nusselt number Pressure (N/m Dimensionless pressure, Prandtl number, Rayleigh number, Temperature ( Components of velocity (m/s) Dimensionless of velocity component, Cartesian coordinates(m) Dimensionless of Cartesian coordinates Thermal diffusivity, Coefficient of volume expansion( Solid volume fraction Dynamic viscosity(Pa s) Kinematics viscosity(m Density (kg/m Dimensionless temperature Fluid Average Nanofluid Reference state solid wall Natural convection in fluid-filled enclosures has attended in recent years since this phenomenon often affects the thermal performance of the systems. Buoyancy-driven flows have many applications in thermal engineering. Among these applications involving enclosures are cooling of electronic components, solar collectors, solidification processes and energy storage systems. Plenty of studies on partitioned enclosure with heat source are available A technique for improving heat transfer is using solid particles in the base fluids, which has been used recently. The term nanofluid refers to fluids in which nano-scale particles are suspended in the base fluid The aim of the present paper is to investigate the effect of location and dimension of heat source on the natural convection flow and temperature fields in a square cavity, which is filled with a copper-water nanofluid. Indeed this geometry has the potential application in cooling of an electronic device. Numerical study is carried out over the wide range of Rayleigh numbers and solid volume fraction and discussed about flow characteristic, Nusselt number and temperature distribution in the cavity. A two dimensional cavity considered for the present study is shown in The governing equations (continuity, momentum and energy equations) for a steady, two-dimensional laminar and incompressible flow are expressed as below: The effective density of the nanofluid at the reference temperature can be defined as: The heat capacitance of nanofluid can be given as: The effective thermal conductivity of the nanofluid was given by Patel et al. The effective viscosity of nanofluid was introduced by Brinkman The boundary conditions are in the following forms: At the heat source's surface: In order to estimate the heat transfer enhancement, we have calculated Nu (Nusselt number) and Nu Eqs. Therefore using the above parameters leads to dimensionless forms of the governing equations as below: The above equations have been solved numerically based on the finite volume method using a collocated grid system. The resulting discretized equations have been solved iteratively through strongly implicit procedure (SIP) First the governing equations have been solved for the natural convection flow in an enclosed cavity filled by pure fluid, In order to compare the results with those obtained by de Vahl Davis In this paper the natural convection flow inside the cavity with horizontal heat source attached to the vertical wall is numerically investigated. The numerical computation was performed for a range of Ra and  The presence of nanoparticles in the water enhances the effective thermal conductivity and leads to the increase in intensity of flow as a result of the augmentation in the buoyancy force, so that at Isotherms are almost uniform in more part of the cavity at Ra Augmentation of flow intensity, as a result of the increase in Rayleigh number, enhances convective heat transfer, so isotherms change completely and become similar to the stream lines, so that at Since the cold flow after coming down from the right vertical wall, first contact the bottom wall of heat source and after that contact the top wall of heat source. So, as can be seen clearly in With an increase of solid concentration due to the increase in the heat transfer from the heat source to the cold wall, the temperature of the heat source surface and also the average fluid temperature decrease.  With the increase of  With reduction in the flow intensity, as a result of the increase in the heat source length, the effect of heat conduction augments, so the increase in solid concentration, which leads to the increase in the effective thermal conductivity, is more effective at longer heat source. So that with 5% increase in solid concentration, the temperature of the heat source surface decreases 18% at    This paper presents a numerical study of natural convection cooling of a heat source horizontally attached to the left vertical wall of a cavity filled with copper-water nanofluid. The left vertical wall is kept at constant temperature, while the other ones are kept adiabatic. The investigation has been accomplished for size particles equal to 100 This work is supported by R&D department of Oghab Afshan and the talented office of Semnan University.