A primitive cow produces about 1000 litres of milk per lactation period, a quantity needed for her calf during the first period of its life. Selective breeding of dairy cows has resulted in an average milk production of more than seven times the amount produced by primitive cows. This increased amount of bovine milk has become a well-known source for human nutrition, both as liquid milk and dairy products. In addition, surplus amounts of bovine milk became available for applications as functional and nutritional ingredients in non-dairy food products. New developments in fractionation, isolation and preservation techniques in the dairy industry allow the manufacture of high quality and safe dairy ingredients. Information on the composition and functionality of these ingredients increased their utilization in a large range of food products. Applications appear in specific fields such as nutrition, pharmacy, medicine, and as support for the functional properties of food products. In this article, a survey will be given of the current fractionation and isolation processes of surplus milk and the composition of the recovered dairy ingredients. Subsequently, attention is focused on the utilization of these ingredients in a number of non-dairy food products and pharmaceutical applications. Desired ingredients may be recovered systematically from milk according to a number of separation techniques ( Usually, whole milk is heated to 65–74 Skim milk may be subjected to different preheating processes before drying, depending on the intended application. The bakery industry usually requires a high-heat milk powder, obtained by a preheat treatment of at least 5 Coprecipitate is recovered after heat treatment of skim milk at 90 Casein and caseinates are produced by acidification of skim milk by either a culture of lactic acid bacteria or by food-grade acids such as hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid. The casein will precipitate around pH 4.6 and is separated by using centrifuges or decanters. Most casein is converted to caseinates by neutralization (to pH 7.0), followed by drying. Caseinates are used as functional ingredients in various food products. Rennet casein is produced by enzymatic coagulation from skim milk at pH 6.7. The enzymes traditionally used, referred to as rennet, are preparations of gastric proteinases of young calves. In the traditional method of rennet casein manufacture, the skim milk is set with rennet in a manner similar to that used in cheesemaking. After coagulation, the gel is pumped to a cooking pipe where the curd is separated from the whey, washed and dried. Rennet casein is a well-known ingredient in processed cheese and cheese analogues. The mildest separation of total caseins and whey proteins from skim milk is achieved by ultrafiltration. A typical membrane for ultrafiltration of milk is permeable for any substance with a molecular weight of less than 10 Most of the whey is recovered as cheese whey, the liquid remaining during the production of cheese. Only 8% of the whey is produced as a byproduct from skimmed milk during the production of casein ( The principles of industrial recovery processes of ingredients from whey before evaporation and/or spray drying are shown schematically in Removal of lactose ( Demineralization involves the removal of minerals and some organic acids by nanofiltration, ionic exchange or electrodialysis. The most complete demineralization is achieved by using ionic exchange ( Electrodialysis ( Specific separation of whey proteins by ionic exchange may be achieved by mixing whey at pH 3.2 with porous crosslinked, negatively charged, viscose particles in a so-called stirred-bed ionic exchange process ( Another ionic exchange method for the production of whey protein isolates is performed in columns according to a fixed-bed process ( Byproducts arising from the fractionation of milk and whey products are increasingly used as food ingredients. Examples are milk salts, which have the same salt-sensation as table salt. Sources of milk salts production are delactosed whey and ultrafiltration permeates, and the minerals from electrodialysis. Hydrolysis of milk proteins is carried out to improve their nutritional characteristics, increase their solubility, and improve their foaming properties. Milk protein hydrolysis may be accomplished with preparations of enzymes that usually occur in the intestinal tract. After the desired degree of hydrolysis, the enzymes are inactivated by heat treatment or separated by membrane filtration. The resulting protein hydrolysates are used for specific nutritional applications. The main components present in the dairy ingredients discussed so far are indicated in Whole milk or skim milk may be preserved by adding sugar (60%) to milk that has been pasteurized and concentrated (∼2.5:1) previously. This so-called sweetened condensed (skim) milk has an osmotic pressure high enough to inhibit growth of bacteria. Sweetened condensed milk is a well-known ingredient in the confectionery industry. Rennet casein has a slightly different protein composition compared to acid casein, caused by the absence of a peptide released from one of the casein molecules. This enzymatic modification results in (rennet) casein products with quite different properties than those of acid casein. Whey still contains about 50% of the nutrients present in whole milk, comprising lactose, whey proteins, minerals, a small amount of fat, and most of the minor water-soluble nutrients from milk, such as vitamins and growth factors. The protein content is calculated from the total nitrogen content multiplied by a factor 6.38 (so-called Kjeldahl factor). This implies that both protein nitrogen and nonprotein nitrogen (NPN) are included, which should be taken into account, particularly for milk, skim milk and whey. In cheese whey 20% of total protein is NPN, which is nearly twice the amount present in (acid) casein whey. Electrodialysis of whey results in a partial desalting because multivalent ions as calcium, magnesium, phosphates and citrates are not or only slightly removed. The protein, lactose, fat and mineral content of delactosed whey, demineralized by electrodialysis, is nearly identical to that of skim milk and is often indicated as ‘skim milk equivalent’. This whey (by)product is a well-known extender for skim milk in ice cream and baby food. Milk and dairy products are used by the food industry in many food applications on the basis of their excellent nutritional and functional properties. The main areas of application are summarized in The flavour of whey, especially that of acid whey, is most compatible with that of citrus fruits in beverages. However, utilization of whey as a refreshing drink is hampered by the presence of whey proteins and fatty components. After World War II, this problem has been solved by using deproteinated defatted whey. A well-known example of such a refreshing drink is ‘Rivella’, produced in Switzerland since 1950 and nowadays still consumed in Canada and The Netherlands. Rivella is a carbonated, clear whey beverage with a bittersweet fruit flavour and a pH of 3.7. Nutritional whey drinks based on pasteurized (desalted) whey mixed with fruit juices at pH 4.0 were developed in the 1970s. Whey or desalted whey was mixed with concentrated fruit juice and sugar. Pasteurization and aseptic packaging guaranteed a shelf-life of 6 months without refrigeration. The good solubility and bland taste of undenatured (undamaged) whey proteins over a broad pH range are important attributes for soft drinks. In the 1970s, the Coca-Cola Company selected whey protein concentrates (WPC) as a nutrient to improve the nutritional quality of their drinks. The drinks could be fortified up to 1% whey proteins, without detectable changes in flavour and appearance. These WPC beverages retained their bland flavour and solubility after in-bottle pasteurization at around pH 3.0. However, the cost of these products appeared to be too high to continue their production on an industrial scale. Dairy ingredients are well-known components in a large number of confectionery products because of their contribution to the characteristic texture, flavour and colour. Some of these products will be discussed with respect to their main functional demands. Candy-type products, such as toffees, caramels and fudges, are cooked syrups; they were originally textured and flavoured by using sweetened condensed milk. The palatability of confectionery products is often improved by the incorporation of air, supported by whipping proteins. Lactose contributes to the colour and flavour of these products, in particular during cooking. Milk fat serves as a source of several significant flavour compounds. Moreover, milk fat improves the mouthfeel of candies due to its disposition in the candy product. Milk proteins enhance the miscibility of formula ingredients because of their emulsifying properties, and contribute to the lightness during whipping and the texture of the candy during cooking. Milk ingredients are also valuable components in chocolate products, especially in milk chocolate, owing to their contributions to flavour, sweetness and protein profile. According to regulations of the European Community, milk chocolate should contain at least 14% dry milk solids and not less than 3.5% butterfat. A basic step in chocolate manufacture is ‘conching’, a heating process with aeration for some hours, which creates typical chocolate flavours. In order to maintain the chocolate flavour during an extended storage period, milk crumb has been introduced as an ingredient for the chocolate industry. Milk crumb is prepared from sweetened condensed milk, sugar, chocolate liquor and cacao mass. This mixture is usually drum-dried and subsequently crushed into grains, which may be stored for several months without loss of flavour when packed into closed sacks. Not all products that have the appearance of chocolate meet the official standards and by regulation these products may not be labelled as chocolate. They are generally referred to as confectionery coatings or compound coatings and are developed for specific uses, e.g. as coatings on centres of ice cream bars, enrobed candy bars and baked goods. In these recipes, sweetened condensed whey, various sugars and optimal additions of fats and emulsifiers may replace part or all of the condensed milk. Most aerated confectionery products are protein-type foams, which are highly sensitive to fatty components; examples are frappé and meringue. Frappé is a highly aerated sucrose–glucose solution, prepared with egg white, which is carefully folded into viscous candy fillings for e.g. caramels, toffees and nougats. Meringue is a whipped (egg white) protein/sugar preparation which is dried at 110–125 Whole milk powder is a well-known dairy ingredient in bread which improves the flavour and colour and retards staling of bread during storage. A requisite is that the milk should be heat-treated intensively before use, in order to prevent loaf depression of the bread during baking. High-heat milk powder meets this requirement through inactivation (denaturation) of a loaf-depressing protein. Whole milk powder may be replaced by a combination of high-heat skim milk powder and butter, depending on legal regulations. Butter and fractionated milk fat, prepared as described previously, are important ingredients in the bakery industry. Since butter is quite expensive relative to other fats, its use is restricted to those products in which flavour makes a significant contribution. High-melting milk fat fractions are functional ingredients in the preparation of puff pastry, providing the crisp texture in dough coatings of almond bread, pies, sausage rolls or apple dumplings. The low-melting milk fat fractions may be used in the production of recombined milk powder from skim milk and milk fat; it appears that the reconstitutability of milk powder is significantly improved. Whey powder is a well-known ingredient in the bakery industry because of its flavour-enhancing and tenderizing qualities. Volume, texture, crust and retention of freshness in wheat bread are improved by the incorporation of a combination of emulsifiers and whey powder in the flour. Usually, 1–2% of whey solids (on the basis of flour) are added, depending on the type and structure of the bread. In the 1970s there was an increasing interest in the production of milk protein-enriched biscuits as nutritional food for children in developing countries. A mixture of delactosed whey and buttermilk added to wheat flour resulted in tasty biscuits containing 20% milk proteins. Hens' eggs are widely used in the baking industry because of their unique properties. Whey proteins have a number of properties in common with egg (white) proteins, and many attempts have been made to substitute WPC for egg white proteins in bakery products. A well-known bakery product in which only egg white is used is angel food cakes. The three basic ingredients of angel food cakes are egg white, sugar and flour. Egg white may be completely replaced by defatted WPC in this product. For economical reasons, there has been much interest in replacing whole eggs in Madeira-type cakes, consisting of whole eggs, sugar, flour and (butter) fat. The main function of egg yolk in this cake is the emulsification of fat, a function that can not easily be performed by other proteins. Preparing a pre-emulsion of fat and whey proteins has solved the lack of fat binding, allowing complete substitution of whole eggs by WPC-80, as shown in A number of milk products are used as functional ingredients or extenders in meat products. Two functional demands of meat products are of particular importance, i.e. the water-holding capacity and the fat-binding ability. More than 70% of the water present in lean meat is ‘free water’, which is important for the tenderness and juiciness of whole meat products. After the animal is slaughtered, part of the free water is expelled and this can be restored with the help of salts and milk proteins such as caseinates and WPCs. Concomitant protein fortification of whole meat products (such as hams) is achieved by injecting a whey protein solution into the meat, using a multineedle system. Luncheon meat is a comminuted (fine-particle) meat product enriched with pork fat and flavouring additives. Fine-particle meat products are prepared by comminution of the muscle tissue in a grinder/mincer, as shown in Numerous species of fish are caught annually throughout the world. The introduction of gel-type seafood products such as surimi on Western markets has opened a profitable outlet for deboned fish flesh. Surimi can be described as a myofibrillar protein concentrate, which is used primarily in the manufacture of various types of Japanese heat-gelled products, such as kamaboko. Egg white and WPC are well-known texturizers for fish products. However, the gel-forming characteristics of pollock ( Finely comminuted fish products are usually prepared in bowl choppers and sometimes in a grinder (see Dietetic foods may be defined as food products designed for special dietary requirements. Infant formulae are mainly designed on the basis of cows' milk as a substitute for human milk. When in the early 1970s it became apparent that whey-based infant formulae can simulate human milk, attention was turned to the development of formulae containing whey. This was the start for formulae prepared by mixing equal amounts of skim milk and demineralized whey. Specific whey-predominant formulae have been developed for preterm low-weight infants, to support a more appropriate balance of amino acids for growth and metabolism. As age advances, physical activity tends to decline and so less dietary energy is required. Food intake also declines with age, but information on the specific nutrient needs of elderly people is scarce. Milk protein concentrate (MPC) with additional nutrients coming from fruits, vegetables or cereal products meets the requirements of food for the elderly. Both high-quality proteins and bioavailable calcium present in MPC are important nutrients for (elderly) people. Slimming foods are introduced to prevent or control obesity, the most prevalent nutritional disorder in prosperous communities. Obesity arises as a consequence of taking in more energy in food than is expended in the activities of daily life, leading to a positive energy balance which is mainly stored as fat. Whey products fit well in slimming foods, owing to their excellent amino acid composition and low fat content. Clinical or medical foods are designed to provide complete or supplemented nutritional support to persons who are unable to digest adequate amounts of food in a conventional form. Whey products have nutritional advances in medical diets because most whey nutrients are present in a bioavailable form. Some patients having defects in their (enzymatic) digestion system require a diet that contains previously ( Lactose is quantitatively the most significant excipient (substance other than the active drug) in pharmaceutical applications. Tablets, capsules and inhalers are the most widespread and convenient forms for administering drugs to patients. Refined lactose is well known as an inert carrier of drugs because of its purity and consistent chemical and physical stability. One of the most important physical properties in the manufacture of tablets is its capability for direct compression. A lubricant (e.g. magnesium stearate) is essential for almost all tablet formulations, which forms a thin film around the particles, necessary for the disintegration of the tablets in water. Another category of medicines is the inhalers. The majority of inhalers contain the active drug bound to small homogeneously sized lactose particles. The drug particles must be in the size range 0.5 to 5 The versatility of lactose is demonstrated by the range of derivatives that can be obtained through chemical and biochemical reactions, as shown in Nutraceuticals or functional foods are food products or food ingredients that provide medical or health benefits, including the prevention and treatment of diseases. Examples of functional foods are bioactive proteins, probiotics and prebiotics. A group of specific bioactive milk proteins include lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, lysozyme and a number of growth factors present in milk and whey. Lactoferrin is credited with several beneficial health-promoting effects, including antibacterial activity in the intestinal tract, acting as a carrier for iron absorption, and regulation of the immune system. Lactoperoxidase and lysozyme are natural antimicrobial milk proteins, which have been described as prospective additives to protect milk and milk products against microbial deterioration. Probiotics may be defined as deliberately digested, health-promoting live bacteria that beneficially affect the microbial intestinal balance of the host. Prebiotics may be defined as nondigestible food ingredients of the diet that reach the colon intact and beneficially affect the host by selectively stimulating the growth and/or activity of probiotic bacteria in the colon. Lactulose (and oligosaccharides) are not absorbed in the small intestine, but migrate to the large intestine. In the large intestine, they appear to be utilized predominantly by all species of The interest in the functional and nutritional efficacy of milk ingredients in food products is still growing, and more interesting results may be expected in the near future. Increasing knowledge on the relation between nutrition and health will stimulate the consumption of functional foods significantly. World-wide, more than 100 billion kg of whey is available as valuable source for dairy ingredients in food products. 