In this paper, the separation of ultrafine alumina and zircon particles by a liquid–liquid extraction method was investigated using kerosene as the organic phase and sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) as the surfactant collector, with application to the recycling of waste generated in abrasive manufacturing. The characteristics of alumina/zircon particles transferred from water to kerosene phase, as well as the effect of SDS addition, were first investigated individually. The separation of an alumina–zircon particle mixture was then conducted to find the optimal extraction conditions. Finally, the technique was applied to abrasive manufacturing waste.
                  The results indicate that without the addition of a surfactant collector, more than half of the alumina particles were extracted from the water phase to the kerosene phase at pH ranging from 8 to 10. With the addition of more than 0.1kg/ton SDS, alumina particles were completely extracted to the kerosene phase from pH 7 to pH 10. On the other hand, pH and SDS addition had no significant effect on the extracted fraction of zircon, which remained at approximately 5–10% throughout the tested pH range. By extracting alumina to the kerosene phase and leaving zircon in the water phase, the two could be separated. Optimal extraction conditions for the mutual separation of alumina–zircon particle mixture were found at pH 9.5 with 1.25kg/ton SDS addition. Similar results were obtained after application of the technique to abrasive manufacturing waste. Under these conditions, the grade of zircon in the water phase solids was 96.2% with recovery of 77.4%, and the grade of alumina in the kerosene phase solids was 76.9% with recovery of 96.1%.The semiconductor industry has undergone rapid development over the last few decades. Many semiconductor devices, such as transistors, are typically made from silicon wafers: thin slices of highly refined pure silicon crystal. Before being used in the fabrication of semiconductor devices, the surface of the silicon wafer needs to be precisely polished. Generally, alumina-based abrasives are used to perform precision lapping. As a unique method from Fujimi Incorporated, a synthetic precision lapping abrasive manufacturer company in Japan, brown fused alumina and zircon sand are mixed in a weight ratio of 1:1 and wet-crushed. Then the mixture, with particle sizes from 3 to 10 For the separation of fine particles, froth flotation is well known and widely applied in mineral processing and material recycling to improve the recovery of fine particles with diameters ranging from 10 to 100 Liquid–liquid extraction, also known as two-liquid flotation, is a mineral processing technique for separating a mixture of fine particles using a polar liquid (usually water) and a non-polar one (usually an organic solvent) to create two different liquid phases In the present study, the use of liquid–liquid extraction for the separation of ultrafine particles of alumina and zircon in abrasive manufacturing waste was investigated experimentally. Kerosene was selected as the organic phase and sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) was chosen as the surfactant collector. At first, a fundamental investigation was carried out using reagent powders of alumina and zircon. The characteristics of alumina/zircon particles transferred from the water to the kerosene phase, as well as the effect of SDS addition, were investigated individually and expressed as an extracted fraction for an aqueous solution of a certain pH. Optimal extraction conditions for the mutual separation of an alumina–zircon particle mixture were investigated. Based on the results obtained, separation of an abrasive manufacturing waste sample was conducted. α-Alumina (Wako Co., Ltd., Japan) and zircon (Nacalai Co., Ltd., Japan) powders, with purity of 95 The abrasive manufacturing alumina–zircon mixture waste sample was obtained from Fujimi Incorporated and utilized in the practical application. The sample was pretreated by 1 Kerosene (Nacalai Co., Ltd., Japan) was used as the organic phase. Sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) (Wako Co., Ltd., Japan) was used as the surfactant collector to control the oil-wettability of the particle surface. The pH of the suspension was adjusted with HCl and sodium hydroxide (NaOH). All the reagents were reagent grade. A portion of alumina or zircon particles (ca. 1 To test the mutual separation of the two particles, the same liquid–liquid extraction procedure was applied to a simulated alumina–zircon ultrafine particle mixture (where the weight ratio of alumina and zircon was ca. 1:1) as well as the abrasive manufacturing waste sample. After extraction, the solids obtained from the kerosene and water phases were collected and weighed separately. The alumina and zircon contents in the solids of each phase were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy using wavelength dispersive spectrometry (WDS–XRF) (Supermini, Rigaku Co., Ltd., Japan). Quantitative analysis was performed by the calibration curve method, where the calibration curve was created by analyzing several standard samples with known alumina and zircon content. The results were given in terms of grade and recovery. The extracted fractions (percent recovery in the kerosene phase) of alumina and zircon without the addition of a surfactant collector as a function of pH are shown in Selection of an appropriate surfactant collector to control the wettability of a particle is mainly based on its surface charge (i.e. the zeta potential of the particle). According to the results in Section The effect of SDS addition on the extracted fractions of alumina and zircon for pH between 4 and 10 is shown in The above results confirm the effect of SDS addition on promoting the extraction of alumina to the kerosene phase. However, it is noted that the results cannot be fully explained only by the electrostatic interaction between the positively charged alumina particles and the anionic SDS molecules. According to the zeta potential of alumina shown in The same liquid–liquid extraction procedure was applied to a simulated alumina–zircon particle mixture (ca. 1 As shown by the results in Section As an example, a photograph of the separating funnel after an alumina–zircon particle mixture was extracted by kerosene with the addition of 0.05 The liquid–liquid extraction for a simulated alumina–zircon particle mixture (ca. 1 As an example, photographs of separating funnels after an alumina–zircon particle mixture was extracted by kerosene at pH 7 with the addition of 0.05 The same liquid–liquid extraction procedure was applied to the abrasive manufacturing waste at various pH values and SDS dosages. The separation results after extraction at pH 9.5 with various SDS dosages are shown in In order to separate and recycle ultrafine particles of alumina and zircon generated in abrasive manufacturing, liquid–liquid extraction using kerosene as the organic phase and sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) as the surfactant collector was conducted in this study. The following results were obtained: Without the addition of a surfactant collector, more than half of the alumina particles were extracted from water to the kerosene phase at pH values ranging from 8 to 10. With the addition of more than 0.1 By extracting alumina to the kerosene phase and leaving zircon in the water phase, the two particles could be separated. Optimal extraction conditions for the mutual separation of an alumina–zircon particle mixture were obtained when more than 1.25 For the abrasive manufacturing waste, the optimal extraction conditions were also found at pH 9.5 with the addition of 1.25 The above results show that liquid–liquid extraction using kerosene as the organic phase and SDS as the surfactant collector is an effective method for the mutual separation of ultrafine particles of alumina and zircon. Furthermore, we consider this method is applicable not only to abrasive manufacturing waste recycling as was shown in this study, but also to other cases where the separation of alumina and zircon ultrafine particle mixtures is needed. The present study was a collaborative research project between the University of Tokyo, Japan and the Fujimi Incorporated, Japan. This work was supported in part by the 21st Global COE program, ’’Mechanical Systems Innovation’’, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Sciences and Technology of Japan, as well as the JST CREST of Innovative Technology and System for Sustainable Water Use Research Area (Shibusawa group).