A copolymer containing 4-Diethanolaminomethyl Styrene (DEAMSt) monomer with Benzyl Methacrylate (BMA) monomer units were synthesized by free radical solution polymerization technique using AIBN as a free radical initiator and 1,4-dioxane as a solvent at 60 °C. The metal complexes were prepared by reaction of the copolymer used as ligand poly(DEAMSt0.70-co BMA) and Ni(II), Co(II) and Zn(II) metal ions in presence of ethanol and dilute NaOH at 65 °C for 48 h in pH 6. The structure of copolymer used as ligand and polymer-metal complexes were characterized by (FT-IR), 1H NMR, elemental analysis, and SEM-EDX techniques. For the theoretical calculations (FT-IR and 1H NMR spectrum) the Hartree-Fock (HF) theory with 6-31G (6D, 7F) basic set was used. In addition, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies were investigated. A good agreement has been found between the theoretical and experimental FT-IR and 1H NMR results.Currently, many researchers have focused on the synthesis of polymer-metal complexes. Polymer-metal complexes have been a subject of several theoretical and applied studies, owing to its industrial importance for many technological applications, such as, nuclear chemistry, organic synthesis, pollution control, hydrometallurgy, wastewater treatment To prepare the copolymer using the free radical polymerization method, for this, 0.6786 g (0.0030 mol) of the modified 4-Diethanolaminomethyl Styrene (DEAMSt) monomer, 0.5472 g (0.0031 mol) of Benzyl Methacrylate (BMA), 1.4-dioxane (3 mL) as solvent, and AIBN (1%) as initiator was placed in the polymerization tube. The prepared polymer tube was passed through argon gas and placed in an oil bath at 60 °C and the reaction was continued for 48 h. The resulting copolymer was precipitated with hexane. The precipitation was done three times. The synthesized copolymer was first placed at room temperature followed by vacuum drying oven at 40 °C for 24 h. FT-IR, The metal complexes of the ligand were investigated in relation to Ni(II), Co(II), and Zn(II). From the polymer-metal complexes prepare in presence of solvent Hartree-Fock theory is an ideal method for the determination of molecular structures, spectroscopic and electronic molecular properties. Moreover, the availability of this method without the need for any experimental data increases the interest in this method in recent years. In this study, HF calculations were carried out by using Gaussian 09 W The approximate geometry of poly(DEAMSt0.70- The formation of chemical reactivity is due to the interaction between the orbitals of the reactive regions (HOMO and LUMO)  The experimental and theoretical structure of poly(DEAMSt0.70- Nowadays, Ab initio NMR calculations play an important role in providing accurate information that is useful enough to investigate the relationship between chemical shift and molecular structure. It is also a very useful method for theoretically understanding the relationship between molecular structure and electronic properties The experimental and theoretical We have investigated the spectroscopic (IR and