Particle size was found to be an important factor in air bubble-induced detachment of colloidal particles from collector surfaces in a parallel plate flow chamber and generally polystyrene particles with a diameter of 806 nm detached less than particles with a diameter of 1400 nm. Particle detachment increased linearly with decreasing air bubble velocity and increasing liquid–air interfacial tension, regardless of particle diameter. The influence of air bubble velocity and liquid–air interfacial tension upon particle detachment was stronger on a hydrophilic collector surface than on a hydrophobic collector surface, whereas detachment was also less on positively-charged collector surfaces. In general, polystyrene particles with a diameter of 806 nm were less sensitive to the air bubble velocity than particles with a diameter of 1400 nm. However the larger particles were less sensitive to variations in liquid–air interfacial tension than the smaller ones. Hence, it is proposed that for larger particles, the liquid film in between the air bubble and the particle takes more time to thin down and form the three-phase contact, necessary to induce a detachment force.Detachment of colloidal particles from collector surfaces is a problem of both practical and theoretical interest. From a theoretical point of view, detachment of particles is frequently used to probe particle adhesion The shear force created by a passing liquid–air interface has been used in in vitro experiments to estimate the relative adhesive forces of microorganisms on biomaterials surfaces, such as silicone rubber voice prostheses In the present work, the influence of the size of the adhering particles on their air bubble-induced detachment from collector surfaces is studied in a parallel plate flow chamber. Two types of monodisperse polystyrene lattices were included in this study, with properties listed in Quartz plates (Lowers Hapert Glastechniek, Hapert, The Netherlands) and microscope glass slides (76×25×1.5 mm) were used as collector surfaces. All collector surfaces were cleaned thoroughly with 2% RBS 35 detergent (Omnilabo International B.V., Breda, The Netherlands) and alternately rinsed in Millipore-Q water, methanol and Millipore-Q water again. Quartz plates were used as a negatively-charged (zeta potential equal to −41 mV from streaming potentials Axisymmetric Drop Shape Analysis by Profile Experiments were carried out in a parallel plate flow chamber that has been described previously in detail For the enumeration of the number of particles adhering to the bottom plate before and after the passage of an air bubble, the entire flow chamber was mounted on the stage of a phase contrast microscope (Olympus BH-2) equipped with a 40× ultra long working distance objective (Olympus ULWD-CD Plan 40 PL). A CCD camera (CCD-MXR/5010, Adimec Advanced Image Systems B.V., Eindhoven, The Netherlands) was mounted on the phase contrast microscope and connected to a PCVision In all experiments, a 10 mM potassium nitrate solution was perfused through the chamber for 30 min with a volumetric flow of 0.025 ml s In order to introduce an air bubble in the system, the flow chamber was connected by a three-way valve to a syringe pump (Terumo SC512, Tokyo, Japan) filled with the potassium nitrate or the nitrate/propanol solution to adequately control the velocity of the air bubble. A 0.1±0.02 ml air bubble was introduced into the flow system through injection in the tubing connected to the chamber by a 1-ml syringe provided with a needle. The approximate projected dimensions of the air bubbles are 25×5 mm ( Regardless of the size of the adhering particles, the percentages of particles detached from the collector surfaces by the passage of an air bubble increased linearly with decreasing velocity of the air bubble ( Detachment of polystyrene particles increased linearly with the liquid–air interfacial tension moving at a low velocity of 2.37×10 The experimental derivatives of the detachment percentages with respect to the air bubble velocity and interfacial tension are summarized in In this paper, it is demonstrated that smaller polystyrene particles are generally more efficiently detached from negatively-charged collector surfaces by a passing air bubble in a parallel plate flow chamber than larger particles. However, this is not the case on a positively-charged collector surface. In addition, unlike larger particles, the detachment of smaller particles appeared less sensitive to the air bubble velocity than to the liquid–air interfacial tension. Previously The adhesion forces of the polystyrene particles to the different collector surfaces can be calculated using the DLVO (Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey, Overbeek) theory. Assuming constant potential conditions, and employing experimental contact angles and zeta potentials, it can be calculated that the adhesion forces are about 10 During drainage of the liquid film, a capillary force develops that resists attachment of the particle to the air bubble. This resistive force can be expressed as In summary, this study shows that particle size is a factor in air bubble-induced detachment of colloidal particles from collector surfaces. Both for small (806 nm) as well as for larger (1400 nm) diameter polystyrene particles, high detachment efficiencies can be achieved from hydrophilic, hydrophobic and positively-charged collector surfaces, providing the velocity of the passing air bubble is sufficiently low. Moreover, it constitutes a warning to those using the high shear rate produced by a liquid–air interface to estimate the number and adhesion force of particles or microorganisms on collector surfaces, since it is