Fuel cell-based breath-alcohol sensor (FCBrAS) remains the most widespread and reliable electrochemical device, for the detection of alcohol due to its inherent advantages such as portability, rapid detection, acceptable accuracy, sensitivity and selectivity. However, despite the advances in nanotechnology, FCBrAS still suffers from several technical challenges including the use of extremely high platinum loadings. In this short review, we opine that this old electrochemistry requires urgent innovative research interventions to be able to serve its purpose in the years ahead.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 17 May 2018  2451-9103/© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. In the last 5 years we have continued to witness an increasing research interest in the use of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), especially from human breath, as the most convenient and preferable analytical samples in clinical medicine, environmental science, agriculture, and food and beverage industry. The reason for this growing research interest is because the VOCs in human breath contain hundreds of chemical compounds that can easily provide important picture of the state-of-health of an individual. Importantly, as discussed previously Alcohol (ethanol) testing is very important in many applications, such as monitoring the use in essential workplaces (such as transportation, healthcare or electricity public utility) where testing for alcohol and drugs is a norm. The presence of alcohol in the blood can be detected using blood samples, urine samples, transdermal testing, and breath-testing. The use of blood or urine for alcohol testing can be invasive and quite challenging to be carried out in a public setting or for quick results. Transdermal testing is thought to be disadvantageous because of its potentially high cost and the tendency to result in inadvertent alcohol detection or false positives BrAC measurements have been performed using different techniques, including gas-chromatography From a general reading of histories and biographies from various online news media, one can easily establish that the research into the possibility of detecting alcohol in human breath has a very long history; could be traced, as far back as 1874, to Frances Edmund Anstie (1833–1874), an English medical doctor who first observed and proposed that a certain amount of alcohol could be consumed daily without any ill effects (i.e., the so-called “Anstie's limit”). The first practical road-side alcohol breath-testing device, a colorimeter known as “Drunkometer”, was invented by an American Biochemist, Rolla Neil Harger (1890 – 1983) in 1931 and awarded a patent in 1936. However, the first portable fuel cell-based breath alcohol sensor, known as “Alcolmeter” was invented by a Welsh Chemist, Tom Parry Jones (1935–2013) in 1974 but was only approved for use in 1979. The device, which is no longer in existence, was manufactured and sold worldwide by Lion Laboratories. Since 1979, different brands of fuel cell-based breath alcohol sensors have been introduced to the market. The name “Fuel cell-based breath-alcohol sensor (FCBrAS)” is due to the fact that the sensor shares similar chemistry and operation with the direct alcohol fuel cell (DAFC), an acid-based fuel cell, which is commonly used to generate electricity The experimental set-up for the study of FCBrAS is best represented as shown in FCBrAS has enjoyed commercial success for well over three decades but, surprisingly, very little research and development (R&D) efforts have been made to curb its inherent technical and cost challenges. Some of these challenges of the commercial FCBrAS and possible mitigating prospects include, but not limited to, the following:      Selectivity is an issue with electroanalytical systems such as the FCBrAS. For example, there are concerns that the breath of people who have taken sour milk products contains ethanol and that such people with false positive results could be prosecuted for drunk driving. The reason for this concern is that milk contains lactose that, upon fermentation gives lactic acid, ethanol and carbon dioxide. Although, it is well-established that the ethanol content of such sour milk product is negligibly low, FCBrAS or related device cannot discriminate the source of ethanol that it detects. Also, it should be recognized that breath of a person who has drunk alcoholic beverages contains some organic species besides ethanol, but such organic species occur at much lower concentrations than ethanol and can be discriminated against by the electrocatalyst used in fabricating the alcohol sensor. For example, Thiago Another interesting aspect of FCBrAS is sensitivity (i.e., charge or current density generated by a unit ppm amount of ethanol gas measured). Several factors (such as catalyst loading, catalyst support, and MEA fabrication) affect the sensitivity of the FCBrAS. Recently, Allan FCBrAS is an old electrochemistry that should benefit from the ever-increasing nanotechnological advances in fuel cell technologies, notably the proton exchange membrane fuel cells and DAFC as well as the alkaline direct alcohol fuel cell. Nanotechnological advances, especially in the design and synthesis of nanostructured electrocatalysts, can lead to the development of the next-generation FCBrAS with improved accuracy, durability, safety, and cost. There is a limited number of researchers in the FCBrAS that may explain the paucity of open literature (as against patents) and slow development in the field. As evident from the recent interventions as we showed in this report, FCBrAS offers huge research opportunities. In our opinion, such opportunities include the design and synthesis of Pt- and/or Pd-based nanoalloys, and solid polymer electrolytes that will support sufficient ion-conductivity. Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: ● Paper of special interest. ●● Paper of outstanding interest. This study was supported by the University of the Witwatersrand (Wits). The financial supports of the National Research Foundation (NRF), DST-NRF Centre of Excellence in Strong Materials (CoE-SM) and National Metrology Institute of South Africa (NMISA) are gratefully acknowledged. Opinions expressed and conclusions arrived at, are those of the authors and are not necessarily to be attributed to the NRF, CoE-SM and NMISA.