Pressure oxidation reaction kinetics and products are compared for the recovery of copper from a chalcopyrite concentrate under medium temperature conditions at 125–150 °C, as patented and promoted by various commercial operations, normally referred to as the Anglo/UBC, CESL and NSC (nitrogen species catalysed) processes. The main aim was to compare the effect of additives on the dispersion of molten sulfur and recovery of copper, and develop a better understanding of the role of chloride ion.
                  Greater than 94% copper was extracted from the concentrate under all process conditions (except NSC) within 30 min. The extraction of the remaining copper in some instances took substantially longer due to poor dispersion of sulfur and agglomeration of the sulfide minerals. The partial oxidation of sulfide to elemental sulfur was about 70–80% at 150 °C and was greater in the presence of chloride ion and at higher initial acidity. Iron was leached and re-precipitated forming a number of different phases depending upon the acidity and salinity. These phases including hematite, jarosite and goethite were characterised using Quantitative X-ray Diffraction (QXRD) analysis. Hematite formation was favoured at higher temperatures (≥150 °C), low acidity and low to moderate salinity. Goethite formation was favoured at lower temperatures (<150 °C) and by low acidity and low salinity. Jarosite was formed under conditions of moderate to high acidity and its formation was enhanced/stabilised in the presence of sodium ions. It was demonstrated that the basic copper salt, antlerite, could be produced under conditions of low acidity.
                  Chloride ion addition and high acid concentrations enhanced copper extraction kinetics and recovery, and inhibited the oxidation of sulfur to sulfate. This suggests that chloride ion is adsorbed on the sulfur surface to restrict direct oxygen reaction. Chloride ion also enhances the anodic oxidation of mineral sulfides and the dispersion of molten sulfur.The hydrometallurgical processes that have been developed for the pressure leaching of chalcopyrite can be classified into low, medium and high temperature regimes. Low temperature processes employ ultra-fine grinding to enhance the leaching kinetics and give high conversions of sulfide to elemental sulfur. Medium temperature processes utilize fine grinding, higher temperatures, typically 140–150 °C, but require the addition of specific reagents to minimize wetting of the chalcopyrite surface by molten sulfur that would otherwise slow the leaching kinetics. Again, moderate to high conversions of sulfide to sulfur can be obtained and the leach residues are generally quite stable, having low sulfate content. At high temperatures, 200–230 °C, leaching kinetics are rapid, however, the entire sulfide content is converted to sulfate leading to substantially higher oxygen consumption and higher acid level, which might require neutralisation in the down-stream processing of the leach solutions. In Part I, the kinetics and products of leaching a chalcopyrite concentrate under low and high temperature process conditions were compared. This paper considers the kinetics and products of leaching at medium temperature using conditions and additives promoted by several commercial proponents, though no experiments were conducted using Dynatec process conditions. Because of the limited disclosure of technical information in the open literature, it was not possible to ensure optimum process conditions and further optimisation was beyond the scope of this work. Particular focus was given to the effect of chloride ion which is commonly added in many pressure oxidation processes to promote copper recovery. A summary of the experimental conditions is given in A chalcopyrite concentrate (as received) was lightly ground and dry screened to produce − NSC experiments were commenced via the injection (using nitrogen gas) of a small amount of sodium nitrite solution followed by the injection of the required oxygen partial pressure. An addition of 2 g/L NaNO The addition of chloride ion in the acidic sulfate leaching of chalcopyrite at moderate temperatures was first pursued by Noranda in the 1970's ( Cominco Engineering Services Limited (CESL) abandoned a total pressure leach approach in the early 1990's to develop a process, similar to the Noranda Antlerite process, for leaching chalcopyrite concentrates. A medium temperature process ( Extensive fully-integrated pilot and demonstration plant campaigns have been successfully undertaken with the CESL process. It is claimed that the economic comparison of this process with smelting is favourable, with about half of the capital and lower operating costs depending upon the current cost of power. An announcement late in 2004 indicated that CVRD would build and operate a semi-industrial plant utilising CESL technology to produce 10,000 tpa copper cathode at the Sossego site. After successful demonstration of the project, CVRD intends to build a facility for the production of 250,000 tpa copper from various Carajás concentrates. Anglo American and the University of British Columbia collaborated on the development of a medium temperature leaching process for chalcopyrite in the absence of chloride ion ( About the same time Phelps Dodge were developing a proprietary process that was demonstrated commercially during a seven month trial at the Bagdad demonstration plant. This process will be employed for the leaching of copper concentrates at Morenci with the facility scheduled to commence production during 2007. Key elements of the process described by the invention of Another notable process was developed by Dynatec that was based upon the commercially successful zinc sulfide pressure leach process ( Following successful operation at the Sunshine Pressure Leach plant during the 1980's, the catalysis of pressure oxidation using nitrogen species has been strongly promoted as a viable alternative technology ( The medium temperature leaching chemistry of chalcopyrite, for the Anglo/UBC and CESL processes, has been summarized previously ( The leaching of chalcopyrite with nitric acid in conjunction with sulfuric acid is normally reported as: However, it was postulated that the actual reaction species is NO  This gives the following combined reaction: The NO generated has a limited solubility and tends to accumulate in the head space of a closed vessel where it reacts with supplied oxygen and re-dissolves allowing NO When the regeneration of the catalyst is included the overall reactions that produce sulfur (or sulfate) are the same for all processes: The hydrolysis of iron proceeds as indicated elsewhere ( The extraction of copper using the Anglo/UBC approach ( Sulfuric acid was rapidly consumed during the first 15 min of chalcopyrite leaching, since the combination of elemental sulfur formation and the rejection of iron are net acid consuming. Thereafter, the free acidity increased slowly as sulfur was oxidised to sulfuric acid ( The effect of reducing the initial acid addition from 50 g/L to 5 g/L (or from 320 kg/t to 45 kg/t dry concentrate, respectively) was to reduce the leaching rate with only about 2/3 of the copper extracted into solution. The requirement for sufficient acid to enable optimal copper recovery is promoted by When sodium chloride was added, the initial rate of copper extraction was higher, however, the final copper extraction was slightly lower ( In continuous operations, strategies other than the addition of surfactants have been shown to be effective in reducing agglomeration. Early operation of the São Bento pressure oxidation circuit was reported to involve mixing oxidised slurry with concentrate feed at a ratio of recycled solids to feed of 4:1 ( In the first CESL experiment, using a high initial partial pressure of oxygen (700 kPa), quite large and irregular sulfide ore aggregates were formed (see For subsequent CESL reactions, aggregate formation was suppressed by commencing the reaction with an oxygen over-pressure of 200 kPa that was increased to 400 kPa after 15 min and to 700 kPa (full over-pressure) after 30 min. This strategy followed the invention of Using CESL leaching conditions with low initial oxygen partial pressure, over 95% copper extraction was obtained with a moderate grind (P The least agglomerated final residue was obtained with a low initial acidity (5 g/L) that allowed the liquor pH to rise above pH 2.8 and precipitate basic copper salts, causing the dissolved copper extraction to drop to 70%. After acid washing the residue to dissolve the copper salts, it was determined that the overall copper extraction during this experiment was 96%. Changes in the measured free acidities of the liquor for the CESL process ( No attempt was made to optimise CESL conditions, for the concentrate employed in the present study, as proposed by The extent of sulfur oxidation can be calculated using leach liquor and residue analytical data, and QXRD data. The conversion of sulfide to sulfur and sulfate was found to vary greatly depending upon the initial reaction conditions ( An important result from the data given in Comparison of the sulfide to elemental sulfur conversions under Anglo/UBC and CESL conditions, using feeds with a nominal grind size P Despite many articles promoting the using of nitrogen species catalysis, the experiments conducted in this study were not able to reproduce the excellent results published by The copper extractions from the NSC reactions conducted in this study are presented in Despite the lower temperature of the NSC leach, the conversion of sulfide to sulfate was estimated to be higher, 25%, when compared with just 12% under CESL conditions ( The mineralogy of selected leach residues as determined by QXRD analysis is presented in The comparison between the calculated and analytical data for iron was less problematic than for high temperature residues that had significantly greater iron content. The poorest agreement was noted for the early samples that may contain an unidentified, poorly crystalline, iron-containing phase that ultimately transforms to an XRD-detectable one. Similar behaviour was noted in Part I for some of the low temperature Activox® leach residues. Under Anglo/UBC conditions, the presence of added acid, 50 g/L, favoured the formation of sulfur rather than sulfate. For residues taken early during the reaction, significant amounts of hydronium jarosite and lesser amounts of hematite and goethite were formed ( As the use of sodium lignosulfonate and an increase in the loading of Quebracho from 3 to 5 kg/t dry concentrate, were more effective for sulfur dispersion, lower sulfur contents were found in the corresponding leach residues ( With a low acid addition, 5 g/L, and the rate of leaching significantly slower ( The addition of sodium chloride was noted previously to enhance the initial leach kinetics ( Under CESL process conditions, with chloride ion supplied as CuCl When sodium chloride and 5 g/L acid were added, chalcopyrite reacted very quickly, though in this instance no goethite was formed; hematite and jarosite precipitation were dominant ( NSC, like the Activox® and other medium temperature processes, is a strong acid consumer during the early stages of the reaction. The leach liquor iron concentration slowly increased during the first 30 min and thereafter, a mixed sodium/hydronium jarosite phase was formed, further reducing the free acidity and causing a substantial drop in the dissolved sodium concentration. The on-going oxidation of sulfur to sulfate enabled the jarosite composition to further increase. The conversion to sulfate was A semi-quantitative assessment of agglomeration was made by wet screening final residues through a 20 μm nylon mesh. In general, the − Although Quebracho was shown to be an effective dispersant under Anglo/UBC conditions, it is not clear that this was the case under NSC conditions given the slower (than expected) leach kinetics ( It was noted by It is clear from this study under medium temperature conditions and from the previous studies at low and high temperatures ( Whilst the mechanism of chloride ion interaction has not been established, it is likely that sulfide minerals undergo oxidation with oxygen by two different pathways — one via formation of elemental sulfur which oxidises slowly to sulfate; and one via formation of thiosulfate which oxidises rapidly to sulfate. Evidence for two separate pathways is given for example by the recent publication of In acid media, Under medium and high temperature, further oxidation of sulfur to sulfate takes place depending on the surface area of the dispersed sulfur. However, fundamental studies by Other fundamental studies on the contact angle and work of adhesion of molten sulfur on mineral sulfides provide evidence for the positive effects of chloride ion in pressure oxidation ( Under Anglo/UBC, CESL, and NSC pressure oxidation conditions, copper extraction was optimised by fine grinding, the addition of surfactant, the presence of a nitrogen species catalyst, or by the addition of chloride ion. Copper extractions > Changing the process conditions was found to have a significant impact upon (1) the conversion of sulfide to sulfur and/or sulfate and therefore the oxygen requirement, (2) the phases found in the leach residue and (3) the production of readily leachable basic copper salts. At moderate temperatures, the admixture of iron-containing phases consisting of hematite, jarosite and goethite was determined by process acidity and water salinity. At sufficiently low acidity, a fraction of the extracted copper could be precipitated as a basic copper salt, antlerite, at sufficiently high copper and sulfate levels. In the absence of chloride ions, organic dispersants for sulfur were required to ensure high copper recovery. Sodium lignosulfonate appears to be a better surfactant than Quebracho when employed in equivalent amounts. However, the dispersion of the sulfur results in more complete oxidation to sulfate and consequently a higher oxygen demand. Hence there is a balance between the addition of surfactants and chloride ion for optimum copper recovery and minimum sulfur oxidation. This work was funded by CSIRO Minerals and the Parker Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgical Solutions. The authors also wish to thank the analytical team, Milan Chovancek, Darren Atheis and Mike O'Shea for providing the analytical data for this study. Furthermore, Phan Khanh is acknowledged for the acquisition of the XRD data and, Nancy Hanna and Rick Hughes for the particle size data. Goutam Das and Matthew Jeffery are also thanked for useful comments on this manuscript.  SLS 