The hydrogen economy is one of the key areas of interest for the reduction of societal greenhouse gas emissions. However, the potential for impact of hydrogen technologies in the transition to a hydrogen economy will vary across the different industrial sectors depending on the source and usage of current energy sources. This paper presents a broad examination of hydrogen economy opportunities and impacts for the minerals industry in Australia. The usage of hydrogen and fuel cell technology in the mining and metals production sub-sectors has differing potential as metallurgical and heavy-duty mobile energy consumption may not be feasibly substituted with hydrogen. This examination indicates a potential of 12–13% reduction in primary energy usage by the minerals industry, with a resulting reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of 9–12% without carbon capture and storage (CCS), or 53–60% reduction with CCS. Other impacts on the industry may include an increased demand for minerals to produce fuel cells, catalysts and infrastructure. Minimal local reserves of platinum group metals are likely to be the limiting capacity factor.The hydrogen economy presents a challenging target for research and development into the reduction of societal greenhouse emissions. There is currently extensive research into fuel cell technology and hydrogen storage, and the various technical challenges in the life cycle of production and utilisation of hydrogen. The individual characteristics of each sector of the economy however, mean that the impacts and potential for implementing a hydrogen economy will be different. This paper takes a near-term, transitional, fossil fuel-based hydrogen economy scenario for Australia, and examines the potential implications for the minerals sector within this scenario. The minerals industry is a key sector in Australia, supplying approximately 2% of jobs and $120 billions of value added to the economy Furthermore, there will be demand for products from the minerals industry. Platinum group metals (PGM), nickel and other metals are used widely as electrode and catalyst materials in the production of hydrogen and fuel cells. Some assessment of the availability and projected requirements of these metals have been performed on a global scale Previous examination of hydrogen economy opportunities for Australia has shown that fossil fuels are the most likely early sources of hydrogen, due to the abundance of fossil fuels, the strength of the fossil electricity industry and the availability of proven, cost effective technology in the form of natural gas steam reforming and coal gasification Most of the current works on hydrogen fuel cells for mobile applications are focussed on light duty vehicles, and hydrogen polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFC) are identified as the key technology. Heavy-duty mobile applications of fuel cell technology, as required for the minerals industry, have not been widely examined, and there are indications that the cost is prohibitive where other factors (such as direct emissions concerns) are not in play The opportunities and impacts of a hydrogen economy on the minerals industry are divided into two categories for the purpose of this work – firstly, the direct energy and greenhouse gas reduction impact on the minerals industry itself, and secondly, other potential indirect or flow-on effects of a broader implementation of hydrogen technologies on minerals operations and markets. Currently, the minerals industry utilises approximately 18% of Australia's total energy consumption In this analysis a transitional hydrogen economy scenario is used, in which fossil fuels are assumed to be the major source of hydrogen and electricity. It is assumed that hydrogen is produced from coal gasification and natural gas steam reforming, and stationary electricity is produced from integration with hydrogen fuel cells (Integrated gasification fuel cell cycle (IGFC) or Natural gas reforming fuel cell cycle (NGFC)). Mobile applications are assumed to utilise hydrogen-fed PEMFC, whilst stationary applications utilise Solid Oxide Fuel Cells combined with a gas turbine (SOFC/GT) to enhance efficiency. All electrical operations are therefore assumed to be hydrogen-run, with subsequent efficiency improvements. No CO For mobile applications, Scenario A assumes that underground mine operations are able to utilise fuel cells, but open cut operations would continue to operate on diesel as fuel cells would be too expensive. Estimates based on the data of Mudd In order to correlate greenhouse gas emissions and energy usage as closely as possible, the Australian electricity grid efficiency of 32.9% The difference in energy reduction and GHG reduction in the mining sector is mostly attributable to the fugitive emissions from coal mining, which is not affected by the energy efficiency gains. The substitution of diesel for coal-based hydrogen production for fuel cells results in an increase of GHG emissions, due to the efficiencies assumed (40% for diesel and 30% for coal-derived hydrogen fuel cells), and the higher emissions from coal as compared with diesel combustion. The assumption that all diesel fuel substitution will be taken up by coal-derived hydrogen is compared with alternative substitution regimes in Integrated gasification plants are advantageous in providing a high concentration CO With the development of hydrogen technology there are numerous opportunities and impacts that could arise for the minerals industry, outside the direct reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. A broad technology and infrastructure analysis would reveal more details of the potential impacts and benefits, some of which are examined here. Coal gasification replacing diesel fuel and current coal-fired power plants under the previous scenario would lead to a decrease in coal used for the minerals industry, and for electricity in the wider economy (1370 If a new generation of electricity and hydrogen plants replaces existing coal-fired power stations, there is also an off-shoot opportunity for the minerals industry to provide carbon storage services. Bradshaw et al. indicate that the potential for CO Currently, many of the mining and minerals operations have natural gas supply pipelines and access to grid electricity. Therefore, under the current assumptions of hydrogen source, the infrastructure required for implementation would largely be limited to new generation offsite power stations and onsite reforming plants, distribution and refuelling stations. Further analysis and optimisation, such as that performed by Ogden et al. and Johnson et al. Other significant areas of interest to the metals industry would be the supply of catalyst and other materials for production of fuel cells. Pehnt Some additional considerations that have not been addressed here, but could be of interest in a full sectoral life cycle assessment are: Expanded light metals markets from increase in their use to improve efficiency in a new generation of fuel cell cars Effect on recycling markets of taking existing vehicles off the road Water production in the fuel cell, and the possibility of its capture and re-usage as process or potable water (especially at remote mine sites). This paper offers an initial examination of potential for a hydrogen economy to impact on the minerals industry. The examination indicates that, given current energy mix and efficiency factors, there is significant potential for a hydrogen economy to reduce energy usage by between 12 and 13%, and decrease corresponding greenhouse gases by between 9 and 12%. It is important to note that the potential for impact is dependent on the sectoral mix of energy sources, as is indicated by the difference in mining and metal's production impacts. When coal gasification is assumed to capture 90% of the emitted CO The minerals industry is unique, in that it is in the position of supplier and user of materials and fuels to support a hydrogen economy. As such, further investigation, especially into the demand side of the hydrogen economy, is warranted in order to assess future potential for the industry. Metals production for fuel cell applications appears at first examination to be limited (especially in Australia) by the availability of scarce catalyst materials such as Platinum, while other mineral compounds are largely available from current production. Potential for the industry to provide services such as carbon storage is also worthy of further investigation – especially in the light of potential trade-offs between coal usage for power/hydrogen and alternative usage for coal bed methane and carbon storage. The author would like to acknowledge the support of Dr. Glen Corder and the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing.