Extracellular Polymeric Substances (EPS) are of fundamental importance for attachment to metal sulfides, biofilm formation and leaching efficiency of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. In this work we have visualized the capsular polysaccharides (CPS) of A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 using the fluorescently-labeled lectin Concanavalin A (ConA) and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Ferrous iron-grown cells exhibited low amounts of CPS. A strong induction of CPS production was observed for planktonic and mineral-attached cells 24h after transfer to pyrite (FeS2). Additionally, CPS production was inducible in the presence of metal sulfide degradation products, even when cells had no direct contact to metal sulfide surfaces. Despite being an autotrophic bacterium, it has been found that sugars, presumably serving as polysaccharide building blocks stimulate CPS production in A. ferrooxidans. A strong induction of CPS was found after growth of cells on floating filters in ferrous iron medium supplemented with 2.5mg/mL glucose or galactose, while the presence of 0.25mg/mL casaminoacids did not show effects on induction of CPS. A similar phenotype was also found after growth under phosphate (Pi) limited growth conditions. Our results strongly suggest that CPS expression is inducible by several factors, including bacterial contact with metal sulfide degradation products, while direct mineral contact seems not to be a prerequisite. The molecular mechanisms regulating expression of genes encoding CPS biosynthesis and export systems in A. ferrooxidans remain to be elucidated.  As an autotroph, All this evidence encouraged us to observe early stages of  Autoclaved polycarbonate filters (GTTB, Ø 2.5 For studying effects of compounds originating from chemical pyrite dissolution on CPS production, filters were inoculated with 2.5 A flotation pyrite from Baia Mare (Romania) with a grain size of 50 to 100 Assays for studying effects of media supplementation on CPS production of cells attached to pyrite were prepared in 2 Polycarbonate filters were stained using a filtration device, which allowed for perpendicular washing of the sample using a water-jet vacuum pump. First, samples were washed twice with 200 A laser scanning module (LSM 510 Carl Zeiss® Jena) coupled to an inverted Axiovert100 M BP microscope (Zeiss®) was used. Appropriate laser excitation wavelengths and optical filters were used for specific detection of fluorophore signals (Argon laser: 488 Basic visualization and image quantification were done using sets of at least five images of each sample with ImageJ ( Pyrite leaching experiments were performed in batch cultures with 5% (w/v) pyrite in 150 Induction of CPS production in To further assess the stimulating factor responsible for induction of CPS or EPS production, the external addition of the products of pyrite dissolution ferrous iron and thiosulfate ( When These findings were confirmed when cells were incubated for 24 The influence of the external media supplementations on pyrite leaching efficiencies was also tested. No significant effects on planktonic cell growth were observed by the addition of glucose or galactose. However, by the addition of casaminoacids in pyrite dissolution assays planktonic cell numbers were increased and pyrite dissolution was reduced. The dissolution was 15% lower after supplementation with 0.25 In this study we have shown that  Growth under P The external addition of the sugars glucose or galactose resulted in the enhancement of ConA signal from The role of QS systems in induction of CPS production and biofilm formation needs also to be highlighted. We have observed that the external addition of synthetic AHLs increased A positive relationship between P Our results show that CPS expression in We gratefully thank the