In this study, the dynamic fragmentation of granites at strain rates of 40–150/s is explored by using SHPB apparatus. Two mechanical classes (i.e. class I and class II) are observed from the stress vs. strain curves in high strain rate loading and the transition strain rate separated the two regimes is about 80/s. The samples are pervasively shattered when the strain rate exceeds the transition threshold and the dissipated energy density is as high as 2.0 J/cm3. Fragment size/mass distributions are quantified using image processing technique and Weibull distribution, which provide better agreements with experimental results. Then a novel energy-based fragmentation model for describing the cylindrical samples compacted by single direction impact is proposed to reasonably predict the characteristic fragment size. The compression kinetic energy item explains the catastrophic fracturing, which is a result of multi-dimensional breakage at high strain rate. The class I loading, described as 'strain energy controlled regime', produces larger-size, less-number debris and behaved as strain rate independent. The class II loading is kinetic energy controlled which results in pulverized debris and rate dependent failure strength.the length of striker, m P wave velocity of the bars, m/s Young modulus of the bars, Pa density of the bars, kg/m incident, reflected and transmitted strains on the bars incident, reflected, transmitted and dissipated energies, J strain rate, /s characteristic strain rate, /s dimensionless constant limiting crack growth velocity, m/s fracture toughness, Pa·m areal flaw density, m average flaw size, m rate increase factor fracture and residual strains fragment probability function the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of fragment CDF according to Lineau CDF according to Mott and Lineau CDF according to Rosin and Rammler scale length of the fragment distribution, m mass scale length of the fragment distribution, m size scale length of the fragment distribution, m shape parameter of the fragment distribution characteristic fragment size according to Mott characteristic fragment size according to Grady and Kipp characteristic fragment size according to Grady characteristic fragment size according to Glen and Chudnovsky characteristic fragment size according to Yew and Taylor characteristic fragment size according to Miller characteristic fragment size according to Stránský characteristic fragment size according to Zhou et al. characteristic fragment size according to Zhou et al. characteristic fragment size according to Levy and Molinari tensile and compressive failure strength, Pa P wave velocity of the rock, m/s Young modulus and Poisson's ratio of the rock, Pa effective P wave velocity, m/s average of the initial distribution of defects, Pa Shock penetration and dynamic fragmentation of brittle materials cover a wide range of areas including defense and shielding in military use From the viewpoint of fractography observed in laboratory, the sequences of the fragmentation consist of four stages as Theoretical models intended to predict the fragment characteristics based on the fragmentation distribution and fragment size average have been studied for many years. Grady Our interest is to understand the dynamic fragmentation encountered in ballistic impact, planetary collision and high velocity shock compressions. The process of dynamic fragmentation (e.g. characteristic size, number, mass distribution) for crystalline rocks is reproduced by Split Hopkinson pressure bar test under different impact velocities. Different methods on the identification of strain rate threshold are discussed. Fragment size and distribution based on number and mass are presented in conjunction with the image processing technique. Statistical distributions are compared to experimental results and a novel energy-based fragment model is proposed. The advantage of the current model is discussed and comparisons with experiments are given. Nanan grey granite from Fujian, China, was chosen for the studied material due to the low porosity and few cracks within the sample. Thin section analysis shows mineral homogeneity of the granite with mineralogical compositions of 26.3% quartz, 51.7% feldspar, 19.5% biotite and 2.5% others including chlorite, garnet, etc. The optical microscope images as shown in To reduce the structural heterogeneity influence on the discreteness of experimental results, all cylindrical samples were cored from the same block at similar dimensions of 5.0 cm in diameter and length. The slenderness ratio (length/diameter ratio) is set as 1:1 to reduce the inertia effect as well as the friction constraint. The thin specimens are designed to ensure stress equilibrium at the ends of the sample and in turn improve the valid strain rate. The two-end surfaces are machined perpendicular to the axial direction to a tolerance of 0.02 mm following the ISRM suggestion Uniaxial compression tests at high strain rates were conducted on a conventional split Hopkinson pressure bar apparatus at Rock Dynamic laboratory in Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics. This SHPB apparatus shown in The energy conservation of the SHPB experiment is based on neglecting of the kinetic energy and thermal dissipation and the strain energies Fragment size analysis was carried out by a combination of manual sieving method and image processing technique of the fragmented rocks. The manual sieving works as preliminary analysis for the size distribution of the debris, and separates the sample into several regimes for further image processing. Sieving method has a limitation on the sampling data due to the discrete diameters of the sieves, i.e. the chosen sieve in this study has seven sieve sizes including In this section, we described the observed mechanical characteristics and macroscopic fragmentation of rocks loaded at different strain rates. The two types of stress–strain behavior are introduced and the strain rate dependency on the peak failure strength, fracture strain and dissipated energy density are presented. The fragment size distribution, obtained by image processing, is then explored to compare with existed empirical models. Quasi-static uniaxial compression tests were performed on granite samples at a size of 50 × 100 mm by MTS with a strain rate of 10 Samples loaded at critical strain rates range below 70/s were found split or fractured and failure strength below 175 MPa (slightly over the average UCS). The input energy is enough to cause unrecoverable damage on the samples and this damage results in macroscopically fractured debris. Considering the unrecoverable dissipated energy, the recovery stage was not observed on the stress–strain curves and the residual strain was larger than the rupture strain. Exceeding the critical strain rate range, the samples are fractured to fine fragments at average size below 2.5 mm. Macroscopic damage is analysed by sieving the sample fragments shocked under various strain rates. As shown in The samples are fragmented to finer debris when the input energy exceeds 2.0 J/cm The stress–strain curves loaded at various strain rates are plotted in  The failure process of samples can be described as the input energy dissipation ( Fragment size distribution (FSD) of shattered samples was firstly sieved, and then analyzed by image processing technique. Statistical and geometric approaches associated with natural defects initiation, nucleation and coalescence were used to characterize the debris features of brittle materials. Fragmentation distribution can be described by a probability function Considering that the experimental data is a discrete series of The most application of the exponential function used in dynamic fragmentation in early theories has success in performing the fragmentation characteristic for metals and other ductile materials. Lineau With regard to Weibull distribution, the hazard function is considered as As discussed above, symbols Major and minor axis histogram distributions of the samples under different strain rates are shown in The scale parameter Apart from the fragment distribution, the prediction of characteristic fragment size is crucial for better understanding of dynamic fragmentation. This section presents the dynamic fracturing model based on energy conservation and the experiments are compared with the models. The earliest dynamic fragmentation theory proposed by Mott The energy-based Grady characteristic fragment size Miller model The energy-based models explored to explain the energy participation during fragmentation and characteristic size is determined by the energy principle. Most models exhibit the same Successful predictions of the fragment size are based on the reasonable form of energy principal. Although Glen and Chudnovsky model commonly provides an underestimated result on the characteristic fragment size, the transition zone existed on the Considering a cylindrical geometry shown in Eq. In order to compare the theory models with experimental results, the material properties used in the fragmentation theories are listed in The dynamic fragmentation has two regimes separated by the characteristic strain rate. The fragment size in lower strain rate regime is almost constant which is approximately The critical strain rate In previous models, the fragment size is controlled by expanding kinetic energy and the approximate fragment size is Experimental results indicate the failure strength of rocks is alternatively strain rate dependent and the critical strain rate separates the stress vs. strain curves as mechanical class I ad class II and differs fragment patterns as split and pulverized. The class II failure, exhibits stronger strain rate dependency and more pervasively fragmented, is studied and the fragment distribution is presented by the Weibull function. The two regimes observed from the pulverized debris distribution reveal the two different failure mechanisms are widely existed as a consequence of dynamic fragmentation. The energy-based theories considering the strain energy term presented this transition phenomenon and fragment size is explained as results of energy consumption and balance. The previous models assumed the brittle solids as lines having infinite length or rings subjected to uniform inner pressure. The matrix is fragmented as a consequence of tensile fracturing caused by expanding or tension spalling. The process of dynamic fragmentation is rather complicated in practical considering the presence of inherent defect, crack initiation, propagation and coalescence. Our proposed model does not attempt to explore the complex background from the viewpoint of dynamic fracturing, but rather we attempt to develop robust theories on the basis of energy consumption maybe existed in the fragmentation process. Reasonable agreement can be found in the comparison with experimental results carried out by SHPB at lower strain rate. This novel mode treats the solid matrix as a cylinder having finite geometry properties. The kinetic energy, provided the energy to derive the crack propagation, is composed of lateral expanding energy and axial compression energy. The expanding energy is the item determines the fragment size in radial direction and the compression energy affects the size fragmentation along the axial direction. The strain energy term is determined by the fracture strength and it is taken as the tensile strength of the material in present study. The breakage appeared in Glen and Chudnovsky model is compression-induced spalling and therefore the strain energy is considered as the compressive deformation stored in the sample. In mechanical class I loading, the failure of the sample is caused by splitting which results from the tensile stress reflected from surface. The difference between the Glen and Chudnovsky model and present model is that the characteristic sizes at low strain rate are In this study, we presented the SHPB tests on granites and investigated the dynamic fragment distribution of the shattered samples under compression in conjunction with image processing technique. Two mechanical classes (i.e. class I and class II) are existed on stress vs. strain curves of granites and the transition strain rate is about 80/s. The breakage of samples appears to be intact, slightly split or split for class I loading, and progress into pervasively pulverization as the strain rate exceeds the critical value. The transition zone where the energy reallocation occurs can be easily identified from the fracture strength vs. strain rate, residual strain vs. fracture strain and dissipated energy vs. strain rate. The fragment distributions, including the size distribution and mass distribution, are compared with different statistical models and the Weibull distribution exhibited a better agreement with experimental results. Bypassing the complicated processing of fracturing occurred in brittle solids under dynamic compression, we developed a novel energy-based fragmentation model for describing the cylindrical samples compacted by single direction impact. The kinetic energy along the loading direction explained the multi-dimensional breakage phenomenon the cause of catastrophic fracturing at high strain rate. The strain energy determined by tensile fracture strength provides a better agreement on the fragment size prediction in the strain energy controlled regime. The contribution of predictive capabilities on dynamic fragmentation for brittle solids can be used to estimate the fragment size in many applications such as rockfalls, mineral processing, blasting and planetary collision. This research was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 