Trace amounts of iron impurity in manganese sulfate solution will seriously affect the quality of manganese products if it is not purified. In this study, we utilized mechanically activated CaCO3 to remove iron from manganese sulfate solution by co-grinding CaCO3 with manganese sulfate solution in a wet stirred ball mill. Effects of rotation speed, milling time, ball/liquid volume ratio, and CaCO3/Fe2+ molar ratio on the iron removal were investigated. The results showed that the iron in the manganese sulfate solutions was efficiently removed with an iron removal rate of approximately 100% under the optimum conditions. Mechanical activation clearly increased the reactivity of CaCO3. This study would provide an alternative method for removing iron from manganese solution.Manganese sulfate as a basic manganese salt is an important industrial intermediate to produce electrolytic manganese products including electrolytic manganese and electrolytic manganese dioxide, chemical manganese dioxide and manganese salts such as manganese carbonate ( There are two forms of iron in the manganese sulfate solution: Fe In our previous work, we found that Mn All reagents (MnSO Milling operations were performed in a lab-scale stirred ball milling equipment (Changsha Tianchuang Powder Technology Corporation, YS7124-JM-1 L, China). The volume of the cylindrical stirred tank is 1000 mL and the balls used were yttrium-stabilized zirconia milling balls of 3 mm in diameter. 250 mL of manganese sulfate solution, a known volume of milling balls and a defined amount of CaCO X-ray diffraction (RU-200B/D/MAX-RB, Rigaku, Japan) analysis was performed to identify the phases of the precipitated samples. The morphology of the precipitated samples were observed by SEM (Ultra Plus-43-13, Zeiss, Germany). The pH of all the solutions was measured by a pH meter (METTLER TOLEDO FE20-FiveEasy™, Switzerland). Manganese concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by the perchloric acid oxidation ammonium iron(II) sulphate titrimetric method ( Rotation speed is an important parameter as an increase in the rotation speed can increase the relative collision speed between the milling balls as well as between the milling balls and the material so that more energy is transferred between them.   Milling time is also an important parameter as an increase in the milling time can increase the reaction time to ensure the CaCO   The ball/liquid volume ratio refers to the volume of the used balls to the volume of manganese sulfate solution. It is also an important parameter as an increase in the ball/liquid volume ratio can increase the collision between the milling balls and the material.  In order to better understand the activation of CaCO The results of the comparative experiments are presented in As Based on the above analysis, the reaction mechanism of for the iron removal from manganese sulfate solution may be described by the following Eqs.  In this study, CaCO