hydroxyapatite (HA) powder has been used widely not only in the bioceramics for hard tissue replacement but also in bioactive coatings of orthopaedic and dental implants. In this communication, we introduce a new hollow spherical HA powder with a thin shell structure (TS-HSHA powder) for the high-performance plasma-sprayed HA coating on the metallic implant. The TS-HSHA powder was prepared by the plasma process with a heat preservation zone around the flight particle. Scanning electron micrographs of the TS-HSHA powder showed that it exhibited a highly spherical morphology and a hollow structure with a shell enclosing a large central cavity. The mean size of the TS-HSHA powder is about 105.75 μm, and the mean shell thickness is only 3.11 μm. Furthermore, not only the formation mechanism of the TS-HSHA powder but also its comparison with the powder obtained by the plasma process without a heat preservation zone were also discussed.Hydroxyapatite [HA, Ca In this study, an effective method was developed to produce TS-HSHA powder, and the characteristics of the TS-HSHA powder were demonstrated. This kind of TS-HSHA powder provides a new alternative feedstock material for the plasma-sprayed HA coating. The agglomerated HA (AHA) powder prepared by a chemical precipitation and spray-drying method was used as the starting material. The plasma process is shown schematically in The morphology and microstructure of the powder were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6460LV, JEOL Ltd, Tokyo, Japan). The mean powder size, mean shell thickness, and their distributions were determined from scanning electron micrographs. The morphology, size, and size distribution of the HA powder varied with the preparation methods and process conditions.  Based on the above results, it is evidently noted that the existence of the heat preservation zone during the plasma process leads to the obvious changes of the morphology and microstructure of the HSHA powder, especially the significant reduction in the shell thickness. As a result, by using the heat preservation zone around the flight droplet after it flies away from the plasma flow, we can effectively produce the specific TS-HSHA (named HSHA-2 in this study) powder. The formation mechanism of the HS powders of ZrO The TS-HSHA powder was produced by the plasma process with a heat preservation zone. We developed clear relationships between the powder characteristics and specific process conditions (without or with the heat preservation zone during the plasma process). The TS-HSHA powder obtained with the heat preservation zone had a significantly less shell thickness, bigger powder size, narrower shell thickness distribution, higher powder melting degree and spheroidization efficiency than those of the HSHA powder obtained without the heat preservation zone. After the molten HA droplet flew away from the plasma flow, the heat preservation zone prevented the droplet from solidifying prematurely before it expanded sufficiently, and thus led to an obvious reduction in the shell thickness and an increase in the final powder size. This study is a beginning to develop a new and innovative HA powder material for the demanding and challenging requirement of the advanced plasma-sprayed HA coating. In future study, we will focus on the preparation and characteristics of the HA coating by plasma spraying with the TS-HSHA powder. This work was supported by the We thank Jesse Alan Steven Konrad (Trinity Western University, Canada) who proofread our manuscript and provided appropriate editing.