The gas dispersion properties of aqueous solutions of fatty acids of different hydrocarbon chain lengths were assessed through measurements of average bubble size and bubble size distributions. Two mechanisms of gas dispersion were identified depending on the pH and speciation of the tested solutions. Solutions of long chain fatty acids containing colloidal precipitates at low pH exhibited low surface tensions, and only a small decrease in bubble sizes was observed for such solutions compared to bubble sizes measured in water. This relatively small change in bubble sizes could theoretically be predicted based only on the corresponding change in the surface tension of the solutions. In contrast, true solutions of long chain fatty acids affected bubble sizes to a much greater extent even though their surface tension values were higher and in some cases comparable to the surface tension of water. A combination of the surface tension and surface tension gradient effects was found to be operative in this case. Experimental results on shorter chain fatty acids strongly suggested that the associated acid species were more surface-active and more capable of reducing bubble sizes than the dissociated carboxylate anion.Fatty acids and their alkali metal salts are primarily used as flotation collectors in the processing of non-sulfide minerals. The physicochemical properties of fatty acids as collectors are discussed in literature extensively (e.g., reviews by Gas dispersion into small bubbles and changes in gas bubble sizes as a function of surfactant concentration are most often explained by two main theories: the coalescence prevention theory ( The bubble break-up theory relies on the concept of the surface tension gradient. According to In our recent contribution ( The main objective of this study is to investigate in more detail the mechanisms through which fatty acids affect bubble sizes. Although the focus of the study is on weak electrolyte carboxylic acids, several sets of experiments were also performed using alkyl sulfates of the same chain length to more clearly delineate the role of electrolyte type in gas dispersion phenomena. The adsorption behavior of the tested surfactants at the gas–solution interface was systematically probed through surface tension measurements. Surface tension measurements were performed using a K11 Mk4 tensiometer with a display panel KB0803 from Krüss GmbH. The data were collected with the use of the Wilhelmy plate technique. In the Wilhelmy plate method, the tested surfactant solution is raised in a container until the contact between the solution surface and the plate is registered. Upon contact with the solution surface, the surface tension of the solution acts on the plate. This vertical force is detected by a force sensor; the surface or interfacial tension is calculated from the measured force and from the wetted length of the plate. The tension is calculated using the following equation: The gas dispersion abilities of the tested surfactants were determined through bubble size measurements using the same approach and methodology as described in our earlier work ( A superficial gas velocity, Extra dry air was supplied from a compressed gas cylinder. Air passed through three digital mass flow meters (ProStar PRS10FRC) with a maximum flow rate of 1000 From each test, a complete bubble size distribution was collected for several thousand bubbles, and the Sauter mean bubble diameter, The concept of the critical coalescence concentration (CCC) was introduced by From the above equation, Sodium oleate powder, (>82% fatty acids as oleic acid) (C Sodium laurate (dodecanoate), 98% pure (C Sodium dodecyl sulfate, 99% (C The sample preparation of these reagents were similar to that of sodium oleate. pH values were measured using Fisher Scientific Accumet Excel XL50 pH meter. The natural pH of each solution was measured at preparation; the pH was then adjusted to the desired value. Oleic acid is a long chain (C The equilibrium surface tension of sodium oleate solutions is presented in Equilibrium surface tension data for sodium oleate were reported by other authors ( For all the tested concentrations a minimum surface tension value can be observed. Also the curves shift towards lower surface tension values as the concentration increases and at the same time the minimum value on each curve shifts towards pH 9–10. According to At pH values around 4, increasing the total concentration of oleate increases only the amount of precipitates, and yet all the surface tension data for various oleate concentrations tend to converge on the same surface tension value of about 40 The surface tension of sodium oleate is illustrated as a function of concentration at constant pH in Comparing the surface tension values at a low total concentration of 10 At pH 6, a precipitate appears at a total oleate concentration of 5 Whenever a precipitate forms, the key question is whether the concentration of all the soluble species in solution is sufficient to induce micelle formation, or whether the surface tension is constant above the apparent CMC value because the concentration of all the soluble species does not change due to the presence of a precipitate. The data at pH 10 and 11 suggest that oleate forms micelles at a concentration of 10 Equilibrium surface tension data for 10 A precipitate does not form at 10 As the pH of solution increases and exceeds the pH of precipitation the precipitate disappears and the dissociated laurate anion becomes the dominant species in solution. At the same time, the surface tension values start increasing at intermediate laurate concentrations (6.5 At even higher total surfactant concentrations, the surface tension data go through a minimum in a very similar fashion to the behavior of sodium oleate. Assuming that this minimum results from the presence of dimeric species in oleic acid solutions ( A key set of results is shown in The results in In the case of hexanoate, concentrations lower than 10 The surface tension remains constant regardless of pH in such very dilute solutions. It should be noted that the solubility of hexanoic acid is very high (8.4 When the surface tension data for sodium hexanoate are presented as a function of concentration at a fixed pH value in Overall, the surface tension data show that undissociated acids are more surface-active at the gas–liquid interface compared to their dissociated anions. This enhanced surface activity of the acids can be explained by a higher ability of the acids to adsorb at the air–solution interface. In the case of surfactant anions, the dense adsorption of the anions at the gas–liquid interface is inhibited by lateral electrostatic repulsive forces and to some degree by the repulsive forces between the charged bubble and the anions. In contrast, electrostatic repulsion between the adsorbed associated acid molecules is insignificant and such uncharged molecules can more densely adsorb at the interface. According to the Gibbs equation, higher adsorption of uncharged molecules at the gas–liquid interface should result in lower surface tension. Equilibrium surface tension data for 2.3 It is noteworthy that the surface tension data for laurate are a strong function of pH, while the data for oleate relatively weakly change with pH – all the data for oleic acid range from 30 The Sauter mean bubble diameter in sodium oleate solutions, as a function of concentration and pH is presented in The natural pH varied quite widely at different concentrations of sodium oleate due to partial hydrolysis of the reagent. The resulting pH values are given next to the data symbols in At pH 10.4, at which sodium oleate is fully dissolved and dissociated in the whole concentration range, this reagent exhibits a strong ability to prevent bubble coalescence. At pH 6.5, all the results were obtained in the presence of a precipitate, so increasing the total surfactant concentration results in a gradual increase in the amount of the precipitate since the solution is saturated with respect to the soluble species. Even though the amount of precipitates increases, the average bubble size quickly stabilizes and does not seem to be affected further by increasing concentration of the precipitate. As soon as the concentration (2.3 When a large fraction of precipitates is present at 3.2 It should be noted that oleic acid solutions containing precipitates were characterized by low surface tension values ( Although the above equation is strictly applicable to calculating bubble sizes generated from a single capillary, the porous sparger system can be viewed as consisting of a large number of individual capillaries with some average diameter, This calculation shows that by reducing the surface tension from 72.5 Under conditions of precipitation of oleic acid, the surface tension seems to be primarily responsible for bubble size reduction since the amount of soluble species is insufficient to generate surface tension gradients or to prevent bubble coalescence. In the absence of precipitates at high pH, the concentration of oleate in solution is sufficiently high to induce gradients although the low surface tension is also a factor. The effect of addition of 0.01 Bubble size distributions for sodium oleate at different concentrations and at natural pH are demonstrated in Although it is difficult to identify which species are responsible for the low surface tension values in oleate solutions at pH 6.5, the validity of the earlier calculations of bubble sizes based solely on changes in the surface tension are further supported by the size and shape of the bubble size distributions shown in It can therefore be argued that oleate solutions at pH 6.5 primarily affect bubble sizes through changes in the surface tension – this mechanism produces only a small change (by about 20–30%) in bubble sizes. However, alkaline solutions of oleic acid appear to additionally reduce bubble sizes to very small values through the bubble break-up and coalescence prevention mechanisms. Gas dispersion studies on sodium laurate solutions provide further insight into the effect of different species on the interfacial properties of fatty acids. The Sauter mean bubble diameter of sodium laurate solutions is shown in At pH 4.5, a colloidal precipitate appears at a total lauric acid concentration of 2 At pH 10.4, when precipitates disappear and the system forms a true solution, there is a very strong effect of laurate anions on average bubble sizes especially at higher laurate concentrations. In the case of laurate solutions at high pH, the surface tension is high ( Since the p  For sodium laurate no sign of bimodality can be observed at pH 4.5 for a concentration of 1.6 Overall for sodium laurate, the strongest effect of concentration (understood as total concentration: all soluble species plus any precipitate) on the bubble size occurs at higher pH, when all lauric acid is in the form of soluble species. As soon as a precipitate appears in laurate solution, the average bubble size increases, the bubble size distribution becomes wider although it can still be characterized by a single dominant peak. In the case of sodium oleate the response is slightly different due to the lower solubility of the acid: when precipitates appear, the bubble size distribution becomes bimodal since the concentration of soluble species in equilibrium with the precipitate becomes too low to induce surface tension gradients and to disperse the bubbles into a narrowly sized population. Since no precipitate is forming in the case of sodium hexanoate in the tested concentration and pH ranges, the effect of ionic and molecular species on gas dispersion properties could be illustrated most clearly ( The Sauter mean bubble diameters in sodium hexanoate solutions are shown in The effect of MIBC, sodium hexanoate, laurate and oleate on the normalized bubble size and surface tension are compared in It could be observed that the behavior of sodium hexanoate and laurate solutions are very similar to MIBC in the sense that they affect bubble sizes at a concentration 100 times lower than the range at which surface tension is affected. While in the case of sodium oleate these two concentration ranges are much closer. All the bubble size data in The effect of pH on the surface tension of fatty acid solutions is related to changes in the speciation of fatty acids. For shorter chain (C The formation of colloidal precipitates under neutral and acidic pH conditions significantly reduced the gas dispersing power of the surfactants. The mechanism of gas dispersing action of fatty acids was a function of the hydrocarbon chain length of the surfactants. It was found that oleic acid, a long chain fatty acid, affected bubble sizes through two different mechanisms depending on the pH and speciation of the solution. Under conditions of extensive precipitation (low pH), oleic acid only weakly affected bubble sizes, and a small decrease in bubble sizes was observed at concentrations at which the surface tension of the solution was also substantially reduced. It was shown through theoretical calculations and through analysis of bubble size distributions that the measured bubble sizes under such conditions could accurately be predicted based solely on the corresponding surface tension value. For true solutions of oleic acid (high pH), for which the surface tension of the solution was also low, gas dispersion into smaller bubbles appeared to proceed through a combination of the surface tension effect and the surface tension gradients (the bubble break-up and coalescence prevention mechanisms). A similar trend was observed for lauric acid, although true solutions dominated by laurate anions at higher pH affected bubble sizes only through mechanisms involving surface tension gradients since the surface tension of the solution under those conditions was almost equal to the surface tension of water. In the case of lauric acid, due to its higher solubility compared to that of oleic acid, it was also possible to show that the associated acid species exhibited stronger gas dispersion properties than the laurate anion. The effect of speciation on the bubble size was most visible in the hexanoic acid–hexanoate system, with hexanoic acid clearly showing stronger gas dispersion capabilities than hexanoate. At the same time, the gas dispersing properties of hexanoic acid were almost the same as those of methyl isobutyl carbinol, an alcohol of the same chain length. Financial support from The authors would like to thank Mr. Aaron Hope for machining most of the parts of the gas dispersion column at UBC.