Advances in pipe transportation have contributed significantly to the application of cemented paste backfill (CPB). However, the pressure drop during pipe transportation with complex circuit shapes has not been fully investigated. Currently, research in the field is largely experiment-centered, where extensive test loop experiments need to be performed for a specific CPB material. By comparison, computational modeling of the pressure drop during pipe transportation through complex circuits is still in its infancy and is hindered by the challenges of technique availability and data scarcity. In this article, we present a framework for investigating and modeling the pressure drop of CPB during pipe transportation with complex circuit shapes. A test loop system was used to investigate the pressure drop of CPB under different influencing variables. Based on the experimental data, gradient boosting regression tree (GBRT) was utilized to develop a prediction model for the CPB pressure drop in the pipe loop. We first discussed the effect of solids content, cement–tailings ratio, inlet pressure, and circuit shape on the CPB pressure drop. The feasibility of GBRT modeling was demonstrated by comparing the predicted pressure drop with the experimental result on both the training and testing sets. We also investigated the relative importance of influencing variables on the pressure drop of CPB. Harnessing such a modeling approach extends recent efforts to determine the pressure drop during CPB pipe transportation and can significantly accelerate the application of CPB in the future.Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is a mine composite material produced using powder tailings, a hydraulic binder, and mixing water. It is introduced in the mining industry for the safe disposal of a large amount of tailings after the extraction of valuable minerals. CPB eliminates the need for constructing tailing dams at the surface, enabling the waste tailings to be effectively used to fill underground voids. Furthermore, this method provides secondary ground support for mining operations, minimizes mining-induced surface subsidence, and enables a greater ore recovery. All these technical, economic, and environmental benefits have led to the wide application of CPB [ To accelerate the efficiency of mining operations, the preparation of CPB is usually performed at the mine surface. Accordingly, the transportation of fresh CPB from the surface plant to the underground voids needs to be properly designed. Among all available transport methods, the hydraulic transport of CPB through pipes is being increasingly used in the mining industry owing to its year-round availability, low technical maintenance, and being environmentally friendly [ The pressure drop during pipe transportation can be well studied through test loop systems, which have been successfully used in slurry transportation investigations [ Ideally, a test loop system should be utilized for every CPB material to examine the pressure drop of fresh CPB and determine the optimum pumping pressure. However, test loop experiments are often costly and cumbersome, slowing down the research and application process. Thus, a flow model that can be used to predict the pressure drop has always been a hot issue in pipe transportation study. For example, Kumar et al. [ In this work, a test loop system was used to investigate the pressure drop of CPB under the influence of solids content, cement–tailings ratio, inlet pressure, and circuit shape. A computational framework was then developed in which the gradient boosting regression tree (GBRT) was used to learn the relationship between the pressure drop and its influencing variables. We also explored the relative importance of the influencing variables in order to provide suggestions for engineering application of CPB pipe transportation. This work paves the way for transporting CPB using pipes and signifies a fundamental change in the process of CPB pipe transportation by teaming researchers and practitioners with GBRT modeling for a reliable prediction of the pressure drop. The test loop system used in this study is shown in Mixer to maintain the CPB at homogeneous state. Pump to circulate the CPB in the test loop system. Test pipes to flow the CPB. Pressure sensors to measure the CPB pressure drop during pipe transportation. Accessories, such as seamless steel tube, to connect the entire test loop system.    Pressure sensors are of the type of Multi System 5060, which enables real-time measurement of the pressure from multiple points. The pressures at different points, P In the test loop system, the fresh CPB leaves the mixer at a predetermined inlet velocity generated by the pump. Then, it enters the vertical upward pipe (P1–P2 in Owing to the influence of shear thinning of the CPB slurry on its rheological behavior [ The materials used for the preparation of CPB included tailings, binders, and water. The tailings used in this study were provided by Sanshandao Gold Mine (Shandong, China), with the physical and chemical characteristics of tailings being analyzed in Central South University (Hunan, China). Specifically, the particle size distribution (PSD) was measured using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer 2000) and the X-ray diffraction (XRD) was determined using a Bruker AXS D8 Advance diffractometer ( In this study, Portland cement (No. 325) was used as the binding agent and tap water was used for mixing. Note that No. 325 cement meets the requirement of Chinese National Standard GB 175-2007. The objective of this study is to determine the CPB pressure drop during pipe transportation under the influence of solids content, cement–tailings ratio, inlet pressure, and circuit shape. In order to determine the appropriate experimental scenarios, rheological and slump tests were performed as suggested in the literature [ A static orthogonal slump test was conducted for 72.0%, 74.0%, and 76.0% solids content and 0.2, 0.1, and 0.067 cement–tailings ratios to measure the consistency of fresh CPB. The results ( Finally, the solids contents were determined to be 72.0%, 74.0%, and 76.0% and the cement–tailings ratios were selected to be 0.2, 0.1, and 0.067. For each combination of solids content and cement–tailings ratio, three inlet velocity values were used, and the pressure drop in different parts of the test loop were recorded. Therefore, the pressure drop is influenced by four independent variables, namely solids content, cement–tailings ratio, inlet velocity, and circuit shape. In this study, GBRT was used for the relationship modeling between the CPB pressure drop and its influencing variables. GBRT is a relatively new AI technique for building predictive regression models without pre-assumptions between inputs and outputs. It is suitable for modeling nonlinear relationships, and the standard implementation of GBRT has been well established. The performance of GBRT has been demonstrated to be more effective than other AI techniques, such as artificial neural networks, in several civil engineering problems [ A fundamental difference between conventional regression techniques and GBRT is that GBRT aims to improve the regression performance of a single model by combining many fitted models. Therefore, two algorithms are used in GBRT, namely decision tree (DT) and gradient boosting. DT is used as a single regression model while gradient boosting is a general meta-learning algorithm for combining single DT models. A DT is a non-parametric technique that uses a tree-like graph for assisting decisions. The main idea behind DT during relationship modeling is dividing the initial dataset into subgroups. The characteristics of samples in each subgroup are as homogeneous as possible, while those from different subgroups are as heterogeneous as possible. Therefore, the training of a DT is mainly on dataset partitioning, which aims to find homogeneous subgroups through minimization algorithms [  Gradient boosting is a meta-learning algorithm that combines single models for improving the predictive performance. In boosting, single models are iteratively fitted to the training data to gradually improve the model's performance on samples that have not been accurately predicted. Gradient boosting has been widely used in AI fields as finding and averaging many single models is believed to be easier than finding a single, highly accurate model [ For regression problems, gradient boosting starts from the definition of a differentiable loss function. The entire process of gradient boosting is centered at minimizing this loss function through the addition of DTs. The loss function of residuals from existing DTs is maximally reduced through the addition of succeeding DTs and all existing DTs remain unchanged afterward. The final GBRT model is a combination of all DTs built during the gradient boosting process, which has shown better robustness and accuracy than a single DT in many datasets [ The results and discussion start with the test loop experiments, which measured the pressure drop under the influence of solids content, cement–tailings ratio, inlet pressure, and circuit shape. The influence of each variable is discussed and compared with the results in the literature. The modeling performance of GBRT is then presented and its verification is carried out using performance measures and external validation measures. Finally, the relative importance of the influencing variables is investigated and discussed for a better understanding of the pressure drop during CPB pipe transportation.  For the influence of solids content, it is observed that the pressure drop increased with increasing solids content for any combination of cement–tailings ratio and inlet velocity. For example, the CPB pressure drop for the horizontal straight pipe was 2.31 MPa/km when the solids content was 71.87% (cement–tailings ratio = 0.2 and inlet velocity ≈ 0.8 m/s), which was increased to 2.60 MPa/km and 3.06 MPa/km respectively when the solids content was increased to 73.49% and 75.56%. This is caused by the decrease in water content with the increase in solids content. The water acts as a lubricant, which facilitates the transportation of fresh CPB. Furthermore, increasing the solids content produces a fresh CPB with a higher Bingham plastic viscosity [ It can also be observed that decreasing the cement–tailings ratio decreased the pressure drop. As decreasing the cement–tailings ratio is equivalent to reducing the cement content, the pressure drop thus correlated positively with the cement content. This is because the cement chemically reacts with water to produce hydration products (e.g., calcium silicate hydrate or C-S-H, calcite, and Portlandite). During the hydration process, tailings particles are bonded to produce larger aggregates, which will affect the fluidity and transportability of the fresh CPB. Furthermore, the water content decreases during cement hydration, which could also increase the pressure drop. As a result, a decrease in cement–tailings ratio is associated with a decrease in pressure drop, which agrees with the findings by Wu et al. [ As expected, the pressure drop increased with increasing inlet velocity. Taking the pressure drop of the horizontal straight pipe with 0.2 cement–tailings ratio and 75.56% solids content as an example, the pressure drop was increased from 3.06 MPa/km to 4.32 MPa/km when the inlet velocity was increased from 0.764 m/s to 1.381 m/s. This is because the pressure drop is produced mainly by the mechanical friction between the test pipes and the transported CPB. The relatively high value of inlet velocity resulted in a relatively high value of slip velocity between particle–particle and particle–pipe, leading to a significant increase in interactions and collisions [ The influence of circuit shape on the pressure drop is illustrated in  Having obtained the experimental data from the test loop system, we now explore the feasibility of GBRT in modeling the relationship between the pressure drop and its influencing variables. As discussed before, four influencing variables were considered in this study, namely solids content, cement–tailings ratio, inlet velocity, and circuit shape. One-hot encoding was used to deal with the categorized value in circuit shape, which is shown in  Hyper-parameters tuning is of great significance for the predictive performance of GBRT. A different set of hyper-parameters will produce a GBRT model with diverse predictive performance. In this study, an intelligent optimization algorithm, namely the firefly algorithm (FA), was used for the GBRT hyper-parameters tuning. The loss function, number of boosting stages, maximum depth of estimators, minimum node splitting number, and leaf node minimum sample were determined to be deviant, 49, 1, 4, and 6 respectively for pressure drop modeling after the hyper-parameters tuning. Detailed introduction on the definition of hyper-parameters, their corresponding ranges, and the tuning process can be found in [  A performance verification was further conducted using the correlation coefficient ( A sensitivity study of influencing variables was performed for a better understanding of the pressure drop during CPB pipe transport. The relative importance score was used to interpret the importance of the influencing variables. In a single DT, the relative importance score of one influencing variable was calculated by the sum of squared improvements at all splits determined by this particular variable [ It can be observed that circuit shape was the most sensitive influencing variable for the CPB pressure drop and its importance score was 0.398. Note that the pressure drop predicted here was the total pressure drop, which included the frictional pressure drop and the hydrostatic pressure difference. It is very easy to understand this variable scoring as distinctive differences were observed on different parts of the test loop system ( The primary strength of this study is experimentally investigating the pressure drop during CPB pipe transportation with complex circuit and introducing the GBRT technique for the pressure drop modeling. Apart from the discussion of the experimental results, the proposed modeling method is expected to aid pipe transportation in a) supporting pipe design by estimating the pressure drop of a piping system, especially with complex circuits, prior to construction, b) reducing the number of test loop experiments for time and cost savings, c) identifying potential pipe blockage, and d) optimizing the inlet velocity of fresh CPB to save energy and avoid pipe wearing. Although the experiments and the proposed modeling method have been developed for fresh CPB, they have great potential for wider applications in the rest of slurry pipe transportation, because the pressure drop problem is also widely encountered in other fields of slurry transportation. The ignorance of separating the frictional pressure drop and the hydrostatic pressure difference is a clear limitation of the present study. Another limitation is that only one type of tailings was studied owing to the high cost of test loop experiments. The influence of the chemical and physical characteristics of tailings on the pressure drop of CPB can be studied when test loop experiments are performed on several types of tailings. A final limitation is that other influencing variables of the CPB pressure drop, such as the elbow radius, were not investigated. The following conclusions can be obtained based on the current study: The test loop experiments show that the pressure drop had a positive correlation with the solids content, cement–tailings ratio, and inlet velocity. The pressure drop was also significantly influenced by circuit shape and the maximum pressure drop was observed in the vertical upward pipes. The GBRT technique has great potential for pressure drop modeling. The optimum GBRT model achieved a 0.999 and 0.998 correlation coefficient between the experimental and predicted pressure drop on the training set and testing set respectively. By verifying the predictive performance of the optimum GBRT model using the external validation methods, the capability of the GBRT technique in modeling the pressure drop was further proved. Circuit shape was the most sensitive influencing variable for the pressure drop with an importance score of 0.398. It is followed by solids content (0.393), inlet velocity (0.124), and cement–tailings ratio (0.084). The combination of loop test experiments and GBRT modeling provides an effective approach for analyzing and predicting the pressure drop, which is of great significance in engineering applications of pipe transportations. For future work, different types of tailings should be tested as the fresh CPB produced with different tailings will have diverse rheological properties. The main objective of experimental and modeling studies is to propose a widely applicable modeling approach for the pressure drop. It is believed that such a modeling approach can provide researchers and practitioners with a reliable and cost-effective way of analyzing the pressure drop during engineering applications. In addition, more influencing variables for the pressure drop and the feasibility of other advanced AI techniques should be investigated. This study was financially supported by the None.