Optimum fragmentation of rocks during blasting is pivotal for the productivity of mining and civil engineering systems. Extensive studies on the ubiquitous fragmentation phenomena in nature and artificial processes have attested to the dominant control of the effective dimensionality and material brittleness on the size distribution of fragments. In this study, by further demonstrating that the impact of brittleness on fragmentation is physically inherent in the material dimension, we present new mechanistic insights into the blast-induced rock fragmentation via integrated analytical modelling, finite element simulation and image processing. A continuous-surface viscoplastic cap model was first calibrated step-by-step against rock behavior in different pressure and strain-rate regimes on various scales. Then, rock blasting was simulated under various bench dimensions and the fracture patterns were image-processed to provide quantitative insights into blast fragmentation. Our findings suggest that the fragments become smaller and rounder while their size distribution becomes more uniform as the rock dimensions decrease. We demonstrated that at smaller rock dimensions, the equivalent increase in energy density and suppression of pressure-induced ductility can conspire to assist crack bifurcation and thus create successively finer fragments towards the unbreakable limit. We also identified significant correlations between the fragment aspect ratio and its size and uniformity of distribution, highlighting the potential use of fragment shape as an indicator for evaluating blasting performance alongside conventional grading analysis.Drilling and blasting represent the most extensively used method for rock breakage in the mining industry. Rock fragmentation by blasting is the first step in the overall comminution process towards delivering marketable products. As the most energy-efficient stage of the mineral production system, generating fragments with an ideal size distribution via blasting is pivotal for improving the efficiency of all downstream processes and thus the total revenue as per the mine-to-mill concept ( Extensive experimental ( The influence of object dimension on the fragment size distribution (FSD) is intertwined with the apparent dependence of the scaling exponent on the impact energy. Specifically, lower loading intensity tends to generate a 2D cracking pattern, whereas higher impact energy induces disordered cracking that is more space-filling in the 3D bulk of the material ( The dependence of the scaling exponent on the material brittleness originates from the distinct mechanisms of fracture network development. During rapid local energy deposition, the weakly dissipative nucleation of fractures is inefficient with respect to converting the deposited energy into surface energy. Therefore, the extension of nucleated cracks would be unstable against bifurcation, and hence side branches are emitted on successively finer scales to dissipate the impact energy ( Notably, pure power-law distributions are identified quite infrequently. They emerge only when the object exhibits sufficient fragility under the dynamic loading that can facilitate pervasive crack branching and when the impact energy is uniformly distributed ( It is thus clear that in rock blasting where the impact energy is non-uniformly deposited on objects of certain brittleness, the fine fragments produced in the crushed zone by self-affine branching and merging could display a rather stable power-law distribution during intense local energy deposition. However, the exponential distribution of coarse fragments created in the fractured zone is conspicuously influenced by the interplay between the object dimensions and loading conditions as well as rock fragility ( Compared to the insurmountable difficulties associated with real-time field measurements, numerical modelling exhibits clear superiority and has proved exceptionally insightful in delineating the processes of blast-induced rock breakage. Nevertheless, although the influence of some controllable design factors on dynamic fragmentation has been studied ( In this paper, a succinct description of the constitutive framework employed is first presented in The CSCM model (MAT 159) in the finite element software package ANSYS/LS-DYNA ( The yield surface of the CSCM model is obtained by a smooth connection between the shear envelope The shear failure surface The cap function These parameters dictating the initial location and shape of the cap envelope can be determined by the yield stresses of the ductile regime in the stress invariant space. With an increasing deviatoric stress in the ductile regime, a porous rock ultimately yields by shear-enhanced compaction and work hardens as pore collapse and grain crushing take place ( The CSCM model characterizes the deterioration of rock properties during complex loading paths with the following formulation to transform the stress tensor without damage ( A modified Duvaut-Lions type of viscoplasticity is incorporated into the CSCM model to characterize the rate dependence of dynamic rock behavior: To simulate the development of fractures in the computational domain, the element erosion technique is employed in this study by using the keyword MAT_ADD_EROSION in ANSYS/LS-DYNA. Although various numerical schemes are available for tracking the ongoing separation of material surfaces in finite element analyses, this approach has been demonstrated to be fairly reliable and accurate upon coupling with a rational damage criterion ( In this study, the determination of the CSCM model parameters is performed with respect to Indiana limestone. This fossiliferous limestone consists of clasts (fossil fragments and ooids) and calcite cement, and the specimen considered has a porosity of approximately 15%. This limestone exhibits brittle-ductile transition at pressures readily accessible in the laboratory, and it has also been the subject of extensive studies over a wide range of loading rates and scales. This allows the parameters of the CSCM model to be determined in a hierarchical manner as elucidated in this section. The parameters responsible for the quasi-static behavior of the rock are first determined based on the rock response in the brittle and ductile regimes during conventional hydrostatic and triaxial compression tests ( Hydrostatic compression tests were performed by  The quasi-static triaxial compression tests are simulated in this study with equivalent cylindrical samples in ANSYS/LS-DYNA. After turning off rate effects, the simulation of triaxial compression consists of two steps. A certain level of hydrostatic pressure is gradually applied at first, and then the (deviatoric) axial stress is increased by controlling the axial displacement while preserving the lateral confinement. The model parameters are determined according to the procedure described in The stress–strain curves during triaxial compression reproduced by the model are compared with the experimental data in Therefore, by determining the parameters of the CSCM model using the proposed procedure, the constitutive framework is able to properly replicate the quasi-static behavior of Indiana limestone in different pressure regimes across the brittle-ductile transition. Apart from the effect of confining pressure, it is well-known that the rock behavior is significantly influenced by the loading rate. A rational description of this rate dependence is thus crucial for a reliable characterization of rock response during dynamic loading. The SHPB tests conducted by A schematic illustration of the SHPB system developed by To reproduce the SHPB tests, the far end of the transmission bar is fixed in the simulation while the incident bar can deform along the direction of impact. The load transfers between the specimen and steel bars by using the keyword CONTACT_AUTOMATIC_SURFACE_TO _SURFACE in ANSYS/LS-DYNA ( The model parameters controlling the rate dependence of the material determined from the SHPB tests are listed in The simulated stress–strain behavior of Indiana limestone under different loading rates and confinement conditions is compared with the experimental measurements in To verify the validity of the CSCM model calibrated using the proposed procedure for parameter determination, the model is applied to simulate a large-scale explosion test performed in Indiana limestone ( To prevent calculation difficulties due to mesh distortion resulting from the large deformation associated with rock blasting, the arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian method is employed in this study to permit the mesh to move independently of the material flow ( The numerical model used for simulating the field explosion experiment is shown in The blasting test performed by The numerical model has the same geometry as the tested sample and is discretized by uniform eight-node hexahedral elements with a size of 2 × 2 × 2 mm. The constitutive behavior of the limestone subject to explosive loading is characterized by the calibrated CSCM model, and the parameters for the PETN charge are listed in To delineate the development of fracture network, the extensively-used element erosion approach is employed in this study. It should be noted that selecting proper erosion criteria is crucial to reproducing realistic crack patterns. In addition, neither a low nor high erosion limit is conducive to the simulations because the former would distort the stress wave propagation with excessive element erosion while the latter could lead to computation overflow and thus interrupt the calculations ( To quantify the blast-induced rock fragmentation, the geometric details of the fragments generated using the current numerical approach are identified using the image-processing package ImageJ ( The blast-induced fracture patterns obtained by the numerical simulation and experimental test are presented in It can thus be concluded that the calibrated CSCM model and the selected erosion criteria are able to reasonably reflect the fracture development during rock blasting. The model is thus applied to investigate the blast-induced rock fragmentation in the following sections. Before delving into the investigation of blast-induced rock fragmentation via large-scale numerical simulations, it is convenient at this point to simply illustrate the effect of brittleness and dimensionality on dynamic rock behavior from an analytical standpoint. Considering the classic initial-boundary value problem of (planar) elastic wave propagation from a cylindrical charge ( Given an infinitesimal bench height (i.e., the plane-stress condition), the out-of-plane stress vanishes ( The greater hydrostatic confinement in the plane-strain condition can thus impede the bifurcation of nucleated fractures upon dynamic loading as the rock behavior becomes macroscopically more ductile ( It can thus be concluded that the effect of rock brittleness/ductility on dynamic fragmentation is physically inherent in the influence of rock dimension, and changes in the rock geometry could significantly affect the patterns of crack development. Hence, the influence of rock fragility and the inextricable impact of bench dimension and explosive energy that control blast fragmentation are explored in this study by incrementally changing the model geometry. The resulting scale dependence of rock fragmentation is systematically examined in the following sections. A three-blasthole bench model is employed in this study as presented in The rock response during explosive loading is characterized by the CSCM model calibrated in a step-by-step manner in the previous section. The explosive material considered in the simulations is TNT, and no coupling media or delayed ignitions are used in order to ensure the bench dimension as the singular variable in the examination. The blasthole diameter is 150 mm and the model parameters for explosives are listed in The element erosion criteria used in this section are consistent with The fragment size identified by image-processing is then characterized using the following three-parameter generalized extreme value (GEV) distribution, which has been found to be suitable for the fragmentation of rock materials ( By incrementally changing the size of burden to 1, 2, 3, and 4 m in the simulation while fixing the blasthole spacing and bench height at 3 and 12 m, representative, 3D and 2D cracking patterns of the bench after blasting are illustrated in  The origin of the observed changes in fragment size with respect to the bench dimension is twofold. On the one hand, it is intuitive that the explosive energy per unit rock volume decreases when the burden is enlarged, and hence fewer inherent flaws need to be activated to dissipate the explosive energy via the creation of new surfaces (i.e., less damage and strain are induced). Therefore, the cascade crack branching associated with pervasive damage and persistent straining is inhibited as the energy density decreases, increasing the potential for the formation of larger fragments ( On the other hand, as discussed in Notably, the finest particle that can be created during fragmentation of a particular rock is dictated by the specific breakage technique ( Moreover, the multi-fractal nature of crack development implies that the resulting fragment shape could also be a reflection of the operative breakage mechanisms. Specifically, finer fragments generated during more intensive energy deposition are more rounded, whereas the coarser particles associated with less violent impact tend to be more elongated ( The influence of spacing on rock fragmentation is examined in this study by varying the distance between each blasthole from 1 to 4 m while maintaining the burden and bench height at 2 and 12 m, respectively. The representative cracking patterns after bench blasting are presented in The resulting CF distributions of fragments fitted using the GEV function are presented in Similar to the previous discussion, the reduction of particle size with decreasing spacing can be attributed to the equivalent increase in energy density and the decrease in accessible hydrostatic stress upon yielding. Therefore, the potential for crack branching increases as spacing decreases, which in turn facilitates the formation of finer particles. Consequently, the range of the FSD becomes narrower and the aspect ratio increases as the particle size approaches the finite penetration depth of cracks (i.e., the unbreakable limit). The characteristics of rock fragmentation resulting from four different bench heights (i.e., 3, 6, 9, and 12 m) are examined in this section. While fixing the burden and blasthole spacing at 2 and 3 m, respectively, the length of the explosive cartridge (and that of the stemming material) is also changed in proportion to the varying bench height. The representative development of fractures after blasting is illustrated in The CF distributions of fragments fitted using the GEV function are presented in Therefore, the observed evolution in fragment geometry against the bench height is attributable exclusively to the changes in the brittle/ductile behavior of the rock with respect to the rock dimension. To be more specific, as the bench height increases, the dynamic stress trajectory can extend further into the ductile regime owing to the confinement effect ( Our study has demonstrated that the fragment size (and shape) and the FSD range respond similarly to changes in the bench size (i.e., burden, spacing, or bench height), irrespective of the underlying mechanism(s) in operation. However, as shown in The higher sensitivity of blast fragmentation to the size of burden is probably attributable to the particular geometry of the bench model established in this study. Being the smallest dimension of the bench, the reduction of burden can suppress the confinement effect more effectively and result in a more drastic decrease in the bench volume and thus a more substantial increase in the explosive energy density. The relationships between the fragment aspect ratio and parameters In this study, we have presented a systematic examination of blast-induced rock fragmentation by integrating analytical modelling, finite element simulation and image processing. By demonstrating that the influence of brittleness on fragmentation is physically inherent in the effect of object dimension, we explored the dominant impact of rock fragility and effective dimensionality on the fragment size distribution via sequential changes in the model geometry. The continuous-surface viscoplastic cap model employed in this study was first validated against multi-scale measurements of Indiana limestone behavior in different pressure and strain-rate regimes. Then, rock blasting under various bench dimensions was simulated using the model in ANSYS/LS-DYNA, and the resulting breakage patterns were image-processed using ImageJ to render size distributions of fragments. Our findings have revealed that as the rock dimension decreases, the rock fragments become smaller and rounder (i.e., the aspect ratio increases), while the range of the particle size distribution becomes narrower. Rock fragmentation was found to be more sensitive to the change in the bench dimension perpendicular to the bank face, which is the smallest dimension of the bench model established. The observed size effects in fragmentation are believed to originate from the increased explosive energy density and suppressed pressure-induced ductility upon reducing the rock dimension. Both factors can promote the cascade branching of side cracks, leading to creation of successively finer fragments towards the unbreakable limit. The strong correlation between fragment aspect ratio and particle size distribution highlighted the potential of fragment shape as a valuable indicator for assessing the blast design performance alongside conventional grading analysis.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the