Particle fragmentation results in a fractal distribution of progeny fragments. Based on the fractal distribution, a statistical approach is proposed to interpret the scaling characteristics in tensile strength of brittle particles. It is found that the relationship between the cumulative survival probability of the particles and the tensile strength follows the Weibull distribution reasonably well. The Weibull statistical theory was commonly applied to calculate the size effect on tensile strength observed in brittle particles. The scaling law between the tensile strength and the particle size is a connector between the fractal distribution and the Weibull statistical theory. The Weibull modulus (m) can be calculated from the fractal dimension (D) of the particle size distribution, as m
                     =
                     D
                     /(3−
                     D). It is extensively verified by uniaxial compression experiments on rock particles.Rock particles forming part of engineering structures such as embankments, rock fills, pile foundations, and pavements are subjected to static and dynamic loads Large particles will have high co-ordination numbers: the loads on such particles will be well-distributed and the induced tensile stresses will be small due to the protection of many neighbors where Particle fragmentation takes place when a particle is subjected to a tensile stress greater than its tensile strength The tensile strength distributions of several brittle particles are found to follow the Weibull distribution By treating the particle crushing as a first-order kinetic process, the population balance model is referred as a simple mass balance for the size reduction where The power-law form of the particle crushing rate, Frances Austin et al. The cumulative mass of the brittle particles with the radius larger than where Baron and Sirotyuk Since the concept of scaling is linked to fractal geometry through scaling laws, it is necessary to answer the question about a possible size effect as a result of fractal geometry. It is widely accepted that the failure of spherical particles compressed diametrically is in fact a tensile failure where where The intrinsic tensile strength of particles will be constant and does not vary with the particle diameter. The apparent tensile strength and the ultimate fracture force are related to the particle diameter, and are given by where where According to Eqs. where where   Yashima et al. The fractal dimensions of the particle size distribution got from the exponent of The model for the particle fragmentation is popularly based on the Weibull statistics of fractures where Substituting Eq. The number of particles in an aggregate in a Euclidean space is given by where Eq. For a fractal aggregate, the number of particles in an aggregate varies with the particle diameter according to the following expression Substituting Eq. If the tensile strength is defined as a tensile stress at a standard probability of survival for various batches of particles with diameter where Combining Eq. McDowell Size effect on the tensile strength of Leighton Buzzard sand is shown in  The probability of survival is calculated from Eq. The exponents of the size effect on tensile strength and the Weibull modulus are related to only one parameter, the fractal dimension of the particle size distribution. The fractal dimension, determined from the particle size distribution of particle fragmentation, can be used to predict the scaling behavior of the tensile strength and the ultimate fracture force. Vice versa, the fractal dimension can be determined from the size effect on the tensile strength and the ultimate fracture force. The fractal dimension determined from the fitting of the size effect on the tensile strength and the ultimate fracture force can be used to calculate the Weibull modulus and the probability of survival. Nakata et al. The fractal dimension calculated from the fitting of the size effect on tensile strength of silica sand is used to calculate the Weibull modulus using Eq. Lobo-Guerrero and Vallejo Brzesowsky et al. Fractal approach leads to the formation used to describe the mass distribution of particles resulting from the fragmentation of a single particle. Scaling law of the tensile strength for a single particle is derived from the fractal formation of the particle size distribution. Scaling law of the tensile strength plays a bridge between the fractal fragmentation of particles and the Weibull statistical theory. The Weibull modulus is calculated from the fractal dimension of the particle size distribution. Extensive experimental data of the tensile strength and survival probability are used to validated the Weibull modulus calculated using the fractal dimension. The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to the