The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of biogas slurry derived from straw-rich farmyard manure on the soil microbial biomass, on the mineralization in the field and on the related crop yield. The experiment was carried out in the following four treatments: (1) fallow, (2) fallow+biogas slurry, (3) spring barley, and (4) spring barley+biogas slurry. The CO2 evolution rate ranged between 15 and 120mgCm−2
                     h−1 in both fallow treatments and showed a significant exponential relationship with the soil temperature at 5cm depth. According to the extrapolation of the CO2 evolution rates into amounts per hectare, approximately 200kgCha−1 or 27% of the biogas slurry derived C were mineralized to CO2 during a 50 days’ period to 18 June in the fallow treatment with biogas slurry. An additional amount of up to 29.5kg inorganic Nha−1 could be calculated as the sum of NH4-N already present in biogas slurry at the time of amendment and from the amount of biogas slurry mineralized in the soil to NO3-N. A good agreement between measured and modelled stocks of inorganic N at 0–60cm depth was obtained after having five-fold increased soil organic C turnover compared to the default values of the model DNDC. The mineralization data are in line with an amount of up to 21kgha−1 more N transferred by the barley plants to their aboveground biomass in biogas slurry treatment. The N not accounted for by the aboveground plant biomass could be explained by the belowground plant-derived N. CO2 evolution from the soil surface, inorganic N content at 0–60cm depth and N transfer into barley aboveground biomass lead apparently to similar results after the application of biogas slurry. The soil ATP content after harvest of the barley was significantly larger in the two treatments with biogas slurry, especially in the fallow treatment indicating a positive effect on the soil microbial community.Agricultural biogas plants have become increasingly attractive, not only for German farmers ( Knowledge about the effects of biogas slurry on C and N mineralization processes in soil, and also on the soil microbial biomass is essential for predicting the N release to crops ( The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of biogas slurry derived from straw-rich farmyard manure on the soil microbial biomass, on the mineralization in the field and on the related crop yield. The mineralization of the biogas slurry was monitored by the CO The experiment was carried out at the 460 The experiment was carried out using a non-randomized split-plot design in the following four treatments: (1) fallow, (2) fallow From 21 March to 18 June, CO In the fallow treatments, nitrogen mineralization was measured approximately once a week from 21 March to 18 June at 0–30 and 30–60 Samples for adenylate determination as indicators for microbial biomass were taken with an Edelmann soil corer with 7 The effects of biogas slurry on CO N dynamics in the field were modelled using DNDC (version 92). The model is described in detail by At first, a model calibration had to be carried out, because the default values of the fraction of resistant litter, humads (active humus) and humus (0.01, 0.053 and 0.937) resulted without any modification of the decomposition rates in very small stocks of inorganic N in the treatment without biogas addition (data not shown). Calibration was done by modifying the soil organic carbon fractions, their decomposition rates and the initial nitrate concentration in the surface soil. An optimum model efficiency EF ( The prediction was carried out for the fallow treatment with biogas slurry addition. The addition was modelled as an addition of NH The mean soil temperature of the fallow treatment at 5 The CO In the fallow treatments, 28 A good agreement between measured and modelled stocks of inorganic N at 0–60 The amounts of aboveground barley biomass and also biomass N were always significantly larger in the treatment with biogas slurry than in the treatment without biogas slurry, regardless of harvest day ( The soil ATP content at 0–10 Approximately, 200 The CO The biogas slurry ration contained 15.8 An additional amount of up to 29.5 The application of biogas slurry led to significantly higher contents of soil ATP, i.e. microbial biomass in the fallow treatment, but not in the barley treatment. C-input by roots, rhizodeposition and biogas slurry all have a positive effect on the maintenance of the soil microbial community in contrast to the plant free fallow treatment. Positive effects on ATP after biogas slurry application are in accordance with the incubation experiment of The different approaches in estimating the mineralization of biogas slurry lead to similar results: (1) CO We would like to thank Dr. Friedhelm Feindt, Gut Sambach, for providing the experimental site as well as for preparation of the seedbed, sowing, and slurry application. We would also like to thank Gabriele Dormann and Katja Grunz for skilled technical assistance, numerous students for sampling, Mick Locke for carefully correcting our English.