Platinum content of two commercial spent reforming catalysts were extracted in aqua-regia solutions under atmospheric pressure and at temperatures up to 100 °C. Three factors, including presence of coke, catalyst particle size, and impeller agitation speed were first tested to study the relative importance of mass-transfer resistances during Pt extraction reaction. Catalyst particle sizes <100 µm and agitation speeds >700 rpm eliminated the internal and external mass-transfer resistances, respectively. The effect of other factors, including HNO3-to-HCl volume ratio, liquid-to-solid mass ratio, and the reaction temperature on the extraction rate of platinum were then examined. Pt extraction rate was significantly increased by increasing liquid-to-solid mass ratio and the reaction temperature. Kinetic modeling using power-law rate equation for Pt extraction revealed that increasing liquid-to-solid mass ratio increases the acid concentration, as a major reactant. This quantitatively accounted for the increased Pt extraction rate. The effect of temperature on Pt extraction kinetics was studied using the Arrhenius equation. The activation energy for the platinum surface dissolution reaction was calculated as 72.1 kJ/mol. This large value indicates that Pt extraction in aqua-regia solution is controlled by surface chemical reaction. The reaction order was 1.5 for Pt concentration in solid and 1.3 for the hydrogen ion molarity in solution.Pt/alumina catalyst is widely used in refining and petrochemical industries for the catalytic reforming process. In this process, the low octane naphtha is upgraded to higher octane aromatic hydrocarbons. Usually rhenium is also added to these catalysts to improve its activity, selectivity and stability ( In this work, we experimentally studied the effects of various parameters on Pt extraction kinetics and maximum platinum recovery. Furthermore, aluminum extraction from the catalyst matrix was also measured. Finally, a variety of reaction kinetic models were considered for the obtained Pt extraction data. Two types of spent naphtha reforming catalysts were supplied by a petroleum refinery. The chemical compositions of the catalysts were obtained by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis. The platinum content was also verified by wet chemical analysis through long-term hot aqua-regia total dissolution and atomic absorption spectroscopy. Phase identification of the catalysts was performed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The two types of the catalysts were separately ground, dried and screened into two different sizes, in order to examine the possible effect of particle size on the observed extraction kinetics. To investigate the effect of decoking on Pt leachability, some of the fine-ground used catalyst sample was decoked by heating in a furnace at 600 °C for 4 h. The coke contents of the “as received” and “decoked” catalysts were measured by Leco analysis. Aqua regia was freshly prepared by mixing concentrated hydrochloric acid (37%) and concentrated nitric acid (65%) at a volume ratio of 3 HCl:1 HNO The batch reactor used in this work was a 1 liter glass container equipped with a thermometer, a mechanical turbine-type stirrer and a reflux condenser. The condenser was used to recover and send back to the reactor as much vapor as possible. Any escaped gases (such as Cl2, NOCl, HCl, and NO For each run, 600 cm The main chemical compositions of the two different types of spent catalysts, as determined by XRF and wet chemical analysis for Pt, are shown in The experimental conditions and the code name of the performed leaching tests are reported in It is believed ( Dissolution of Pt from the catalyst is a redox reaction that undergoes according to Reaction [III]: As Reaction [IV] shows, aluminum extraction from the alumina catalyst support is an acid-attack reaction. Due to high acidity in solution, the produced Al As mentioned in the Experimental section, the obtained solution samples were analyzed for H As a result, the consumed NaOH solution during titration to reach a solution pH The effects of six parameters, including state of coking, HNO The effect of decoking on Pt extraction kinetics was examined in tests S1 and S2 ( Although the fixed 1/3 volume ratio of HNO For the aluminum extraction results in To achieve faster kinetics and smaller reactor sizes, solid leaching processes require severe agitation to suspend solid particles and to preferentially eliminate the external mass-transfer resistances. As reported in The factor that impacts the internal particle mass-transfer resistances is the catalyst particle size. Two different catalysts sizes: smaller than 50 µm (test C2) and between 50 and 100 µm (test C1) were leached in otherwise exactly the same conditions. No measurable differences were observed between the Pt extraction kinetics of these two tests, as also shown in The liquid to solid mass ratio was the other major factor that was investigated. Three levels of 5, 10, and 15 liquid/solid ratios were examined in tests C6, C2, and C7, respectively. The temperature of all these three tests was constant at 80 °C (see The Pt and Al extraction kinetics were finally studied at three temperature levels of 50, 80, and 100 °C in tests C4, C2, and C5, respectively. The other experimental conditions, such as liquid/solid ratio and HNO To predict the major N, Cl, and Pt species in concentrated HNO In heterogeneous solid–fluid reactions, at least, the following three sequential steps occur: (a) diffusion of reactants through the fluid film surrounding the solid, (b) diffusion of reactants through the solid matrix, and (c) chemical reaction on the internal areas of the solid. As explained in the previous section, the level of slurry agitation and the solid particle sizes were selected in such a way that diffusions of reactants in the fluid film and inside the particles were not the limiting steps (as confirmed by the leaching tests). Hence, it is assumed that the observed Pt extraction kinetics is solely governed by the surface chemical reactions. Two classical fluid–solid reaction models, namely, homogeneous diffusion model (HDM) and shrinking core model (SCM) ( The empirical power–law equation ( Where − In Reaction [III] for Pt extraction, the concentrations of the other two reactants, namely Cl For highly non ideal systems such as concentrated electrolyte solutions, rate equations must be in terms of activities rather than concentrations ( For a batch operation, a mass balance for platinum yields: Where, Since, platinum extraction data are conveniently reported in terms of percent extracted, Eq. Where The total concentration of H Where, For each leaching test from To obtain the optimum value for Where The values of Tests C2, C4, and C5 have been performed at different temperatures. Hence, temperature-dependent parameters may be obtained through these experimental data. The modified reaction rate constant, Where In general, the activation energy of a physical process, e.g. diffusion is less than 20 kJ/mol while that of a chemical process exceeds 40 kJ/mol ( To verify the kinetic modeling work, Eq. Decoking did not enhance platinum extraction from the spent reforming catalyst significantly. Catalyst particle sizes <  Frequency factor of reaction rate constant Surface–reaction activation energy, kJ/mol Overall reaction rate constant The observed reaction rate constant The modified reaction rate constant as defined by Eq. The molarity of the hydrogen ion in solution, mol/L The reaction orders The observed rate of platinum extraction per unit mass of solids in the reactor, mol/s kg The universal gas constant (8.3145 Reaction temperature, °K Weight fraction of platinum in solids The initial platinum weight fraction in the ground catalyst feed Total weight of the solids inside the reactor, kg Fraction of platinum extracted