Objectives
                  This study was conducted to ascertain whether laboratory rats are an adequate animal model for aging oral cavity research, especially on occlusal tooth wear (OTW), which progresses with aging and causes abnormal occlusions. Mastication has been reported to relate to cognition in the elderly. Thus, it is important to care for the oral cavity, especially in the frail elderly, for the maintenance of all-round quality of life. Adequate and appropriate animal models are essential for basic and clinical research on the oral cavity.
               
                  Methods
                  Dried maxilla and mandible specimens from 98 young, aging or aged female F344/N rats were used.
               
                  Results
                  The levels of OTW of all molars were monitored with aging. The molar tooth began to wear at 1-month old (M) and progressed rapidly till 12M. Subsequently, OTW progressed slowly till 30M, and then rapidly again after 35M.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study showed that progress of OTW is well correlated with the entire life span of the rat, and suggested that the rat aged over 12M would be an adequate animal model for research on OTW in middle-aged and elderly people.In developed countries, human life expectancy in recent decades has been greatly prolonged, and the elderly population has been rapidly growing. According to the World Health Report 2006 by WHO, more than 20% of people are over 60 years old in European countries and Japan. The average life expectancy in Japan was 86 years for females and 79 years for males, and in 2002 both male and female reached the longest life expectancy in the world. Japan is becoming an aging society at a globally unprecedented pace. It is widely acknowledged, both within and outside the government of Japan, that more than one in four Japanese will be over 65 years old by 2015. Health research on senior citizens is needed, especially regarding the frail elderly, for the maintenance of their quality of life (QOL). Aging and/or aged animal models are required in such studies for biological understanding of aging properties. The National Institute for Longevity Sciences (NILS) established an aging farm and succeeded in the production of 30 months old (M) F344/N rats. Dysfunctions of the oral cavity, caused by various diseases including peridontics, caries and abnormal occlusions, may lead not only to poor nourishment but also to constitutional symptoms like migraine or palsy through temporomandibular disorders. However, few precise and systemic aging analysis reports have been available on the teeth of rats. Additionally, the aging characteristics of rats have been reported to be different depending on the strain, substrain and gender. In this study, we focused on and monitored occlusal tooth wear (OTW) of molars, which progresses with aging and causes abnormal occlusions, in female F344/N rats aged from 1 to more than 35 Aging and aged female F344/N rats were established in the NILS aging farm, The experimental protocol was performed with the permission of the Committee for Animal Ethics NILS according to the Guideline of NILS Animal Experimentation with due care for animal rights and welfare. The occlusal surface of molar tooth of (especially young) rat has several high cuspis dentis protuberances which made it impossible to distinguish between the enamel and dentin. For this reason, we needed to modify Broca's index, The medians and intraquartile ranges in OTW scores of all molar teeth were calculated in each aging group. Non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis, for multiple comparison, and Wilcoxon rank sum tests were employed to reveal the differences in OTW scores among positions of the teeth (M The molar teeth of rats are classified as boundont with several cuspis, and three major peaks were prominently observed ( M Tanaka et al. OTW has been reported to progress with aging, and is commonly used to estimate the age of humans in anthropology OTW originates from mechanical (attrition) and chemical factors (erosion). The M Since there were no differences between the right and left quadrants (data not shown), the rats used in this study would have normal occlusion originating in normal mastication at least in the lateral direction. It was interesting that higher OTW progress was observed in the molar teeth at contraposition (lower M In human, compared with other animals, OTW increases slowly The molar teeth of rats aged over 12 Though it is risky to prepare rats in a senescence phase (>35 It is commonly recognized that OTW tends to be more progressive in male than female. This study demonstrates that characteristics of OTW change with aging in the molar teeth of female F344/N rats. OTW progressed with aging in three phases, corresponding to growth, aging and senescence stages in the whole life span of rats. Though the rat molar tooth was pointed in shape and readily showed wear, OTW of molar teeth of rats aged over 12