This paper presents a correlation found between the surface roughness and critical surface tension of wetting of calcite and barite minerals. The minerals were ground in ball, rod and autogenous mills to collect samples for further tests (i.e. roughness and wettability). The surface roughness values of those minerals were determined on the pelleted surfaces of the ground powders by employing Surtronic 3+ roughness-meter instrument. The contact angle measurements were also made by a goniometer on these pellets in order to determine the critical surface tension of wetting of calcite and barite minerals. From the experimental work, it is stated that the wettability degree of calcite and barite minerals increase with their increasing surface roughness. The relationships could be stated as: γ
                     c=aR
                     a+b type of equations; where γ
                     c is the critical surface tension of wetting, R
                     a is the surface roughness measured, a is the slope and b is the intercept of the regression line.Grinding by different mills is crucial to liberate valuable minerals from gangue, produce the desired sizes and increase the surface area of those liberated particles for further processing. Many investigators have reported that shape and morphological properties of ground particles affect their end-use properties such as flotation, wettability, flowability, abrasivity, ability to be granulated or compacted, covering or light reflection properties and reactivity Many authors also concluded that the type of mill has a more marked effect on the particle shape after size reduction than the character of the material. The different types of mills can be classified as regard to the main stress that acts on the particles that are compression, shear, attrition, impact and internal forces. In addition, three modes of frgmentation are usually defined: abrasion, chipping and massive breakage It is well known that wetting of solid surfaces by liquids has many practical applications and consequently has been an important area of both applied and basic research for many years. The roughness term used is referred to any solid or mineral whose surface is not microscopically smooth as being rough The objective of this work was to determine the possible relationship between the surface roughness of calcite and barite determined by Surtronic 3 As mineral particles are made smaller and smaller, it follows that their surfaces assume a greater and greater importance, therefore surface characteristics and properties will clearly influence any fine particle processing operation. Size reduction causes new surfaces and this will be effective in any processing due to increasing interfacial area Roughness is perhaps the most striking property of solid surfaces The critical surface tension of wetting ( Several other techniques are also available for determining the The minerals used in the grinding tests, roughness and contact angle measurements were calcite and barite from Turkey. These materials were prepared by crushing to −850+600 μm sieve fractions for ball milling, −4.75+3.35-mm fractions for rod milling and −10+1-mm fractions for autogenous milling. The specific gravities of calcite and barite were determined to be 2.70 and 4.5 g/cm After grinding for a certain time, the appropriate amount of fine mill products was saved for further tests, such as Surtronic 3 The experiments by ball milling were carried out in a cylindrical mill of 200 cm A conventional rod mill was used with an internal diameter of 200 mm and a volume of 8792 cm Autogenous grindings were performed using a rubber lined laboratory scale mill of 420×225-mm dimensions with 31156 cm In order to determine the surface roughness of particles in pelleted forms, a portable stylus type roughness-measuring instrument called Surtronic 3 The main advantage of the method of surface roughness is found in the direct mechanical nature of the technique. For each mill product of calcite and barite minerals that is in pelleted form, three measurements were made and the roughness values ( Methanol solutions of different concentrations (%w/w) were prepared for construction of Zisman's wettability diagram to obtain the critical surface tension of wetting values ( The critical surface tension of wetting (   Abrasion is the main mechanism of comminution in autogenous mills, while impact crushing predominates in ball and rod mills The The critical surface tension of wetting ( The quality of the particle surfaces after grinding is essential for flotation and wettability-based processes for the attachment of air bubbles or desired liquids to these solid surfaces. Although mineralogical and chemical properties of the ore affect the results from case to case, grinding type is also another factor to produce round or rough particles for further processes. Therefore, surface roughness determined in connection to wettability variation is a good indication of better floatability results.  The surface roughness ( The critical surface tension of wetting ( The variation of the contact angle, deg liquid–vapor surface tension, mN/m critical surface tension of wetting, mN/m surface roughness, μm internal diameter of mill, mm length of mill, mm volume of mill, cm fraction of mill volume filled with ball bed fraction of mill volume filled with powder fraction of void spaces in ball bed filled with powder The authors wish to thank to TUBİTAK (Project #100Y058) and Cumhuriyet University (CUBAP) for their financial aid.