A variety of fractures can occur at the thumb metacarpal base, which classically result from axial loading through a partially flexed thumb. Thumb base fractures account for 4% of all hand fractures The management of intra-articular thumb base fractures remains the subject of debate, with the main controversy pertaining to whether articular congruity prevents the onset of symptomatic osteoarthritis and disability The trapeziometacarpal joint (TMJ) is biconcavoconvex, akin to two interlocking saddles. A volar beak metacarpal prominence articulates with a recess in the trapezium. Physiological thumb base stability is sacrificed to permit multiplanar movement, including opposition and prehension – the ability to diametrically oppose the thumb and the four neighbouring digits and the ability to grasp, respectively. Although 16 TMJ ligaments are described Dorsoradial subluxation of Bennett and Rolando fractures results in loss of metacarpal height, adduction (varus) malalignment and narrowing of the first web space [ Biplanar radiographs can distinguish between different thumb base fracture patterns ( Intra-articular two-part fracture-subluxations of the thumb metacarpal base with a single volar beak fragment are termed Bennett fractures following the seminal description by Edward Bennett in 1882 Therapeutic studies with a minimum of five years of follow-up are summarised in Many uphold the role of longitudinal traction and dorsoradial metacarpal base pressure with the metacarpal held in the hitchhiker position: pronated and extended [ A systematic review of Bennett fracture outcomes identified 39 studies (all retrospective) published between 1958 and 2015 that reviewed 1240 patients and 11 different treatment methods Operative management was first described by Lambotte Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) permits early active mobilisation Irreducible or impacted Bennett fractures with a large volar beak fragment may require ORIF with one or two lag screws [ A short-term review of nine Bennett fractures managed with lag screw fixation reported near-anatomical reduction (<1 mm) and good functional outcomes at a mean follow-up of 14.2 months Alternative fixation techniques are described, including skeletal traction [ CRPP is the first-line treatment for acute Bennett fractures [ Intra-articular three-part Y- or T-shaped fracture-subluxations of the thumb metacarpal base are termed Rolando fractures following the original description in 1910 Silvio Rolando worked with the benefit of radiography and identified frequent loss of reduction with cast immobilisation [ Langhoff et al. External fixation is an alternative treatment, especially for small basal fragments or those associated with severe soft tissue injury [ Rolando fracture basal fragments are usually of sufficient size to permit lag screw fixation. Using the radiopalmar (Wagner) approach, reduction is maintained with reduction forceps and/or temporary K-wires and held with lag screw(s) and a contoured locking T-plate [ The small size and multiplicity of the fragments in highly comminuted intra-articular fractures precludes fragment-specific internal fixation. These complex injuries often result from direct trauma and associated soft tissue injury is common. Management should also aim to restore articular congruity, maintain metacarpal length and prevent web space narrowing [ Fractures of the thumb metacarpal shaft are uncommon, with forces more commonly transferred to the base Maintaining pain-free thumb movement, especially opposition, is fundamental to hand function  The volar oblique (or beak) ligament and the dorsal ligament complex are important stabilisers of the thumb base. In Bennett fractures, the ligament remains attached to the undisplaced volar beak fragment. The two-part Bennett fracture occurs four times more commonly than the three-part Rolando fracture. Major deforming forces acting on the thumb metacarpal include adductor pollicis, abductor pollicis longus (APL) and extensor pollicis longus. Displaced intra-articular thumb base fractures are unstable and usually require operative management, which aims to restore articular congruity, maintain metacarpal length and avoid narrowing of the first web space. Articular step-off <1 mm is generally associated with superior outcomes. Bennett fractures are commonly managed with closed reduction and percutaneous pinning with K-wires. Irreducible fractures may be treated with lag screw ORIF. Rolando fractures are usually impossible to reduce closed and ORIF with a locking plate is often performed through the radiopalmar (Wagner) approach. Extra-articular epibasal fractures are usually stable following closed reduction and cast immobilisation. There is no high-quality evidence to favour one treatment over another for thumb base fractures and prospective randomised trials are required. None. Dr. Mark McCann who performed the anatomical dissection shown in