Directional rock rupture is an important and common problem in the engineering of rock breaking. Directional rock rupture can be effectively achieved by linear collaborative directional hydraulic fracturing controlled via pre-slotted guide and fracturing boreholes. In this paper, the RFPA2D-Flow software is utilized to verify the experimental results of linear collaborative directional hydraulic fracturing controlled by pre-slotted guide and fracturing boreholes, and its basic law is studied. We find that: (1) By comparing with hydraulic fracturing controlled by a single pre-slotted fracturing borehole or by a pre-slotted fracturing borehole and guide boreholes without pre-slots, the linear collaborative directional hydraulic fracturing controlled by a pre-slotted guide and fracturing boreholes has a better effect and a larger directional expansion range. (2) The greater the length of the pre-existing slot, the more favourable the induction of directional expansion of the hydraulic fracture along the direction of pre-existing slot. (3) A smaller angle between the line connecting the borehole centres and the maximum principal stress and a smaller coefficient of horizontal stress difference correspond to a smaller deflection angle of hydraulic fracture propagation (i.e., the angle between hydraulic fracture propagation and the pre-existing slot), which is more conducive to directional expansion of the hydraulic fracture.According to existing numerical simulation and field test results, the major fracture propagation direction of the conventional hydraulic fracturing technique in the hydraulic main fracture extension direction is controlled by the three-dimensional stress field In recent years, methods combined with hydraulic fracturing were utilized by scholars to control the fracture expansion direction. The purpose of combination methods is to achieve an omni-directional permeability improvement of a coal seam and directional rock rupture in a specific orientation. The existing results of theoretical analysis, physical tests and numerical simulation show that two methods can guide the directional fracture propagation: the guide groove generated by radial perforation and an annular slot and the guide seam generated by a mechanical or hydraulic slit Hydraulic fracturing guided by a control borehole induces directional expansion of a hydraulic fracture as much as possible by adjusting the spatial arrangement of the guide boreholes around the fracturing borehole In the existing research, the fracture initiation and its propagation direction can be induced by hydraulic fracturing controlled by a pre-existing slot or a dense linear fracturing borehole. Drawing lessons from the above two types of fracturing technology, we proposed directional hydraulic fracturing controlled by a pre-slotted guide and fracturing boreholes. In this paper, using the solid–liquid coupling software RFPA The RFPA Mechanical parameters such as the elastic modulus, strength, and Poisson's ratio of the material meso structure are assigned according to the Weibull distribution. The inhomogeneity formula is as follows. During the process of hydraulic fracturing, the stress state and permeability characteristics of rock continue to affect each other, and eventually cause the material damage. During the damage process of a fractured rock, its permeability changes with time. The effects of the existing fracture propagation, new fracture initiation and seepage-stress-damage coupling of these two fractures are considered. Equilibrium equation: Geometric equation: Constitutive equation: Seepage equation: Permeability equation: When the stress or strain state of the element reaches a given damage threshold, the element begins to be damaged, and the elastic modulus of the damaged element can be expressed as follows (1) When the shear stress of the element reaches the Mohr-Coulomb damage threshold, Damage variable: Permeability coefficient of the element: Here, (2) When the force on the element reaches the tensile strength Damage threshold: Damage variable Permeability coefficient of the element: Here, Under the action of the complex stress and damage evolution processes of the rock mass, the seepage-stress coupled equation are built by this model. The seepage and linear elastic stress are calculated by the finite element method, and the equations are solved by the method of coupled iterative cycles In this numerical simulation, a two-dimensional plane stress model with a size of 300 mm × 300 mm is adopted ( To ensure that the numerical calculation can more closely simulate the real physical experiment, the actual physical parameters of the experimental sample are adopted in the numerical simulation as much as possible. The relevant parameters utilized in this numerical simulation are presented in It can be seen from the results of numerical simulation ( By comparing the numerical calculations and physical experimental results of sample 1, sample 2, sample 3 and sample 4 in It can be seen from the numerical results ( The deflection angle of the hydraulic fracture is the angle between the propagation direction of the hydraulic fracture and the pre-slot line. The deflection angle of the hydraulic fracture is measured from the results of numerical calculation and physical experiment under different horizontal stress difference coefficients. It can be seen from It is shown by the results of numerical calculation ( Based on the above analysis, the parameters selected in the numerical calculation are reasonable, and the calculation results are reliable. It is also feasible to study the fracture propagation rules of linear collaborative directional hydraulic fracturing controlled by pre-slotted guide and fracturing boreholes with the help of RFPA To explore the guide effect of pre-slot on the propagation of hydraulic fracture, three kinds of combination models is built. The combination model (CM) 1 is a single fracturing borehole with a pre-existing slot. CM 2 is one fracturing borehole with a pre-existing slot and two guide boreholes without pre-slot, and the CM 3 is a one fracturing borehole and two guide boreholes with pre-slots. It is the cloud map of the pore water pressure distribution, acoustic emission signal and the shape of the hydraulic fracture of these three models that are compared with each other, which is respectively in The acoustic emission signal during the propagation of hydraulic fractures is displayed in With RFPA With the control variate method used, it is the factors of the length The diameter It can be seen from It can be seen from The diameter It can be seen from It is the anisotropy of the rock that makes the hydraulic fractures on both sides of the fracturing borehole completely unsymmetrically propagate, which is illustrated in The angle The diameter It can be observed in When the In this paper, a numerical simulation method is utilized to study the rules of directional hydraulic fracture propagation and its influencing factors controlled by pre-slotted fracturing and guide boreholes. The results are shows as following. (1) The process of linear collaborative directional hydraulic fracturing controlled by pre-slotted guide and fracturing boreholes can be divided into five stages: water injection boost, directional hydraulic fracture initiation, stable directional propagation, unstable directional propagation and penetration. Compared with hydraulic fracturing controlled by single pre-slot and by the pre-slotted fracturing and no pre-slotted guide borehole, the linear collaborative directional hydraulic fracturing controlled by pre-slotted fracturing and guide borehole has a better guide effect. The directional hydraulic fracture propagation is better and its range is larger. (2) The effect of stress concentration exists at the pre-slot tip of the fracturing borehole. It makes the tangential effective tensile stress at the pre-slot tip increase with the increase of water pressure in the fracturing borehole. When the stress at the pre-slot tip of the fracturing borehole exceeds the tensile strength of the rock, a hydraulic fracture is initiated. The external performance is that the main hydraulic fracture preferentially begins to crack in the direction of the pre-slot tip. The larger the length of the pre-slot, the weaker the effect of the macroscopic stress field on the hydraulic fracture, and the more favorable it is for the directional expansion of the hydraulic fracture along the direction of the pre-slot. (3) For a fixed length of the pre-existing slot, when the included angle of the pre-slot line and the maximum principal stress Funding Statement This work was supported by Transformation of Scientific and Technological Achievements Programs of Higher Education Institutions in Shanxi (TSTAP) (No. 2020CG050), Scientific and Technological Innovation Programs of Higher Education Institutions in Shanxi (STIP) (No. 2019L0938), Special project of 2019 plan for the introduction of high-level scientific and technological talents in development zone of Lvliang city (Development of automatic disassembly platform for hydraulic support pin shaft) (No. 2019L0002), Science and technology project of Lvliang city in 2019 (Pressure relief and permeability improvement technology by integrated hydraulic flushing and cutting for low permeability coal seam containing methane) (No. 2019L0008), Natural science foundation of Shanxi Province-Mechanical behaviour and breaking mechanism of three-axis fracture of weak and fractured coal body in coalbed methane mining (No.201901D111330), the Key Innovation Team for Fault Diagnosis and Health Management Technology of Coal Mine Machinery Equipment of “1331 Project” in Shanxi Province (No. TD201812), Research Start-up Funding of Doctors in East China University of Technology- Prediction method of mining subsidence by combining mechanics and geometry (No. DHBK2019235), Research Start-up Funding of Doctors in Luliang University (No. 1901010145) and School-Level Teaching Reform and Innovation Projects of Luliang University in 2020 (No. JXGG202039 and JXGG202027). The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.