Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) and Cu2FeSnS4 (CFTS) nanoparticles were synthesized by thermal decomposition of metal precursors. Dispersion of the precursors in the solvent prior to reaction significantly lowered the temperature and time required for the reaction. Extensive characterization of the synthesized nanoparticles was done. Materials characteristics of the synthesized nanoparticles such as elemental composition, band gap and morphology were found to be similar to the nanoparticles prepared by conventional synthesis techniques.Cu(In,Ga)Se Thin film based solar cells are commonly fabricated using vacuum deposition techniques such as sputtering or co-evaporation, which contribute significantly to their production cost. Ongoing research as reported in literature focuses on developing a solution based process as an alternative to vacuum deposition. This offers the advantages of high throughput, efficient material usage and low processing temperatures We report the synthesis of CFTS nanoparticles by thermal decomposition using copper acetate, ferric nitrate, tin chloride and thiourea as precursors for the first time. CZTS nanoparticles have also been synthesized by the same process. Extensive characterization of the synthesized CZTS and CFTS nanoparticles was carried out for phase identification, morphology and band gap measurement. The precursors used for the experimental work were copper acetate monohydrate (Cu(CH Cu The phase purity and crystallinity of synthesized powders were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (PANalytical X-ray diffractometer) and Raman spectroscopy (HORIBA HR800). XRD was performed in the 2 CZTS and CFTS nanoparticles were synthesized at 400 °C for 1 h. Similar results were obtained for phase formation and band gap at 400 °C for 2–8 h. Results reported here are exclusively for powder synthesis at 400 °C for 1 h. XRD pattern of CZTS ( It is important to note that the XRD patterns of CZTS, CFTS, Cu Similarly, the Raman spectrum of CFTS ( FEG–SEM images show agglomerated nanoparticles of CZTS, CFTS ( The bright ﬁeld TEM image shows equiaxed single crystal CZTS particles of 10–20 nm ( From the optical absorption spectra obtained in the wavelength range 400–1000 nm for the synthesized CZTS, CFTS nanoparticles dispersed in ethanol, molar absorption coefficients (cm    The relations between molar absorption coefficient ( Chalcogenide nanoparticles (CZTS, CFTS) were prepared by single step synthesis by thermal decomposition using metal acetates, nitrate, thiourea and SnCl The authors would like to acknowledge