In the present research, effect of Lankford parameter and anisotropy of mechanical properties on formability of cold-rolled and annealed cartridge brass sheets at different temperatures (300–600°C) has been investigated and the results were related to texture components which analyzed by EBSD technique. The cold rolled texture components mainly Cube {100}〈001〉 component changes to Copper {112}〈111〉 component with increasing the annealing temperature up to 500°C. An offset in average R value has resulted in improvement of deep draw ability. Maximum flow stress anisotropy was found at 400°C because of presence of enormous twins and grain boundaries that lead to improve persisting dislocation structures and accumulation of dislocations.Red and semi-red brasses are widely used in plumbing applications such as fittings and fixtures. They are easily cast, are strong, having excellent corrosion resistance It is well known that grain boundaries have a profound effect on the mechanical properties of materials due to the well-known Hall–Petch relationship, which describes the yield stress in terms of the grain size. Many other features of the microstructure, such as a distribution of grain and twin boundaries and presence of other interfaces and lattice defects are often ignored. As far as twin boundaries are concerned, there is some indication from the experiments, on the specimens with deformation twins, suggesting enhanced strengthening due to twin boundaries. Brass deforms by both slip and twining mechanisms but because of lower activation energy of twining, the mechanical twining in low SFE materials is preferred to slip mechanism In order to examine the role of twinning on anisotropy, texture development and their effect on formability of annealed brass, authors consider the different temperatures in annealing process and investigated optimum condition for mechanical properties and formability in manufacturing process of brasses. The chemical composition of the research material (cartridge brass sheet with a thickness of 3 In order to discuss about the effect of annealing twin density as well as grain size on mechanical property anisotropy and Lankford parameter, clear metallographic pictures preparation is necessary to determine the precise amount of them. The brass samples were etched for 3–5 In order to obtain the texture of the specimens, crystal orientation map in a large area of 500 Grid circles with diameter All specimens experienced same amount of engineering strain and then ellipsoid diameters are measured accurately. Lateral ( Deep draw ability of brass sheets subjected to thermo mechanical processing, determined by swift cup test. It is well known that deep draw ability of sheet metals can be determined by limit drawing ratio (LDR). Since the punch diameter is contrast, several blanks in deferent diameters cut from brass sheet to achieve LDR in range 1.90–2.20. Once a specimen can form a perfect cup, there is no need test same specimen with lower LDR. The ratio of maximum blank diameter to punch diameter ( In the Erichsen test, a hemispherical punch was pressed into the sheet until fracture occurred. Then at this point the test was stopped immediately and the height of the dome was measured. Erichsen test was conducted on specimens with thickness of 1.0–70 Optical and SEM micrographs of annealed samples are presented in The result of the twin density as a function of the grain size has been shown in These results in comparison with theoretical equation proposed by Pand et al. {1 The information provided by pole figures refers only to the statistical distribution of each pole direction and there is no way to obtain the complete orientation intensity of individual grains from the pole figures. For quantitative understanding about the change in texture during the annealing process, ODF of the deformed specimens after various annealing temperature was analyzed using EBSD data. The ODF is defined as a probability of the density of orientations. In a textured sheet metal, because of the preferred orientation of crystals, tensile behaviors of the material become non-isotropy. So that the principal normal strains in different directions is not equal anymore. In this condition, active slip systems are not the same in normal directions. The ratio of true strains along width to thickness direction ( For brass sheets annealed at 400 Generally, maximum Another important conclusion is the moderate increase of In this section, after tensile test of annealed samples at different angles with RD, the various mechanical properties of brass sheets were evaluated. Variation of yield and ultimate tensile strengths at different angles to RD lead to significant results. The anisotropic behavior of material strength is controlled by two factors, i.e., the persisted dislocations structure (PDSs) and the statistical accumulation of dislocations It is very important that at lower annealing temperatures about 400 Cartridge brass sheets annealed at 500 It is well known that average normal anisotropy is desirable for improving LDR of deep drawn metal sheets The drawn specimens performed by Swift’s cup test are shown in At 400 This can be explained in consistent with the Hall–Petch effect: the twin-matrix interface acts as barrier to dislocation pile-up formation and the strain accommodation is more complex due to the reduction of the mean slip length. Other authors The stretch ability of cartridge brass sheets that measured by Erichsen test is shown in  The cold rolled specimen shows mainly Cube {1 Maximum flow stress anisotropy was found at 400 It is clear that sheets annealed at 400 Stretch ability of cartridge brass sheets increased at higher annealing temperatures at the range of 400–600