Periprosthetic fractures associated with total knee arthroplasty occur intraoperatively or postoperatively. The parameters that determine the treatment are stability of the fracture and the implant, site of the fracture, and bone quality. Intraoperative fractures, if undisplaced and stable, can be managed by protected weight bearing and motion. If displaced, they are treated by internal fixation and a stem. Postoperative fractures, if undisplaced and stable, can be managed by restricted weight bearing and motion. If the fracture is displaced, in association with a stable implant, management is by internal fixation. If the fracture is associated with an unstable implant, then a revision with a stemmed component must be performed. If there is associated loss of bone stock, then augments or structural grafts may be necessary.Periprosthetic fractures adjacent to knee implants can occur intraoperatively or postoperatively Intraoperative or early postoperative periprosthetic fractures can be prevented by the following measures. For primary knee arthroplasty, previously placed hardware should be removed at least 3 months before knee arthroplasty, or, if removed at the same time as knee arthroplasty, stems should be used to bypass stress risers. Avoid eccentric placing of the box cut for posterior stabilized femoral components. After high tibial osteotomy, avoid lateral placement of the tibial component; otherwise, the stem can perforate the lateral tibial cortex. Avoid forceful eversion of the patella. Eversion of the patella, if difficult, can be delayed until after the distal femoral cut is made. Otherwise, the patella or the patellar tendons are at risk. Avoid perforation of the anterior femoral cortex if intramedullary instrumentation is used. If a significant perforation (>1 cm in diameter) does occur, then it should be bypassed with a stem. In revision arthroplasty, guide wires and radiographs can be used before reaming. Stemmed components should be used routinely. Radiographs should be taken with trial stems in place. Avoid forceful eversion of the patella by doing a quads snip or, in more difficult situations, a quads turndown or a tubercle osteotomy. The treatment of periprosthetic fractures depends on the stability of the fracture, the stability of the implant, and the quality of the bone stock. Routine radiographs usually are adequate, but computerized tomography scan may be helpful in defining the degree of comminution and bone loss. Fractures that are identified intraoperatively during primary or revision arthroplasty should be fixed and protected by a stem so that range-of-motion exercises can proceed as usual, although weight bearing may have to be delayed. These are usually metaphyseal fractures that can be fixed by screws and protected by a stem. If the fracture is not recognized until the recovery-room radiographs, and if the fracture and the implant are stable, conservative treatment can be considered, recognizing that range-of-motion exercises and weight bearing might have to be monitored closely so that displacement does not occur. Fractures that occur postoperatively can be caused by significant trauma, or by minimal trauma if the bone has been weakened by osteolysis or osteoporosis. If the fracture is undisplaced and stable and the implant is solid, conservative treatment can be performed. This may require restricted weight bearing and protected range of motion (cast brace). Most fractures require surgery, and the technique depends on the stability of the implant and the quality of the bone stock. Most fractures are metaphyseal and adjacent to the implant. If the fracture is diaphyseal and well proximal or distal to the implant, then the implant usually is stable and the fracture is fixed independently of the implant. Metaphyseal fractures of the femur with a stable implant can be fixed by a buttress plate, a periarticular plate, or a retrograde locking intramedullary nail. This latter technique requires access to the medullary canal through the intercondylar notch, which depends on the type of implant used. Posterior stabilized implants do not allow this access. Additionally, for this technique, the fracture cannot be too distal or comminuted Metaphyseal fractures of the tibia are not as common as the femur. If the implant is stable, these fractures can be managed by buttress plates or periarticular plates. Fractures of the femur or tibia in association with an unstable implant require revision with stemmed components. The stem should provide some fixation for the fracture, but additional internal fixation may be necessary. As a rule, the stems are not cemented unless the patient is of very low demand (ie, elderly or small). A cemented stem may interfere with fracture healing and also would make further surgery very difficult. Periprosthetic fractures treated by internal fixation usually require 8 to 12 weeks to heal, and patients should be on restricted weight bearing until there is radiologic evidence of union. Range-of-motion exercises can be initiated early (ie, after 48 hours) if the fixation is stable. Otherwise, range of motion may have to be delayed for 7 to 10 days and then protected by a cast brace. The most difficult problem is the periprosthetic fracture with a loose implant and poor bone stock. If the bone loss is contained, then morsellized allograft bone can be used. If the bone loss is segmental, revision can be performed with augments to replace mild-to-moderate bone loss (approximately 2 cm on the femoral side and 5 cm on the tibial side). Augments can compensate for more bone loss on the tibial side because of the combination of augment and thicker polyethylene. If the bone loss is beyond augments, then either a mega prosthesis or structural allograft implant composite must be used The allograft prosthetic composite reconstruction allows reattachment of residual host bone and its attached host collateral ligaments, so that a constrained, rather than a hinged, prosthesis can be used. The implant is cemented to the allograft, but not to the host. The junction of host and allograft are stabilized by a press-fit stem (not cemented and not porous-coated) and a step-cut or oblique osteotomy. The host canal is therefore available for future revision surgery, if necessary. On the tibial side, the patellar tendon with host tuberosity can be fixed to the allograft A series of 10 patients with periprosthetic distal femoral fractures and poor bone stock have been reconstructed with allograft prosthetic composites. At an average follow-up of 6 years, there was 1 nonunion and 1 amputation for infection.