Change in mechanical properties of rocks under static loading has been widely studied and documented. However, the response of rocks to cyclic loads is still a much-debated topic. Fatigue is the phenomenon when rocks under cyclic loading fail at much lower strength as compared to those subjected to the monotonic loading conditions. A few selected cored granodiorite and sandstone specimens have been subjected to uniaxial cyclic compression tests to obtain the unconfined fatigue strength and life. This study seeks to examine the effects of cyclic loading conditions, loading amplitude and applied stress level on the fatigue life of sandstone, as a soft rock, and granodiorite, as a hard rock, under uniaxial compression test. One aim of this study is to determine which of the loading conditions has a stronger effect on rock fatigue response. The fatigue response of hard rocks and soft rocks is also compared. It is shown that the loading amplitude is the most important factor affecting the cyclic response of the tested rocks. The more the loading amplitude, the shorter the fatigue life, and the greater the strength degradation. The granodiorite specimens showed more strength degradation compared to the sandstone specimens when subjected to cyclic loading. It is shown that failure modes of specimens under cyclic loadings are different from those under static loadings. More local cracks were observed under cyclic loadings especially for granodiorite rock specimens.In situ rock is basically subjected to monotonic and cyclic or dynamic loadings. A proper and detailed understanding of how the mechanical properties of rock change when subjected to different loading scenarios is required for the safe and proper design and construction of civil, mining and geotechnical engineering structures such as underground openings, tunnels, rock pillars, foundations and for better understanding of other related operations such as drilling and blasting. Cyclic loadings are generated by seismic events, earthquakes, blasting, repetitive loadings and explosions which affect either surface or underground rock structures ( It has been widely acknowledged that a rock structure subjected to cyclic loading often fails prior to reaching its designed stress level or bearing capacity of its static uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). The mechanism is widely referred to as “fatigue” ( From the literature review, it was found that some researchers focused on the variation and degradation of intact or jointed rock properties under uniaxial and triaxial cyclic loadings and some others investigated the fatigue damage mechanism. It was first reported by  The effects of cyclic loading and strain rate on the uniaxial strength of sandstone were studied by  Different damage variables used to examine the damage evolution under cyclic loading were discussed by To date, most of previous works attempted to evaluate the change in mechanical properties of rocks under different cyclic loading conditions. Few studies, however, have addressed the question: Which of the maximum stress level and loading amplitude has a stronger cyclic effect? Moreover, the cyclic response of soft rocks and hard rocks is not fully understood. As mentioned previously, the fatigue behavior of hard rocks such as granodiorite and soft rocks such as sandstone, which are very common rocks in most rock structures, was always of great importance. The cyclic behaviors of these two kinds of rocks under constant frequency but with varying loading stress amplitude and stress level are presented in this study. Among the intrusive rocks, granite and granodiorite are the most common and frequently encountered ones in most underground mining activities. In addition, as a result of the high strength of granitic rock, it is also widely used in the construction industry. Sandstone is also bedrock for rock structures and its behavior is different from a hard rock like granodiorite. The rock specimens were obtained from sandstone and Gosford granite/granodiorite outcrops quarry in New South Wales, Australia. Petrographic thin section analysis shows that granodiorite is weakly altered coarse-grained leucocratic holocrystalline and it contains anhedral quartz (20–30%), orthoclase (∼20%), subhedral, zoned plagioclase (20–30%) and medium-grained flakes biotite (∼10%). Sandstone is fine-grained and well-sorted and dominated by sub-rounded to angular quartz (∼80%). The matrix material consisting of clay and sericite accounts for around 10% of the specimen. The intergranular porosity of this sandstone is approximately 10%. Photographs of the analyzed specimens from these two rock types in cross polarized light (XPL) are shown in Specimens were available in two sizes: regular-size with diameter of about 54 mm and height of 131 mm and small-size with diameter of 42 mm and height of 102 mm. Seven (five small-size and two regular-size) specimens of granodiorite and seven (four small-size and three regular-size) of sandstone were tested to determine their UCS values. The sandstone specimens were oven-dried for 24 h so as to eliminate any moisture present therein. Since the average water content was determined to be very low (equal to 0.3%), the effect of water content on the obtained results was neglected. The tests were done using a GCTS uniaxial testing system UCT 1000, as shown in The specimens were loaded using a servo-controlled loading machine. The linear variable differential transformers (LVDTs) were used for simultaneous readings of axial, radial and volumetric strains. UCS values for all specimens were recorded for analysis. Some laboratory tests have been performed through use of uniaxial cyclic loading to investigate the mechanical fatigue behaviors of the tested rocks. The granodiorite and sandstone specimens, used for cyclic loading, were in the same size as those used for monotonic uniaxial compression loadings. Uniaxial monotonic compression tests were conducted on both rock types. The average UCS for the tested specimens was used as the guiding maximum possible strength of the rock and to define the maximum stress level of cyclic loading. The uniaxial cyclic tests were carried out in a stress control mode. The loading waveform was sine waveform which has already been found to have a stronger dynamic effect than a ramp (triangle) waveform ( The CCL was designed to examine the effects of loading amplitude and the maximum stress level on fatigue strength. The regular-size specimens were tested under a CCL condition while the testing for the small-size specimens was done in a SCL manner. Under SCL conditions, the loading amplitude was kept constant whereas the maximum stress level was increased step by step. These tests were designed to find the fatigue stress of the tested rocks and to explore the effect of maximum stress level on the fatigue strength. For the SCL tests, the initial mean stress was set and the specimen was loaded at a set amplitude for a specific time The effects of the maximum stress level and loading amplitude on fatigue life and strength degradation of the tested rocks were investigated by uniaxial cyclic tests. As mentioned earlier, two types of cyclic loadings with constant mean stress level, named CCL, and increasing mean stress level cyclic loading, named SCL, were considered in these tests. Characteristics of all SCL paths are detailed in  The analysis of fatigue behavior of specimens as well as strength characteristics under various maximum stress levels has been carried out. In As can be found in Comparing the results of specimens St.-R-4 and St.-S-6 with that of St.-R-5, under the same loading amplitude of 5 MPa, it can be seen that the fatigue life of specimens decreased as the maximum stress level increased. The specimen St.-R-5 failed after 65 cycles under a maximum stress level of 34 MPa (94.4% of UCS), whereas both specimens St.-R-4 and St.-S-6 did not fail under the maximum stress of 83.3% and 85.2% of UCS, respectively, even after a large number of cycles. A similar result was also obtained for granodiorite specimens. Specimens G-R-3 and G-R-4 did not fail after 1 h (about 3600 cycles) and 2 h (about 7200 cycles) of loading under the maximum stress levels of 90 MPa (75% of UCS) and 94 MPa (78.3% of UCS), respectively, however, they failed when the maximum stress levels increased to 82.5% and 88.3% of UCS (results of G-R-5 and G-R-6), respectively. The fatigue life and strength ( A similar finding was also reported by other researchers. According to Amplitude is a key factor when analyzing the cyclic loading, as it is an indicator of how much the maximum and minimum stresses vary from the mean stress and it also determines the values expected for the maximum stress reached. Even with a slightly lower initial loading stress, the specimens subjected to higher magnitudes of amplitude failed sooner than those under low amplitudes. Comparing the fatigue life and strength of small-size sandstone specimens, St.-S-5 and St.-S-6, under the same maximum stress level, it is clear that the fatigue life and strength of sandstone decreased as the loading amplitude increased from 3 MPa to 5 MPa. Specimen St.-S-5 with loading amplitude of 3 MPa failed after 2153 cycles during the second stage of SCL when the maximum stress level was 40 MPa. Specimen St.-S-6, whereas, with loading amplitude of 5 MPa, failed after 1930 cycles during the second stage of SCL when the maximum stress level was 40 MPa. The fatigue strength of specimen St.-S-6 loaded under a higher loading amplitude was 38.03 MPa (86.4% of UCS), lower than that of specimen St.-S-5, which was 39.47 MPa (89.7% of UCS). Comparing the fatigue life and strength of specimen St.-S-7 with those of specimens St.-S-5 and St.-S-6, it suggests that the effect of loading amplitude is stronger than that of the maximum stress level. Specimen St.-S-7 loaded under a maximum stress level of 85.2% of UCS with higher loading amplitude of 6 MPa failed during the first step of SCL, after just 470 cycles (shorter fatigue life) and lower fatigue stress (81.1% of UCS) compared to St.-S-5 and St.-S-6 that did not fail during the first step (at the same maximum stress level of 85.2% of UCS). These two specimens failed during the second stage when the maximum stress level increased to 91% of UCS. Thus it can be concluded that the rock would more easily yield at a lower maximum stress level with higher loading amplitude than at a high maximum stress level with low loading amplitude. This finding, however, needs to be validated by more experimental data. The importance of loading amplitude has also been stated by As can be found in The effect of loading amplitude on fatigue life was also reported by The fatigue strength of the tested rocks can be determined from the results discussed above. As previously mentioned, each type of rock has a strength threshold at which it can sustain loading under a large number of cycles if the loading level is less than this threshold. According to Based on the fatigue strengths of sandstone and granodiorite, it can be concluded that the fatigue strength of hard rocks is relatively lower than that of soft rocks. Thus the brittle rocks are more prone to be weakened under cyclic loading than ductile rocks. The more brittle the rock, the more the strength degradation, and the less the fatigue strength. Damage mechanism was always an interesting topic to figure out how solid materials fail by fracturing and cracking. Identifying crack development through laboratory tests would improve our understanding of the real failure process in practice ( During laboratory testing of granodiorite and sandstone specimens subjected to uniaxial cyclic loadings, there were some disparities observed in the fatigue failure of rock specimens. Some specimens developed immediate failure and premature yielding though the loading amplitude was minimal and the maximum stresses were not significantly high. However, a few specimens have shown no yielding or axial strain and lateral strain as a result of dynamic deformation failure. One significant observation noted is that fatigue characteristics are dependent on geological condition, in situ stress and depth of core extraction as well as chemical composition of the rock microstructure formation. The unlikely variability in cyclic failure is an obvious heterogeneity of the rock specimens due to changes in in situ stress distribution, which might have altered the mechanical properties of the intact rock, i.e. strength, deformability and especially permeability initiated due to development of network of stress relief cracks. These conditions could have created stress corrosion phenomena and plenty of weakening mechanical actions, i.e. weak strain bonds around the crack tips thus facilitating crack propagation at lower stress levels. Moreover, the perceived nonhomogeneity is a result of microscale heterogeneity of the rock specimens. It is believed that the presence of microstructures has created an additional dimension on the nonhomogeneous specimen. There is room for expansion of one or more individual micro-fractures into cleavage fractures (splitting/extension mode) and a dramatic drop of load-bearing capacity to abrupt failure. The main objectives for this study were to investigate the effects of loading amplitude and stress on the mechanical properties of sandstone and granodiorite and to understand how the cyclic response differs from soft rock of sandstone to hard rock of granodiorite. From the conducted tests and obtained results, the following conclusions were drawn: The increasing mean stress level tests (SCL path) provides a decent way to not only explore the effect of the maximum stress level and loading amplitude on cyclic response of rocks but also to investigate the effect of loading history on their fatigue behavior. The fatigue life decreased with an increase in the maximum stress level if the cyclic loading amplitude remained constant. The decreases in the fatigue life and strength were evident with increasing loading amplitude. The effect of loading amplitude is stronger than that of the maximum stress level. The rock would more easily yield at a lower maximum stress level with higher loading amplitude than at high maximum stress level with lower loading amplitude. The fatigue strength of hard/brittle rocks seems to be less than that of soft/ductile rocks. The more brittle the rock, the more the strength degradation, and the less the fatigue strength. It is observed that more local cracks are formed after cyclic loading tests compared to static loading tests. Further experimental work, however, is required to be carried out to validate that the loading amplitude has more cyclic effect than the maximum stress level. Different rock types are suggested to be tested under cyclic loading to precisely explore the difference between fatigue response of hard rocks and soft rocks. It would also be interesting to assess the effects of rock fabric and its heterogeneity on the fatigue response. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We would like to express our sincere gratitude to Department of Mining Engineering and Metallurgical Engineering of Western Australian School of Mines (WASM),