A polymerizable complex of copper(II) ion with unsaturated quaternary ammonium cation-modified salicylaldoxime ligand was prepared and used to synthesize a novel copper(II) ion imprinted polymers (Cu(II)-IIPs). Elemental analysis (EA), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and NMR spectroscopy confirmed the structures of the polymerizable complex and Cu(II)-IIPs. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller surface area analysis (BET), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterized physical properties and morphologies of synthesized metal complex and corresponding polymers. The effect of pH, contact time, and initial Cu2+ and SO4
                     2− concentration on the simultaneous adsorption of Cu2+ and SO4
                     2− ions of Cu(II)-IIPs were investigated. Cu(II)-IIPs showed high hydrophilicity and simultaneously rapid adsorption of Cu2+ and SO4
                     2− from solution. Moreover, Cu(II)-IIPs displayed highest adsorption capacity in the pH range of 5.0–6.5, the separation factor (β) between Cu2+ with respect to Fe3+ was 1866, the equilibrium adsorption capacities for Cu2+ and SO4
                     2− were almost the same and close to 0.13mmolg−1 at 25°C. Stripping experiments revealed that 1.5molL−1 H2SO4 was an effective eluent for desorbing copper (II) ions from Cu(II)-IIPs. In additional, Cu(II)-IIPs exhibited good recyclability and reusability for 5cycles without deterioration of its selective ion-absorbing capacity.The production of copper, one of the most important metals, comes from metallurgical industry. Hydrometallurgical methods feature simplicity, rapid mass transfer kinetics, capability for scale-up, and facile recovery of the solvent extractant Solid phase extraction (SPE) emerges as an alternative method for copper production to address the issues in hydrometallurgy It was noted that the Tasker group Elemental analysis was carried out on a Carlo Erba-EA1108 elemental analyzer (PerkinElmer, Fremont, USA). The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) spectra of the synthesized monomers, polymerizable copper (II) complex, imprinted and non-imprinted polymers were recorded using a Bruker FTIR-Tensor 27 Spectrometer in KBr pellets. The proton nuclear magnetic resonance (  Standard stock solutions of metal ions with concentration of 0.5–4.0 PCC was synthesized in three steps under optimized conditions ( DAMA-S was named DAMA-SA was named 5-[(chloride PCC was a complex and named as bis{5-[(chloride Cu(II)-IIPs was synthesized according the process sequence as Solution polymerization was used to synthesize Cu(II)-IIPs and non-IIPs. PCC (5.0 Adsorption of Cu The selectivity of separation capacity of Cu In Eqs. Copolymerization of PCC with other neutral difunctional comonomers afforded crosslinked polymer network, and porous Cu(II)-IIPs particles (Scheme 3) were yielded after the copper(II) ions were removed from the network. Firstly, PCC was synthesized by self-assembly reaction of DAMA-SA and copper (II) template, the structures of PCC and DAMA-SA were determined by elemental analysis, IR, and IR spectroscopy is important in structure confirmation and analysis of Cu(II)-IIPs. Compared to Cu(II)-IIPs after copper (II) removal, signature adsorption bands on the IR spectra of PCC matched closely with it, indicating that the removal of copper(II) ion did not affect the polymers' backbone and functional groups. The presence of adsorption bands near 3430 and 3428 Thermogravimetric analysis of Cu(II)-IIPs was conducted under nitrogen atmosphere to prevent oxidation. TGA curve indicated that weight loss of Cu(II)-IIPs underwent three stages from room temperature to 600 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to examine the morphologies of Cu(II)-IIPs and non-IIPs ( The pH of solutions exhibits significant influence on the adsorption properties of Cu(II)-IIPs and non-IIPs for Cu In contrast to the trend of adsorption of Cu The adsorption capacity is an important parameter to quantify the amount of adsorbent required to capture a mole of metal ions from a given solution. The static adsorption capacities of Cu(II)-IIPs and non-IIPs were tested as follows: 0.5 Adsorption rates of Cu  The competitive adsorption experiments were performed in the prepared solution containing Cu The capability of extractants to be regenerated and recycled is one of the key factors for the application in copper hydrometallurgical process. Several eluents were tested in order to regenerate Cu(II)-IIPs. 1.5 In this manuscript, a novel polymerizable complex of Cu