The introduction of activated carbon to recover gold from cyanide leach solutions in the last quarter of the 20th century had a breakthrough impact on the economics of gold ore processing, as the world gold industry entered a period of unparalleled expansion following the deregulation of the gold price in the mid-1970s. By replacing the Merrill–Crowe zinc cementation step, carbon-in-pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL) recovery provided a process that allowed the treatment of lower grade and problematic ores, at lower capital and operating costs and higher metal recoveries. In a relatively short period of 10–15years, the new technology was developed, proven, and implemented industry-wide. This chapter focuses on advances made in the design and operation of CIP and CIL plants. Advances have been in the area of carbon management, with specific focus on the use of process modeling. While the elution and regeneration components are essential aspects of a CIP plant, in practice, the capital cost of this area of the plant is a relatively small part of the overall project cost and can therefore be engineered with a higher contingency factor.The author gratefully acknowledges the contributions and assistance provided by members of the Gold Processing Technology Group, Curtin University. The author also acknowledges the support provided by industry through the collaborative AMIRA P420 “Gold Processing Technology” project, which made available some of the information presented in this chapter. The use of cyanide to leach gold ores revolutionized the gold industry at the beginning of the 20th century, providing a new process that was efficient, cost-effective, and widely applicable. The introduction of activated carbon to recover gold from cyanide leach solutions in the last quarter of the 20th century had a similar impact on the economics of gold ore processing. By replacing the Merrill–Crowe zinc cementation step, carbon-in-pulp (CIP) and carbon-in-leach (CIL) recovery provided a process that allowed the treatment of lower grade and problematic ores (e.g., high-clay ores), at lower capital and operating costs and higher metal recoveries. In a fortuitous bit of timing, this technology became available as the world gold industry entered a period of unparalleled expansion following the deregulation of the gold price in the mid-1970s. As a consequence, in a relatively short period of 10–15 Although the era of CIP commenced in the late 1970s, the use of carbon for the recovery of gold was recognized and practiced much earlier. In 1927, Gross and Scott of the U.S. Bureau of Mines published an extensive report on the use of charcoal to recover gold and silver from cyanide solution, identifying many of the key parameters of the process ( The modern application of activated carbon as an alternative to the Merrill–Crowe process had its genesis in the post-war years in the United States. The first CIP flowsheet was introduced at the Carlton Mill, Cripple Creek, Colorado ( The first modern CIP plant in Australia was commissioned in 1975 at Canbelego, New South Wales, to retreat 6 In South Africa, the first CIP plant was commissioned in 1978 By the late 1980s, most of the equipment and processes that today characterize CIP technology were in place. By 2000, several hundred plants had been built. The majority of the activated carbon used for precious metal recovery is either granular coconut-shell carbon or peat-based extruded carbon. Important considerations when selecting an activated carbon for use in a CIP operation include gold-loading kinetics (activity), gold-loading capacity, elution kinetics, level to which gold can be eluted, strength and abrasion resistance, particle-size distribution, and wet density. The properties of a particular activated-carbon sample will have a significant impact on most aspects of the gold-recovery operation, affecting variables such as carbon inventory, residence times, gold losses, carbon losses, and elution conditions. Therefore, due consideration must be given to the physical and chemical properties of the virgin carbon when selecting a particular brand for precious-metal recovery. In addition to standard ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials; now ASTM International) procedures (see Several different methods for monitoring the rate at which gold is adsorbed onto carbon from an alkaline cyanide solution have been proposed ( Essentially, all the procedures involve contacting a known mass of carbon with a solution of known initial gold concentration, collecting and analyzing samples of the solution over a period of time, and then calculating the activity of the carbon sample based on the data obtained. Unfortunately, there is still currently no accepted standard method for evaluating carbon activity. A number of the test methods are summarized in Curtin University method (modified Mintek method – Tennant Ltd. method ( Mintek method ( Calgon Corporation method ( Pica Pty Ltd. method ( Sutcliffe Speakman ( It should be noted that the first-order rate equation, on which most of the calculations of a rate constant are based, does not apply when the carbon is near equilibrium and when solution grades of the test liquor are depleted ( The AMIRA P420A Gold Industry Survey of Australasian mining operations (   The gold-loading capacity of an activated carbon, often referred to as the The approach used by Attrition resistance or hardness of the carbon is (in part) inversely related to its kinetic activity. That is, increasing the internal surface area of the carbon will yield a more active material but will weaken the structure, rendering it more susceptible to breakage. Many methods have been proposed for determining the resistance of activated carbons to particle-size degradation under service conditions, including the ball-pan hardness method, the Denver cell wet-attrition test, the stirring-bar method, and the dust-elutriation method. No method has been accepted as an industry standard. However, the ball-pan hardness method has been used widely in the carbon industry and is useful for establishing a measurable characteristic of the carbon for comparison purposes. Based on an ASTM method ( There are several methods available for the measurement of wet attrition resistance ( Methods used in the gold-mining industry are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( Methods used are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( Three methods of surface-area determination are of relevance to gold processing: The specific surface area of the carbon is measured by the adsorption of a gas of known dimension (typically nitrogen) under standard conditions of temperature and pressure, in the low-pressure range of an adsorption isotherm. The iodine number represents an approximation of the surface area available to most adsorbates ( The carbon–tetrachloride activity (CTC activity) of a carbon is a measure of the micropore volume or activation level of the material ( Methods used are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( Methods used are typically based on the ASTM procedure ( This test is only necessary for virgin carbons intended for use on plants using slotted screens ( Models can be useful tools for assessing the influence of design, operational variables and cost factors on circuit performance ( High-quality experimental data are required in order to make effective use of models and simulations ( Leach feed-grade – solids and solution Leach-feed pulp density Solids flow rate Specific gravity (SG) of solids and solution Volumes of the leach and adsorption tanks, pulp density, carbon concentration Leach/adsorption tank profiles – gold concentration in solid, liquid, carbon Tailings grade and density Barren and loaded carbon grades Modeling the CIP/CIL process has been attempted by a number of researchers since the 1980s ( It is not intended to exhaustively review all the models that have been published over the years; as an overview, several of the models will be briefly described, including the Nicol model based on simple film-diffusion theory, the Stange model based on population balance, and the Liebenberg and Van Deventer model based on pore diffusion.  The model was tested in steady-state continuous tests and batch tests and was then extended to simulate a five-stage CIP pilot plant. The Mintek leaching kinetic model was incorporated so that the model could also be used for modeling CIL plants. The Mintek model has been further developed into a simulator (SIMCIL), which is available on-line to sponsors of the AMIRA P420 Gold Processing Technology collaborative project. In a series of three reports, This distribution takes into account the noninstantaneous nature of carbon transfer and any carbon leakage from tank to tank. The approach removes one of the major assumptions of other models, viz., that carbon transfer is instantaneous.  The model was tested through validation testing and three case-study tests. Testing was performed for different scenarios such as carbon leakage and concurrent leaching. Model results were in good agreement with actual plant data. The three case studies were performed to study the effects of carbon transfer, leaching, and eluted-carbon loadings and to demonstrate the model's ability to simulate a wide range of operating conditions. For example, for the effect of carbon transfer, four different modes of carbon transfers were modeled – carousel operation where all the carbon is transferred to the next tank, continuous-transfer operation, and two types of sequential transfer.   This more recent model attempts to take into account changes in the parameters of the isotherm between tanks with an empirical relationship to the effect of changing cyanide levels down the cascade with feed cyanide concentration and feed pH value as the parameters. Recent developments in gold processing have seen a greater proportion of circuits with a CIL, or part CIL configuration, compared with the early CIP plants. The number of leach and adsorption stages in modern CIP/CIL plants is variable. Most of the sites have none or only one or two leach tanks. As the number of adsorption stages increases, the amount of carbon required at each stage decreases ( In summary, increasing the number of stages will have the following effects on the circuit ( Less carbon is required to achieve the same barren solution gold concentration. Higher gold loadings on the carbon in each stage (except the first stage). Lower weighted-average gold loading on carbon. Less gold lock-up (lower gold inventory). Less carbon abrasion and gold loss. Shorter carbon retention time, thus lowering fouling potential. CIL can often be an attractive option. There are advantages from a capital cost point of view but this arrangement may present a number of operational problems. For example, carbon and gold inventory is higher for a CIL operation compared with a typical CIP operation ( The overall extraction of gold from the ore is increased owing to increased residence time in the leach. The increase in solution tenor in the adsorption feed, combined with the fact that little leaching takes place in the last few stages in the plant, resulting in improved adsorption performance and overall increase in gold recovery. The difference between the CIL and CIP routes is reduced as more stages are added and the required inventory is decreased ( The amount of carbon in the CIL circuit is not dependent on the size of the vessels but on total gold input and number of stages. A typical CIL circuit will have lower carbon concentrations than in a CIP circuit because the leach vessels are typically much larger than normal adsorption vessels. The amount of pulp that has to be transferred to move the required amount of carbon is, therefore, significantly increased. This increases the flow through the interstage screens, which have either to be enlarged or supplemented by external screens. Transfer times tend to be longer than for CIP operations and the plant is upset for longer periods. In addition, leaching and adsorption requirements may easily be in conflict and optimization of these stages may be difficult to achieve.  One of the few significant mechanical innovations in CIP in the past 15 Elimination of carbon back-mixing due to carbon not being transferred as a batch in cascade CIP Removal of the recirculating-pulp load Reduced capital costs Reduced operating costs  An important consideration related to carbon residence time is that the longer the carbon remains in contact with the pulp, the greater is the extent of fouling and the greater is the detrimental effect on adsorption of gold (  A higher carbon inventory is often the result of a low carbon activity, caused either by inefficient regeneration or circuits with high fouling capacity (e.g., flotation tails circuits).    There is sufficient carbon in the adsorption plant; Good eluted-carbon assays (<40 There is a minimum of leaching in the last few adsorption stages; Carbon activity is consistently high through good acid washing and regeneration practices; and There is minimal co-current flow of carbon through the circuit caused by leakage of carbon through interstage screens. The final point is of particular importance for slotted screens. Off-specification or poorly prepared carbon may contain a large fraction of granules that are of a shape or size that can pass through the screen. Leakage also results from holed screens due to poor maintenance. Relatively little concurrent flow of carbon is required for the efficiency of adsorption to be affected adversely ( It has often been suggested that more carbon should be added to the later stages of an adsorption circuit than to the early stages to scavenge gold (  Modeling Australasian circuits using SIMCIL has generally shown little or no benefit by skewing carbon distribution to either the front or back of the circuit. Two exceptions to this general rule are (1) where leaching continues down the circuit, there is an advantage is moving the carbon to the back of the circuit, and (2) where the ore contains a preg-robbing component, advantage can be gained by having higher concentrations of carbon in the front of the circuit. One significant factor that has been noted in the modeling is the effect of variable carbon distribution in a circuit on soluble gold loss (see It can be seen from the table that, after normalizing the carbon inventory, the minimum solution-loss result is achieved with equal concentration of carbon in all tanks. Significant additional solution loss results with variable distribution. The model successfully predicted the trend observed in the plant. Barren-carbon grades of 20–50  The majority of sites reported carbon losses of between 10 and 30 High carbon inventories result in extended carbon residence, with the carbon being subjected to increased attrition time in the tanks. However, the major source of carbon loss is during the elution and regeneration stages, arising from mechanical factors during carbon transfer (short radius bends in transfer piping, high pumping velocity, high carbon density, and screening) or from uncontrolled regeneration leading to burning of the carbon, resulting in reduced attrition resistance. Higher gold loadings on carbon have the beneficial effect of decreasingthe size requirements of the elution-regeneration plant. Some savings in carbon usage rate may also be achieved owing to reduced carbon handling. Carbon inventory will not be significantly affected, although the average carbon activity in the circuit may decrease due to longer average carbon residence times ( Carbon loading is strongly influenced by the gold tenor in the pregnant solution. Loaded carbon values can be up to 10,000 times higher than the gold tenor in solution (   The smaller the particle, the greater is the adsorption rate. Although the size range of particles in the circuit is relatively small, it is nevertheless significant. For the same contact time, the smaller particles will become loaded to higher values than the larger particles, and the gold loadings on individual particles will be distributed as a result. The method of carbon transfer also has an effect. The mean gold loading on the carbon in the circuit decreases from the first to the last contactor in the adsorption train. During the transfer cycle carbons from different tanks become mixed to some degree, unless the complete carbon inventory in each tank is instantaneously moved upstream.  In the Woollacott–Erasmus study, it was found that 11% of the carbon contained 30% of the gold, this carbon being classified as small, highly loaded particles that could impair the performance of adsorption and elution processes. Such particles would have lower than expected adsorption rates before they are removed from the adsorption circuit. In addition, some fraction of the gold in these particles is likely to be found in the smaller pores of the carbon and so may be less accessible to elution. Modifying operating practices to reduce the proportion of carbon that is loaded in this way should improve the adsorption and elution. Carbon movement can either be performed in one transfer per day or numerous small transfers using either of the following methods ( Loaded carbon is transferred from the first tank and then sequentially down the bank until regenerated carbon is added to the last tank. This is known as Regenerated carbon is added to the last tank and then carbon is transferred sequentially upstream until loaded carbon is transferred from the head tank. This is known as Down-bank transfer temporarily depletes one stage of carbon, which creates longer transfer times, effectively reduces number of stages available for gold recovery and results in significant loss of gold to tails. This loss increases substantially if the activity of the carbon is reduced. Up-bank transfer temporarily doubles the carbon concentration in one of the stages, returning to normal as the batch is transferred. This transfer regimen creates more mixing of the carbon and a flatter gold on carbon profile but is considered more desirable than increasing tails loss. Hence, up-bank transfer is the preferred method. The relative performance values for the transfer of various fractions of the carbon inventory at each stage during each cycle are given in The operating costs associated with elution and regeneration are proportional to the rate of carbon transfer through the circuit ( As noted in Section 4.10, carbon is typically moved up the circuit in a batchwise fashion from tank to tank. The ultimate aim is to ensure that carbon is delivered to the first tank in the circuit for removal and elution at a rate that accommodates the planned gold production and targets gold loading on the carbon. A secondary aim is to maintain the desired carbon concentration profile through the circuit. The process of carbon control and measurement has been almost entirely manual in operation. Carbon transfer pumps for each tank are normally managed by the process technician by manually switching the pumps on and off as required. Similarly, carbon concentrations in each tank are determined by manually sampling a volume of pulp, screening out the carbon, measuring the volume of carbon with a measuring cylinder, and converting this volume to a concentration (g/L) by assuming a density factor (typically 0.5 The first attempt to improve this process was the development of the Debex Carbon Concentration (C While the Debex meter did perform as described, the uptake in the industry was low, and Debex ceased marketing the unit in the early 2000s. With a greater focus from the industry on optimization in recent times, Mintek have recommenced marketing the meter directly, as the Mintek C An alternative to the Mintek meter has recently been developed by the Gold Technology Group at Curtin University in Perth ( Both devices make possible the automation of the carbon transfer pumps, providing a more consistent and precise carbon movement process. As noted previously, carbon kinetic activity is an important factor in the efficient operation of a CIP circuit. Lower carbon activity will result in higher carbon inventories in the circuit, lower gold loadings on the carbon, and higher soluble gold losses from the circuit. The average carbon activity in a circuit is mainly a function of the efficiency of the carbon regeneration process (i.e., not the activity of the new carbon). The importance of returning the barren carbon to good kinetic activity has long been known ( Obtaining a good kinetic activity for a barren carbon is a function of 3 steps: Acid washing to remove inorganic adsorbates, such as calcium Elution to remove gold, silver, and base metals Thermal regeneration to remove organic adsorbates and refresh active sites In general, process operations manage the acid washing and elution stages well; however, the thermal regeneration process is often problematic. Lack of focus in this area often leads to underinvestment in good equipment, poor operating practices (insufficient temperature/residence-time/steam), and poor maintenance. Often operations will cease thermal regeneration for an extended period due to equipment failure. While there is often no observed immediate impact, over time a significant degradation in CIL performance will occur. More recently, there has been a renewed focus on better carbon regeneration, as part of the overall focus on improved carbon management. Recent publications ( This chapter has focused on advances made in the design and operation of CIP and CIL plants. Most of the advances in recent years have been in the area of carbon management. Trends toward cyanide-free elution (e.g.,