Frothers are used in flotation to reduce bubble size and as a consequence increase gas holdup. For 1-alcohols, C 4 to C 7, and three commercial frothers, MIBC, DF250 and F150, it is shown that at equivalent Sauter mean bubble size gas holdup depends on frother type. The paper explains the gas holdup result by showing the effect of frother type on single bubble rise velocity profile, i.e., local velocity vs. distance (up to 350cm). For example, a 1.45mm bubble in 0.4mmol/L pentanol hardly slows relative to water only while in 0.4mmol/L hexanol it reaches minimum velocity. This corresponds to the higher gas holdup in 1-hexanol compared to 1-pentanol. To compare frothers we introduce velocity at 300cm vs. concentration and the concentration to reach minimum velocity, CMV. The CMV illustrates the strong frother effect: for example, CMV for the alcohols decreases by about one order of magnitude for every 1 C increase in chain length. The decrease in CMV with frother type correlates with the increase in gas holdup. It is shown that all frothers tested follow the same minimum velocity-size trend modeled reasonably by the relationship proposed by Karamanev for terminal velocity.Bubble size is a key variable in flotation and other bubble reactors and recent developments are making measurement more routine ( The substitution implies that gas holdup is uniquely related to bubble size, as assumed in drift flux analysis ( The setup, similar to Replicate measurements on gas holdup and bubble size were made and the mean and standard deviation are displayed on the Figures. The column was operated at a gas superficial velocity of 1 The same setup described by Replication required extensive washing, with up to 25 times the column volume (ca. 20     To compare frothers,  Treating the minimum velocity as terminal (U The single bubble rise velocity profile is measured to help interpret the lack of correspondence between bubble size and gas holdup. In determining the velocity profile a strict protocol was established: the column was filled to precisely 350   Rather than employing the full profile to compare frothers we introduce the concentration to attain minimum velocity at a given distance, CMV. The choice here of 300 The CMV results for alcohols ( Interpretation of gas holdup using single bubble velocity omits multiple bubble size and swarm hindering effects. The evidence is that examining other bubble sizes besides 1.45 Detailed discussion on mechanisms related to frother type is outside the scope but would involve such factors as: mass transfer rate, molecular orientation and packing at the bubble surface, surface mobility, surface activity, surface tension gradients, hydration effects, surface viscosity and drag. Future publications will explore correlations between CMV and HLB (hydrophilic–lipophilic balance) and between velocity and shape, following the observation of others ( Terminal rise velocity is probably the most quoted property of bubble motion. The fact that there is a velocity profile means determination of terminal velocity in presence of surfactants requires care. The evidence is that the bubble reaches the same minimum velocity regardless of concentration, lower concentrations simply requiring more time (distance) to reach the minimum. Recognizing this we apply two criteria to define terminal: when velocity reaches minimum with distance; or when velocity at a given distance reaches minimum with concentration. Respecting these criteria current results are combined with previous data to generate terminal velocity vs. bubble size which shows frother (surfactant) type is not a major factor ( In this study generating single bubble velocity profiles to help interpret bubble size vs. gas holdup data in frother systems the following are the main findings: The different frothers produce about the same minimum bubble size but not the same maximum gas holdup. The effect on gas holdup is related to the effect of frother type on bubble rise velocity. Frothers are compared by plotting velocity at 300 The order of increase in gas holdup with frother type corresponds to the order of decrease in CMV with frother type. For alcohols, the CMV decreases by about one order of magnitude for every 1 C increase. The minimum velocity vs. bubble size is shown to be independent of frother type; and equating with terminal velocity the trend is fitted by the model of Karamanev. The work was conducted under the Chair in Mineral Processing funded through