Viscosity measurements of polymeric flocculant solutions of poly-dimethyldiallylammonium chloride (DMDAAC) and poly-acrylamide/acrylic acid (AM/AA) families at various concentrations and solution chemistry have been carried out using the Cannon–Fenske routine viscometer. In this study, the viscosity behavior of these polymer solutions is described in terms of reduced viscosity. From the reduced viscosity-polymer concentration (η
                     red-C) plot, the linearity of the viscosity behavior is observed for the nonionic polymer (poly-AM). The nonlinear behavior of the ionic polymer solutions of the cationic (poly-DMDAAC) and the anionic (poly-AM/AA) obtained from this study is the result of electroviscous effects. For the cationic polymer solutions, the polymer concentration (C) and molecular weight (MW) dependence of the viscosity results mainly from the second-order electroviscous and hydrodynamic effects, respectively. Ionicity dependence of the viscosity of the anionic polymer solution may be attributed to the second-order electroviscous effect. The effect of solution pH and electrolyte addition using sodium chloride on the viscosity of charge type polymer solutions is due to the third-order electroviscous effect. The hydrodynamic and electroviscous effects will be discussed in detail.High molecular weight polymers are used extensively as flocculants in the mineral industry. Flocculation of colloidal particles using these polymers is accomplished via charge–patch neutralization and/or bridging process. According to the Einstein’s theory of viscosity of colloidal suspensions, the relative viscosity is a function of the volume fraction of suspended particles. The primary electroviscous effect is due to distortion of the electrical double layer around the particles by gravity or shearing process, which introduces an additional energy dissipation contribution to the viscosity of the suspension. The resulting contribution to the viscosity is proportional to the volume fraction of the suspended particles. The secondary electroviscous effect refers to the change in viscosity behavior of charged particles arising from The tertiary electroviscous effect is related to changes in the shape of a non-rigid, charged particle due to The electroviscous effects for polymer solutions, in principle, are similar to those for colloidal suspensions. The difference is that a polymer molecule is much more flexible than a solid particle. As a result, the hydrodynamic volume of the polymer molecule can vary substantially at the same chain length.   Staudinger’s proposed law of viscosity is as follows: However, experimental data collected did not always agree with this law and it appears that it is valid only for polymers of very low molecular weight ( Note that the [ The ionicity and molecular weight of polymers have significant effects on both viscosity of polymer solutions and flocculation of mineral suspensions. The viscosity of ionic polymer solutions is also sensitive to pH and electrolyte concentration of makedown water. Eight polymeric flocculants with different ionicity and molecular weight were used in this study. The characteristics of these polymers are summarized in Viscosity measurements of polymer solutions at various concentrations and solution chemistry were carried out using a Cannon–Fenske viscometer. The Size 100 Viscometer was used to measure the solution viscosity of polymers with MW ranging from 0.05 The concentration ( The The slight increase in the The MW dependence of the reduced viscosity shown in  For nonionic polymers, the increase in the The variation of reduced viscosity with solution pH for various types of polymers at a concentration of 0.03 The effect of the solution pH on the From It is noted that the The effect of electrolyte addition using NaCl on the reduced viscosity of various polymer solutions at a concentration of 0.03 The Again, From The viscosity behavior of polymeric flocculant solutions is discussed in terms of hydrodynamic and electroviscous effects. The importance of the hydrodynamic effects is shown by the molecular weight dependence of reduced viscosity of the cationic polymers. The electroviscous effects, especially The financial support from the Faculty of Engineering, Chiang Mai University is gratefully appreciated.