Nickel is an integral material to our modern, high-performance technological society. With increasing emphasis being put on energy efficiency and global climate change, it is important for companies to understand in detail the energy use and greenhouse gas implications of their business. The present analysis is a facility-level life-cycle assessment of these twin impacts covering the entire global nickel industry. Cradle-to-gate results (including extraction, production, and fabrication) are presented here for selected nickel and nickel alloy products, including upstream energy required for fuel production. Stainless steel is one of the most highly recycled metals in the world. In order to assess the energy and carbon implications of secondary material use, recycling scenarios for three grades of stainless steel (AISI 304, 409, and 430) were considered. Using the current scenario as a baseline, maximum use of scrap (within technical limits) and all-virgin production results varied widely. Smelting/Class II refining was the most energy intensive step of production, accounting for 50–90% of total primary energy use. Transport contributed 2–11% of the total, depending on the nickel product considered. A sensitivity analysis revealed that the results are highly dependent on the energy requirements for upstream fuel production, which apply to all steps of the assessment. These results will help the nickel industry navigate energy and climate change concerns in the coming years.Nickel is in many ways a metal of affluent societies. It is not necessary for the construction of large structures, as iron and steel are, or for electrical conduction, as copper and aluminium are. Its major uses are for high-performance technological products, which take advantage of its valuable characteristics such as high heat resistance, strength, and durability. That said, nickel and its primary alloy, stainless steel, provide such utility that their presence in modern technological society is pervasive, from cutlery to industrial reactor tanks to jet engines. The life cycle of nickel, as for most metals, is relatively complicated: even just for nickel fabricated semi-products (prior to manufacturing into final products), there are numerous grades of metal with varying compositions and properties. Nearly 70% of nickel is used for stainless steel fabrication. Nickel is also used in non-stainless alloy steels (7%), nickel- and copper-based alloys (11%), nickel plating (6%), foundry (3%), and other specialty uses (4%) ( Nickel is also quite energy intensive to produce, as the results here will show. As international discourse and policy on energy consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, and climate change develops, large industrial facilities such as nickel smelters and refineries will feel financial, regulatory, and public pressure to act responsibly. Most large companies now produce annual reports that attempt to quantify the energy and carbon impacts of their operations, and detail plans and programs that further sustainability in the metals sector. The question of which metrics to use to evaluate sustainability is under debate; for example, the International Council for Mining and Minerals has developed a set of Principles that members must implement ( Because of its large environmental footprint, metal mining and production has been a focus of energy analysis and life-cycle assessment for several decades. Other researchers have attempted to look at the entire metals sector as a system, with links among metals at all stages of the life cycle ( Concerns of the energy and carbon implications of the nickel industry have increased in recent years with the re-introduction of nickel pig iron from China for use as a low-grade ferronickel substitute. Nickel pig iron was produced in Europe several decades ago, before the introduction of new pyrometallurgical processes that were more energy efficient and produced higher grade ferronickel. In China, nickel pig iron is typically produced in small-scale blast furnaces that had been taken out of carbon steel production for economic and environmental reasons, though the recent ramp up in production has brought several electric arc furnaces on line as well. Chinese demand for nickel in stainless production has exploded in recent years, as with most metals, as production levels have increased nearly 10 times since the start of the decade. Chinese domestic demand for nickel has also increased dramatically during that period, from approximately 50 In an effort to quantify the environmental impacts of nickel specifically, the international Nickel Institute commissioned a series of life-cycle assessment studies ( The uncertainty of LCA results can be reduced by incorporating more detailed inventory data. The purpose is to provide an updated and extremely detailed accounting of the energy use and greenhouse gas impacts of nickel production worldwide, covering all major facilities and representing nearly 100% of world production. This study is based on publicly available facility data, which can have their own limitations, including out-of-date information, aggregation of process steps, ambiguous treatment of co-products, and exclusion of low-volume inputs. Therefore, while the present study is more comprehensive in its coverage of facilities than those previous, the lack of up-to-date survey information introduces some uncertainty into the results. Current processing of nickel ores utilizes an assortment of technologies, both pyro- and hydrometallurgical, with much more variety than for base metals such as copper or aluminium ( In 2005, there were approximately 66 active nickel-producing mines, over 50 smelters and Class II processing facilities, and 25 Class I refineries in operation. (Since that time, several additional production facilities have come on-line.) The defining characteristic of the present study is that it accounts for energy use and greenhouse gas emissions on a facility level instead of using average values. As described in detail below, this assessment incorporates data on the ore grade and type, processing technology, fuel types (including for electricity generation), geographical location, product quality, and co-products of every nickel production facility in the world. The methodology used here resembles that described by The functional unit for the assessment is one ton of nickel or nickel alloys. Results are given for Class I nickel (refined to greater than 99% purity), Class II nickel (refined to less than 99% purity, such as ferronickel and nickel oxide sinter), as well as several grades of stainless steel, which is the most important first use of nickel. The products considered here are listed in A complete energy life-cycle assessment should track the direct and indirect energy inputs into all processes and stages of the product life cycle. Indirect inputs are those that are upstream of a process, such as the energy needed to construct the smelting facility itself. In practice, including all indirect inputs is extremely difficult without using gross average data from life-cycle inventory databases or environmental input–output (EIO) tables. As the present study focuses on energy and greenhouse gas emissions, the upstream energy required for fuel production is included in the analysis. This is the only category of upstream (or indirect) inputs that is included explicitly. A schematic diagram of the nickel production system and system boundaries used here is shown in Production, trade, and energy data are all for 2005, or the closest available year. Losses are considered during mining, milling, and beneficiation, smelting, refining, and scrap preparation. Transportation is considered between each step and is assumed to be 100% material efficient (that is, no nickel is lost). The major co-products of nickel smelting and refining, namely copper matte and blister copper, cobalt compounds, and sulfuric acid, are included in the analysis. Following previous studies ( Mine production statistics are generally widely published; however, there are often inconsistencies across sources. A number of sources were consulted in order to create a table of nickel mines that included nickel and/or ore production tonnages, ore grade and type, geographical location, and mining technique. These included Electricity requirements for hard rock mining are generally much higher for underground mining than for open-pit mining because of the need for drilling, ventilation, water removal, and hoisting of rock to the surface. Open-pit mines generally consume more liquid fuel because of the use of mining trucks to transport rock up from the pit. For the present study, consumption of diesel fuel and electricity was derived from a previous study that grouped different mining regions according to ore type and grade ( Milling and beneficiation also consumes large quantities of electric power, as large boulders must be crushed down to the size of the mineral grains. Electricity consumption therefore depends crucially on this grain size, as well as the rock hardness, number of screenings, and factors around the particular process of beneficiation. In general, milling and beneficiation are applied only to sulfide ores, though some laterite ores do get milled and most go through a screening process to remove large boulders. The use of flotation agents in beneficiation leads to direct emissions of CO Average final energy consumption values are shown in Nickel smelting is the most complicated stage of the global nickel life cycle, and the most important in terms of energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Its complexity stems from the range of technologies used as well as the variety of intermediate nickel products that are outputs of the smelting process, including ferronickel, nickel matte, nickel oxide sinter, and nickel pig iron. In past energy analysis research on nickel, two processes have generally been considered: (1) pyrometallurgy of sulfide ores using flash furnaces and (2) hydrometallurgy of lateritic ores using high-pressure acid leaching (HPAL) and solvent extraction/electrowinning (SX/EW) ( Drying, calcining, and electric arc furnace (EAF) smelting of laterite ores for the production of ferronickel, and a small amount of matte. Krupp-Renn direct reduction of lateritic ores into ferronickel (only at the Oheyama smelter, Japan). HPAL hydrometallurgy, where an acid solvent is applied to laterite ores that dissolves much of the nickel. The Caron process, where ammonia is applied to roasted calcine and nickel and cobalt are extracted electrolytically from the resulting liquor. Pyrometallurgy of sulfidic ores using Direct Outokumpu Nickel (DON), conventional, and Inco Oxygen flash furnaces to produce nickel matte. Nickel matte production using a reverberatory furnace (only at the Chengdu smelter, China). Blast furnace (BF) and EAF production of nickel pig iron (only in China) and EAF production of secondary nickel pig iron (7.9% Ni, 13.8% Cr, 70.3% Fe, only at the International Nickel Reclamation Company, United States). This list corresponds for the most part with the processes considered in the nickel LCA conducted by As with mine production, a production table of intermediate products from nickel smelters was created using the same sources listed above, with additional data derived from company and trade websites. This table includes production statistics (in contained nickel), nickel content in the final product, feed ore/concentrate type, and process used. Energy is consumed for different purposes depending on the process. Pyrometallurgical processing of laterite ores has high fossil and electrical energy requirements, as laterite ores have a high water content and the presence of magnesia leads to high melting temperature. For most pyrometallurgical processes, fossil fuel is consumed both as a source of heat and as a reductant. HPAL processing requires energy to heat the acid solvent and to pressurize the chamber. Electric arc furnaces consume significant amounts of electricity, and also use carbonaceous electrodes and electrode paste, which produces CO Energy use data were derived on a facility level using several global nickel smelter surveys ( Additional refining to remove the impurities remaining after smelting or extract nickel from solution is necessary to produce Class I (>99% purity) nickel. As with smelting, there are several processes that are used, including electrorefining, electrowinning, hydrogen sulfide reduction (Sherritt), Caron, and carbonyl (Mond) processing. The majority of Class I nickel in 2005 was produced from matte, though the future dominance of laterites as a source of nickel ore means that HPAL and related technologies will be much more important in the future ( Again using global production data, a table of refineries was created that shows production statistics, geographical location, and process technologies for every Class I nickel refinery in the world. Sources included Country-level production data for austenitic and ferritic stainless steels for 2005 were gathered from There are many non-nickel inputs into stainless steels, as listed in The transport of intermediate products represents a significant and often over-simplified portion of overall primary energy consumption for metals processing and production. Traded products included in this analysis were chromite, nickel, and iron ores and concentrates, ferrochromium, ferronickel, nickel oxide sinter, nickel pig iron, nickel matte, refined nickel, direct reduced iron (DRI), and scrap of all kinds. A trade matrix was created for each of these products, derived from global trade statistics for 2005 ( Chromite and nickel ore have relatively low transport-related energy consumption figures because smelters are often located in mining regions. Nickel pig iron is assumed to be used entirely in the Chinese stainless steel industry. In order to convert from local electricity consumption to primary energy use, the effective electrical efficiency was derived for each country (and individual facilities, where possible) using data from the International Energy Agency (IEA) and company reports and websites ( Three major co-products of nickel production were considered here: copper, cobalt, and sulfuric acid. These are produced at different stages of the nickel production cycle and slightly different allocation procedures were used for each. Copper is often co-mined with nickel in large sulfide deposits and smelted into a mixed-metal matte, which also usually contains a small amount of cobalt. These mattes have highly variable compositions from facility to facility; the ratio of nickel to copper ranges from 0.8 at Canada's Inco Sudbury smelter to nearly 40 at Australia's Kalgoorlie smelter ( Sulfur dioxide (SO Cobalt is an important co-product of nickel production; refined cobalt is a product of nearly all Class I nickel refineries. Cobalt production statistics from nickel refineries were gathered from the United States Geological Survey ( Stainless steel is one of the more highly recycled metals; the secondary nickel content of stainless steel production was more than 40% in 2000 ( Nickel scrap inputs to Class I refining were assumed to be 0.7% of the total, with a maximum content of 5% ( Energy used for scrap collection and preparation is generally difficult to ascertain with any precision, due to the quickly changing nature of the scrap market, lack of robust trade statistics, and highly disaggregated nature of local scrap industries. Energy consumption was assumed to be 67 Production losses of nickel and alloying elements increase the amount of primary material and energy required to produce a unit of final product. Elemental losses from the various stages of production are shown in Fossil-based energy use is considered as an environmental impact category as it results in the depletion of non-renewable resources, as well as emissions to the atmosphere. Here, we consider only those emissions that contribute to global climate change (greenhouse gases). Direct fuel use, upstream energy, and fuel use for electricity generation were combined for each process to determine the amount of each fuel used per ton of product. This result was coupled with carbon intensity figures (mass of carbon dioxide emissions per ton product) from the Energy Information Administration ( There are many material inputs to nickel production that cause, either directly or indirectly, additional greenhouse gas emissions. Carbon-containing materials can evolve CO There are also greenhouse gas emissions that result directly from the processing of metal ores. These occur primarily from the pyrometallurgy of lateritic ores. Much of the nickel in laterite ores occurs as nickeliferous limonite of the chemical form (Fe,Ni)O(OH). During the ore preparation and smelting stages, the hydroxyl groups in the ore decompose and reform as water, in a process known as dehydration. The remaining oxygen is reduced directly during refining to form carbon dioxide. The blowing of oxygen through nickel matte can also produce nickel oxide by the oxidation of Ni For each of the nickel products included in the analysis ( In order to assess the sensitivity of the present analysis to certain input variables, each major variable was increased in isolation by 10% to examine the effect on total primary energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. Ferronickel and Class I refined nickel were considered. Comparable results for austenitic (304 grade) stainless steel can be found in The energy intensities of nickel and nickel products are highly variable, depending on raw material sources, process routes, and product specifications. For all nickel products, the smelting and refining (production) steps consume the most primary energy and are responsible for the highest greenhouse gas emissions of any category. Transportation accounts for 2–11% of energy use while mining and concentrating account for 7–35%, depending on the nickel product. Considering fuel type, coal/coke contributed the most primary energy of any fossil fuel type for each nickel product. Coal/coke is used for heating and directly in smelting as a reductant, and it is the source of a large portion of the electricity grid in many countries with large nickel industries, such as Australia. While some smelters are located near hydroelectric installations that provide cheap, clean power, such as the Xstrata refinery in Norway, the overall contribution of renewables (hydro, biomass, and geothermal energy) to the global production of nickel is at most 7%. The majority of primary energy is used directly, that is, as fossil fuel during the production of nickel. For nickel matte, however, the prevalent processes of electrorefining and electrowinning require much more electricity than they do direct fossil fuels. Ferronickel also has a large portion of its primary energy requirements due to electricity use in electric arc furnaces. 2005 production levels were 1100 None of the intermediate nickel products contain much secondary nickel and so scrap collection and processing represents an insignificant contribution to total energy consumption. Because relatively little Class I nickel scrap is available for recycling and few facilities are designed to accommodate secondary material, there is not much opportunity to realize significant energy and greenhouse gas savings through substitution for virgin material. These average results mask a wide variation in energy consumption at the facility level. On a contained nickel basis, energy consumption for nickel production spans a wide range of values, as seen in The different mining and beneficiation practices for underground and open-pit mines, as well as for sulfide and laterite ores, result in a wide range of energy requirements, as shown in Nickel occurs in natural deposits at much lower concentrations than many other base metals, such as iron and aluminium, and so nickel production requires correspondingly high volumes of rock that must be mined and processed. As clearly shown in It is clear from The refining step for Class I nickel is much less energy intensive than either the mining or smelting steps above. Most refining processes rely primarily on electricity as an energy source and does not require extensive heating. The energy credit from the co-production of cobalt during refining also lowers the net energy requirements slightly. The analysis for stainless steel is more complicated, as these alloys incorporate many more materials and process steps than for primary nickel production. For 304 grade austenitic stainless steel, current production requires 57 Given year 2005 production levels of 18.5 Unlike austenitic stainless steel, 409 grade ferritic stainless contains 0–0.5% titanium, which is extremely energy intensive to produce, requiring 644 430 grade ferritic stainless steel contains no titanium but 16% chromium. This increases its energy requirements slightly compared to 409 grade: current production requires 43.3 These energy savings have significant impacts on greenhouse gas emissions. The use of secondary material in austenitic and ferritic stainless steel production in 2005 prevented approximately 30 million tons of CO Nickel pig iron production has constituted much of the expansion of the nickel industry in China over the past several years. In 2005, Chinese production of nickel pig iron was 4.5 Increased use of nickel pig iron has other environmental consequences as well, stemming from the high level of coke use and the vintage of most small Chinese blast furnaces used for smelting. Elevated local levels of particulate matter and phosphorus contamination of stainless steel are two trends that should be expected, in the absence of dramatic improvement in industry practices in China. Energy analysis and life-cycle assessment results can be quite sensitive to certain model parameters. Sensitivity analysis revealed that changes in all major parameters had a much smaller effect than in previous work ( Although commercial ore grades are decreasing and nickel pig iron is growing in importance as a source of supply, new processing technologies may lead to an overall decrease in the energy requirements for ferronickel and refined nickel production. Atmospheric acid leaching of ore heaps does not require the intensive pressurization necessary for current HPAL technology. Combined biological and chemical hydrometallurgy of sulfide ores also has the potential to reduce dramatically the energy used in beneficiation and leaching. Bio-leaching does not require fine milling of sulfide ores prior to processing and also takes place at atmospheric pressure. Detailed energy consumption data are not available for these processes, but it will be important in coming years to examine whether these technological advances can balance the increases in energy requirements due to other factors. Detailed accounting of energy use and greenhouse gas emissions is now an integral part of corporate environmental strategy and responsibility. Accurate accounting over the product life cycle requires a large number of specific data, especially so for products with long and shifting supply chains. The use of average values can in many cases distort the picture by grossly under- or overestimating life-cycle impacts. In a culture where consumers of all kinds demand information about the energy and greenhouse gas impacts of a specific product in a specific place, and money is transacted based on that information as part of a carbon market, it is essential to perform life-cycle assessments with as much detail as possible. The present study provides results for nickel and nickel products and alloys based on facility-level data, accounting for ore type and grade, processing technology, fuel type, geographical location, country-to-country trade, and product quality. Thanks are due to my colleagues Barbara Reck, Jeremiah Johnson, and Thomas Graedel at the Center for Industrial Ecology at Yale University; Sophia Wong and Bruce McKeon at the Nickel Institute for guidance and suggestions; Jim Middleton for careful reading of the work; and John Barkas of Metalytics Pty Limited for valuable comments and data.