In this study lithium was extracted from β-spodumene with hydrofluoric acid leaching. The operating parameters studied were: solid–liquid ratio, stirring speed, particle size, temperature, reaction time and HF concentration. Reagents and products were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The lithium extraction efficiency of 90% could be reached with solid–liquid ratio, 1.82% (w/v); temperature, 75°C; HF concentration, 7% (v/v); stirring speed, 330rpm and reaction time, 20min. Al and Si can be precipitated as Na3AlF6 and Na2SiF6 with a recovery of 92%. Lithium carbonate was separated from leach liquor by carbonatation and crystallization during water evaporation, with recovery values of 90%, approximately.Lithium is a relatively rare metal, but it is found in many minerals due to its high chemical reactivity. However, there are a few minerals that are useful for the production of lithium compounds. The most important lithium mineral is spodumene, which generally is accompanied by quartz, feldspar and mica ( Important sources for the obtention of lithium are salt flats and salt lakes. The interest in them has considerably increased in the last two decades. In these sources, lithium is found mainly in a chloride form ( In Argentina, main lithium deposits are divided into those from brine deposits and those from spodumene. The salar with the greatest content of lithium is found between Salta and Catamarca provinces. This one is known as “Salar del Hombre Muerto”; it contains a total amount of 800,000 Spodumene occurs naturally in α phase, with a monoclinic structure of the pyroxene type. This structure is resistant to the attack of chemical agents, either gaseous or liquid. Spodumene transforms into its β phase through calcination at 1100 Lithium is considered a strategic metal, whose use has significantly expanded in the last years. Lithium compounds are used in the preparation of lubricants, in the manufacture of glass and special alloys, and also in the pharmaceutical industry, in the production of drugs used in psychiatry. Lithium and its compounds have recently found use in energy storage devices such as rechargeable lithium-ion batteries ( The most common industrial processes for the extraction of lithium from spodumene are acid and alkaline digestion, and the ionic exchange method. The products obtained through this methods are lithium carbonate, lithium hydroxide and lithium chloride, respectively. Acid digestion is carried out with concentrated sulphuric acid at temperatures higher than 250 There have been published relevant findings about the dissolution of β-spodumene in an autoclave at temperatures around 250  The β-spodumene dissolution with HF can be represented by the following reaction ( The objective of this study was to establish the optimal operational conditions for a new extraction process of lithium from β-spodumene with HF, in a closed vessel. Furthermore, a novel process for the recovery of Li The experimental tests were performed in a closed vessel of 500 The leaching agent was HF (40% The mineral used was α-spodumene, extracted from the mine “Las Cuevas”, located in the department of San Martín, San Luis, Argentina. The α-phase was calcined at 1100 The bulk composition of the ore is shown in The results of the characterization by XRD are shown in In In The results of the studies carried out by SEM and EDS on different particles of the sample, with and without thermal treatment, coincided with those obtained by XRD. The specific surface of the β-spodumene was 1.41 For each test, a mass of the ore and a volume of distilled water were placed into the reactor. The mixture was subsequently heated in a water bath, with stirring until the final work temperature was reached. Once the desired temperature was achieved, an appropriate amount of HF was added to the mixture, so as to obtain different acid concentrations. From that moment, the reaction time was calculated. Once the experiment was finished, the solid was filtered, dried at 75 Lithium was analyzed by atomic absorption to calculate the extraction percentage in all the experiments by the following equation: where: Li The operational parameters studied were: solid–liquid ratio, stirring speed, particle size, temperature, reaction time and HF concentration. The residual Al and Si in the liquor obtained after the leaching of the mineral were removed as the compounds Na The recovery of Li from the resulting solution after the precipitation of Al and Si can be carried out by any known method. In this case, the carbonation process was used. Lithium was precipitated from alkaline solutions using CO  In In order to investigate the effect of leaching temperature on the lithium extraction, a series of leaching experiments were performed from 10 to 75  To study the effect of stirring speed on the lithium extraction efficiency, experiments were performed on conditions of solid–liquid ratio, 1.82% ( When the stirring speed is over 330 Solid–liquid ratio effect on lithium extraction efficiency was investigated from 0.9 to 7.2% ( To study the effect of reaction time on the lithium extraction, experiments were conducted on conditions of the solid–liquid ratio, 1.82% ( In order to investigate the effect of HF concentration on the lithium extraction, a series of leaching experiments were performed from 5 to 30% ( In This can be explained considering that, for values above those stoichiometrically required for reaction (1), complete dissolution of β-spodumene is achieved and albite present in the sample begins to be dissolved, reaction (6). This leads to the formation of cryolithionite (Li  It can be inferred from The results indicate that the extraction efficiency of Li decreases with the augment of HF concentration because this augment favors the formation of Li The result of XRD characterization of the solids precipitated is shown in In To determine the recovery values of Na Na The resulting compounds Na  The liquor obtained after the recovery of Al and Si were evaporated until the concentration of Li was 20   Gravimetric analysis showed that the recovery of Li as Li The resulting lithium carbonate was analyzed by AAS to determine the purity of the precipitate. The concentration of major impurities in the lithium carbonate is shown in In summary, a process including the leaching with HF was employed to extract lithium from β-spodumene. The experimental results indicate that the optimal conditions to achieve a lithium extraction higher than 90% were: solid–liquid ratio, 1.82% (