Introduction:
                  Based on own experiences and the review of the recent literature, this paper focusses on actual theories about the physics of shock waves (i.e. mechanism of stone disintegration and tissue trauma), actual lithotriptor concepts, new technological developments, and the comparison of lithotriptors.
               
                  Material and Methods:
                  We performed a MEDLINE research, evaluating more than 50 articles on extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy. In addition, the results of recent experimental and clinical studies performed in collaboration with manufacturers and acoustic phycisists were included in this survey.
               
                  Results:
                  Today mainly two types of lithotriptors are provided by the companies: an economic ESWL-table or a more sophisticated urolithotriptor. Stone localization is predominantly based on fluoroscopy (isocentric C-arm). There are four discussed mechanisms of stone disintegration: the tear-and-shear forces by reflection of shock waves at acoustical interphases play a major role in the initiation of stone comminution, whereas the role of cavitation is limited to the final process of stone disintegration (together with dynamic fatigue). Recent studies did not support the theory of quasistatic squeezing. Nevertheless, larger focal zones seem to be advantageous, since shock wave energy (not peak pressure) represents the most important parameter for stone fragmentation. Energy density is responsible for shock wave induced tissue trauma, which is mainly caused by cavitation.
                  Electromagnetic sources are used most frequently in new lithotriptors (Siemens, Storz, Dornier, Direx), because of the variabilty of focal zone (i.e. different focussing principles, dual focus), constancy of the impulses, and long-term reliability (more than 1 Mio. shock waves). The clinical comparison of different lithotriptors should be based on modified Efficacy Quotients (i.e. distinguishing between curative and adjuvant auxiliary measures). Recent studies indicate, that actual lithotriptors are able to meet the “gold standard” of the Dornier HM3, however with all advantages of a multifunctional table, high patient comfort (i.e. treatment without general anesthesia) and significantly lower costs.
               
                  Conclusions:
                  After a decade of minimal changes and progress, exciting technological developments based on a better understanding of shock wave physics are taking place, which will definitively stimulate further research and thus improve the results of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy.Based on experimental results In these machines ( Between 1990 and 1992, most of the leading lithotriptor companies developed new machines or modified their systems ( A combined localization system of ultrasound A wide range of energy output of the shock wave source (i.e. peak pressure) aiming at an efficacy similar to the Dornier HM3 with respect to desintegration and retreatment rate. A larger aperture of the focussing system enabling treatment under minimal anaesthesia (no or i.v. analgesia), thus benefiting patient comfort and enabling out-patient ESWL. Integration of the shock wave source, the fluoroscopic unit and the ultrasound device in an endoscopic treatment table (i.e. work station) for multifunctional use of the lithotriptor. However, recent technical developments and treatment results, together with the fact that biliary lithotripsy has diminished in importance, had a significant impact on the development of further lithotriptor concepts Today, mainly two types of lithotriptors are provided by the manufacturers   Increasing perfection in three lithotriptor generations has led to systems of high fragmentation efficiency and minimal side effects. Despite this success, there was only limited agreement on the relevant fragmentation mechanisms. However, recent studies mainly promoted by manufacturers (i.e. Storz-Medical, Siemens, Dornier) lead to distinct agreement about physical parameters responsible for either stone fragmentation or renal trauma. Based on the current physical knowledge there are four different mechanisms of stone fragmentation are discussed ( This mechanism has been introduced primarily In addition to the direct strain action on the stone, the negative pressure wave causes cavitation in the water surrounding the stone and also, within the water in the microcracks and cleavage interfaces of the calculus. Cavitation erosion is especially observed at the anterior and posterior side of artificial stones in vitro Experiments with test stones revealed that the disintegration does not depend on the maximal shock wave pressure or the rise time which both have significant impact on the tear and shear forces, but much more on the shock wave energy. Earlier observations of first cleavage planes either pararallel or perpendicular to the wave propagation lead to a third “squeezing” theory of fragmentation described by Eisenmenger This theory stimulated the discussion about the importance of a large focal size and a lower focal pressure (i.e. in the HM3) compared to the small focal size with high pressure due to the large aperture in the newly designed systems. Experimental studies with translucent test stones and high speed fotography were able to demonstrate, that the passage of the shock wave front results in a high orthogonal pressure zone in the second third of the stone ( Recently, dynamic fatigue has been proposed as a general theory for stone comminution and tissue injury in SWL  The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) recently presented a draft for standardized measurement of shock waves. Herein, all relevant parameters describing a shock wave physically are listed and defined ( Concerning the relevance of these physical parameters for stone disintegration, various groups tried to reproduce the theory of quasistatic squeezing, because this would favorize a larger focal zone. However, the theory could not be confirmed because different focal zones had no impact on stone disintegration, primary fragmentation occurred orthogonal to the shock wave front, but not in the middle of the stone, if two stones are focussed with a total diameter less than the focal zone, only the first stone breaks. All these observations are consistent with the experimental work of Zhong On the other hand, in accordance with Eisenmenger Interestingly, this correlates well with recent results of an animal study concerning the sequence of shock wave energy for optimal fragmentation by Preminger's group Several strategies have been proposed to improve the efficiency of shock wave lithotripsy. The first one is based on the idea that forced collapse of cavitation bubbles by a shock wave can significantly enhance the damage to a nearby solid surface, and thus stone fragmentation. Recent studies using a piezoelectric annular array shock wave generator that can be retrofitted on an HM3 lithotriptor have demonstrated that stone fragmentation Theoretically it may be useful to adapt the focal size to the size of the stone, mainly to minimize the tissue trauma. Direx was the first manufacturer which presented three different types of ellipsoids for the electrohydraulic shock wave generator. Recently Storz-Medical introduced a lithotriptor enabling the use of two different focal sizes. Technically this can be realized by two different rise times of the shock wave using the same generator and paraboloid reflector ( Another strategy to improve shock wave efficiency relies on the mechanism of squeezing respectively spalling. Based on this principle, a shock wave with a large focal diameter (up to 20 Animal experiments as golden standard sudden changes (leaps) of impedance in the tissue penetrated by the shock wave, nuclei of cavitation in the parenchyma, blood, urine or bile, elasticity and resistance of the tissue exposed to shock waves. Recently, in cooperation with Siemens Medical Solutions an in-vitro test system was established aiming at a quantitative judgement of the renal vascular damage There is no doubt, that in the last decade peak pressure has been overestimated as the main factor for stone fragmentation. Future developments should be focussed on the optimization of the focal size to deliver adequate amounts of energy to disintegrate the stone and avoidng at the same time high levels of energy density representing the main physical parameter for induction of tissue trauma. Another limiting factor in this equation represents the aperture of the system enabling still anaesthesia-free treatment. Due to physics a small focus is only possible with large apertures and generators with small apertures (i.e. more painful) are only capable to form a big focus. It must be emphasized again that this holds true independent from the energy content and thus from the expected medical efficiency. Overall, it is most likely that further optimization of the pressure waveform, distribution, and sequence of the lithotriptor shock waves is needed in order to maximize stone comminution while minimizing tissue injury in SWL. At the moment, three types of shock wave sources are used in the different machines. The manufacturers tried to find solutions to improve or eliminate the disadvantages of each principle. Nevertheless, emphasis has been placed on the The electromagnetic systems are more durable than electrodes (life span up to 1,000,000 vs. 10,000 The major disadvantage of Despite technical improvement (Piezolith 3000, EDAP LT02), the main disadvantage of It becomes evident that some of the theoretical advantages (i.e. higher focal pressure, larger focal area) could not be translated into better clinical results (i.e. higher efficacy in the in vitro stone model did not result in lower retreatment rates; Treatment strategies in ESWL are to a great extent influenced by the imaging system available in a lithotriptor. Early second generation lithotriptors were equipped either with ultrasound or fluoroscopy. In the meantime, the various lithotriptor manufacturers have modified the stone localization systems favouring the use of an isocentric C-arm. Lithotriptors with a single fluoroscopic localization system especially designed for urological purposes (i.e. Lithostar Multiline, Modulith SLX) present another alternative ( minimizing the localization error due to respiratory movement of the kidney and ureter, providing better image quality (especially if airbags are used) due to the shorter distance to the object. Such concepts are realized in three most recent lithotriptors (Storz Modulith SLX-F2; Siemens Lithoskop, Direx Integra). Recently, Storz-Medical presented a new computer-aided system to reduce the radiation exposure of the patient: the Lithotrack in the Modulith SLK ( Sonographical localization represents the cheapest localization modality. In these machines, either coaxial or lateral ultrasound are utilized. There is no doubt that sonographical localization of most renal calculi is possible and treatment success can be adequately assessed due to real time scanning without X-ray exposure. Moreover, the localization error due to deviation can be excluded, if a coaxial scanner is used. This is a major beneficial point in the treatment of children and infants. However, several The efficacy quotient (EQ) defined by Preminger, Clayman and Denstedt The EQ as originally defined by Denstedt, Clayman and Preminger takes into account only the auxiliary procedures after ESWL. However, as auxiliary procedures performed prior to ESWL also have the purpose to enhance treatment results, Tailly Another modification of the efficacy quotient aims at further precision of the lithotriptor results. Whereas no auxiliary measures before lithotripsy were performed in the first USA study on the Dornier HM3, now, the percentage of pre-ESWL procedures amounts to 30% to 40%, which mainly includes the placement of ureteral stents for the treatment of larger stones (>2 There is no doubt that the modified EQ represents a valuable parameter for the overall efficiency of a lithotriptor. Nevertheless, the retrospective analysis of ESWL results can only demonstrate certain trends and concepts in the development of new stone machines, i.e. the higher retreatment rates of second generation lithotriptors or the reduced number of ureteral calculi treated on lithotriptors using ultrasound localization. Moreover, all EQs have been designed with the specific treatment philosophy of the old Dornier HM3: All patients had general or epidural anaesthesia, the treatment should be completed by a single session, and the stone-free rate was determined after 3 months This scenario has changed completely: On the new machines, almost all treatments are performed either without or maximally under i.v. analgesia. This has resulted in a higher re-treatment rate, but also induced the development of new treatment concepts, such as stir-up ESWL, low pressure treatments or the booster technique Since the stone-free rate significantly determines the EQ, the mean observation time should be mentioned (i.e. EQ The specific advantages and drawbacks of the different machines can only be determined by There is no doubt that the early series on the Dornier HM3 have established a high standard concerning the clinical efficacy of ESWL, which could not be reached by every of the second generation machines ( The number of pre-ESWL procedures increased significantly from 0%–10% to 20%–30% reducing the post-ESWL morbidity significantly. The main factor for this change represented the introduction of an indwelling stent for the treatment of larger stones or relief of symptomatic hydronephrosis prior to ESWL in case of ureteral calculi, which represent today almost 50% of our patients. It is evident that all patients had a major benefit from this approach: We observed no septicemia, only 1% required a percutaneous nephrostomy, and the failure rate of in situ-ESWL for ureteral stones necessitating ureteroscopic extraction amounted to 5 and 8% respectively. Recently, some authors have endeavoured to also keep pre-ESWL auxiliary procedure rate low, treating all ureteral stones in situ and “de novo”. ESWL is performed under minor or even without anaesthesia leading to an increased retreatment rate. There still exists the efficacy-versus-pain ratio: The optimal low number of re-treatments on the Dornier HM3 (5–14%) can only be achieved under epidural anaesthesia, whereas on the new lithotriptors with i.v. analgesia the retreatment rate ranges about 20–30%, and the piezoelectric machines providing anaesthesia-free ESWL require 45–65%, which has not changed significantly with the introduction of the new sources ( ESWL has become significantly less expensive requiring less room and a much better handling of the devices. These changes may have an important impact on the choice of the lithotriptor. First of all, the Efficacy Quotient should not be taken as introduced by Clayman and Preminger Further developments are already focussing on the improvement of the desintegrative efficacy of the lithotriptors. There is evidence that shock wave energy and not peak pressure represents the main factor for stone disintegration. The impact of a variable focal size will be determined soon. Further technological improvements may concern an optimization of the wave form avoiding negative pressure with cavitation-associated tissue trauma. Finally new imaging technology might be applicable for extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy like 3D ultrasound for stone targeting or colour-duplex sonography to determine early stone fragmentation ( Please visit Which technical form of shock wave generation is not used in current lithotriptors for extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy? Electrohydraulic (spark gap). Electromagnetic (flat-coil, cylinder). Piezoelectric. Laser-induced (LISL). Which physical shock wave parameter is responsible for stone disintegration? Peak positive pressure. Peak negative pressure. Energy density. Energy. What principle of stone localization is predominantly used in lithotriptors? Color duplex sonography. Lateral ultrasound. Isocentric C-arm. Two X-ray converters. Which parameters are not necessary for the calculation of the efficacy quotient of a lithotriptor? Stone-free rate at 3 months. Number of auxiliary procedures. Number of impulses. Re-treatment rate. Which physical principle does not explain the mechanism of stone disintegration? Resonance phenomenon. Tear-and-shear forces (Hopkinson effect). Cavitation. Dynamic fatigue. Which physicle parameter is responsible for shock wave induced tissue injury? Energy. Energy density. Frequency. Focal size (−6