Many experimental studies have been carried out to characterise the mechanical performance of cable bolts under axial or shear loading. The common limitation in all these studies is that only single-variate descriptive analysis was included leading to an insufficient understanding of interactive influences of a range of parameters on the mechanical performance of cable bolt. Also, defining a reasonable number of experiments for the testing program that includes wide range of parameters has been a challenge for the scholars and practitioners. Thus, to address these limitations in a sound and logical manner, two statistical techniques being Taguchi and Response Surface Methodology (RSM) were introduced to demonstrate their effectiveness for a proper design of experiments leading to a minimum number of tests without compromising the output quality. Such a task was performed on the data reported in the literature. In addition, the quantitative post-data processing was conducted using Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). To be specific, ANOVA was mainly performed to quantify the contribution of different independent parameters (e.g. confining medium and grout strengths as well as borehole dimeter) on the dependent ones (e.g. peak and residual loads as well as the initial stiffness) individually and interactively. RSM was also used for the post-data multivariate statistical analysis. Finally, it was concluded that with the aid of Design of Experiments techniques such as Taguchi it is feasible to develop a minimum number of experiments to obtain the most representative tests results without compromising the quality of research outcome along with some quantitative post-data processing using ANOVA. Also, it was demonstrated that one of the most important specifications of RSM is to provide the quantitative and visual interactive effects of independent parameters on the mechanical performance of different cable bolts using multiple regression modelling.Cable bolt is one of the most effective ground support systems which has been widely utilized in different engineering projects including civil tunnelling and underground mining. A number of studies have investigated the cable bolt behaviour experimentally Experiments are normally followed by an extensive analysis of the test results. To date, most of the studies on the mechanical performance of cable bolts have included only single-variate descriptive or qualitative analysis. For instance, Stillborg, Taguchi technique As a result, in this study, initially, the Taguchi technique In principle, the design of experimental program can be achieved using two approaches being full or partial factorial. The former is able to cover the full range of levels of each influential (independent) parameter leading to a large number of experiments while the latter aims to cover the least number of testing conditions without compromising the comprehensiveness of test results. Taguchi technique Taguchi technique ANOVA is utilized to quantify the relative effect of each factor on the responses where in the case of cable bolt, a factor or an independent parameter can be UCS of confining medium or grout and an example of response or a dependent parameter is an ultimate peak load, residual load or initial stiffness of cable bolt. In other words, ANOVA is performed as part of post-data processing to quantitatively assess the effects of independent parameters on the dependent ones. In such an analysis, the sum of squares of each factor ( Then, the mean error square of factors can be determined by a following formula: Also, the A weighting method of relative contribution of a factor (or an independent parameter) to a response (or a dependent parameter) based on RSM is a powerful platform for the design of experiment and post-data processing based on advanced mathematical and statistical analyses. RSM offers partial factorial design of experiment similar to that explained for Taguchi with slightly more experiments. In order to demonstrate the advantages of DOE and quantitative post-data processing, a set of laboratory data related to cable bolt behaviour was selected from the literature to conduct DOE and post-data processing. The combination of Taguchi and ANOVA was used for the experiments conducted under partial factorial condition while for those performed under full factorial condition only RSM was utilized for the post-data multivariate statistical analysis. The influences of a number of independent parameters including confining medium diameter, embedment length and borehole diameter on the peak load of standard 7-wire cable bolt during the pull-out tests were investigated by Rajaie. While Rajaie The effects of confining pressure and embedment length on the peak load of Reflex cable bolt were investigated by Thenevin et al. After running ANOVA on the reported data by Thenevin et al., Chen et al. ANOVA was then conducted on the reported data by Chen et al. Due to the associated complexity with the shear testing of cable bolt, a limited number of studies have been conducted in this regard. The shear test results reported by Aziz et al. The cable bolt surface roughness seems to have a dominant influence on the performance of cable bolts under shear loading compared to the bulb structure and the level of pre-tensioning. It was found that the indented cable bolts always exhibit a lower shear load compared to the smooth wire plain cable bolts. A full factorial experimental program for MW9P cable bolt was designed by Li et al. For the Twin Strand Bulbed cable bolt also the full factorial program was designed and conducted in which the effects of three independent parameters including confining medium strength, grout strength and the borehole diameter on the peak load were investigated. Confining medium strength varied at two levels being 64 and 11 MPa. The grout strength had two levels at 80 and 62 MPa and the levels of variation for borehole diameter were 55 and 65 mm. To perform RSM on MW9P and Twin Strand Bulbed cable bolts, initially the levels of each independent parameter were coded within a range of −1 and 1 for model fitting as listed in The statistical parameters associated with RSM analysis on MW9P cable bolt are given in From Eqs. The polynomial function with coded values for the modelling of peak load of Twin Strand Bulbed cable bolt is as follows: The validity of RSM model obtained from Strand Bulbed cable bolt is confirmed by the statistical parameters listed in Li et al. RSM were conducted on the test results obtained from Sumo and TG cable bolts with the coded independent parameters as listed in The results of MRM led to Eq. The statistical parameters were obtained thereafter (see From Eq. To date, extensive and high-cost laboratory experiments have been reported by various researchers on cable bolt performance under axial or shear loading. However, a common limitation in all these studies is that only the effects of a low number of individual parameters has been evaluated on the performance of cable bolt without considering any interactive effects among the independent parameters leading to a lack of profound understanding of the relative effects of a wide range of parameters individually and interactively. Such a limitation can result in an underestimation of the importance of interaction between the independent parameters that can in turn lead to inefficient design of support system. In addition, the testing programs of many studies have not been effectively designed resulting in either an insufficient or superfluous number of tests being conducted. Considering the cost versus performance of laboratory experiment design, the Taguchi method as one of the Design of Experiments (DOE) techniques was applied to the reported testing programs of cable bolts in the literature in order to develop an optimum number of required experiments that would produce the most representative tests results without compromising the quality of research outcome. It was demonstrated that the use of DOE can lead to about 60% reduction in the required number of experiments to achieve statistically sound and logical testing program. Also, the Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was applied to quantify the contribution of different independent parameters to the performance of cable bolts under axial or shear loading. The Response Surface Methodology (RSM) was then used to illustrate its effectiveness for the multi-variate statistical analysis. Finally, it was demonstrated that both RSM and Taguchi approaches can help the scholars and professionals to better understand not only the influence of an individual parameter but also the interactive effects of a range of independent parameters on the behaviour of cable bolts under axial or shear loading. Danqi Li declares that he has no conflict of interest. Yingchun Li declares that he has no conflict of interest. Mostafa Asadizadeh declares that he has no conflict of interest.Hossein Masoumi declares that he has no conflict of interest.Paul C. Hagan declares that he has no conflict of interest.Serkan Saydam declares that he has no conflict of interest. 