The high-temperature acid pressure leaching of nickeliferous laterites employs multi-compartment continuous autoclaves treating a variety of lateritic feeds. Previous work has correlated the kinetics of nickel dissolution, as well as the solubility of important metals in this process, with acid concentration levels calculated at the temperature of leaching. This was achieved by a speciation analysis resulting in a universal kinetic equation for Ni dissolution from limonitic feeds and from limonitic/saprolitic blends. In the present work, these findings were combined to develop a comprehensive model for a continuous multi-compartment autoclave. To this end, the kinetics of Co, Fe, Al, and Mn was also estimated and included in the reactor model. The resulting model is capable of predicting Ni extraction and concentrations of major impurities during autoclave operation for a wide variety of process conditions and feed compositions. It was implemented in a computer simulator that can be used to investigate diverse process scenarios and to select acidity levels for different types of feed. Finally, the model is compared with continuous mini-plant pressure acid leaching data as provided by INCO Technical Services (ITSL) during process development campaigns.High-temperature pressure acid leaching is currently the process of choice to recover nickel and cobalt from limonitic laterites. Previous experience demonstrated that a series of well-agitated continuous autoclaves is the best choice for successful nickel and cobalt extraction by sulphuric acid leaching at 250–270°C Experimental studies of the direct sulphuric acid pressure leaching of laterites conducted at the University of Toronto over the last 6 years The solubility of metals that precipitate during the process was investigated first. A solution speciation approach was thus formulated for Al, Fe and Mg Equilibrium constants for the precipitation of Al, Fe and Mg and a kinetic equation for Ni dissolution were presented in the previous publications by the authors The present model is entirely based on the process solution chemistry under autoclave conditions. Hence, a high-temperature speciation model Ni kinetic equations are given in The kinetics of Mg dissolution was found to be extremely fast to be properly identified via a kinetic equation The following considerations were taken into account in estimating the amount of “soluble” Mg in the feed. Batch tests with a blend containing 2.47 wt.% Mg yielded Mg extraction values ranging from 73.2% to 76.7%. Hence, a mean value of The equilibrium constant for Mg given in The chemistry of iron dissolution–precipitation was reviewed in detail previously In the present model, it was also assumed that As stated above, iron precipitation as hematite is assumed to proceed through the formation of basic ferric sulphate. The latter quickly converts to hematite. For this process model, it is important to know the amount of basic ferric sulphate in the precipitate that is not converted to hematite. This allows us to calculate the total dissolved sulphate concentration as the amount of sulphate added with sulphuric acid, less that precipitated with Al and Fe. Equilibrating this total aqueous sulphate concentration with that calculated from the speciation analysis While the presence of unconverted basic ferric sulphate in solid residues will have to be confirmed by further experiments, the following observation may be considered as an indication that this conversion is incomplete. Sulphate balance calculations in batch experiments showed that sulphate rejection from solution by means of hydronium alunite precipitation does not suffice. Hence, extra SO It should also be noted that the calculated amount of FeSO Since the predominant Al phase in laterites is gibbsite, the kinetics of Al dissolution and precipitation was derived using data from a pure system of gibbsite and sulphuric acid Data for only five experiments at low acidity  It is known In establishing the precipitation kinetics of Al, the following considerations were taken into account. Precipitation is spontaneous and therefore, particles are growing by nucleus agglomeration rather than by crystal growth The agglomeration of hydronium alunite particles does not affect the Al balance and, therefore, the agglomeration kinetics is not important for modelling purposes. To further simplify the kinetic model, it was also assumed that hydronium alunite precipitation starts when the saturation ratio is equal to 1. It was adopted that under conditions of non-controlled precipitation, a secondary nucleation mechanism dominates Co in laterites is mainly associated with the manganese mineral, asbolane. Asbolane (or asbolite), which is also known as earthy cobalt, mostly consists of MnO A comparison of Co and Mn kinetics also reveals their close association. Dissolution kinetics of Co and Mn in limonites for two typical experiments is given in For limonitic/saprolitic blends, both Since the solubilities of Mn(IV) and Cr(III) in sulphuric acid at elevated temperatures are negligible Finally, it is assumed that the relative extraction of Mn (i.e., The kinetics of Co dissolution was established in the same way as the Ni kinetics The RMS error for The Co kinetic equation established for limonitic feeds The speciation program, solubility formulae and kinetic equations were combined together to form a continuous steady state autoclave model. The computer code was written in “Mathematica®” version 3.0 for Windows 95/NT The simulator calculates extractions of Ni and Co, as well as the concentrations of the impurities (Mg, Mn, Al, Fe, Cr) at temperature. The concentrations of hydrogen and bisulphate ions at temperature are, of course, also calculated. These two parameters cannot be directly measured, and their prediction is extremely important in order to understand and correlate the chemical changes inside the autoclave under various operating conditions. Metal concentrations are then rendered back to room temperature for comparison with experimental data. The model performance was tested against data supplied by ITSL from continuous mini-plant pressure acid leaching testwork. Continuous leaching tests were conducted both with limonitic feeds and with limonitic/saprolitic blends of various compositions. The operating conditions were: approximately 30% solids (before acid addition), 250°C and 270°C, 0.21–0.52 acid/ore ratio, and 30 and 45 min mean residence time. Two slurry samples were taken. The first sampling point was after 25% or 50% of the total residence time. The second sampling point was at the end of the autoclave (from the discharge). The comparison of Ni extraction predicted and measured at the two sampling points is shown in  The apparent predictive ability of the model can be improved if appropriate compensating corrections were introduced, or if the model were compared against instantaneously filtered samples. The former would require inclusion of dissolution kinetics and solubilities at lower temperatures, as well as exact timing of handling procedures, which renders the task impractical. The latter would require more sophisticated sampling techniques than currently employed in conventional piloting laboratories around the world. Finally, a more accurate solution chemical model is also expected to improve the predictive ability of the model. Nevertheless, for the given complexity of the chemical system, the present model (built on first principles), as tested on a variety of feeds and conditions, is considered acceptable. A continuous autoclave model for sulphuric acid pressure leaching of laterites was built based on first principles, i.e., leaching and precipitation kinetics as well as metal solubilities. The model was developed on batch laboratory data and successfully tested against data generated during continuous mini-plant campaigns by ITSL. The model was found applicable to both limonitic feeds and limonitic/saprolitic blends. This model universality is entirely due to its account for the process chemistry “at temperature”, i.e., under autoclave process conditions. In particular, the hydrogen ion concentration is used to correlate leaching kinetics. However, the selection of proper dominant metal ions and complexes is a prerequisite for the prediction of [H The extra assumptions made to arrive at a model that correlated well with experimental data are also important findings that have their own merits. Hence, the findings reported in this paper are as follows: Precipitation of hydronium alunite is not the only way for sulphate to be rejected from the system. Most probably, part of SO Co and Mn are closely associated in laterites and follow similar dissolution kinetics. A solids diffusion-controlled shrinking core model equation that assumes a constant curvature of particles was found to fit the data. The ultimate Co extraction is approximately 91%. Mn dissolves up to its solubility, which depends on the sulphate concentration. This solubility may also be affected by the presence of chromium. Kinetics of Al dissolution is also described by a diffusion-controlled shrinking core model equation. A model of secondary nucleation with subsequent agglomeration of the nuclei was adopted for Al precipitation. Aluminium needs at least 0.3 mol/L of H The kinetic equations used in the model were derived from batch leaching experiments with various feed compositions conducted at temperatures from 230°C to 270°C. The model considers the concentrations of seven metals (Ni, Co, Mg, Mn, Al, Fe, Cr) correlated with [H This work was financially supported by ITSL and the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors wish to thank the personnel of ITSL for the continuous support, fruitful discussions over the course of the project, and for the permission to publish these results. The development of the continuous autoclave model is based on the population balance equations derived by the authors Since goethite particles are agglomerates of needle-like grains and, therefore, a particle size analysis of these grains is hardly possible, it was assumed that the grains are monosized, i.e., the size distribution is given by δ function. Then integrating The population density functions evaluated from If the extraction of Al obtained from