Solvent extraction with Kelex 100 has been recognised as a possible method for recovering gallium from Bayer liquors, but the practical process has not been so attractive as to cause a general technological break-through. The purpose of this research was to enhance the Ga/Al selectivity and efficiency of the extraction and re-extraction processes, while making the method as simple as possible. Instead of applying various additives and modifiers, the approach was based on the fundamental extraction kinetics with the pure kerosene/Kelex 100 system and a method of selective re-extraction boosted by possible chloro-complex formation in HCl media. The main factors examined during the extraction tests were solution pH, concentration of Al, amount of the reagent and the intensity of agitation, whereas HCl concentration was varied to improve the performance of the re-extraction step. The extraction results were interpreted in terms of the heterogeneous transfer mechanism. A Ga/Al selectivity index of almost 100 could be achieved at a Ga yield of ∼70% with 10–20% Kelex 100 in kerosene and the pH set to ∼14.3 from a NaOH solution containing 100 ppm Ga and 1100 ppm Al. As a practical source, the zeolite mother liquor has also proved suitable for the procedure. Aluminium carried over to the extractant can be separated from gallium during the combined re-extraction procedure, removing aluminium with 5–6 M HCl from the organic phase, then eluting gallium with ∼2 M hydrochloric acid solution.In order to extract gallium from the Bayer aluminate solution (containing 100–200 mg dm A great deal of earlier research work has promoted solvent extraction as a promising alternative ( Modifications to this formula by changing the composition of the branched chain and moving it to the 5th position have been attempted to enhance the rate of extraction ( The organic phase is conventionally diluted with the simple and inexpensive kerosene. Other possible diluents (Kermac 470B–Triangle Refineries Co., Aromatic 150–Exxon Co., Escaid 200, cyclohexane) have been shown to improve the extraction kinetics in synthetic solutions ( Modifying the basic kerosene — Kelex 100 system may prove more or less efficient in terms of productivity, however, to promote practical application, efficient extraction of gallium and retention of aluminium are the key parameters and a simple system is preferred. The common kerosene — Kelex 100 extractant may be made suitable for these objectives. As the chemical properties of gallium and aluminium may not offer great potentials for separation, selectivity can be enhanced by exploiting the possible differences in the reaction kinetics of the respective extraction processes. Instead of enhancing the reaction rate, more accurate control of the process is intended. The reagent, containing the substituted hydroxyquinoline ( The kinetics achieved with a kerosene — Kelex 100 mixture, without any modifiers, has been examined for the extraction of gallium ( The extracted metals can be removed from the organic phase with acidic solutions. Hydrochloric acid and the chloride product are generally advantageous for high purity purposes ( On the other hand, anion-exchange equilibrium experiments with aluminium in hydrochloric solutions, have proved that this element is generally incapable of forming higher chloro-complexes, therefore the re-extraction of aluminium is not hindered by increased HCl concentrations. While gallium is retained in the organic phase, aluminium – previously co-extracted – can be removed selectively. Reducing the HCl concentration below ∼ Samples of the fresh Kelex 100 reagent have been mixed with the required volumes of pure kerosene at room temperature. The volumes of both the contacted aqueous and organic phases were 100 cm Effective shaking times of the extraction and re-extraction experiments were expressed discounting the intervals of settling and sampling. Every experiment resulted in a large number of raw solution samples, which needed accurate dilution before analysing them for Ga and Al. The results were processed using a specially developed computer program which included an automatic correction for instability of the instrument. The extremely low concentrations were determined according to a zero-forced calibration method, based on the actual blank values. Nevertheless, higher selectivity index values than ∼ Due to its strong expected effect on selectivity and its serious economical implications, the pH of the treated solutions was a key factor to be investigated. It was generally set to the values 13.5, 13.7, 14, 14.2, 14.3 and 14.5, corresponding to 0.32, 0.5, 1, 1.59, 2, and 3.2 mol dm Increasing the Kelex 100 concentration accelerates the extraction of both metals, and this effect is stronger in the case of aluminium. Extraction of gallium is already fast enough with only 14% Kelex 100 in kerosene and further increasing the reagent concentration is harmful to the Ga/Al selectivity. The rate of metal extraction from the The forward and reverse rate constants of the transformation of the gallate ions are At higher concentration of the reagent in the organic phase, and considering the The influence of NaOH concentration is less obvious because the Na As the strongly hydrated hydroxo-complex aluminate ion can hardly loose its voluminous hydration sphere, it is not preferred to be bound by the chelating functional group of the extractant. However, increasing the NaOH concentration may promote the dehydration of the aluminate species, thereby enhancing the extracting reaction. This may explain the strong effect of increasing the pH on the examined process. As this phenomenon has also been observed for gallium, but its relative strength was markedly lower, the hydration of the hydroxo-gallate species can be considered less extensive. This is also shown by the relatively high rate of gallium extraction at lower NaOH concentrations. The different abilities for dehydration are reflected in the Ga/Al selectivities, monotonously falling as the NaOH concentration and the time of extraction increase in The pH settings examined in the experiments have all proved feasible for Ga extraction, however there are significant differences in performance characteristics. The time of extraction to reach a satisfactory Ga yield is considerably shorter at higher pH, but the Ga/Al selectivity drops also earlier. In general, increasing the pH value beyond ∼ Beyond the aspect of practical efficiency, using this high recovery level for reference is also suitable for a more accurate determination of the changes in the aluminium concentration in the solution. Although, lower Ga yields would still mean remarkable improvement in view of the ∼ Another important parameter can be the composition of the organic phase. Increasing the concentration of the active agent significantly accelerates the extraction process. The lowest examined Kelex 100 concentration (10%) – without the addition of modifiers – results in conveniently moderate reaction rates, facilitating accurate control of the operation. The extraction procedure can be stopped at a satisfactory Ga yield, still avoiding any significant levels of aluminium in the organic phase. Referring to the ∼ The extraction mechanism was further examined by applying magnetic stirring of varied intensities and 14% Kelex 100 in kerosene. Two stirring speeds are compared in The lower degree of dispersion, producing less interfacial area and consequently lower reaction rates, especially depresses the extraction of Al, which process is kinetically more hindered. However, reducing the intensity of agitation too far is also disadvantageous. The lowest examined stirring speed (400/min) did not disperse the macroscopic phase boundary and was unsatisfactory even for the Ga extraction. The effect of agitation is further illustrated by the comparison of two different contacting methods in As the extraction process was found to work satisfactorily with the 100 ppm Ga–1100 ppm Al solutions (modelling the zeolite mother liquor), experiments were carried out also for solutions of considerably higher aluminium and lower Ga concentrations (referring to the Bayer liquors after precipitation). With solutions containing 100 ppm Ga and 14,000 ppm Al, It is also seen that at high sodium–aluminate concentrations, the Ga/Al selectivities become approximately uniform in the entire examined pH range (with the value around 10). The ionic strength is increased as in the case of adding NaOH, promoting the dehydration of aluminate species and thus accelerating the extraction of aluminium. Therefore the strong effect of pH seen in earlier experiments with dilute solutions is subdued by the high aluminate concentration making the concentration of Kelex 100 in kerosene the primary parameter for optimization. The processing of the zeolite mother liquor (from Ajka Alumina Company, Hungary) has also been tested. Besides the raw zeolite mother liquor (pH 14,51, 3,25 M NaOH) solution samples were prepared with reduced pH (14.3, 14.2, 14, 13.7, 13.5). In these cases calculated portions of the free NaOH content were neutralised by controlled addition of cc. HCl. However, this method of setting the pH caused somewhat different conditions compared to those in the synthetic NaOH solutions. While reducing the pH, the concentration of the sodium ions and the ionic strength remained high. It promotes the dehydration of the aluminate ions, thus making also aluminium more capable of chelation, and the sodium ion concentration enhances the extraction rate according to Eq. In order to examine the possibility of selective re-extraction, equal portions of the saturated organic phase (collected after equilibration with the 100 ppm Ga–14,000 ppm Al solutions) were treated with HCl solutions of various concentrations in the 1–6 M range. To prove the expectation based on The curves in The experiments have proved that gallium can be extracted with an appreciable selectively and yield from alkaline aluminate solutions and the zeolite mother liquor with 14–20% Kelex 100 in pure kerosene without the addition of modifying agents. Selectivity can be enhanced by taking advantage of the differences in the kinetic behaviour determined by the dehydration of the respective hydroxo-complex species. The pH of the aqueous solution needs to be set preferably below 14.3. Higher pH and ionic strength values promote the formation of extractable Al species. Although not advantageous for selectivity, high concentration of aluminium can be allowed in the alkaline solution without impeding the process of Ga-extraction. Nevertheless, reducing the loss of aluminium justifies the treatment of Ga solutions with the lowest possible aluminium concentrations, like the zeolite mother liquor – available in some alumina plants – or the diluted aluminate solutions (available generally at the washing lines). Treating solutions of approximately 100 ppm Ga and 1100 ppm Al, the value of the Ga/Al selectivity index can be almost 100 and the Ga yield ∼