The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of lime particle size and lime calcination level as well as slag properties (basicity, viscosity, CaO activity and density) on lime particle dissolution at temperature in the early stage of process blowing time of the basic oxygen furnace (1400 °C in the present paper). Experiments were carried out in an electric furnace using lime samples of 6 mm and 9 mm particle size and 80% and 100% calcined at different FeO and SiO2 contents at 1600 °C. The results showed that the dissolution is faster using 6 mm particles, the lowest level of calcination and lower ratios between FeO and SiO2 content in the slag. The smaller particle size favors a larger area of specific contact of the particle with the slag. The increase in the ratio between the FeO and SiO2 content in the slag resulted in a decrease in the rate of dissolution that can be attributed to the increase in lime activity and consequent decrease in the percentage of CaO saturation. This result suggests that lime-slag contact area and percentage of CaO saturation seem to be more significant than basicity in the lime dissolution process obtained in the experiments.In converter operation, an adequate control of the slag-metal reactions that occur throughout the process is necessary to ensure satisfactory results[ Hamano et al.[ Hamano et al.[ The authors also studied the influence of slag basicity on lime dissolution, keeping the slag FeO content constant. They concluded that the increase in basicity decreases the rate of lime dissolution, since it increases the CaO activity in the liquid slag, decreasing the term Δ(%CaO) of Eq. According to Dogan et al.[ Schlitt and Healey[ The aim of this paper was to evaluate the influence of the lime particle size, lime calcination level and slag properties (basicity, viscosity, CaO activity and density) on the lime particle dissolution in temperature at early stage of the time blowing process in BOF (at 1400 °C) with initial slags containg different percents of FeO and SiO  The calcination level followed the tests of Tanaka et al.[   The viscosity of the liquid part was calculated using FactSage software. The effective viscosity was calculated using Eq.    The experimental apparatus was designed to use an iron-carbon alloy produced by melting pure iron with 2.8% of pure graphite. This strategy aimed at avoiding test contamination as well as obtaining a better thermal control of dissolution experiments. A 950 g iron-carbon alloy was added to a MgO crucible, which was then taken to an electric resistance furnace at a temperature of 1400 °C. High purity argon was injected at a flow of 10 NL/min to prevent oxygen from entering the system. After the metal melted and the temperature stabilized, a mixture of FeO and SiO It was not possible to perform elemental analysis due to the small amount of slag. Independent tests were carried out to avoid any risk of contamination of the slag. Therefore, a test lasting 2.5 min was performed and then another test was performed in a new crucible simulating dissolution for 5 min. The preparation of the final slag was carried out in such a way as to separate the undissolved lime from the liquid slag. For this, the slags were crushed, hydrated, and separated by sieving and magnetically. It took a week to hydrate the undissolved lime. Then, a sieve separation was performed using two sieve sizes, first a 0.5 mm and then a 0.075 mm. After sifting, it was performed a manual magnetic separation. Thus, the hydrated lime was weighed, taken into a kiln to convert it in CaO. The final of CaO was weighed. In this study the lime dissolution rate was calculated in two steps. First, the percentage of dissolved lime was divided by the reaction time. Then, it was transformed into a variation of lime particle radius with time. Therefore, the average rate of lime dissolution was calculated in intervals of 250 s and 300 s. This decreases in radius with time was considered to be the same result that would be obtained using Eq. The rate of lime dissolution was initially calculated based on the percentage of dissolved lime divided by the time in minutes of each experiment. Due to the total dissolution of the lime in experiments with 80% calcined 6 mm limes (except for basicities 3 and 4 in the 150 s experiment), it was not possible to calculate the dissolution rate in these cases, as the precise time when the total dissolution occurred was not known. Therefore, the rate was estimated based on the equation of the curve generated by the other results. First, the final radius of the particles was calculated using lime density (3.08 g/cm Then, the dissolution rate of lime (m/s) was calculated dividing the difference between the final and the initial radius, in mm, (Δ dissolved radius) by the time of the lime particle dissolution process in each slag (seconds). This decrease in the radius with time was then considered to be the same result obtained by Eq. Through The lime particles were dissolved after the 150 s of the experiments under the conditions 6 mm–80% calcined (F/S = 1.18 and 2.49). The d  The rates for experiments made with the 6 mm particle, 80% calcined at 300 s, are not shown because it was not possible to determine precisely what the dissolution rate was, as previously mentioned in The experiments were compared using 6 mm and 9 mm particles, 100% calcined, at 300 s, as they had all the data for making these comparisons.  The investigation was accomplished through the experiments using lime particles of 6 mm with 80% and 100% of calcined during 150 s.  In this section, the influence of slag properties, such as basicity, liquid and effective viscosity, density, percentage of lime saturation and CaO activity on the lime dissolution rate are analyzed. This analysis was done for the initial and final slags.  The properties shown in The properties of the initial slags varied, due to the variation in the FeO/SiO The influence of the FeO/SiO    When analyzing The Δ(%CaO) saturation is the drive-force for CaO diffusion from solid lime into liquid slag. According to Equation For the final slags, the properties studied were basicity, CaO activity, liquid viscosity, density, CaO saturation content, and basicity at 150 s and 300 s. These values are shown in Influence of slag basicity on lime dissolution and dissolution rate.  Influence of CaO activity and percentage of lime saturation on the dissolution rate.  Influence of slag viscosity and density on dissolution rate. The viscosity of the liquid slag was calculated considering the total dissolution of CaO in the liquid. However, as there was no total lime dissolution in some experiments,  Therefore, in the case of the present study, the increase of the Δ(%CaO) had a greater weight in the dissolution rate than the increase in viscosity and decrease in the density of the slag, as it caused a greater decrease in the saturation percentage (57–41%) than an increase in viscosity and density. For the conditions of the present work, it can be concluded that: Increases in lime particle size decreases the dissolution rate due to the smaller specific contact area between lime and slag; The lime dissolution rate decreases with increasing calcination level. This was because the decomposition of carbonates from partially calcined limes increases the porosity together with the effervescence that can tear the layer of 2CaO·SiO The lime dissolution rate decreases with the increase in the FeO/SiO Less dense slag promoted greater foaming, and consequently a greater interaction of the lime particle with the slag, which probably increased the rate of lime dissolution; An increase in basicity decreased the lime dissolution rate. This is because the increase in basicity produces an increase in CaO concentration and activity and there is a decrease in the term Δ(mol%CaO); An increase in CaO activity causes a decrease in the lime dissolution rate. This was because with the increase in CaO activity a lower percentage of CaO is needed to saturate the slag in CaO, decreasing the term Δ(mol%CaO); In this work, the increase in the term Δ(mol%CaO) had a greater influence on the dissolution rate than the increase in viscosity and decrease in the density of the slag, because it caused a greater decrease in the percentage of saturation (57%–41%) than an increase in viscosity and density. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to