A series of Al3Ti- and near-γ TiAl-matrix discontinuously-reinforced composites have been produced and their elevated temperature flow behavior evaluated. Specifically, steady state compressive flow stress (i.e. maximum flow stress) was determined as a function of temperature (1000, 1100, 1200°C), strain-rate (10−3, 10−4 s−1), and composite reinforcement loading percentage (30, 40, 50 v%). The experimental results have been used to develop unified constitutive equations for each matrix type that can be used to survey the sensitivity of the respective flow behavior to the independent variables of high temperature wrought processing. The results indicate that while the temperature and strain-rate dependence of flow stress can be described in terms of a traditional Zener–Holloman (temperature-compensated strain-rate) analysis, reinforcement volume percentage may additionally represent a non-traditional but influential independent variable of processing. It is shown that particulate volume loading can be used to positively influence the deformability characteristics of the composite.Aluminide intermetallic alloys and their composites (i.e. intermetallic matrix composites—IMCs) have been the focus of numerous studies for their potential as low-density alternatives for the heavier nickel- and iron-based superalloys presently occupying applications requiring high structural strength at elevated temperatures The aluminides of titanium are of particular interest due to their high strengths and moderate densities [ Despite their occasional comparisons to ceramics in terms of ambient temperature mechanical behavior, however, the titanium aluminides are readily capable of being processed using conventional, albeit elevated temperature, metal-working techniques. The processability of these alloys can be extended to include broad ranges of discontinuously-reinforced (DR) composite forms of these matrices, as well. Significantly, it has been demonstrated that the incorporation of relatively high loadings of TiB This study characterizes the high temperature flow behavior of a series of highly-loaded titanium aluminide matrix composites, primarily for its relevance towards understanding and establishing the conditions for the processing and/or manufacturing of these materials via high temperature wrought techniques such as forging or extrusion. At high temperatures, flow stress can be notably sensitive to temperature, strain-rate, and material microstructure; quantification of the sensitivity of flow stress to these variables is fundamental to designing a successful wrought processing protocol Titanium aluminide matrix composites were produced using an in-situ, reaction-synthesis technique. Elemental powders of titanium (−100 mesh), aluminum (−100 mesh), and boron (−325 mesh, amorphous) were appropriately formulated and blended to create composites consisting of nominally-stoichiometric Al Phase constituency was assessed and confirmed using X-ray diffraction techniques as obtained from a Scintag diffractometer incorporating Cu Kα monochromatic radiation. Following synthesis, the as-reacted composite sponge was communitively reduced to −100 mesh powder using gyratory crushing followed by disk-pulverizing between ceramic plates. The powder was subsequently densified by canning within hermetically-sealed commercially-pure (CP) titanium tubes and hot isostatic pressing (HIP) for 2 h at 1300 Following densification, conventional metallographic techniques were used to create polished planar sections for metallographic observation, and for the measurement of TiB Flow behavior of the densified composites was evaluated through the measurement of peak (strain-independent or steady state) flow stress as determined from elevated temperature compression loading. Specifically, tests were performed at temperatures of 1000, 1100, and 1200 Typical microstructures of the two composite types (Al  The sensitivity of flow stress to strain-rate is shown in  The flow behavior individually presented in The structure constant, The measured flow data, presented assuming a linear relationship with respect to temperature-compensated strain-rate (Zener–Holloman Parameter) are shown in Flow stress surfaces, generated using averaged values of  The general relationships among flow stress, deformation rate, and temperature for a given material are well established and form the basis for several approaches to the prediction of processability The decrease in flow stress as TiB  Other researchers have reported on the elevated temperature deformation behavior of alloyed variations of near-γ TiAl alloys using conditions that partially coincide with those utilized in the present study The results presented in The flow behavior of a series of TiB Conclusions from this work include: (1) Highly-loaded titanium aluminide matrix composites are readily deformable at elevated temperatures. (2) The deformation behavior of the composites can be modeled using a simple Zener–Holloman relationship for flow stress as a function of strain-rate, temperature, and volume percentage of reinforcement within the composites. (3) The values of the constitutive constants obtained for the composites are higher in their magnitudes relative to values reported in the literature for unreinforced variants. The higher values are a consequence of the plastic flow being confined to the matrix portion of the composite only. (4) The presence of the particulate reinforcement serves to dramatically alter the flow characteristics within the composites. In particular, decreasing flow stresses are observed as volume percent increases over the range of 30–40 v%; increases are noted within the Al The authors wish to acknowledge the sponsorship of Matsys, Inc. (Springfield, VA) and the Office of Naval Research, under contract N00014-96-C-0427. Use of the high temperature testing facility at Oak Ridge National Laboratory was sponsored by the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of Transportation Technologies, Office of Advanced Automotive Technologies, as part of the High Temperature Materials Laboratory User Program, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy under contract number DE-AC05-00OR22725.