A new method of copper extraction from its ore is examined in this paper. Based on the electrokinetic processes used for soil remediation, the technique envisaged consists in the copper dissolution by ammonia solution using an electric field. The ore is mixed with 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 +
                              
                           
                           /
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              
                                 3
                              
                           
                        
                      solution and it is inserted in a five compartment cell between two ion exchange membranes. Then the system acts as an electrodialyser where the ore represents the solution which should be demineralised. Moreover, ammonium crosses the membrane from an adjacent compartment to increase the dissolution giving rise to 98% of extraction yield after 400h. The role of the current and the transport mechanisms have been examined through this interesting process which reduces the number of operation units and saves energy by the fact that it does not need oxygen pressure for an alkaline leaching.The recovery of metals from non-ferrous ores has been widely studied ( Copper ores can be considered as classical examples which are treated by hydrometallurgical processes. Generally, either copper oxides or roasted sulfides are leached without requiring any further oxidation. Leaching of copper ores occurs by means of either acid leaching or ammonia leaching. It is known that acid leaching is not suitable for ores which contains carbonates such as covellite or limestone. In such case, ammoniac leaching is performed although it is often carried on with both high pressure and elevated temperature. A number of processes have been developed to leach polymetallic ores which contain copper in autoclaves using temperatures above 100 Recently, the new developments of the electromembrane processes in the solid matrix treatment, particularly in the soil remediation field ( All experiments have been performed using typical samples furnished by the ORGM (Research Mining Organisation of ALGERIA). Samples were analysed by both X-ray fluorescence Siemens (type SRS 3400) and X-ray diffraction Phillips (type PW 1710). The average composition of copper and other accompanist elements is recorded in All conventional leaching experiments were performed using 30 All electrokinetic experiments have been performed using a five compartment cylindrical Plexiglas cell ( The cation exchange membrane used is the CMV Selemion membrane of exchange capacity 3.85 Metallic ions were determined by means of a Perkin Elmer model 2380 atomic absorption spectrophotometer and some samples were verified by means of ICP Varian Model Vista Pro. Ore conductivities were measured by a Hanna Instrument conductimeter HI 9032 inside a thermostatic bath at 298 Conventional leaching were performed first using ore samples mixed with appropriate solutions. Copper electroextraction from its ore can be called electroleaching because the use of an electric field provokes a potential difference between two electrodes which influences the leaching operation. To show this influence on the copper dissolution, two comparatives experiments have been carried out first: Once time, the ore sample is immersed inside a solution of equimolar mixture of NH The same experiment is repeated using the same current density during eleven days. Final copper extraction yields have shown a great difference between them. In effect, 8% of copper are recovered inside the catholyte when the current is applied only one day while 62% of copper are extracted by a continuous electroleaching. Thus, many electroleaching experiments have been performed to optimise some treatments parameters against the Algerian copper ore. The study of the grain size effect has shown that the better extraction is obtained when grains ore are ranged between 50 and 200 The roasted copper ore treated is present as both an oxide and a sulphate form. The leaching mechanism is probably governed by the complexation reaction between both Cu(I) and Cu(II) and ammonia solution. The leaching efficiency is depending upon the pH since the speciation of ammonia in aqueous solution is linked to the pH. Knowing that the p However, the electrolysis of water is the most important electron transfer reactions that occur at electrodes. It provokes an acid front which is carried towards the cathode by electrical migration, diffusion and convection. The hydrogen ions produced decrease the pH near the anode, then, in this part of the cell, copper can be dissolved as Cu At the same time, an increase in the hydroxide ion concentration causes an increase in the pH near the cathode. The pH variation as a function of time along the cell is represented in The other important advantage of the electroleaching process is the fact that it does not need an oxidant reagent to enhance the copper dissolution. In the experimental cell, the ore sample is in contact with a buffering solution composed by a fixed ratio of NH Conductivity measurements in some points between the two electrodes are reported versus time in In this work, a new in situ leaching process is proposed to recover copper from an Algerian ore. The principles of soil remediation by electrokinetic process have been applied with success. Interesting extraction yields have been obtained without using both pressure and oxidant in the course of an alkaline leaching. Although the kinetic is low, the process tested reduces the number of operating units avoiding the filtration phase and purification–concentration step. Moreover, the electroleaching gives rise to a new hydrometallurgical route where the recovery of metals can be very selective by the use of the membrane. Mechanisms will be elucidated to improve this new hydrometallurgical route.