We reviewed 77 patients with an acetabular fracture, treated operatively through a non-extensile approach after an average time of 45 months. The ilioinguinal approach was chosen in 41, the Kocher–Langenbeck approach in 36 patients. Following the Letournel classification, the most frequent lesions were posterior wall (26%), two-column (22.1%) and anterior column (14.3%) fractures. Subchondral impaction, intra-articular fracture fragments and fracture comminution, called modifiers, could be identified in the preoperative CT-data of 38 patients (49.4%). Patients were operated after an average of 4 days. Average hospital stay was 19 days. Sciatic nerve and peroneal nerve palsy were registered in 5.6%. Deep venous thrombosis was seen in 10.4%, peri-articular ossifications in 7.8%. During the 45-months follow-up, 10.4% patients needed secondary total hip arthroplasty.
                  Using the Merle d’Aubigné score, 15 patients had an excellent, 39 a good, 15 a moderate, and 8 a bad result. In accordance with the Harris Hip Score, 29 patients achieved an excellent, 26 a good, 9 a moderate and 13 a bad result. Twenty of twenty-three (Merle d’Aubigné score) and twenty of twenty-two (Harris Hop Score) patients with moderate or bad results had one or more modifiers. Patients with operatively treated acetabular fractures, who had CT-findings such as subchondral impaction, fracture comminution or intra-articular fracture fragments in their preoperative examination, score significantly lower at middle term in the Harris Hip and Merle d’Aubigné scoring systems.Open reduction and internal fixation of acetabular fractures remains a major challenge for orthopaedic trauma surgeons. The main reasons are: acetabular fractures are seldom, diagnostic assessment and classification are complicated; surgery is difficult and may be associated with dangerous or long-life complications. There still remains debate on the optimal approach to the broken acetabulum. Letournel developed extensile and non-extensile surgical approaches for open reduction and internal fixation. Several factors, which influence prognosis of acetabular fractures, have been identified. Nevertheless, there is no clear evidence on how traumatic changes of the acetabular articular cavity influence outcome after anatomical reduction. The role of preoperative CT-findings such as subchondral impaction, fracture comminution and presence of intra-articular fracture fragments for middle and long-term prognosis has not been studied extensively yet. We hypothesise that almost all acetabular fractures can be treated through non-extensile approaches and that the local characteristics of the fracture at the articular cavity play a major role for prognosis. In this retrospective study, we reviewed all records of patients with acetabular fractures of our level I trauma centre, treated surgically through a non-extensile approach. Institutional review board approval was obtained. The recruitment period of this study lasted from January 1998 until April 2005 (88 months). Excluded were acetabular fractures in children, pathological fractures and fractures treated more than three weeks after trauma. Patients primarily treated operatively in other institutions were also excluded. In the recruitment period, five patients with complex acetabular fractures were treated through an extended iliofemoral approach. They were also excluded from this study. Following patient data were recorded: age, sex, injury pattern and fracture classification in accordance with Letournel All patients were treated by 2 surgeons (PMR or MHH). Surgical technique followed strictly the recommendations for reduction and fixation described by Letournel. One hundred and twenty-five patients with acute acetabular fractures were treated operatively in this 88 months period. Seventeen patients died within the follow-up period, twelve patients moved to another country (most truck drivers and construction labourers), the other nineteen patients had no or only short follow-up in our institution and could not be reached for this study. The remaining seventy-seven patients were reviewed clinically and radiologically after an average time of 45 months (12–101 months). Sex ratio M/F was 4.5/1; there were 44 right sided (57.2%) and 33 left sided (42.8%) fractures. Twenty-one patients (27.3%) were primarily admitted in our institution, 56 secondarily (72.7%). The average ISS of our patient population was 14.6 (9–45). Average age was 45 years (14–79 years). Age distribution is presented in Thirty-seven fractures (48.1%) were type A, 22 (28.6%) type B and eighteen (23.4%) type C lesions in accordance to the AO classification. Following the Letournel-classification, Following analysis of CT-scan data, modifiers could be identified in 38 of 77 fractures (49.4%). Subchondral impaction was seen in 27 fractures (35.1%), comminution at the fracture site in 15 (19.5%), intra-articular fracture fragments in 8 (10.4%). Patients were operated on average four days after admission (2–18). The ilioinguinal approach was chosen in 41, the Kocher–Langenbeck approach in 36 patients ( On postoperative X-ray evaluation, reduction was rated as anatomical or near-anatomical in all but two cases. In the last patients, early operative revision was performed. Both fractures had been fixed primarily through an ilioinguinal approach, but postoperative CT-evaluation revealed unacceptable displacement of the posterior column or wall. The displaced posterior column and wall was addressed through a Kocher–Langenbeck approach within days after the primary surgery. In five other patients, secondary surgery was necessary: two times hematomas had to be drained, two times intra-articular screws have been removed and in one patient an early recurrent posterior hip dislocation was reduced and the posterior wall refixed. There was no postoperative infection. In 10 patients nerve damage was registered: six times the lateral cutaneous femoral nerve (6 of 41 ilioinguinal approach patients or 14.6%), two times the sciatic nerve (2 of 36 Kocher–Langenbeck approach patients or 5.6%); and two times the deep peroneal nerve (2 of 36 Kocher–Langenbeck approach patients or 5.6%) was involved. At follow-up, only two patients showed residual neurological symptoms. In eight patients, complete neurological recovery was recorded. Deep vein thrombosis was seen in eight patients (10.4%). Two of them developed pulmonary embolism, but no lung surgery was needed. Both patients survived. The average hospital stay was 19 days (7–43). The average duration of in-hospital stay was especially influenced by the severely injured patients. During the follow-up period, eight patients (10.4%) needed secondary total hip arthroplasty ( At clinical follow-up, eighteen patients (23.4%) were totally free of complaints; forty-seven patients (61.0%) had mild and intermittent or light pain during exercise. Ten patients (13%) had more severe pain during activities and two patients (2.6%) complained of continuous pain. Forty-four patients had a normal gait (57.1%), twenty-eight had slight to moderate limp (36.4%) and five needed walking aids such as crutches (6.5%). Following the scoring system of Merle d’Aubigné (4), fifteen patients had an excellent (19.5%), thirty-nine a good (50.7%), fifteen a moderate (19.5%), and eight a bad (10.3%) result. In accordance with the Harris Hip Scoring System (9) 29 patients (37.7%) achieved an excellent result, 26 (33.8%) a good, nine (11.7%) a moderate, and thirteen (16.9%) a bad result. Taking the presence of modifiers into account, we could register that twenty of twenty-three patients, who had moderate or bad results following the Merle d’Aubigné score (86.9%) had one or more modifiers. Twenty of twenty-two patients who had moderate or bad results following the Harris Hip score (90.9%) had one or more modifiers at primary surgery. There is a statistical significant relationship between modifier YES/NO and the results in the Harris Hip Score: ( Open reduction and internal fixation of acetabular fractures is challenging surgery. There is still debate on which approaches to use and how to preoperatively assess the “personality” of the fracture in relation to outcome. In this retrospective study, we analysed intra- and postoperative complications and looked at middle term outcome of acetabular fractures, treated in a level one trauma centre through non-extensile approaches. We postulated that traumatic lesions of the acetabular articular surface negatively influence outcome. Non-extensile approaches have been used by many authors for open reduction and internal fixation of acetabular fractures. Letournel obtained excellent and good outcomes in 81% using single non-extensile approaches. The acetabular cavity cannot be seen directly through the ilioinguinal approach. This bears the risk of unnoticed perforation of the joint with one or several screws. When intra-articular screw placement is confirmed later on, quick removal of the intra-articular implant will clear the joint. This was done in two patients of our series and both had a good outcome. Palsy of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve is a typical complication of the ilioinguinal approach. The nerve crosses the incision at the level of the anterior superior iliac spine. Elongation of the nerve with irreparable damage can occur during reduction manoeuvres. Residual femoral head dislocation occurred in one patient, which has been treated through a Kocher–Langenbeck approach for a posterior wall fracture with severe comminution. The plate has not been able to buttress all fracture fragments. Although posterior wall stability was restored in secondary surgery, outcome was bad. Palsy of the sciatic or peroneal nerve occurred in four patients each treated through the Kocher–Langenbeck approach. Most nerve palsies were noticed in the first period of our series. All were due to elongation during reduction manoeuvres. As a consequence, we changed the position of patients to be operated through the Kocher–Langenbeck approach. If no flip osteotomy with surgical hip dislocation is needed, patients are put in the prone position. This way, the hip is extended and the knee joint can be flexed. This relaxes the sciatic nerve avoiding nerve damage by traction. Outcome of nerve palsies was good in all but one patient. Deep venous thrombosis was seen in 10.4% of our patients. Two of them developed lung embolism. The high ratio of secondary referrals and the delay of surgery were risk factors for thrombosis. A thorough preoperative evaluation and adequate prophylaxis is needed to minimise the risk on thrombosis. Functional outcome following the Merle d’Aubigné score was excellent and good in 70.1% of patients, following the Harris Hip Score in 71.5%. The significance of traumatic lesions of the acetabular cavity was clearly depicted in our series. Fracture comminution, subchondral impaction or intra-articular fracture fragments, which was present in half of our patients, significantly worsened outcome. Twenty of twenty-three patients, who had moderate or bad results following the Merle d’Aubigné score (86.9%) had one or more modifiers. Twenty of twenty-two patients who had moderate or bad results following the Harris Hip Score (90.9%) had one or more modifiers. The significance of these modifiers is not clearly described in other series. Plaisier et al. This study has several limitations. It concerns a retrospective study with a limited number of patients. A third of our patients dropped out. As these patients were operated by the same two surgeons, who strictly followed the treatment principles and therapeutic goals described by Letournel, there is no reason to assume that their management was different than the patients, who remained in follow-up. The main reason for the drop out is the long recruitment time of this study and the strict separation of in-patient and out-patient clinical care in our country. Our definition of modifiers may be subject of discussion. Moreover, the volume and localisation of the traumatic changes of the articular cartilage were not taken into account, only their presence or absence was registered. We were not able to evaluate the influence of the modifiers separately, as their number was too small. Prospectively conducted studies are needed to more clearly identify independent factors, which influence prognosis after operative treatment of acetabular fractures. The vast majority of acetabular fractures can be reduced and fixed anatomically or near-anatomically through, non-extensile approaches described by Letournel. An excellent and good middle-term outcome of more than 70% can be expected. Preoperative analysis of CT-data renders a more detailed view on the “personality” of the acetabular fracture. The presence of subchondral impaction, fracture comminution and intra-articular fracture fragments influences outcome despite anatomical reduction. We found a significant relation between the presence of these modifiers and outcome in accordance with the Harris Hip and the Merle d’Aubigné scores.