The design of pushbacks is essential to long-term open pit mine scheduling because it partitions the pit space into individual units, controlling ore and waste production. In this paper, a new model is proposed for the pushback selection procedure, which consists of characterizing the potential pushbacks based on the comprehensive family of nested pits and selecting those ones that meet a set of criteria, for instance, bounded ore and waste. An advantage of this method is the possibility to automate the pushback selection methodology, applying well-defined criteria for the selection and reducing the time employed in the planning task.Long-term open pit mine production planning plays a key role in assessment of mining projects. One of the main output is known as production plan, which is about how and when the mining reserves will be extracted, generating a promise that commits the mine production over time. Usually, due to the complexity of the problem, the planning process is divided into stages, generating three related problems that are sequentially solved in order to obtain a tentative production plan, that is: (i) determination of the final pit, which consists of delimiting the subregion of the mine where the extraction will be carried out; (ii) pushback selection, that corresponds to a partition of the final pit that allows to guide the sequence of extraction and to control the design; and finally, (iii) temporary production scheduling, which defines in every pushback when the different zones will be extracted and which of them will be processed. This paper is focused on the second stage, about pushback selection. The design of pushbacks is a key component for the long-term open pit mine scheduling process because it is critical for the final design of the mine and the profit obtained. The pushbacks are used as a guide for the subsequent temporary production scheduling stage, defining where the extraction process begins and where it stops. In addition, pushbacks ensure safe pit walls, assist in meeting the ore production requirement and provide a minimum operational width to accommodate mining equipment and different access to the mine, among other activities. Traditionally, the pushback selection is often carried out manually by expert mine planning engineers using a number of empirical rules on the nested pits obtained using the methodology developed by In this paper, a new model is proposed for the pushback selection, which consists of characterizing the potential pushbacks based on the comprehensive family of nested pits and selecting those pushbacks that meet certain specified conditions, for instance, bounded ore and waste, using mixed integer linear programming. Details of the proposed model followed by the illustration of its performance using a number of deposits as case studies are provided. The paper is organized as follows: in The most common approach for producing pushbacks is the pit limit parameterization, applied on an algorithm that produces an ultimate pit limit. This is done by scaling the block economic value when the algorithm is used to define the pit limit, partitioning the ultimate final pit into a set of nested pits from which pushbacks are manually selected. From a point of view, it is possible to classify the algorithms used to find pit limit as optimal or heuristics, depending on whether optimality can be ensured. A complete reference for this topic can be found in   A number of heuristic procedures have been developed to generate pits. Given a block A different approach was proposed by  Some efforts to incorporate the mine production scheduling decision into the pushback selection are: In the last years, the incorporation of several sources of uncertainty in the planning process has attracted great interest of the researchers. For example, those that have included geological uncertainty: In this section the main notation and formulation for automated pushback selection will be presented. The methodology is based on the following assumptions in order to obtain a series of nested pits. A set of blocks denoted as Set The generation of nested pits has a great impact on pushback selection. They are generated using a metal price parameterization and an economic block model.   It solves a series of final pit problems (UPIT) by considering each economic block model according to Steps in order to refine pits in terms of volume and tonnage.   It is very important to highlight that this procedure does not guarantee to reduce the gap between successive pits, because this strongly depends on the distribution of ore in the deposit. For example, in deposits with diseminate ore and huge tonnage of waste material, it is not possible to ensure such refinement. Once the set of nested pits is defined, the next step is to use these pits in order to select pushbacks that help to control the production planning. Under the traditional methodology, one of the difficulties and limitations this task has is related to the non-application of well-defined criteria to select pits that represent pushbacks, and its success strongly depends on the expertise of mine planner in order to control key indicators, such as gapping problem, stripping ratio between waste and ore, minimum operational spaces, among others. In this paper a new model is proposed: characterizing the pushbacks from the set of nested pits, the model allows to find the best combination of pushbacks by satisfying a number of different criteria, which are related to the key indicators said before. Let The set of pushbacks will be denoted by Given Also, there exist It is impossible to test all combinations (enumerative schema), considering the exponential behavior of (iii). For example, if For each pushback, let To automate the pushback selection, it is necessary to characterize the family of potential pushbacks. The set of The variables related to the decision of whether to select or not a given pushback are There exist a number of alternatives in order to define the objective function. The particular choice will depend on the mine planner objectives and the particular case study. In general, the recommendations in order to realize a good choice are to ensure the extraction of mineral as soon as possible, which is related to nested pits definition, based on parameterization over metal price, but also to ensure equilibriums of waste and ore movements across life of mine, postponing the waste extraction as much as possible, while at the same time, the design of pushbacks keeps minimum operational spaces. Some examples of objective functions that should be chosen are: Minimization of the tonnage differences among selected pushbacks (gap problem). Minimization of the stripping ratio (waste/ore) into the first pushbacks, delaying as much as possible the waste extraction. Maximization of the ore tonnage within each pushback. Optimization of the number of pushbacks, for instance, what is the minimum number of pushbacks that satisfy the requirements given by the constraints. Definition of an operational design measure in order to maximize the pushback width along a preferred direction. The constraints are classified as    (c.1)  A very interesting particular case is about controlling the differences among pushback tonnages. If the growth rate of tonnages for the nested pits is relatively low and constant, the gap problem in the pushback selection should be avoided. In this case, in order to represent the desired objective function, a minimization of total deviations regarding to a reference value shall be used. The reference value corresponds to the tonnage of each pushback when it has a equipartition of the ultimate final pit into In this section the methodology above presented was applied on two case studies: one from a gold deposit and the other from a copper deposit. The aim of these experiments is essentially to evaluate the performance of the proposed model on two different kind of orebodies. In both instances the model implemented was (PS), that is, throughout In order to implement the model (PS), the The first case study is known as McLaughlin gold deposit, which was located in the northern Coast Ranges of California. This deposit was mined from 1985 until 1996, but gold processing continued through 2002. It was a world-class gold orebody and one of the world’s finest examples of a hot spring-type epithermal precious metals system. The dataset (blocks coordinates, tonnage and ore grade) is obtained from the Minelib library ( The second case study corresponds to a part of a porphyry copper deposit, but due to confidentiality considerations no more details can be given. This deposit will be called The parameters used for the generation of nested pits for both cases are shown in The Now, considering a family of In Now, different instances for automatic pushback generation are set: for these, the number of required pushbacks are imposed from 3 to 6, resulting in four instances for each case. An important aspect of this methodology is the time required for arriving at the final solution: the nested pit generation was computed in both cases for all instances in less than 60 s, while the automated pushback selection was computed in 5 s in the most time-consuming instance. This indicates one of the main advantages of this model, which is so fast to compute a pushback selection applying well-defined criteria. The results for each instance and each case are shown in An important aspect in pushback design is their role in the production scheduling. Pushbacks strongly influence access to the ore and waste blocks in all periods in order to maximize the net present value (NPV). It is clear that NPV will be higher if ore blocks can be mined during early periods. By construction of nested pits approach as revenue factor increases, so does the amount of waste. Based on these facts, if the gap problem is controlled, an additional result is the desired behavior of stripping ratio: the pushback selection moves from low stripping ratio sectors of the mine towards high stripping ratio sectors, helping to obtain a high NPV in scheduling stage. In this paper, a new model for automatic selection of pushbacks from a set of nested pits as support and applying a set of well-defined criteria is presented, in the context of long-term open pit mine planning. This model works on a mixed integer programming setting, characterizing properly the family of pushbacks from pits that can be obtained using, but not limited to, standard methods such as parameterization of metal price or similar. Some important considerations about the nested pits support: for one side, the generation of nested pits has a key impact into automated pushback selection, therefore it is important to be careful in the selection of the The proposed approach was applied on two different case studies, showing that it was able to produce quickly alternative sets of pushbacks that minimize the total tonnage differences among them, helping to avoid the so called As future work, the characterization of the set of pushbacks from nested pits support should be used as the basis in order to develop a family of models that enable to move forward in new algorithms for pushback generation in a more efficient way. Additionally, to research about alternative supports to nested pits to guarantee good feasible solutions. Another research line should be to incorporate time dimension into pushback selection to ensure a design that reach high NPV in production scheduling, similar to E. Jélvez and N. Morales were supported by