 Thomas Ray Bradley was born in Adelaide, South Australia, in 1923. Following his high school graduation in Melbourne in 1941 he commenced a metallurgical engineering degree course at the University of Melbourne but interrupted his studies to join the Royal Australian Air Force in 1944, training as a navigator. Following his discharge from the Air Force at the end of World War II, he returned to the University of Melbourne to complete his BSc and MSc in Physiology. In 1950, he moved to the Physiology Department at Sydney University, where he worked on thyrotropic hormone and married Val who predeceased him by several years. In 1952 they travelled to England, and there, at Reading University, Ray developed an assay for Prolactin, completing his PhD in 1956. In 1957 he returned to the Physiology Department at the University of Melbourne to continue his research in pituitary hormone biology. In 1960 he again left Melbourne to work as a visiting scientist at the National Cancer Institute at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to pursue a different research interest: the analysis, propagation and characterisation of normal lymphocytes and transformed lymphoid tumor cells. It was while working with Llyod Law and Bob Roosa at NIH that Ray learned the fundamentals of cell culture and cell cloning, which were key to the ground-breaking research project he initiated on his return to the Physiology Department at the University of Melbourne in 1962. The development of a quantitative in vitro agar colony-forming cell assay for mouse bone marrow progenitor cells was to become a landmark study in experimental hematology. The resulting publication in the Australian Journal of Experimental Biology and Medical Science in 1966, “The Growth of Mouse Bone Marrow Cells In Vitro”, coauthored by Don Metcalf, was identified as a citation classic in 1979 In 1975, Ray was persuaded by George Hodgson to move to the Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute in Melbourne where he became Deputy Director of the Biological Research Unit. In the ensuing 13 years until his formal retirement in 1988, Ray and George formed a formidable team embarking on research dissecting the hematopoietic stem cell compartment and analysing the organisation of the hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell hierarchy. Pioneering studies exploiting the selective toxicity of 5-fluorouracil for more mature lineage restricted and multipotent progenitor cells in the bone marrow, while sparing the more primitive non-cycling hematopoietic stem cells, led to the detection of pre-CFU-s cells and the radical reassessment of models of hematopoietic organization. The observation that hematopoietic progenitor cells isolated from the bone marrow of 5-fluorouracil–treated mice required multiple growth factors to grow in agar led to the description of High Proliferative Potential Colony-forming Cells (HPP-CFC) and the validation of the HPP-CFC assay as one of the most reliable in vitro surrogate assays for stem cells with long-term reconstituting ability in vivo. Ray's arrival at the Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute was a catalyst for the recruitment and development of a strong hematopoietic research group whose members would go on to make significant contributions to the isolation, characterization, and ordering of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, the delineation of the role of cytokines in regulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation, and the characterization of the hematopoietic stem cell niche. But, Ray's legacy extends far beyond his material contribution to the field due to his largely unseen role as teacher and mentor. He had a profound influence on our own careers, and those of us privileged to have been trained and mentored by Ray, or to have worked alongside him, have fond memories of an amazingly generous and gentle man with an ever-present cheeky smile. We remember him as a wonderful teacher, a creative and innovative scientist ever-ready to share his knowledge and insights to encourage and empower those around him, especially young investigators, to wonder, think laterally, and challenge ideas. Ray was never too busy to stop and chat and would often be involved in deep scientific debates over terms and phrases used in the literature or the inappropriate perpetuation of dogma or unproven concepts. Although continuing his active engagement in research for some years following his retirement, Ray devoted much of his time in later years to his passion for jazz as an avid listener and collector of recorded jazz music, and as an amateur cornet player. In retirement he played a prominent role in establishing the Victorian Jazz Archive, the premier museum of Australian jazz, formed to preserve all forms of Australian jazz music and memorabilia. Family was paramount in Ray's world. He was devoted to Val and he treasured nothing more than being a father and grandfather and spending time with his children (Julie, Michael, Mary, and Elizabeth) and his grandchildren. Following his retirement, the International Society of Experimental Hematology recognized his contribution to the field by naming a Distinguished New Investigator Award in his honour; and in 1990 Ray was awarded a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) medal in recognition of his services to medical science and technology, particularly in the field of cell biology. For those of us that have been part of his sphere of influence, it has been a rare honor and privilege to have known him and worked with him. He will be sadly missed by his family, friends, and colleagues.