Among the conventional means of meat processing to ensure microbial safety and shelf life extension are the use of chemical additives and heat pasteurization/sterilization. While these processes have proven effective over the years, the severity of their actions has been a major focus of scientific discussion due to their detrimental effects on nutritional and sensorial quality of the meat products. The recent consumer awareness of the impact of their diets on their health and overall well-being, which has also led to their demands for clean labels for food products; safe, minimally processed and with natural ingredients, has mandated meat processors to explore options that can satisfy these consumer demands. High pressure processing has been widely researched for its effectiveness in reducing/eliminating microbial population and extending meat products' shelf life while preserving the products' freshness and sensory quality. The present paper intends to provide updated viewpoints about the potentials of high pressure processing technology for extended shelf life meat products.High-pressure processing (HPP) is a promising technological alternative to conventional heat treatment for food processing. HPP particularly satisfies consumers' increasing demand for minimally processed food, free of chemical additives and preservatives yet safe, nutritious and of high sensory integrity ( Since its first discovery by Hite in While the changes induced by HPP in meat may be different from those induced by heat processing, they may not be insignificant and could either be detrimental or beneficial depending on several factors such as processing parameters and product formulations ( High pressure processing has been finding increasing usage in the meat industry. The application of HPP technology is typically preceded by the food products being hermetically sealed in a flexible container. The packaged product is then subjected to pressure ranging from 100 to 600 Among numerous factors that make HPP treatment an attractive technology for meat processors include its potential for effective microbial inactivation, shelf life extension, flavor and nutrient maintenance as well as yield enhancement ( HPP application is generally governed by the Le Châtelier's principle which states that if a chemical system at equilibrium experiences a disturbance (e.g., concentration, temperature, volume or pressure change) then the system responds to establish a new equilibrium state. As a result, any conformational change or reaction that is accompanied by decreased volume is also favored by increased pressure ( Protein is a crucial component of food and other biological organisms and several studies have revealed that the structure of proteins changes when under the influence of pressure ( HPP inactivates microorganisms by interfering with regular cellular functions. According to Food composition plays a vital role in the effectiveness of HPP treatment. Water activity is among the critical process factor for microbial inactivation by HPP. Generally, low water activity (notably below 0.95) protects microorganisms against pressure lethality ( The peculiarities of muscle foods and muscle-based food products which include their high perishability, high water activity, suitable pH and nutritional composition favorable for microbial proliferation have particularly made HPP technology well suited for varying meat processing applications. This has informed its wide application both in raw and processed meat. Although more emphasis will be given to shelf life extension in meat and meat products in this article, some of these applications will be briefly discussed in the following sections. HPP technology has great potential for raw meat treatment ranging from minced, diced, sliced, to whole intact muscles. This is because it can efficiently increase shelf life and safety of raw meats, enhance its tenderization and could influence meat's cook loss. As the ultimate goal of meat industries is to extend the shelf life of raw meat without chemical preservatives and no significant effect on sensorial qualities, HPP technology may offer some opportunities to achieve this goal. Meat tenderization is another promising application of HPP on raw meat. Components of meat responsible for toughness include the connective tissue/stromal protein and the myofibrillar proteins. High pressure treatment exerts structural changes on meat protein by rupturing the non-covalent (mostly hydrophobic and electrostatic) interactions and subsequent reformation of intra and inter-molecular bonds within and among protein structures ( Meat products are those in which the fresh meats have been subjected to one or more processing procedures, including comminution, dehydration, fermentation, curing or cooking, among others ( Considering the recent increase in consumer demands for low salt and naturally cured meat products, the technological quality implication on such product may include reduced protein extractability and poor water holding capacity, hence, inferior texture quality. Not only that, processed meat formulated with reduced salt or no nitrite may become highly susceptible to microbial growth and shorter shelf life due to lower ionic strength and higher water activity. Given that HPP treatment can increase protein unfolding and water binding functionality in meat products, there appears to be some potential for its application in low salt meat formulations. HPP technology is a viable tool that could partially compensate for the salt reduction in meat formulations, thereby meeting consumer demands of reduced-salt meat products while still keeping the product safe with extended shelf life. In their study to evaluate the use of HPP in enhancing the quality and shelf life of reduced sodium and naturally cured cooked ham and wiener, Aside from these well-known applications of HPP in meat products as discussed previously, research has also shown that high pressure in combination with heat treatment could result in meat products with higher fat and water retention due to a stronger gel network. Many authors have reported that HPP increases the pH of meat (up to 0.2–0.3 unit higher) compared to the untreated control, enhancing moisture retention and water binding capacity ( Although information relating to the effect of HPP on the chemical safety of meat product is scarce, few studies have shown that high pressure treatment could decrease the content of natural and biogenic amines (e.g., spermine, agmatine, tyramine, putrescine and cadaverine, among others) in meat products ( Having established that high pressure technology is an effective technology in the elimination of microorganisms and in the shelf life extension of meat products, it is important to examine other possible effects that may result when HPP is applied for shelf life extension in meat products. This section focuses on the general effects of HPP on meat/meat products quality, nutrition and sensory attributes. As a rule of thumb, the rate of cell death increases with increasing pressure but does not follow a first order kinetic as a tailing effect could sometimes be observed ( It therefore seems that most pressure sensitive bacteria are rod or spiral shaped while the highly resistant ones are spherical ( A major limitation to the widespread industrial applications of HPP especially to raw meat is the changes it induces to meat appearance due to protein denaturation. High pressure processing has been shown to result in meat discoloration ( Similarly, fresh meats are more affected than processed (e.g., dry cured or fermented) meat. Lipid oxidation is a major cause of meat quality deterioration. Also, products of lipid oxidation may pose some health risks having been implicated in several disease conditions including cancer and coronary diseases ( Several components could be responsible for the flavor of meat and meat products. These could include reducing sugars, vitamins, amino acids, peptides and nucleotides. While HPP may have minimal effects on vitamins and small flavor molecules, the oxidation of lipid components as well as modification of enzymes responsible for flavor development induced by HPP could play a significant role in meat flavor impairment. Furthermore, HPP treatment affects meat textural attributes including water holding capacity and tenderization. Meat textural properties are largely influenced by the connective tissue and myofibrillar (actomyosin) systems and the former is stabilized by hydrogen bonds which is relatively inert to pressure treatment ( Consumer acceptance of meat and meat products is largely determined by the color, texture, flavor and oxidative stability ( Owing to the recent trend toward Clean Label safe food products; free from chemical additives, made with natural ingredients and minimally processed, meat products may become susceptible to microbial proliferation and spoilage. Similarly, several meat quality and technological attributes may be impacted when meat processors respond to the consumer demands of no/low salt or chemical additives. High pressure processing technology appears to have potential to compensate for this meat products' formulation change. Although the technology may present some bottlenecks especially for raw meat application, it has proven advantageous for processed meat with shelf life extension, microbial safety and maintenance of color, flavor and nutritional content. As several intrinsic and extrinsic factors including temperature, pH, a