The discrete element method has been used to investigate the micro mechanics of shearing to a critical state on the loose and dense sides of critical. Isotropic compression has previously been modelled in 3D using a large number of particles and without the use of agglomerates. The same procedure is used here. Particle fracture is governed by the octahedral shear stress within the particle due to the multiple contacts and a Weibull distribution of strengths. Isotropic compression of a silica sand has been simulated to 20MPa and followed by unloading to a range of stresses before shearing to a critical state, using micro parameters which relate to the silica sand particle strengths. The samples at the lowest stress levels exhibit peak strength and dilation. The sample at the highest stress exhibits contraction and ductile yielding to a critical state. A critical state line is established, which appears to become parallel to the isotropic line in log e-log p space at high stress levels. This paper shows that it is the evolving fractal particle size distribution during isotropic normal compression which governs the behaviour on unloading to different overconsolidation ratios. The micro mechanics of the critical state line are shown to be in the evolving particle size distribution during normal compression, and how such an aggregate behaves when it is unloaded.It has recently been demonstrated by the authors that it is possible to accurately model the one-dimensional and isotropic compression of sand using the discrete element method The normal compression lines for one-dimensional and isotropic compression were parallel, and the isotropic boundary conditions were shown to give rise to anisotropic local shear stresses within the soil sample. De Bono and McDowell had previously implemented their simple breakage model to a large-scale triaxial model By considering both a larger range of confining pressures, as well as overconsolidated sand, one of the key aims in this brief paper is to take the next step towards achieving a realistic critical state line in DEM, using a crushable sand with realistic characteristics—i.e. experimentally obtained strengths and hardening law, and the ability for particles to fragment repeatedly (a feat not possible using agglomerates). Another objective is to clarify whether the critical state line obtained from simple shear tests on the overconsolidated sand is parallel with the normal compression line defined by Eq. The importance of including particle crushing when modelling granular soil is becoming increasingly recognised. Using DEM, crushing is typically modelled by either replacing breaking grains with new, smaller fragments [e.g. The crushing model used in this work uses the replacement method, and is detailed in McDowell and de Bono Cheng et al. It is also important to note that without particle crushing, it is not possible to achieve a true normal compression line; Minh and Cheng To determine whether fracture of a particle should occur or not, the average octahedral shear stress within each particle is used: McDowell When a particle breaks, it is replaced by two new fragments, both of which are spheres. The new sphere fragments overlap enough to be contained within the bounding parent sphere. The volume of these fragments equal that of the parent sphere, hence ensuring conservation of mass. The axis joining the new spheres is aligned in the direction of the minor principal stress for the parent sphere. The simulation procedure initially involves applying a small stress increment, after this all particles are checked and allowed to break if the particle octahedral shear stress exceeds the particle strength. Following the replacement of the ‘breaking’ particles, a number of computational timesteps are then completed to allow the overlapping fragments to move apart. These two steps of breaking and dissipation are repeated if necessary, until no further breakages occur, after which the stress is reapplied (if necessary), then the next stress increment is applied. In their previous work, the authors modelled normal compression using a scaled-down oedometer. In this work, a sample with a different aspect ratio is used to accommodate the triaxial shearing that follows unloading (shown in The progressive particle size distribution (PSD) of the isotropically compressed sample is shown in  The well-known Jâky Wood   An additional set of simulations were performed after unloading to 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10  It is reassuring to see that the critical states obtained from both sets of shear tests lie on the same critical state line. Moreover, it is interesting to observe the difference in behaviour of the two different shear tests conducted from initial states of From these results, particularly the conventional triaxial tests, which exhibited ductile behaviour and contraction at the highest stresses, it can be therefore seen that fractal distribution of particles which resulted from crushing during normal compression (in this case to 20 A previously used particle splitting model has been used to investigate the evolution of critical states. A sample of spheres has been isotropically compressed to a stress of 20  size effect on strength for a material particle size (diameter) initial particle size voids ratio voids ratio corresponding to the yield stress on the linear log coefficient of lateral earth pressure Weibull modulus critical state friction constant mean stress octahedral shear stress in a particle value of octahedral shear stress such that 37% of particles are stronger for a given particle size critical state friction angle peak friction angle stress tensile stress at failure horizontal, vertical stress mean strength principal stresses in a particle yield stress on the log critical State Line discrete element method normal compression particle size distribution The authors would like to thank the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (