An experiment was conducted in which two sulphide ores and one platinum ore were each subjected to high voltage pulses and mechanical breakage, with the same specific energy input, in order to compare the mineral modal abundance and grade in the two comminution products. The data from this experiment have provided unambiguous evidence of greater enrichment of the minerals with high conductivity/permittivity in the less than 0.3mm size fractions of the electrical comminution product. Numerical simulations using COULOMB 3D indicated that with the existence of an electrical potential difference in the system, a high electrical field intensity was created around the boundary of the minerals with high conductivity/permittivity, causing selective fragmentation, thereby elucidating and supporting the experimental findings.World consumption of minerals is on the increase and this trend is likely to continue. However, the depletion of many high grade ore reserves is leading to an increased need to process ores of lower grade. To liberate the valuable minerals from such ores requires fine grinding, a process which demands higher energy requirements and yields lower energy efficiencies. Addressing this comminution dilemma has become a major focus for the mineral industry. Consequently, improvements in rock breaking and mineral liberation techniques which can reduce energy consumption and improve metal production processing are being sought to address this challenge. The specific liberation process, such as the disintegration of ores by high voltage pulses, has been suggested as a possible route by which mineral liberation properties can be enhanced, relative to conventional breakage methods ( Andres reported a number of comparative studies on the comminution products of various mineral ores, including an apatite nepheline ore ( High voltage pulse fragmentation is also used in geological application; with the advantage of allowing the liberation of minerals along the natural grain boundaries and existing deep fractures, without the unnecessary breakage of particles: a condition not achievable with conventional breakage methods. In recycling building materials, crushing concrete material with a multistage crusher or mill cannot separate the constituents, and the process also produces a large proportion of dust and small particles. However, high voltage pulses can break concrete along the boundary of the different constituents and recover sand, gravel and cement separately. The cement fraction can be baked to produce cement clinker ( All of these examples, reported in the literature, suggest that there is a mechanism of selective fragmentation happening during the high voltage pulse process. However, recent research has found that the results of particle pre-weakening and mineral liberation of ores tested with high voltage pulses were significantly different. Some ore particles treated with a small energy input by high voltage pulses became very fragile, resulting in a large reduction in the energy requirement in the downstream grinding process. However, other ore particles did not behave similarly (  This paper uses experimental data to verify the existence of selective fragmentation in the high voltage pulse process. The observed selective fragmentation trend is then linked with the electrical properties of the minerals encountered in the high voltage pulse treatment. Numerical simulations were conducted to further examine the effects of mineral properties on electrical field distributions in mineral particles, to elucidate the fact that electrical comminution can produce selective fragmentation for mineral ores. The outcomes can be used to guide the usage of high voltage pulses in achieving better results, based on the electrical and mechanical properties of ores. Experiment details including the ore samples tested, the equipment used for the electrical and mechanical comminution tests, the testing procedures, and the experimental errors, have been given in a separate paper ( Two sulphide ores and one PGM ore were tested in this study. Ore 1 sample was from a copper-gold mine located in New South Wales, Australia, Ore 2 was from a low grade gold ore mine located in Western Australia, and Ore 3 was from a platinum group metal (PGM) mine located in South Africa. The mineral composition, and the grain size of the minerals of interest for the three ore samples, were determined with an MLA (mineral liberation analyser) and are summarised in The received feed samples were crushed and screened to obtain the required size fractions of 37.5–45 The high voltage pulse breakage experiment was conducted with selFrag Lab equipment installed at selFrag AG based in Switzerland. The selFrag Lab is designed to process wet batch samples in the one kilogram range. For the liberation experiment, the operating parameters were set at 100–120 A laboratory rod mill was employed as a mechanical breakage device to treat the ore samples. Mono size fractions of the ore samples, similar to those treated by selFrag, were ground in the rod mill for a given period of time. Both selFrag and rod milling processes were in open circuit breakage. The net mill power consumption was calculated using a calibration method reported by There were 170 sets (2 In the liberation experiment, particles of the mono size of 9.5–12.5 The modal abundance of the minerals of interest was used to demonstrate the selective fragmentation effect. The modal abundance of minerals can be found in the MLA measurement data, which shows the volume fraction of the mineral of interest in each size fraction. The volume fraction of the mineral can be converted to a mass percentage of the mineral, taking into account the density of the mineral. The modal abundance of the mineral shows the amount of this mineral cumulated into size fractions, whether in a form of liberated, binary or ternary composites. Apparently, the modal abundance of minerals reflects the enrichment of particular minerals by size: the larger value indicates that this mineral is more vulnerable to being selected for fragmentation from the parent particles. Therefore the modal abundance is adopted to examine the selective fragmentation results associated with a specific comminution route. The results presented in this section are mainly from Ore 1. Results from the other two ores are used to validate the trends observed from the Ore 1 sample.  The modal abundance of bornite exhibits a slightly different trend, as shown in As shown in In summary, comparison of the modal abundance by size, in the Ore 1 sample, indicated that chalcopyrite and pyrite were preferentially liberated by high voltage pulses. Bornite mineral was also preferentially selected for liberation at 21.9 Note that the modal abundance of minerals only reflects the composition of the minerals of interest by size, but it does not take into account the mass distribution by size. Mineral grade in the 0–0.3 The data show that electrical comminution consistently produced a higher grade of metalliferous minerals. The relative change in grade by electrical comminution is presented in The data exhibit a general trend indicating that the minerals with high conductivity produced higher enrichment. The conductivities of the chalcopyrite, pyrite, bornite, pyrrhotite and pentlandite minerals are all larger than 0.8 The authors are aware of the fact that the values of mineral conductivity or permittivity may vary in a range, and conductivity or permittivity is not the only variable governing high voltage pulse performance. The other mineral properties such as grain size, ore texture, etc., also affect liberation in electrical comminution. In this study, modelling of the electrical field intensity under static conditions has been tackled, using the boundary element method (COULOMB 3D software), in order to investigate the electrical field intensity distribution across a range of minerals representing the various ores used for the experimental investigation. The simulation calculates the electrical field intensity profile at various conditions. A cylindrical domain, representing the property of water, has been set up to allow changes of mineral properties within the system. Inputs of two different voltages are needed across the top and bottom areas of the cylindrical domain, to allow for the existence of an electrical potential difference in the system. The minerals of interest are usually selected as spheres or other suggested shapes, which are imbedded within a cubical or spherical gangue. All mineral particles are imbedded within the domain, allowing for a good representation of the actual experiment. A circular x-plane has been placed within the system to illustrate the results in a two-dimensional format (see Once the computational calculation is completed, the results are shown on an x‐plane view in the form of flux (arrows), representing the electrical field intensity and its various directions (notice in the flux always flows in the direction of high potential to low potential; the magnitude of the flux is presented on a colour scale with red indicating high intensity and blue low intensity; the distance between the flux represents the concentration of charges, where the shorter the distance, the higher the concentration of charges. For the studies described in this paper, the commercially available program COULOMB, which is based on the boundary element method and developed by the Integrated Engineering Software, was employed. In the past, several methods including finite difference, finite element, boundary element, boundary integration and charge simulation have been used for solving the electrical field intensity distribution ( The boundary element method, which is based on a formulation of the boundary integration equation, is an alternative approach to the solution of the boundary value problem. This method does not seek a direct solution of the potential. Instead, an equivalent source, which would sustain the field, is found by forcing it to satisfy a prescribed set of boundary conditions, under the so called Green's function. This function relates the location and effect of the source to any point on the boundary, and eliminates the need for a finite element mesh or a finite difference grid. The equivalent source is usually located on the boundaries and interfaces of different media (e.g. the electrical field at an interface of two dielectrics). Once the source is determined, the potential or its derivatives can be calculated at any point. It has been found that many valuable minerals often exhibit different electrical properties when compared with gangue minerals. The result shown in Similar trends were observed in the simulations for Ore 2 and Ore 3. The results show that the field flux bends towards the metalliferous minerals such as the pyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite spheres, which all have higher conductivity and permittivity than silicate ( Simulations were conducted on the electrical field intensity distributions of chalcopyrite and quartz spheres embedded within K-feldspar, for different electrical potential differences (0 The simulations also indicate that with an increase of electrical potential from 0 An experimental study was conducted on three ore samples to compare mineral modal abundance and the grade of the products generated by electrical and mechanical comminution routes with the same specific energy levels. The data demonstrated the following trends: The chalcopyrite and pyrite in Ore 1, the pyrite in Ore 2, and the pyrrhotite and pentlandite in Ore 3 were enriched in the size fractions below 0.3 The bornite abundance in Ore 1 of the electrically comminuted product at low energy levels was not as high as that found in the mechanically comminuted product. But at higher energy levels, the trend reversed, exhibiting that the bornite mineral was better enriched in the electrical comminution product. Silicate minerals at both low and high energy levels showed no significant difference between the two products. Statistical analysis confirmed that the observed differences were real, with the majority of the cases exceeding the 95% significance interval. A numerical simulation was used by applying the boundary element method to simulate the electrical field intensity under various particle conditions. Electrical principles suggest that the location of breakdown, or the paths of the streamer, is strongly related to the location of the high intensity field. A general trend was observed from the simulation that high electrical field intensity was created around the boundaries of the minerals with high conductivity/permittivity. This suggests that the higher the difference in electrical properties between two mineral phases, the higher the induced electrical field intensity at their interface. Hence, preferential breakage along the grain boundaries of the high electrical field intensity is one of the major causes of selective fragmentation. This explains the finding in the experimental study that chalcopyrite, pyrite, bornite, pyrrhotite and pentlandite minerals were enriched in the electrically comminuted product in the 0–0.3 The numerical simulation also indicates that the applied electrical potential level is another major factor affecting the breakage outcome in electrical comminution. The simulation showed that the higher the energy applied, the higher the induced electrical field intensity. This elucidates the observation that the bornite modal abundance was improved in the electrical comminution product, as the input specific energy was increased. The maximal electrical field causes small displacements of the bound charges or mobile charges in different minerals, resulting in polarisation. Polarisation determines the location of breakdown ( Obviously, there exists an optimal electrical comminution condition for individual ores. This depends on a number of factors, including: the electrical properties of the minerals in the ore, the relative difference of the electrical properties between the valuable minerals and the gangue minerals, the grain sizes of the minerals of interest, how the minerals of interest are distributed inside a particle, and the particle texture, etc. Therefore the efficiency of electrical comminution needs to be optimised on a case to case basis. The experimental results presented in this paper have demonstrated the enrichment trend of minerals with high conductivity/permittivity in the minus 0.3 Numerical simulations indicate that a high electrical field intensity was created around the boundary of the minerals with high conductivity/permittivity. This suggests that the higher the difference in electrical properties between the two mineral phases, the higher the induced electrical field intensity at their interface. Hence, preferential breakage along the grain boundaries of minerals at high electrical field intensity is one of the major causes of selective fragmentation. This elucidates and supports the experimental findings. The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the