The sorption of gold, silver, palladium and platinum chlorides onto a carbonaceous sorbent prepared from flax shive by treatment with hot sulfuric acid is described. The results showed that the rate of sorption followed a first-order relationship with the initial rate described largely by pore diffusion. The sorption of the metal ions followed the Langmuir equation with the calculated monolayer capacities following the order: Au(III)>Pd(II)>Ag(I)>Pt(II)≈Pt(IV). The sorption process was shown to occur by ion exchange reactions with functional groups on the sorbent. Once the metal ions had been loaded onto the sorbent, they were, except for platinum(IV), reduced by the sorbent to the metal with oxidation of the sorbent generating further ion exchange sites for sorption of the metal ions. This allowed the possibility of recycling the sorbent until significant amounts of the precious metal had been accumulated, thus simplifying the recovery of the metal by combustion of the residual sorbent.The value and scarcity of the precious metals, gold, silver, platinum and palladium make it imperative that all the waste aqueous solutions are treated to try to recover them economically. Several appropriate technologies are available including precipitation, ion exchange and adsorption. The latter is probably the most suitable as large volumes of very dilute wastes can be treated economically. The most common adsorbent is active carbon where many different commercial sources are available, but in recent years, there has been a trend to look for other adsorbents that might provide an environmental advantage by using agricultural and other natural waste materials that otherwise might cause problems for disposal. One such material is flax ( Two general methods of converting an agricultural waste into a sorbent may be used. The first subjects the feed material to a temperature below 800 °C for a defined period of time to form a char and remove the volatile and tarry compounds formed as by-products. This char can then be ‘activated’ by heating at a higher temperature, 800–1200 °C, in the presence of steam or oxygen to produce the required surface area and pore structure. The alternative process involves chemical activation, where the feed material is impregnated by chemicals such as zinc chloride, phosphoric acid or potassium sulphide prior to the carbonization process at 400–600 °C in the absence of air. An alternative way of preparing a sorbent is to dehydrate the feed material with sulfuric or phosphoric acid to produce a porous active carbon ( In a series of studies using a sorbent prepared by the dehydration of flax shive with sulfuric acid ( A few studies have been published of the removal of such metals on carbon sorbents where the reduction to the element has been observed, including gold ( Chemicals: gold(III) chloride; silver(I) nitrate; palladium(II) chloride; sodium tetrachloroplatinate(II) and sodium hexachloroplatinate(IV) were supplied by Aldrich Chemicals Ltd. Stock solutions were prepared in distilled water and the pH adjusted with dilute sodium hydroxide or the appropriate dilute acid. Carbon sorbent was prepared from flax shive supplied by the Natural Fibre Organisation, Hampshire, UK, by dehydration with sulfuric acid. Details of the preparation and characterization of the material are the subject of an earlier publication ( As prepared, this sorbent had the following characteristics: surface area: 19 m The adsorption studies were carried out batch-wise in stoppered containers and shaken in an incubator until equilibrium was reached. Samples of the solution were withdrawn at intervals and analysed to determine the metal concentration using a Perkin–Elmer Plasma 40 ICP-AES. Both the wet and dried carbon sorbent were used with the sample weights adjusted for the moisture content of the wet material to give results that were directly comparable. Experiments were repeated three times and mean values are recorded. Standard deviations and analytical errors were calculated and the maximum analytical error was ±5%. This was used to establish the deposition of metals onto the sorbent. A Philips PW1730 generator with a Philips 1050/25 powder goniometer and Philips PW 1390 measuring electronics were used with copper Kα radiation and a nickel filter. Using the weights and volumes shown in The metal uptake was found in the initial stages to vary almost linearly with the square root of time, Overall, the rate of sorption follows a first-order relationship, Eq. Sorption capacity and temperature effect. The sorption of the metals followed an ‘L-type’ adsorption isotherm ( Gold and silver were chosen for studies on the effect of temperature on sorption where a rise in temperature from 25 to 45 °C increased the metal uptake ( If sorption follows an ion exchange process involving the active functional group on the sorbent, then protons should be released into solution according to the charge on the metal ion (Eq. As noted above, earlier it had been observed that mercury(II) species adsorbed onto the flax sorbent was reduced to either mercury(I) chloride or the element depending on the anions in solution ( Relevant standard electrode potentials for the reduction of the precious metal ions are shown below: The related oxidation of the carbon sorbent was shown in previous studies with mercury(II) ( The effect of other metal ions in the feed solution has also not been investigated but once again, it was shown in the studies with mercury that, although these did compete with the mercury for the ion exchange sites, the overall effect on the process was limited and the light ions could probably be eluted following the reduction step and prior to recycling. This study has shown that the sorbent prepared from flax shive by treatment with hot sulfuric acid is capable of effectively removing precious metals from dilute solution by an ion exchange process. Following the loading of the metals on the sorbent reduction of the metal ions occurs generating further ion exchange sites on the carbon that allows the sorbent to be recycled to treat further batches of dilute feed solutions. One of the authors (E. I. El-Shafey) would like to thank the Egyptian Government for the award of a scholarship. Mr. H. Gilbertson, NFO, is thanked for supplying the flax shive used in this work.