The present case study pertains to the generation of free face in a solid bench of a limestone quarry located in the Philippines. Due to certain unavoidable operational circumstances, the bench was devoid of free face. Notwithstanding, it was essential to exploit the high grade limestone from the given bench. Given this, a suitable firing pattern was designed for the said bench to form a 75m long and 15m wide opening slot cut. The field scale implementation of the designed firing pattern was conducted methodically to generate the opening slot and provide a free face for the subsequent blasting operation on the bench for regular production of limestone. State-of-art digital image analysis of the blasted muck in conjunction with excavator cycle time observation, boulder count and measurement of throw were deployed to evaluate the efficacy of the designed firing pattern at pilot as well as full-scale blast. The designed firing pattern yielded satisfactory fragmentation results.The free face is known to provide a reflective surface for the shockwave, which is necessary for fragmenting the rock mass The objective of the present work was to form a large opening slot, 75 To meet the objectives, full-scale blasts were conducted in the limestone quarry. The quarry operated in three sections, west, central and east. The present study pertains to the east section workings, where the limestone beds, separated at 2–3 Unfortunately due to the unprecedented rainfall during the monsoon period, the central pit section was pooled with water. Because of this, it was not possible to extract limestone from the central pit section. Although the immediate overlying bench of the east section also consisted of the highest grade limestone, the free face of this bench was backfilled with waste material (very poor grade limestone & other waste rocks by the previous contractors who operated the quarry). The waste rock, being disposed of on one side of this bench over several years, was voluminous, well compacted and stiff which caused enormous congestion. This, in turn, resulted into absence of any free face for blasting the limestone on the given bench. The situation is illustrated in After understanding the scope of the problem, it was contemplated to design a suitable blast round for the formation of opening slot cut. The objective was to sequence the inter-hole delay in order to provide adequate and progressive burden relief on one hand, while restricting the collision on the other hand. The basic premise for providing relief in the given case was to detonate at least two adjacent holes at a sufficiently earlier delay time, in front of the holes to be fired. This premise was followed in fixing-up of inter-hole and inter-row delay intervals in the firing pattern. The recommendations published by various researchers describing the role of delay timing on fragmentation, muck pile characteristics, back break, and high wall profile were considered As the blast size of the designed firing round was large (with 110 holes accommodated in 5 drilling rows), due thought was given to provide adequate and progressive relief to the congestion suffered by holes fired in the successive rows from the already blasted buffer of rock from the previous holes. The progressive relief was provided in the successive rows of the blast by systematically incrementing the delay interval between the consecutive holes in the rows. A thorough perusal of Furthermore, in the projected blast round design, the judicious plugging of the blast hole collar ( Due to the extreme production pressure for high grade limestone, from the quarry management, the designed blast round size was inevitably large (especially for a solid bench like this). Nonetheless, it appeared precarious to attempt this blast round straight away on the candidate bench without any pilot-scale trials. Hence, in order to ascertain the efficacy of the designed firing pattern vis-à-vis the existent straight V-firing pattern, pilot trials were conducted with the designed firing pattern on an existing upper bench in the east section of the pit. Although the upper bench was a normal production bench with free face, pilot-scale blasts were thought to provide useful insight on the fragmentation results. Here, it may be of consequence to argue for the need to draw a comparison with straight V-pattern. This was largely done to overcome the strong bias of the management for straight V‐patterns, while making an opening slot cut. The strong bias of management for the straight V‐pattern could be attributed to its superior performance and standardization on the existing benches of this quarry Hence, three blasts B1, B2 & B3 were fired on the straight V‐pattern ( As described later, the results of the pilot‐scale blasts (B4, B5 and B6), fired on the projected design, were reasonably convincing for its implementation on the candidate limestone bench in order to provide the opening slot cut. Keeping in mind the objectives of the present work, the following methods of fragmentation assessment were implemented in the blasted muck piles: Image analysis: The technique of digital image analysis was used in the present study by the capturing of scaled digital images of the blasted muck pile to quantify the fragment size and its distribution. In order to cover the entire muck pile, the images were captured at a period interval of 1-hour throughout the excavation history of the muck pile, giving due cognizance to the recommendations made by several researchers Average cycle time: The excavator cycle time was meticulously recorded throughout the excavation history so as to characterize the degree of fragmentation by scrutinizing the average cycle time data. A precise stopwatch was used for this purpose. The relationship between the cycle time of excavators and the degree of fragmentation in the blasted muck piles has been reported by several researchers Boulder count: The total number of separated oversizes ( or boulders) from the blast which, could not be loaded by the excavator, were counted at the face Throw: The throw (or heave) of the blasted muck affects the lateral spreading of the muck pile, which, in turn, governs the loading segment of the cycle time of the excavators. Throw is the horizontal distance at which center of gravity of blasted muck lies as shown in the The principal features of the blasts (B1–B3 & B4–B6) are presented in A perusal of On the other hand, an inordinate increase in the excavator cycle time (29.14 An inspection of the fragment size distribution curve for full-scale blast (B7) and the salient blasting results for this blast (  The following conclusions may be drawn from the case study: The combined influence of proper delay sequencing and blast hole plugging appears to be important when designing an opening slot cut on a solid bench. The inter-hole and inter-row delay interval of 8–25 Judicious plugging of the blast holes (at the beginning of each row, in the perimeter zone holes and in the last row holes) appears to provide adequate fragmentation and good high wall profile through the better usage of explosive energy. It also offers a promise in controlling the throw of the muck piles. The fragment size results are coherent with the excavator performance, boulder count and muck pile throw results. The authors are indebted towards the excellent co-operation and support rendered by the entire operational crew, staff and management of the Republic Aggregates Company Inc. Especial note of thanks to Prof. R.T. Domingo, Professor, Asian Institute of Management, for aptly analyzing the changes through Six-Sigma approach and recommending the same for field-scale implementation.