When presented with ferrous ions and tetrathionate in growth media, individual archaeal species, Acidianus brierleyi, Metallosphaera hakonensis and Sulfolobus metallicus, exhibited different patterns of substrate utilisation and cell growth. Total cell numbers for A. brierleyi were about 60% of those for M. hakonensis and S. metallicus after complete substrate utilisation, and specific growth rates were affected by substrate concentration and cell growth history. High iron(II) concentrations inhibited S. metallicus growth. In relation to mixed microbial communities in high-temperature bioleaching reactors, the results are consistent with the hypothesis that specific growth rates of different species grown on different substrates strongly influence community structure. The combination of T-RFLP with substrate analysis and cell counts is a valuable analytical tool for the discrimination and semi-quantitative estimation of species in mixed cultures that can be used to gain better understanding of community structures and population dynamics in complex bioleaching systems.The development of biooxidation processes employing stirred tank technologies for the pre-treatment of gold-bearing pyrite (FeS Three archaeal genera are commonly represented amongst iron(II)- and sulfur-oxidising acidophiles in high-temperature bioleaching systems: The goal of the present work was to compare substrate utilisation when each species was presented simultaneously with ferrous ions and tetrathionate ions. Tetrathionate was chosen as the RISC because the solubility of elemental sulfur in water is practically zero ( Basal salts medium (BSM) was prepared by adding (NH  Dual-substrate media were prepared as follows: High iron (II): tetrathionate (high-Fe(II)) medium contained BSM-YE supplemented with 35 Aliquots for analysis and bacterial enumeration were removed periodically under aseptic conditions. An E Liquid samples (5–15 T-RFLP analysis was undertaken using the 16S rRNA genes as described previously ( In the description of the results, the term ‘sequential’ substrate utilisation describes those cases where less than 20% of the second substrate had been oxidised at the completion of primary substrate oxidation. Similarly, ‘concurrent’ substrate utilisation describes cases where more than 20% of the second substrate had been oxidised at the completion of primary substrate oxidation. The term ‘diauxic growth’ refers to a pattern where an initial stage of cell growth was separated by a lag period from a further stage of cell growth, typically indicating sequential utilisation of two substrates ( For When grown in low-Fe(II) medium, both iron(II)- and tetrathionate-adapted  Only small amounts of thiosulfate, pentathionate and hexathionate were detected among the non-sulfate reaction intermediates during utilisation by Substrate oxidation involves the transfer of electrons from the oxidised substrate to oxygen ( In these experiments the tetrathionate concentration was held constant at 2.5 In experiments where there was sequential utilisation of the ferrous and tetrathionate ions (e.g. for Few comparative data are available for the test species. Mixed cultures of two archaea, The data obtained for the growth of the selected archaeal species in dual substrate media might be useful for predicting the community composition in stirred tank reactors processing mineral sulfides at high temperatures. The foundation for such an approach rests with the better-studied moderate-temperature leaching reactors in which the microbial communities were comprised of bacteria and mesophilic archaea. In those processes, it was shown that a transition from sulfur-oxidising microorganisms such as The archaea used in the present tests have similar preferred temperatures and solution pH for growth and closely-related strains of the three genera have been detected in bioleaching reactors charged with sulfide mineral concentrates ( The hypothesis was tested using T-RFLP to investigate changes in the microbial community during substrate utilisation in a simple batch system containing The results were not as anticipated. Semi-quantitative T-RFLP analysis indicated that growth of A different utilisation pattern emerged at 70 The test temperatures 60 Clearly other factors than iron(II) and reduced inorganic sulfur contents will influence the evolution of archaeal communities in high-temperature bioleaching reactors. The community in a continuous, multi-stage reactor system (pH 1.1) processing chalcopyrite was dominated by When presented with two substrates, ferrous ions and tetrathionate, In tests with single species, the total number of cells after utilising both substrates varied between species, with both Data obtained from the For iron(II)-adapted Specific growth rates were variable. For In relation to mixed microbial communities in high-temperature bioleaching reactors, these preliminary results are consistent with the hypothesis that specific growth rates of different species grown on different substrates strongly influence community structure. The combination of T-RFLP with chemical analyses (the electrochemical determination of ferrous ion concentrations and the HPLC determination of soluble reduced sulfur species) and cell counts is a valuable analytical tool. Its application to further defined mixed-microbial batch reactors and extension to continuous reactors will increase our understanding of community structure and population dynamics in complex bioleaching systems. The authors thank D. Hewitt for valued technical assistance in maintenance and method development in respect of HPLC analyses. The financial support of the Australian Government through the CSIRO Minerals Down Under Flagship and the Parker Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgy solutions is gratefully acknowledged.