The flotability of wet and dry ground spodumene was found different when sodium oleate was used as a collector, and the flotation recovery of wet ground spodumene was higher than that of dry ground spodumene. It is well known that the flotability of minerals is closely related with their crystal structures and surface properties, therefore morphology and structure examinations on wet and dry ground spodumene were performed by SEM and XRD. It was confirmed that wet ground spodumene had smoother surface and more exposed {110} and {100} planes, while more exposed {010} planes were found on dry ground spodumene surface. The specific surface areas of wet and dry ground spodumene in size fraction of −105+38μm were determined to be 0.252m2/g and 0.382m2/g, respectively. However, the maximum adsorption densities of sodium oleate on wet and dry ground spodumene were 21.5×10−6
                     mol/m2 and 12.5×10−6
                     mol/m2, respectively. The densities of surface AlO broken bonds were calculated to be 6.376×1018, 4.351×1018 and 14.057×1018/m2 for {110}, {010} and {100}, respectively. The result indicated that {100} and {110} planes were more favorable for the adsorption of oleic acid ion than {010} plane.Spodumene is a principal economic mineral containing lithium, accounting for more than 90% of world production of Li-bearing minerals. Flotation is the most widely used method for the beneficiation of spodumene. Studies involving spodumene flotation have been carried out by many investigators, most of which are concentrated on the flotability of main minerals in pegmatite spodumene ores and the performance of collectors and depressants As many beneficiation processes such as flotation are dependent on the surface chemical reactions occurring on the surface of the minerals, it has to be noted that the cleavage and fracture characteristic of minerals during crushing and/or grinding plays a vital role in the subsequent processing. The cleavage and fracture of minerals has a close relationship with their crystal structures since the cleavage and fracture always happens along the direction of the weakest interplanar bond forces. The crystal structures determine the surface properties, such as the polarity, unsaturated bonds and the formation of microstructures. It is of great significance to master the crystal structure of minerals and their principle of cleavage and fracture to predict the cleavage plane of minerals. Moon and Fuerstenau However, different crushing and/or grinding methods, for a crystal structure, can lead to difference in the cleavage and fracture. Feng It is well known that spodumene is an anisotropic mineral with very prominent cleavage at {1 Considering the anisotropic characteristic of spodumene and the fact that grinding method can affect the cleavage and fracture of minerals, experiments of wet and dry grinding of spodumene were carried out, and the effect of grinding methods on the cleavage of spodumene as well as on their flotation behavior were discussed in this study. Properties of several cleavage planes of spodumene were studied. Single spodumene bulks, obtained from Keketuohai Rare Metal Mine (Altay district, Xinjiang, China), were crushed by hammer and picked by hand. Then the handpicked high-purity spodumene was crushed by a corundum jaw crusher to −3 The grinding tests were operated in a laboratory porcelain mill at 30 Subsequently, the two kinds of ground spodumene samples were screened to get different size ranges, including −105 Sodium oleate of analytical quality was used as the collector in the micro-flotation tests. Solutions of HCl and NaOH were applied for pH adjustment of the system. The standard of deionized water is: electrical resistivity Micro-flotation tests were performed in a laboratory flotation apparatus at 1700 The XRD measurements were performed on a DX-2700 diffractometer with CuKα radiation (at 40 Scanning electron microscopy of JSM-6490LV model was used for the measurement of morphology. Samples were stuck on the mode with double sided carbon tape, and coated with Pt to make them conducting. BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) measurements were carried out on a Quantachrome SI gas adsorption analyzer to determine the specific surface area of the two kinds of ground spodumene with size fraction of −105 The adsorption of sodium oleate on both wet and dry ground samples in size fraction of −105 The Accelrys Material Studio 5.5 (MS) modeling package was used for the calculation of spodumene crystal structure. Crystal structure of spodumene was built by Build Crystal module and then optimized by Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) The nature of various surface atomic sites on different crystalline planes of spodumene was studied in detail using the surface slab models. The density of Al Micro-flotation tests were conducted to compare the flotability difference between wet and dry ground spodumene in different grain sizes as a function of pulp pH. Sodium oleate was used as a collector in these tests with a concentration of 6 As shown in The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the wet and dry ground spodumene of three individual sizes (−75 Based on the XRD analysis in The relative intensities of peaks in the pattern are believed to reflect the relative contents of crystalline planes in the two samples The SEM micrograph was also conducted to analyze the differences of exposed surfaces of wet and dry samples and the results are shown in The specific surface areas of wet and dry ground spodumene in size fraction of −105 From The optimized lattice parameters of spodumene are According to the studies reported Generally, the density of surface Al To further identify the relative affinity of sodium oleate on different planes in a more definitive manner, it is assumed that there are only three kinds of surfaces, i.e. (1 In the present study, a few investigations were carried out to examine factors contributing to the flotation behavior difference between wet and dry ground spodumene, and several important remarks can be made from the results obtained. The flotation results demonstrated that the dry ground spodumene had poorer flotation response compared with wet ground one. The specific surface area of dry ground spodumene was larger than that of wet ground spodumene, while the adsorption density of sodium oleate on wet ground spodumene was larger than that on dry ground spodumene. The XRD patterns revealed that the cleavage and fracture characteristic of spodumene was altered by grinding conditions. Wet ground spodumene has more {1 The density of surface Al The authors wish to thank the support of