This paper presents field test data from four instrumented rigid square pad foundations on soft clay that were brought to failure under concentric vertical loading. The test programme comprised two unconsolidated undrained (UU) foundation tests as well as two consolidated undrained (CU) tests. In the latter case the two foundations were preloaded to a proportion of the UU capacity and the soil was allowed to consolidate before being brought to undrained failure. In this paper, the site works and testing procedures are presented along with the load- and time-settlement responses of all four foundations. Horizontal stress and pore pressure data are presented for the two CU tests. The undrained and consolidated undrained load-settlement responses are shown to agree well with theoretical and numerical predictions. Results from the UU tests were the subject of a prediction exercise, summarised in a companion paper presented in this special issue.This paper presents the results of four large-scale shallow foundation tests on soft estuarine clay carried out at the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF), near Ballina, NSW, established as part of the activities of the Centre of Excellence for Geotechnical Science and Engineering (CGSE). Two rigid square pad foundations were loaded concentrically to failure in an unconsolidated and undrained condition (UU1 and UU2). Another two foundations were loaded with 30% and 50% of the measured UU failure load and allowed to fully consolidate before being brought to failure under undrained vertical concentric loads (CU1 and CU2). In this paper, the foundation response is analysed in conjunction with high quality site investigation data. An international shallow foundation prediction exercise was run in conjunction with these field tests to assess the current state of practice for predicting the undrained load-settlement response and ultimate capacity of shallow foundations. The outcomes of the prediction exercise are presented in a companion paper in this special issue Results of large-scale foundation tests on soft clay under vertical centric loading are sparse in the literature, and most notably include those carried out at the UK’s national soft soil test site, in Bothkennar, Scotland The shallow foundation construction details and observed performance, as presented in this paper, are freely available in digital form through The NFTF is located in the north western part of Ballina, NSW on the east coast of Australia, (see The site comprises a crust layer of alluvial clayey silty sand to a depth of about 1.5  The secant shear modulus of the triaxial data, G Four square foundations with 1.8 Reinforced concrete loading blocks were cast on-site at the same time as the foundations ( All foundations were equipped with survey targets to monitor displacements during loading and consolidation stages (if included). Reflective targets were mounted on three steel reinforcement bars and attached to the first loading block, as there was insufficient space to mount them directly on the foundation. The steel bars were installed to a height sufficient to be visible above the excavation. Three targets were selected to ensure that three dimensional movements of the foundation could be captured. A licensed surveyor used a total station theodolite (TST) to measure foundation displacements. The instrument error of the TST used was given as 3 arc-second, resulting in an accuracy of 0.5 For the CU tests, three Vibrating Wire Push-in Pressure Cells The entire programme ran from June 2014 to March 2016. The timeline illustrating the key stages is shown in Stage 1: Site works for the shallow foundation field tests commenced in June 2014, involving site clearance; excavation of the foundation pit through the surficial crust layer to the top of the soft estuarine clay ( Stage 2: The second stage of site activities commenced in September 2014 and involved dewatering the excavated pit, removing the formwork and undrained loading of two foundations to failure (UU1 and UU2). Following the UU tests, the remaining two foundations were loaded to 30% and 50% of the failure load obtained from the undrained tests in preparation for the consolidated undrained foundation tests, CU1 and CU2. The load was maintained constant for a period of 18 Stage 3: The third stage of site activity commenced in March 2016 and involved the application of a further load increment to each foundation, followed by a consolidation period of 6 The foundations were loaded to failure in approximately 1 tonne increments over a time scale to ensure an undrained soil response. The 35 tonne crane placed the pre-cast concrete blocks one at a time, releasing the load in increments of approximately 1 tonne. Prior to loading to failure, each CU test comprised two load and two consolidation stages, illustrated in Due to the higher than planned preload, failure of the foundation for test CU1 required all eight concrete loading blocks to be used. This required CU2 to be unloaded prior to its final loading stage (see Final loading stage in The load-settlement behaviour of test UU1 and UU2, taken from the crane load and survey measurements, are shown in Bearing capacity was defined at the point at which the foundation movements increased without any change in load, identified from the time dependent settlements (Δs/Δt) between loading steps, i.e. at constant load ( The excavation in which the foundation was cast and the gap between the foundation and excavation walls complicates the boundary conditions, such that simple hand calculations are not well suited to the interpretation and a finite element approach in which the geometry could be represented was adopted. An axisymmetric model using the Abaqus finite element software package was created. The finite element model, shown in The crust was modelled as an elastic perfectly plastic material with Young’s modulus E For the soft clay layer, a linear elastic perfectly plastic Tresca model was adopted. The shear modulus and undrained shear strength profiles were based on the data in The load-settlement response predicted from the FEA is shown in The discussion above has shown that the observed foundation load-settlement response and undrained bearing capacity can be reasonably predicted from the available site investigation data and a simple constitutive model, provided the presence of the gap is modelled. The load-settlement and time-settlement response at each stage of the consolidated undrained foundation tests (CU1 and CU2) are shown in In the following sections, the undrained load-settlement response, consolidation response and the consolidated undrained bearing capacity are discussed. The axisymmetric finite element mesh described above for interpreting the UU response ( MCC parameters could alternatively be derived through a programme of element tests The sequence of the key activities modelled replicated the site activities for test CU1 and included: Excavation of the foundation pit (undrained) Construction of the foundation (undrained) Consolidation period (30 Preloading the foundation (undrained, q Consolidation period (540 Additional increment of preload (undrained, q Consolidation period (6 Final undrained loading to failure (undrained) The results of the FE simulations are compared with the observed response of test CU1 in The undrained load-settlement responses during the two preloading stages and during the final undrained loading to failure of the CU tests are compared with those during the UU tests (see The pressure cell data (shown in From The second loading and consolidation stage was carried out in order to facilitate interpretation of the consolidation response given the difficulty and uncertainties with the data from the first consolidation stage. A detailed picture of the pore pressure response at a depth z  In A more detailed picture of the load-settlement response for the final loading stage, showing the vertical movement of each corner target and the direction of the foundation tilt, is provided in The interpretation of the failure load for the CU tests followed the same procedure as for the UU tests. The maximum permissible load in test CU1 was 70  The gain in undrained vertical bearing capacity of a shallow foundation due to preloading and consolidation was also predicted using a theoretical framework based on critical state soil mechanics concepts A programme of large-scale instrumented shallow foundation field tests investigating the undrained and consolidated undrained load-settlement response and ultimate capacity under vertical centric loading has been carried out at the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF) for soft soils. Site works and activities in preparing the tests are presented along with load- and time-settlement observations to failure. The load-settlement response, ultimate capacity and failure mode of the two unconsolidated undrained tests agreed well with each other providing confidence in the construction and testing procedures and the uniformity of the site over the area of the tests. The successful consolidated undrained (CU) test indicated an increase in bearing capacity due to the preload and consolidation phase, which was well predicted by a critical state based framework. The load-settlement response and ultimate limit state of the unconsolidated undrained tests (UU) were shown to be well predicted by numerical analysis using a simple elastic perfectly plastic constitutive model. Comparison of the observed and predicted load-settlement response were the subject of an international prediction exercise, the results of which are presented in a companion paper in this special issue. The programme of field tests presented in this paper adds to a sparse database of large-scale shallow foundation tests on soft clay on sites with extensive site characterisation. Such studies provide an essential benchmark for assessing techniques and methods for deriving stiffness and strength parameters, available constitutive models and available prediction methods for shallow foundation response. Field testing provides an invaluable and convincing means of assessing analytical and numerical methods of predicting shallow foundation response. This work forms part of the activities of the Centre for Offshore Foundation Systems (COFS). Established in 1997 under the