This paper compares the critical impeller speed results for 6L Denver and Wemco bench-scale flotation cells with findings from a study by Van der Westhuizen and Deglon [Van der Westhuizen, A.P., Deglon, D.A., 2007. Evaluation of solids suspension in a pilot-scale mechanical flotation cell: the critical impeller speed. Minerals Engineering 20, 233–240; Van der Westhuizen, A.P., Deglon, D.A., 2008. Solids suspension in a pilot scale mechanical flotation cell: a critical impeller speed correlation. Minerals Engineering 21, 621–629] conducted in a 125L Batequip flotation cell. Understanding solids suspension has become increasingly important due to dramatic increases in flotation cell sizes. The critical impeller speed is commonly used to indicate the effectiveness of solids suspension. The minerals used in this study were apatite, quartz and hematite. The critical impeller speed was found to be strongly dependent on particle size, solids density and air flow rate, with solids concentration having a lesser influence. Liquid viscosity was found to have a negligible effect. The general Zwietering-type critical impeller speed correlation developed by Van der Westhuizen and Deglon [Van der Westhuizen, A.P., Deglon, D.A., 2008. Solids suspension in a pilot scale mechanical flotation cell: a critical impeller speed correlation. Minerals Engineering 21, 621–629] was found to be applicable to all three flotation machines. The exponents for particle size, solids concentration and liquid viscosity were equivalent for all three cells. The exponent for solids density was found to be less significant than that obtained by the previous authors, and to be consistent with values reported in the general literature for stirred tanks. Finally, a new dimensionless critical impeller speed correlation is proposed where the particle size is divided by the impeller diameter. This modified equation generally predicts the experimental measurements well, with most predictions within 10% of the experimental.weight of solid per weight of liquid, times 100 impeller clearance – bottom, m impeller diameter, m particle size, m acceleration of gravity, m surface based air addition rate or superficial gas velocity, m arbitrary equation constant related to the impeller size and design equation constant related to impeller ability to work under gassed conditions impeller speed, s critical impeller speed, s parameter used in Zwietering’s correlation tank diameter, m mass fraction of solids in the suspension liquid level, m viscosity, kinematic, m density, kg gas gassed conditions just suspended condition for solids liquid solid ungassed conditions water The central step in flotation is particle collection, following successful particle–bubble interaction under favourable chemical and hydrodynamic conditions. Effective solids suspension is a necessary precondition for particle collection and is largely dependent on the hydrodynamic conditions in the cell. Solids suspension has been extensively investigated by many authors ( After Zwietering’s work, many other models were developed to describe the critical impeller speed in stirred tanks. Some of these models were empirical ( Recently, The aim of this paper is to compare the critical impeller speed results for 6 Bench-scale 6 The effects of solids concentration and particle size on the critical impeller speed were determined using the mineral apatite. The range of solids concentrations and particle sizes was chosen to ensure the suspension of all minerals at all conditions used in the study. At higher solids concentrations and with coarser particle size classes it was not possible to adequately suspend all minerals. For example, the −210 The effect of solids density was evaluated in terms of relative densities. The minerals quartz (sg. 2.65 The effect of the liquid kinematic viscosity was evaluated using two particle size fractions of quartz (−149 Researchers have proposed various ways for incorporating the effect of the air flow rate on solids suspension in stirred, aerated vessels ( Due to the different impellers designs for the Denver and Wemco cells, measurements were carried out over a different range of superficial gas velocities ( Solids suspension can intuitively be visualised as the result of two opposing mechanisms. The first mechanism is a suspension mechanism and is mainly influenced by the impeller action and geometry. The suspension mechanism is related to a combination of bulk flow effects, which depend on impeller pumping capacity, and turbulent eddies, which depend on local energy dissipation rates. The opposing mechanism to suspension is the sedimentation mechanism, which causes phase separation, and is mainly influenced by particle and pulp properties. The driving force behind sedimentation is the well-known terminal settling velocity of a particle. The effects of particle size, solids concentration, relative solids density, liquid viscosity and aeration rate (superficial gas velocity) on the critical impeller speed are discussed in the following sections (cf. Particle size is expected to have a relatively strong influence on solids suspension due to its strong influence on the terminal settling velocity. Solids concentration is expected to influence solids suspension due to its effects on hindered settling, turbulence dampening, and (possibly) viscosity effects. The solids density is expected to have a large influence on solids suspension as the solid–liquid density difference is the real driving causing solids settling. The higher the (relative) density the more difficult it is to achieve effective solids suspension. Liquid viscosity plays an indirect role in the settling of a particle due to its effect on the drag coefficient. However, liquid viscosity may also influence the suspension mechanism through turbulence dampening. Studies on the effect of the liquid viscosity on solids suspension in stirred tanks have shown that this variable has little or no influence on the critical impeller speed ( The effect of aeration on solids suspension is complex and typically leads to a general deterioration in solids suspension due to, amongst others, large reductions in power draw. The effect of the superficial gas velocity on the critical impeller speed was evaluated by means of the relative increase of the critical impeller speed under gassed and ungassed conditions, by manipulating Eq. This section compares the general critical impeller speed equation (cf. Eq. The numerical results in The terms in the general critical impeller equation (cf. Eq. From This paper compares the critical impeller speed results for 6 CNPq and CAPES are fully acknowledged for supporting the work and providing scholarships for two of the authors.