Algae have come into prominence over the last decade as a commercial biofuel feedstock due to their high production efficiencies compared to first and second feedstocks. However, algal investment is not economically feasible currently due to the operational and capital cost. There is still need for innovations for both high productivity and green productions. In order to decrease the cost of the algal processes, usage of some wastes as cultivation medium for algal productions and novel biofuel production methods should be considered according to green chemistry principals. In this study, seawater and wastewater supplied from Istanbul Water and Sewerage Administration (ISKI) were used and combined at different ratios to be utilized as a growth medium for Nannochloropsis oculata and Tetraselmis suecica microalgae strain under the same growth conditions, and its effect on cell proliferation and growth kinetics were investigated. It was found that, both N. oculata and T. suecica can tolerate and utilize the wastewater and, the specific growth rate of the cultures can up to 0.5430 d−1 (75% of wastewater) for N. oculata and 0.4778 d−1 (25% of wastewater) for T. suecica. Different concentrations show different results for the growth of two species due to the effect of higher concentrations of the fundamental sources on growth stage and change of ionic composition of the culture medium. To evaluate bioethanol production performance of these two strains, samples which included maximum carbohydrate content as well as control groups were chosen for further studies. The results showed that T. suecica is much suitable for ethanol production using municipal wastewater as a culture medium.Meeting the increasing energy demand has been one of the important problems to be solved over last decade due to the expansion of world population and increase in industrial prosperity. The major energy demand is still supplied by conventional fossil fuels such as oil, coal, and natural gas ( On the other hand, their harvesting and purification and need of various pre-treatments made their production quite challenging and not economical ( Algae can be considered as the third generation of biofuel feedstock considering the challenges of the first and second feedstock faced for renewable energy production. In recent years, microalgae related studies is growing and becoming popular due to the fact that microalgae need less cultivation area than terrestrial crops and also can be cultivated in saline water, brackish water or even wastewater. In cultivation process, culture media and culture conditions are the main aspects to be considered. In order to increase productivity of microalgae, nutrients such as nitrate, urea, ammonium, vitamins, phosphorous, nitrogen, iron, manganese, selenium, cobalt, nickel, and zinc are required in optimal level and as well as growth conditions, yet this may become more costly (  The study was carried out in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing fresh To convert algal biomass into bioethanol, alkaline pre-treatment was performed to degrade the biomass and increase the yeast’s the accessibility to carbohydrate structures for fermentation. In this process, 0.75% (w/v) concentration of NaOH was added to the algal biomass and stirred at 500 rpm for 10 min. Then the four samples were incubated at the temperature of 120 °C for 30 min in an oven ( During 14 days of cultivation, measurements of optical density and cell density of the cultures were used to monitor the algal growth. Optical density was measured by using UV–visible spectrophotometer at 680 nm for Productivity of To evaluate bioethanol concentration YL 6100 GC gas chromatography was used. Samples that obtained during the bioethanol fermentation process (24 h and 48 h) were taken and prepared for GC instrument for further analysis. Samples were filtered using 0.45 μm filters to avoid blocking in column. The GC gas chromatograph contains flame ionization detector (FID) and 30 m × 0.32 mm x 0.25 μm ZB-FFAP column oven. The temperature of injector, detector and oven were maintained at 150, 250 and 100 °C, respectively. Hydrogen was used as carrier gas. Bioethanol concentration was calculated using calibration curve that prepared by the different concentration of bioethanol standards (0.1%–10% (v/v)) ( Total carbohydrate and GC analysis were carried out in triplicate. The results obtained from each experiment were the average of these data. After 14 days of cultivation, the cell density and the optical density of On the other hand, it was seen that the growth curve of High amount of ammonium usage can stop microalgae growth causing a decrease in the culture pH as pH < 6. In the case of utilizing nitrate, pH of the medium increases with the nitrate consumption. Theoretically, when 1 mol of nitrate is used, 1 mol of OH There is a linear relationship between nitrate usage, and the pH of the medium and microalgae growth. If nitrate is used excessively, the pH may increase to over 10 and may affect microalgae growth ( According to The results in According to the BP statistical review of world energy-2016 report ( According to This study demonstrates that for effective cultivation microalgae species such as Zubaidai Reyimu gratefully acknowledges Turks Abroad and Related Communities for the scholarship programme.