 The use of each fixation method is dependent on the fracture anatomy and patient-specific factors. The specific indications are discussed with the individual procedure. The various methods are not mutually exclusive and can be combined to treat complex cases.  The wrist should be assessed for deformity and any open wounds. Open fractures require urgent washout, fracture treatment, and antibiotics. Significant displacement of the ulna may indicate ligamentous injury and the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) should be assessed for instability. A complete neurovascular examination should be performed, with specific attention paid to median nerve function. The elbow should be assessed for tenderness and deformity. Findings could indicate an associated radial head fracture or dislocation. Commonly associated fracture patterns include the Essex-Lopresti, which is a fracture of the radial head plus a DRUJ dislocation, or a Monteggia fracture, which consists of an ulnar shaft fracture with associated radial head dislocation.  Anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique images of the wrist should be obtained. Proper reduction will attempt to restore 22 to 25 degrees of radial inclination, 10 to 15 mm of radial height, and 11 to 15 degrees of volar tilt ( The fracture pattern of the distal radius is assessed. Operative fixation is considered in fractures with dorsal tilt >10 degrees, a radial inclination angle of <15 degrees, a radial shortening >5 mm, positive ulnar variance >3 mm, and/or an intraarticular step-off ≥2 mm ( Associated ulnar styloid fractures do not require fixation. The ulna should be assessed for injury and the carpal bones assessed for displacement, abnormal spacing, or concomitant fracture. Pay attention to the integrity of radial shaft and metacarpals to ensure that these are available to provide sites for fixation if necessary. Computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging provides more detailed fracture anatomy as well as evidence of carpal bone injuries.  Unstable extraarticular distal radius fractures Simple two- or three-part intraarticular distal radius fractures Displaced distal radius fractures in children or adolescents Preoperative films of a patient with displaced extraarticular fracture with dorsal angulation and radial shortening (  Extensor tendons, the cephalic vein, and superficial radial nerve are at potential risk for injury. Radial-sided pins are placed between the first and second dorsal compartment. Dorsal ulnar pins in the intermediate column of the radius are between the fourth and fifth extensor compartments.  A hand table is used with the forearm placed in a pronated position.  The procedure can be performed through a purely percutaneous method or through a miniopen technique using 1- to 2-cm incisions. With the open approach, the soft tissue flaps are elevated and the skin is retracted. Branches of the superficial nerve are identified and carefully protected.  A 0.062-in (1.57-mm) Kirschner wire (K-wire) is inserted into the dorsal ulnar fracture line until the volar cortex is felt ( The wire driver and wire are then moved distally as a unit to “lever” the distal radial fragment into reduction ( With the fracture reduced, a dorsoulnar pin is advanced into the volar cortex to secure the reduction ( A second dorsoradial pin can be placed to further buttress the reduction if necessary (  If there is difficulty in reducing the fracture, a blunt elevator can be placed percutaneously. This can be inserted into the fracture site dorsally and used to lever the fracture into a reduced position. To hold stability in the volar cortex, the K-wire should be drilled only once. Drilling, reversing, and then redrilling can lead to instability of the wire and fixation. Care should be taken not to overreduce the fragment. Excessive volar flexion can displace the fragment volarly.  A third pin is inserted in the radial fracture line at 90 degrees to the dorsal volar pins ( The entire pin is then translated distally with fingers levering and pushing the distal fragment to restore radial inclination ( The pin is then driven through the ulnar cortex to secure its position ( Applying a lever force at the tip of the wire will lead to bending of the wire without reducing the fracture. Force is applied as close to the bone as possible while pushing with fingers to guide the distal fragment into reduction. Acceptable reduction is achieved when the thick volar cortex is aligned, rather than overlapping.  A fourth pin is placed through the cortex of the radial styloid and advanced into the ulnar cortex to secure the reduction achieved by the intrafocal wires ( Adequate reduction and stabilization can be achieved ( Skin incisions can be made to release tethering around any pins. The radial styloid can be easily fragmented and multiple passes should be avoided.  Several different percutaneous techniques have been described and can be tailored to the particular fracture pattern ( (D) The De Palma technique, which uses the ulna to support the radius. Pins are placed from the ulna toward the radial styloid targeting both the volar or dorsal cortex of the radius with separate pins. Pediatric fractures of the epiphysis in some cases can be treated adequately with a single radial pin (  Patients are seen after 2 weeks for a dressing change and are converted to a removable thermoplast splint. The removable splint provides stability and enables the pins to be cleaned. Finger and elbow range of motion (ROM) are initiated. The K-wires are removed in the office at 6 weeks after surgery. Excellent results can be achieved improving the anatomic alignment of fractures ( A patient 6 months after fracture fixation with percutaneous pins demonstrates excellent functional return ( Longer immobilization will delay restoration of motion. Pins are removed and motion is initiated as soon as there is enough healing to provide stability from displacement.  Pin infection is a risk factor for failure. Motion around the pins will cause movement of the pins in and out of the skin and increases the risk of infection. If pins become infected they are removed immediately to avoid deep-seated infection, although this may lead to fracture collapse if this occurs before fracture stability. If a patient had poor hygiene habits, the pins can be buried below the skin at the time of the initial operation to reduce infection risk. The pins are retrieved later with a short second procedure  Distal radius fractures with severe comminution Fractures with significant impaction Open injuries with signficant soft tissue loss that may preclude use of internal fixation Preoperative films of a patient with an impacted and dorsally angulated and comminuted fracture (  The distal pins are placed along the dorsal radial index finger metacarpal. The superficial radial sensory branch runs near the incision in the hand and must be elevated away and protected. The proximal pins are placed along the dorsal radial shaft of the radius. The position is proximal to the crossing of the tendons of the first compartment and distal to the insertion of the pronator teres. The radial sensory nerve is also located in the area and should be protected.  A 3-cm longitudinal incision is made along the dorsal radial side of the index metacarpal ( Another 3-cm longitudinal incision is made on the dorsal radial aspect of the radius 8 to 12 cm proximal to the wrist joint. Blunt dissection is used to expose the radius and proceeds between the tendons of the brachioradialis (BR) and extensor carpi radialis longus (ECRL). Pure percutaneous placement or open incisions without adequate visualization will lead to a higher rate of iatrogenic nerve injury.  A 3-mm pin is inserted in a plane parallel to all the metacarpals near the base of the index finger metacarpal using the double pin guide. The pin is driven perpendicular to the index finger metacarpal shaft ( The pin is centered between the dorsal and volar cortex and inserted through the radial and ulnar cortex of the metacarpal. The parallel pin guide is used to place a second pin distal to the first. The guide facilitates the second pin being inserted at the same angle and plane as the first pin (  Avoid oversinking the pins. This may inadvertently injure the interossei muscles. A pin placed too dorsal or volar can risk fracturing the cortical bone of the metacarpal.  After exposure of the radius, a 3-mm pin is inserted perpendicularly into the radial shaft between the tendons of the BR and ECRL in a plane consistent with previously placed metacarpal pins. A second pin is inserted distal to the first pin using the parallel pin guide. All pins should be in a similar plane and angle ( Use a self-retaining retractor to protect nerves and tendons during drilling.  Adequate force should be used with the self-tapping pins, especially when hitting the ulnar cortex of the radius. Without adequate force the pin will overdrill the radial cortex as it tries in insert in the ulnar cortex. This can lead to pin loosening. An alternate pin site needs to be chosen if this happens.  The proximal and distal incisions are closed with 4-0 nylon sutures around the pins. A single distraction rod is applied and the fracture is reduced into anatomic alignment ( More complex fractures may require a multibar system. Percutaneous pins or open reduction and internal fixation can be used to supplement external fixation for adequate restoration of the articular surface. The pins are wrapped with petroleum gauze and a wrap is placed to protect the incisions until they heal ( Ensure adequate skin-to-fixator distance so that as soft tissues swell postoperatively they will not be impinged by the device. Take care not to injure the radial nerve and branches during closure.  Dressings and sutures are removed at 10 to 14 days. Patients are allowed to clean around the pins with soap and water, but should not wet the entire fixator in the shower or bath. Finger range of motion is encouraged after suture removal ( The fixator is removed in the office at 5 to 6 weeks ( Final radiographs demonstrate healing of the fracture ( Patients can achieve excellent range of motion at follow-up, but it may take several months because of the prolonged wrist immobilization (  Comminuted or unstable intraarticular fractures Unstable extraarticular fractures Volar shearing fractures Preoperative films of a patient with an intraarticular fracture of the distal radius with volar displacement and angulation (  The incision is made along the volar radial wrist. The palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve is ulnar to the flexor carpi radialis (FCR). With an incision radial to the FCR, there is no need to visualize this nerve during exposure ( The dissection takes places along the border of the FCR through the subcutaneous tissue down to find the flexor pollicis longus (FPL). Retracting the FPL ulnarly protects the median nerve. A superficial branch of the radial artery courses slightly ulnar near the distal aspect of the dissection and should be protected.  The upper extremity is extended on a hand table with the forearm supinated. A tourniquet is placed on the upper arm.  A 7- to 10-cm longitudinal incision is made along the radial border of the FCR starting at the wrist crease and proceeding proximally. If more distal exposure is needed, the incision is extended as a zigzag over the joint ( The dissection is done sharply with a knife and appropriate structures such as the radial artery and venae comitantes are retracted radially. Crossing arterial branches are coagulated. The FPL tendon and its muscle belly is manually swept away using a finger and then retracted ulnarly to expose the pronator quadratus ( The pronator quadratus is divided with an L-shaped incision along its radial and distal border, and it is elevated ( An elevator is used to strip the periosteum and expose the fracture (  Make an incision long enough to ensure adequate exposure. A blunt rather than a sharp self-retaining retractor can be placed to hold the exposure and avoid puncturing critical structures. Take care not to disrupt the volar carpal ligaments from the radius by dissecting too far distally.  The fracture anatomy is identified. The volar fragments are disimpacted by hyperextension of the wrist. An osteotome is placed into the volar fracture line to lever the segments into reduction. The wrist is flexed to reduce the fracture ( The reduction is checked both visually and with fluoroscopy.  Release of the insertion of the brachioradialis may aid reduction because this helps reduce the deforming forces on the distal segment ( Reduction can be temporarily secured with a radial styloid 0.062-in percutaneous K-wire. Ensure that all fracture fragments are mobile enough to be reduced.  After assessment of the reduction, a volar plate is selected. The plate is centered on the radial shaft and placed distal enough to capture the distal fragment(s). The plate can be checked under fluoroscopy and adjusted as necessary. A nonlocking bicortical screw is drilled and placed into the elongated central elliptical hole over the radial diaphysis. Use of this hole permits proximal and distal translation guided by the fluoroscopy images ( Positioning is checked both visually and under fluoroscopy and the plate is adjusted as appropriate. If the position is good, this first screw is tightened down (  Most plating systems offer a variable length of the diaphyseal component and wider or slimmer options for the metaphyseal component, depending on the size of the radius and fracture anatomy. All volar plates have a similar concept for the plate to buttress the volar cortex while the distal locking screws buttress the articular surface ( Ensure the plate is centered on the radial shaft before the first screw is placed. The elliptical hole allows for rotation and distal-to-proximal translation but does not allow for radial ulnar translation.  Distal locking screws are placed to secure the distal fragment. Fixed or variable angle guides can be used, but attention must be paid to the angle for each individual screw. In general, there is a slight increase in distal angulation as you move from the most ulnar screw hole to the more radial screw holes ( A 22-degree oblique lateral view is necessary to check screw placement to ensure that there is no articular penetration. The hand or C-arm is angled in a manner that corrects the overlap of the articular surface caused by the radial inclination on a standard lateral view. This view places the entire articular surface in profile (  Overly penetrated screws (black arrow) can lead to extensor tendon irritation and injury ( Plates placed too distally or with significant volar prominence may be at increased risk for tendon irritation or rupture.  The pronator quadratus (PQ) routinely is repaired to the brachioradialis fascia with 3-0 vicryl suture ( The incision is closed with a running subcuticular suture ( A short-arm volar splint is placed. PQ repair provides a soft tissue layer between the plate and overlying tendons. Unless the PQ is shredded, it should be repaired.  When closing the PQ to the BR fascia, avoid suturing the radial artery or first compartment tendons. One must distinguish between the PQ and the FPL muscle. The slightly more superficial FPL muscle may be mistaken for the PQ and if sutured to the BR, will be problematic.  The splint is removed at 10 to 14 days postoperatively. Patients are changed to a removable thermoplastic splint and start range-of-motion exercises with self-directed hand therapy, unless wrist stiffness develops during the healing period, which will require treatment by hand therapists. Patients with volar plating have been shown to regain function faster than other methods because of early postoperative mobilization ( Repeat x-rays are performed at 5 to 6 weeks. If there is adequate healing, patients start or increase strengthening activities ( Patients who are noted to have signs of continued tendon irritation should be considered for elective hardware removal at 6 months after fracture fixation when the fracture has healed.  Severely comminuted intraarticular distal radius fractures that cannot be fixated with conventional means Distal radius fractures with associated metaphyseal or diaphyseal comminution Osteoporotic bone in which direct fracture fixation is likely to be poor Patients who refuse external fixation or are poor candidates because of bone quality, hygiene issues, or psychologic illness Preoperative photos show an elderly patient with radial deviation and subluxation deformity of the wrist, closed traumatic wounds, and significant swelling ( Preoperative x-rays show a severely displaced fracture with distal diaphyseal comminution and osteoporotic bone (  The dissection takes place proximally over the dorsal radius and distally over the long finger metacarpal. The surgeon should understand the anatomy of the six dorsal compartments of the wrist ( Distally, the extensor tendons of middle finger and branches of the radial nerve are encountered. These should be identified and retracted away for protection. The plate will pass from the long finger metacarpal through the fourth dorsal compartment, which contains the extensor digitorum communis (EDC) and extensor indicis proprius (EIP). The extensor pollicis longus (EPL) tendon of the third The muscle bellies of the abductor pollicis longus (APL) and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) also are encountered in the proximal dissection. The superficial radial nerve is at risk during the proximal dissection in the forearm.  A tourniquet is placed on the upper arm.  The exposure involves two or three longitudinal incisions. A 4-cm incision is made distally over the shaft of the long finger metacarpal. The subcutaneous tissue is incised and the extensor tendons and nerve branches are retracted radially ( A 6-cm incision is made along the dorsal radial shaft. Dissection proceeds through the subcutaneous tissue down to the radial shaft. The interval adjacent to the brachioradialis and ECRL or between the extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) and EDC is used. Care must be taken not to injure the superficial branch of the radial nerve ( An optional 2- to 3-cm incision over the Lister tubercle can be used to release the EPL or applied to aid with fracture reduction. Alternatively, the proximal incision can be extended distally to facilitate exposure (  A bridge plate also may be attached to the index finger metacarpal. In these circumstances, the plate passes through the second dorsal compartment, which contains the extensor carpi radialis brevis and longus (ECRB/ECRL). The plate is placed proximally in the interval between the muscle bellies of the ECRB and ECRL. Fixation to the index finger metacarpal will cause slight ulnar deviation of the wrist and may make it easier to reestablish radial inclination when the fracture is reduced.  The 2.4-mm distal radius bridge (DRB; Synthes) with tapered ends is used. The plate should span from the distal long finger metacarpal to the radial shaft to fix at least three screws 4-cm proximal to the fracture. Starting distally along the metacarpal bone, a Freer or Cobb elevator is used to develop a plane between the extensor tendon and the joint capsule over the fourth compartment. The plate will lie superficial to the joint capsule. After a path is made, the plate is inserted in a retrograde fashion from the area of the metacarpal. The EPL, which has already been mobilized, is retracted radially to prevent capture under the plate ( As the plate is advanced, it is visualized in the proximal incision and care is taken to make sure the plate travels under tendons or muscle. Other plates, including a mandibular reconstruction plate or the variable length 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate (Synthes), have also been described for use in this technique. Ensure that all tendons are retracted away and that the plate is directly against the bone. The EPL and digital extensors will be at risk for rupture if compressed under the plate.  The fracture is provisionally reduced with traction. The plate is centralized over the metacarpal and aligned on the radial shaft. The second-to-last hole at the distal end of the plate is drilled, and a bicortical screw is placed in the metacarpal. Placement of a single screw facilitates some slight plate adjustment if necessary ( Ensure the screw is centralized in the metacarpal. Violation of the ulnar or radial cortex could lead to iatrogenic fracture.  Traction is applied again and the fracture is reduced. The plate is centralized to the radial shaft while the forearm is kept in neutral rotation. The plate is clamped to the radial shaft with a bone reduction clamp. Fluoroscopy is used to assess fracture reduction ( If reduction is adequate, the proximal portion of the plate is secured to the radius with a bicortical screw ( The remaining screws distally and proximally are placed so there are at least three screws distally and three screws proximally. Overdistraction can restrict finger range of motion and cause complex regional pain syndrome. Passive range of motion is checked in the digits after plate fixation. The radiocarpal space should not exceed 5 mm.  Distraction may not fully reduce severely comminuted fractures. Approximation of multiple fracture pieces can be achieved with cerclage wires. K-wires or lag screws can be used to stabilize individual segments ( Bone grafting may be of benefit in severely impacted fractures to fill in gaps. Aggressive fixation may lead to more comminution or compromise tenuous vascular supply to small bone fragments.  The incisions are irrigated and the deep subcutaneous tissues approximated with interrupted sutures. The skin is closed with running absorbable sutures ( A short-arm volar splint is placed.  The splint is removed at 10 days. Active range of motion of the digits and forearm rotation is performed immediately and maintained throughout the fixation period. Patients are allowed to use the extremity with a weight restriction of less than 5 pounds of lifting. Fracture healing is followed radiographically and clinically every 4 to 6 weeks. The plate is removed typically at 3 months postoperatively, but can be earlier or later depending on fracture healing. The patient presented in this chapter had only partial healing at 6 months after fixation ( Aggressive range of motion of the wrist is started immediately after hardware removal. Outcomes in regard to range of motion and function are reported to be similar at 1 year postoperatively in comparison to other techniques. 