Mesoporous calcium silicate (MCS) and mesoporeous bioactive glass (MBG) are important components of silicon-based bioceramics and have been widely investigated. However, few studies were specifically focused on the differences between MCS and MBG scaffolds for bone regeneration application. In this work, we 3D printed MCS/PCL and MBG/PCL scaffolds with highly similar inter-structure and mechanical preperties. And human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) were used to evaluate the bioactivity and biocompatibility of that two scaffolds. After soaked in simulated body fluid (SBF) for 3 days, both MCS/PCL and MBG/PCL scaffolds showed good mineralization. Although there was no statistical difference hBMSCs proliferation on these scaffolds, MBG/PCL scaffolds showed better capacity of improving ALP activity of hBMSCs than MCS/PCL scaffolds. Moreover, MBG/PCL scaffolds significantly enhanced the osteogenic-related gene expressions, such as osteocalcin (OCN), bone morphgenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), collagen type I (COL-1), bone sialoprotein (BSP), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), and bone sialoprotein (BSP). Together, the results indicate that MBG/PCL scaffolds are promising implants for bone regeneration application.Porous scaffolds mediating bone regeneration have been considered as an effective method for bone defects repair and treatment [ Calcium silicate (CS) and bioactive glass (Ca In this work, we invesitigated the adhesion, proliferation, differentiation and osteogenic-related gene expression of human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBMSCs) on MCS and MBG scaffolds for further P123 (Mw = 5800), PCL (Mw = 80000) and tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). HCl (>37%), Ca(NO MCS powders were prepared according to previous work with some modifications [ MCS/PCL and MBG/PCL scaffolds with 3D interconnected macroporous structure were fabricated via 3D printing technique (3D Bio-Architect In this work, hBMSCs were used to investigate cell response to scaffolds. Before used, scaffolds were sterilized in 75% alcohol for 4 h and then ultraviolet irradiation for 2 h hBMSCs were cultured in minimum essential medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/L streptomycin (Hyclone) at 37 °C in 5% CO To evaluate the osteogenic differentiation of hBMSCs on scaffolds, the ALP activity were measured at day 7 and day 14. Briefly, washing scaffolds with cold PBS three times to remove the culture medium, and the obtained hBMSCs were lysed in of 0.1% Triton X-100 for 15 min. The lysates were centrifuged at 15000 g for 10 min at 4 °C, and then supernatant was collected to measure ALP activity according to the manufacturer's protocol (QuantiChrom™ Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit, BioAssay Systems, USA). The total protein content and the optical density (OD) were measured, and relative ALP activity was obtained using the formula: relative ALP activity = changed OD values/the reaction time and the total protein content. The mRNA expression of osteogenic-related genes, ca. osteocalcin (OCN), bone morphgenetic protein-2 (BMP-2), collagen type I (COL-1), bone sialoprotein (BSP), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), bone sialoprotein (BSP), was measured by qRT-PCR. Briefly, after cultured for 7 days and 14 days, the cells were harvested to extract RNA. And the obtained RNA was used to synthesize complementary DNA for qRT-PCR analysis. The expression of the related genes was normalized against the β-actin gene expression. All samples were assayed in triplicate, and independent experiments were performed. The relative expression was calculated with this formula: 2 Previous studies demonstrated that MCS and MBG have excellent drug-loaded capacity and prior bioactivity due to large surface area and highly ordered mesoporous channels. From the biomedical view, mesoporous materials with large surface have rich chemical groups, especially, Si To realize better repairing effect, 3D interconnected structure of implants is necessary for supporting cell penetration, new tissue ingrowth and vascularization [ Previous studies demonstrated that the To investigate the cell response to scaffolds, hBMSCs were used in this study. The cell adhesion and morphology were obtained by SEM and LSCM, shown in The proliferation of hBMSCs on scaffolds were investigated by CCK-8 assay, shown in Osteogenic-related gene expressions of OCN, BMP-2, COL-1, BSP and RUNX2 for hBMSCs on MCS/PCL and MBG/PCL scaffolds were measured by qRT-PCR analysis after 7 and 14 days ( In this work, MCS/PCL and MBG/PCL scaffolds with highly similar in inter-structure and mechanical properties were fabricated using 3D printing technique. And that similarity could avoid the interference of the comparing osteogenic properties between MCS/PCL and MBG/PCL scaffolds. After soaked in SBF, both scaffolds showed good The authors gratefully acknowledge the support by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at