Engineering MOFs nanocrystals into hierarchical/macroscopic structures is critical for many applications. However, defects between MOFs nanocrystals often exist due to the uncontrollable nucleation and growth in MOFs crystallization. In our study, inspired by biomineralization processes in nature, we report a facile and generic method to prepare polymer@MOFs capsules with defect-free MOFs layer through controlled interfacial mineralization. Specifically, zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) and polydopamine (PDA) capsules are used to prepare the polymer@MOFs capsules. The PDA capsules are exploited to confine Zn2+ ions within the capsule lumen and on the capsule wall. When incubated into a solution of 2-methylimidazole (2-MeIm), Zn2+ ions on the capsule wall will trigger the interfacial nucleation of ZIF-8, while Zn2+ ions in the capsule lumen will diffuse into the capsule wall and react with 2-MeIm, enabling the growth and formation of defect-free ZIF-8 nanolayer. The molecule-sieving property of polymer@MOFs capsules is tested by the controlled permeation of small molecules (methylene blue, 6.0×13.8Å2) through the capsule wall, conferring the enzyme-embedded polymer@MOFs capsules with the unique features of on/off control of enzymatic reactions over multiple reaction cycles, and high stability of entrapped enzymes against long-term storage. Through changing the species of polymer capsules, shapes of polymer capsules and species of MOFs, a series of polymer@MOFs capsules are prepared, highlighting the versatility and functionality extension of this interfacial mineralization method.Owing to their regular and tunable pore structure at the molecule scale, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have attracted great interest for a variety of applications In nature, living organisms construct hierarchical organic–inorganic hybrid materials through a well-documented biomineralization process In this study, a facile and generic method was developed to prepare polymer@MOFs capsules with molecule-sieving property through controlled interfacial mineralization on polymer capsules. Zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) and polydopamine (PDA) capsules were selected as the typical MOFs and polymer capsules, respectively, for the construction of polymer@MOFs capsules As shown in To demonstrate the interfacial mineralization process, we used polydopamine (PDA) capsules as the typical polymer capsule to induce the mineralization of ZIF-8. The catechol groups in PDA could assemble Zn To demonstrate the interfacial mineralization process, we used polydopamine (PDA) capsules as the typical polymer capsule to induce the mineralization of ZIF-8. The catechol groups in PDA could assemble Zn The crystalline structure of ZIF-8 nanolayer was then characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in The crystalline structure of ZIF-8 nanolayer was then characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in To further elucidate the interfacial mineralization mechanism, time-resolved formation process of ZIF-8 nanolayer was monitored by SEM, XRD and FTIR. After incubated in 2-MeIm solution for different time (10–60 To further elucidate the interfacial mineralization mechanism, time-resolved formation process of ZIF-8 nanolayer was monitored by SEM, XRD and FTIR. After incubated in 2-MeIm solution for different time (10–60 Meanwhile, ZIF-8 nanocrystals gradually grew bigger (diameter: from 109 Meanwhile, ZIF-8 nanocrystals gradually grew bigger (diameter: from 109 On the basis of the above analysis, a continuous and defect-free ZIF-8 nanolayer was obtained through controlled interfacial mineralization of MOFs on PDA capsule wall, which may also bear size-selective feature of MOFs nanocrystals. To validate this hypothesis, the porous structure was characterized by N To demonstrate the molecule-sieving property of the interfacial mineralized ZIF-8 nanolayer, methylene blue (MB), as the probe molecule, was encapsulated in the lumen of PDA@ZIF-8 capsules. In detail, MB was first loaded into the capsule lumen by incubating PDA capsules into MB solution. After the interfacial mineralization of ZIF-8 nanolayer, MB was encapsulated into the lumen of PDA@ZIF-8 capsules. Since the size of MB (6.0 To demonstrate the molecule-sieving property of the interfacial mineralized ZIF-8 nanolayer, methylene blue (MB), as the probe molecule, was encapsulated in the lumen of PDA@ZIF-8 capsules. In detail, MB was first loaded into the capsule lumen by incubating PDA capsules into MB solution. After the interfacial mineralization of ZIF-8 nanolayer, MB was encapsulated into the lumen of PDA@ZIF-8 capsules. Since the size of MB (6.0 Molecule-sieving MOFs have been widely used to protect the biomolecules/cells and tune the selectivity of the loaded catalysts Molecule-sieving MOFs have been widely used to protect the biomolecules/cells and tune the selectivity of the loaded catalysts In our study, Zn In our study, Zn To further evaluate the versatility, PDA capsules with different shapes, including sheet and flower, were also used to induce the interfacial mineralization of ZIF-8. Sheet- and flower-like PDA capsules were prepared by using two dimensional MOFs (ZIF-L) and three dimensional Cu To further evaluate the versatility, PDA capsules with different shapes, including sheet and flower, were also used to induce the interfacial mineralization of ZIF-8. Sheet- and flower-like PDA microcapsules were prepared by using two dimensional MOFs (ZIF-L) and three dimensional Cu In summary, a continuous and defect-free molecule-sieving MOFs nanolayer were constructed through controlled interfacial mineralization of MOFs on polymer capsules. The hierarchically confined metal ions reacted with organic ligands on the capsule wall, enabling the nucleation and growth of MOFs and thus the formation of defect-free MOFs nanolayer. The as-prepared polymer@MOFs capsules exhibited distinct molecule-sieving property, which successfully prevented the permeation of small molecules with the size greater than 3.4 Dopamine was provided by Yuancheng Technology Company (Wuhan, China). Sodium carbonate anhydrous (Na PDA capsules were prepared by using spherical CaCO First, PDA capsules were incubated in 4 PDA capsules were incubated in 4 As a control, 1 The PDA capsules were suspended in 4 The enzyme immobilization efficiency was determined by Eq. The activity of immobilized HRP was determined by adding HRP-PDA@ZIF-8 capsules into 40 The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared online at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study, which will be made available on request. The authors declare no competing financial interests. The authors thank the financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: