Steel girders with corrugated web plates (BGCWs) have already been used in many bridges around the world because they own several advantages compared with traditional plate girders with flat webs. They have considerably high shear resistances and provide weight saving by reducing the web thickness and by eliminating the use of transversal stiffeners. However, these girders practically have been designed based on half-scale experimental tests. On the other hand, it has been recently recognised that high strength steels (HSSs) provide designers with the opportunity of creating more slender and weight efficient structures than would be possible if the normal strength steels (NSSs) have been used. To gain benefit from the advantages of both the BGCWs and the HSSs in one structure, this research work is carried out to investigate the BGCWs built with HSSs which have seldom been explored in literature despite being utilised in the Pennsylvania Demonstration Bridge with corrugated web, USA, which was opened for service in 2005. Finite element models, by using ABAQUS programme, have been used to accomplish this investigation. They are firstly verified by comparing their results with the existing test results in literature. Then, extensive nonlinear parametric studies are generated considering the corrugation dimensions used in the available constructed bridges. The strengths of the girders are compared with the available design models and the best model calculating the ultimate shear strength is highlighted. Additionally, from this investigation, an understanding for the real behaviour of the BGCWs built with HSSs is established.Recently, it has been recognised that using high-strength steels (HSSs) in buildings On the other hand, the use of corrugated plate profiles as the webs of girders in bridges, steel frames and buildings has been accelerated, thanks mainly for their significant shear stability. They also eliminate the need for the double-sided transverse stiffeners that have a principal influence on raising the shear strength of the I-section plate girders with flat webs. Accordingly, they provide relatively high strength-to-weight ratios This paper is, accordingly, emphasising on the fundamental shear strength and behaviour of bare plate girders with trapezoidally-corrugated webs ( Before an investigation on the shear buckling behaviour of the BGCWs formed from HSSs could be made, it was important to start with a review of the current knowledge on those girders formed from NSSs. Accordingly, this section provides short up-to-date summary and critical review on the shear buckling behaviour of the CWGs formed from NSSs, raising the main differences in behaviour between them and those girders formed from flat webs. The above mentioned Accordion Effect Another difference in the shear behaviour between the CWGs and the IPGs is the dissimilar buckling modes that may take place in the CWGs girders based on the corrugation dimensions. While the IPGs show the well-known local buckling mode supported diagonally by the flanges and the vertical stiffeners The investigations on the inelastic behaviour of the CWGs Four main design models may be found in literature for predicting Additional difference in the shear behaviour between the CWGs and the IPGs may be realised by comparing the deformed shapes of the girders when they fail by shear. While the IPGs exhibit plastic hinges (PHs) when the developed diagonal tension field yields In this research, the general purpose commercial FE software ABAQUS (version 6.13) All girders were subjected to concentrated loads at their mid-spans so that constant shear stress distributions were ensured in their shear spans; see The 8-node doubly-curved thin shell element with reduced integration “S8R5”, which uses five degrees of freedom (dof) per node, was used to model the BGCWs in the current nonlinear analysis similar to the previous investigations by Elgaaly et al. On the other hand, a convergence test was carried out in order to assess the requirement of the mesh refinement; this ensures that accurate results are achieved without consuming too much disk space and time in the process. Therefore, the girder was simulated five times by changing the number of elements used across the width of each fold of the corrugation. It was found that to minimize the computational effort without sacrificing the accuracy of the results, four elements across each fold of the corrugation are to be employed in the analyses. The shape of the current FE mesh is shown in It is widely known that the post-buckling behaviour of the members cannot be analysed directly due to the discontinuous response at the critical load when the buckling occurs. Accordingly, a continuous response instead of bifurcation has to be utilised to analyse such post-buckling stage. To do so, initial imperfections should be added to the perfect geometry, so that some response in the buckling mode appears before the bifurcation point is reached. Additionally, the results of the FE analyses in literature The high strength steel S460 The accuracy of the above discussed FE model is checked in this section by analysing three different test specimens Moon et al. The tested girder was modelled as a simple beam similar to the test set up. The ratio between FE and experimental shear ultimate strengths Additional FE verification was made by using the test results of Driver et al. The comparisons between the FE and experimental shear strength versus mid-span deflection are depicted in Based on the current verification of the FE model (with an average This subsection provides the details of the parametric studies generated to investigate the shear strength and behaviour of the BGCWs built with the HSSs. The current parametric study has been conducted in BGCWs considering the original dimensions of bridge plate girders used in practical applications as presented in The shear deformation of the BGCWs built up with HSSs is discussed herein. On the other hand, Herein, the ultimate shear strengths The comparison between the Moon et al. Later on, Sause and Braxtan Recently, Hassanein and Kharoob From the comparisons presented previously in Additional comparisons were made with the modified versions of the strengths proposed by Sause and Braxtan Based on the current parametric study, the effects of the considered parameters on the behaviour of BGCWs are evaluated herein. Accordingly, this subsection presents and analyses the effects of the web thickness The effect of web thickness value is examined here by using two bridge corrugation dimensions as samples of the qualitatively similar results. The relationships between the load and the mid-span deflection are illustrated in To investigate the effect of web height As can be seen in On the other hand, the shear stiffness As mentioned earlier, the deflection The effects of the profile of the corrugated web on the shear strength and behaviour of the CWGs are investigated in this section by changing the depth   In recent years, the problem of shear buckling of bridge girders with corrugated webs (BGCWs) formed from normal strength steels (NSSs) has been the focus of a substantial amount of investigations. On the other hand, the structural use of high strength steel (HSS) in building and bridge constructions is currently increasing. Accordingly, this paper presented numerically the nonlinear shear buckling behaviour of the BGCWs built by using the HSS of grade S460, as an attempt to combine together the advantages of both the BGCWs and the HSSs. Despite the fact that these girders have already been used in several bridges, especially in the USA, they have been rarely investigated in detail for their shear behaviour. From the current investigations, the following main conclusions may be drawn: The original design model suggested by Sause and Braxtan It was noticed that increasing the web thickness While increasing the web height The deflection at the ultimate loads may suitably be predicted by the assumption that the elastic behaviour of the girders extends to the ultimate load values. The effects of the corrugation depth It is recommended to further extend this work into higher HSSs (e.g. 800