The comminution process in stirred media mills is determined mainly by the number of stress events in the grinding chamber and by the intensity acting at these stress events. For a certain stress intensity, a certain relation between the product fineness and the number of stress events exists. Since the product of stress number and stress intensity is a measure for the specific energy, for each stress intensity, a certain relation between product fineness and specific energy also exists. The effect of stress intensity, stress number and specific energy on the product fineness is determined by the breakage characteristic of the material. With respect to the breakage characteristic, two main groups can be distinguished: firstly, deagglomeration and disintegration and secondly, grinding of crystalline materials. Among others, the breakage characteristics determine how strongly the specific energy consumption is affected by the stress intensity.Many papers deal with the influence of different operating parameters on the comminution process in stirred media mills. A main object of these papers was to find characteristic parameters that can describe the influence of diverse operating parameters on the product fineness or other product qualities. Since many materials with very different properties like yeast cells and ceramics are ground in stirred media mills, partly different results were found by the different research groups. At first, the specific energy input was found to be a very important parameter which can apparently describe the effect of stirrer tip speed, solids concentration of the suspension, grinding media density and mill size on the fineness of limestone For grinding of limestone, Kwade The different meaning of the characteristic parameters specific energy and stress number for the product quality will be clarified in this paper. It will be shown that the grinding characteristic of the comminution material is responsible for how specific energy, stress number, and stress intensity influence the comminution result. The comminution process in stirred media mills is as a rule determined by how often each particle or agglomerate of the feed material (and the fragments arising from the feed particle or agglomerate) is stressed (number of stress events); and how high the stress intensity at each stress event is. Since the movement of grinding media and product particles is a statistical process, distributions have to be used to describe the relative number of stress events and the stress intensity. Up to now, those distributions could not be developed. Nevertheless, it is possible to derive characteristic parameters that can describe the relative number of stress events and the stress intensity Regarding the breakage behaviour of the comminution material, in principle, two main groups of comminution processes can be distinguished: Deagglomeration of agglomerates and disintegration of cells. Grinding of crystalline materials (monocrystals or aggregates of crystals). The characteristic of a deagglomeration or disintegration process is that the stress intensity to break the agglomerates or cells is relatively small so that shear stresses between the surfaces of the grinding media are sufficient for breakage. Moreover, with respect to the product quality, only two conditions of an agglomerate or a cell exist: an agglomerate is still complete (unbroken) or it is deagglomerated (broken) into its primary particles and a cell is uninjured or it is destroyed (disintegrated). In reality, there could be conditions between these two extreme conditions, but usually, these intermediate conditions will exist only shortly (for example, if an agglomerate breaks into smaller agglomerates and not into its primary particles). Against that, in case of grinding crystalline materials, the stress intensity to break a particle is higher so that a particle must be captured and stressed by relatively high normal stresses between two grinding media. Thereby, with increasing stress intensity, the size of the fragments of a crystalline feed particle decreases steadily until at a very high stress intensity, a minimum particle size is reached. The difference in the breakage behaviour of different crystalline materials is how many fragments and which fragment sizes arise when a feed particle (monocrystal or aggregate of crystals) breaks at a certain stress intensity. If a particle is sufficiently stressed, particles of some materials can break in very fine fragments, which can hardly be ground further, whereas particles of other materials can break in only a few larger fragments, which can be ground further easily. The derivation and definition of characteristic parameters for the number of stress events and for the stress intensity will be summarized in the following sections with respect to the different grinding characteristics described above. In a batch grinding process, the average number of stress events of each feed particle or agglomerate (and the fragments arising from it), the so-called stress number SN, is determined by the number of media contacts, The number of media contacts can be assumed to be proportional to the number of stirrer revolutions The condition for the proportionality described above is that the mode of grinding media motion does not change significantly by changing stirrer speed, number of grinding media and other parameters. According to Kwade The probability that a particle is caught and sufficiently stressed at a media contact depends, besides others, on the type of the comminution process and, thus, on the breakage behaviour of the material. In case of grinding of crystalline materials (e.g. minerals and ceramic materials), the probability is proportional to the active volume between two grinding media, which is shown in Due to Stadler et al. The number of feed particles is proportional to the overall volume Thus, for deagglomeration and disintegration and for grinding of crystalline materials, different so-called reduced stress numbers, SN Beside the number of significant stress events, the stress intensity at each stress event influences strongly the comminution result. A mathematical description of the stress intensity can be derived by considering the grinding mechanisms being found in stirred media mills (for more details, see Based on this knowledge, a characteristic parameter for the stress intensity was derived. For the derivation it was assumed that only single particles are stressed intensively between the grinding media and, therefore, the stressed particle volume does not depend on the grinding media size; the tangential velocity of the grinding media is proportional to the circumferential speed of the discs; the diameter of the discs is kept constant. In case of deagglomeration, disintegration, and grinding of weak or medium hard crystalline materials like limestone, it can further be assumed that the elasticity of the feed material is much smaller than that of the grinding media. Under this assumption, the energy which is transferred to the particle which is caught between two grinding media is proportional to the energy stored in the two grinding media before stressing the particle and, thus, is not a function of the material of the grinding media and of the feed. In this case, the stress intensity SI is approximately proportional to an expression, which is called stress intensity of the grinding media, SI If the elasticity of the feed material is about the same or higher than that of the grinding media material (e.g. comminution of ceramic materials), the modulus of elasticity of the product, El The two parameters SI The principal influence of the stress intensity on the fineness of the fragments, which result from stressing a single particle between two grinding media, follows from Against that, when grinding crystalline materials, the specific surface will further increase with increasing stress intensity, but usually at a lower slope because the energy utilization is smaller than at the optimum stress intensity. The more difficult the feed material is to grind, the greater the slope of the curve. Thereby, two boundary cases can be defined. The upper limit can be assumed to be the case when the new surface area increases proportional to the stress intensity. In this case, the slope of the curve is one. The lower limit is equal to a deagglomeration process, in which the size of the fragments does not depend on the stress intensity as long as the stress intensity is higher than the optimum stress intensity. In this case, the slope of the curve and the value of exponent is zero. Real cases of grinding crystalline materials will lie between these two boundary cases so that the exponent of the power function will be between 0 and 1. Therefore, at SI>SI If instead of the product fineness, the energy utilization is used to characterize the effect of the stress intensity, If a single crystalline particle is stressed, right of the optimum stress intensity, the relative increase in product fineness or specific surface, respectively, is smaller than the corresponding relative increase in stress intensity so that the energy utilization EU decreases right of the optimum. The more difficult the feed material is to grind, the smaller the decrease in energy utilization. The upper limit is probable if the energy utilization stays constant while the stress intensity increases. Thus, for SI>SI It has to be mentioned that the above explained trends are related only to those processes where the product quality can be measured—direct or indirect—by the particle size distribution, the deagglomeration rate or the disintegration rate. At those processes, a similar result can be achieved by either stressing the feed material many times at low stress intensities or by doing it only a few times at high stress intensities. The only prerequisite is that the lowest used stress intensity leads to an increase in product fineness. In other processes where the product quality is not or only partly dependent on the particle size, the just mentioned combination of stress intensity and stress number might not hold. As an example, the brightness in the paint and lacquer industry is such a product quality. It might be possible that a special effect can only be obtained by using very high stress intensities or that the product quality increases steadily with increasing stress intensity. In this case, no optimum stress intensity below the highest possible stress intensity exists, at which the product quality is the highest. Therefore, the maximum product quality can only be achieved if the highest possible stress intensity is used. It is also not yet known if the maximum product fineness depends on the stress intensity. According to the above mentioned arguments, a comminution process is determined by the stress number and the stress intensity, i.e. the result in product fineness is always the same as long as the operating parameters are chosen in a way that stress number and stress intensity are constant. As described above, the stress intensity can be seen as the specific energy consumed at a single stress event, i.e. the energy transferred to the stressed particle related to the particle mass (or volume). If all particles in the mill are taken into account, the product of the stress number and the stress intensity is proportional to the total specific energy, which is the total energy input related to the total mass (or volume) of the feed material. Therefore, the overall specific energy consumption of the mill is a good measure for the product of stress number and stress intensity. The specific energy is constant, if stress number and stress intensity are constant, or the stress number is constant, if stress intensity and specific energy are constant. Thus, at a constant stress intensity, the product fineness can be correlated either with the stress number or the specific energy input. In order to achieve an identical product quality two of the three parameters— Over the last 20 years at the Institute of Mechanical Process Engineering of the Technical University of Braunschweig, batch grinding tests with different materials were performed. Because of the batch operation, the results are not influenced by a residence time distribution. The grinding tests were run with different closed stirred media mills. The stirred media mills differed in size (volume differed between 0.58 and 5.5 l) and construction, but all mills were horizontally placed and had a stirrer consisting of several perforated discs fixed on a shaft. For example, for grinding of limestone, a stirred media mill with a grinding chamber volume of 5.5 l shown in In the following, as an example for the deagglomeration and disintegration process, the disintegration of yeast cells with a mean size of 4.5 μm, which was investigated by Bunge In case of deagglomeration and cell disintegration, the objective of the comminution process is to break off an agglomerate or to disintegrate a cell. If the agglomerate is destroyed or the cell is disintegrated, further comminution does not cause a further improvement of the product quality. In case of cell disintegration at a stress event, the cell wall remains either intact or is destroyed. In case of deagglomeration, besides that the agglomerate remains in its original form or that the agglomerate is decomposed completely in the individual primary particles, an agglomerate composed out of several primary particles can be decomposed in a few smaller agglomerates and possibly in primary particles. Therefore, a partial success can also be obtained. Moreover, the primary particles can be ground further and thus contribute to a further increase in product fineness. As shown in To what extent this basic considerations are valid is shown in the following using results measured for the disintegration of yeast cells. Since Bunge If the disintegration rate is plotted versus the specific energy, for each stress intensity, a different curve exists. This is shown in If the specific energy required for a disintegration rate of 60% is depicted as a function of the stress intensity of the grinding media, SI In the case that a crystalline particle (monocrystal or aggregate of crystals) is stressed by two grinding media, the fineness of the resulting fragments increases with increasing stress intensity. As an example, the grinding behaviour of limestone is discussed in the following using measurement results of Kwade If the median sizes shown in For smaller media (399–661 μm), the position of the curve depends on the specific energy input: for low specific energies, larger media yield a finer product, whereas for high specific energies, smaller media are advantageous. The reason for this behaviour is the fact that at the beginning of the grinding process, the stress intensities of the grinding media with sizes between 399 and 661 μm are not sufficient for fast grinding of the feed particles, so that multiple stressing is necessary (stress intensity is left of the optimum stress intensity in For each stress intensity, a certain relation between the product fineness and the stress number and between the product fineness and the specific energy, respectively, exists. Therefore, at a certain stress intensity, a certain product fineness can be produced only with a certain stress number or a certain specific energy, respectively. This statement is shown in As it is presented before the influence of stirrer tip speed as well as size and material of the grinding media on the result of different comminution processes can be described well by two of the three parameters—stress number, stress intensity and specific energy. The relation between product quality (fineness or disintegration rate), stress intensity and stress number or specific energy depends on the breakage behaviour of the material. Vice versa, if the relation between product quality, stress intensity and stress number or specific energy is known, statements regarding the breakage characteristics and comminution behaviour of the material can be found. This will be shown in the following by comparing comminution results of the following five different materials: pigments (results published by Stadler et al. In In case of the synthetically produced SiO The relation between the ratio of specific energy and minimum specific energy and the ratio of stress intensity and optimum stress intensity can also be derived from From Looking at the effect of stress number and stress intensity, it should be considered that in continuous operation, above all, in the one passage mode, this effect is superimposed by an influence of the residence time distribution. The residence time distribution and, thus, the number distribution of the stress events determine essentially the maximum particle size of the product. Against that, the average particle size is influenced only slightly by the residence time distribution. Using the stress number and the stress intensity to describe and to explain comminution and dispersing results, it has to be considered that the equations for the stress number and stress intensity given in The effect of stress number, stress intensity and specific energy on the product quality (e.g. product fineness or disintegration rate) depends on the breakage characteristics of the comminution material. In case of a deagglomeration or disintegration process at stress intensities higher than the optimum stress intensity, the product quality is only a function of the stress number and not a function of the stress intensity. Against that, in the theoretical case of grinding, a very tough material in which the fineness of the fragments at a stress event increases proportional to the stress intensity (i.e. where the energy utilization is constant), the influence of the operating parameters on the product fineness could be described only by the specific energy. From the relation between the specific energy required for a certain product quality and the stress intensity, the effect of stress intensity on the product fineness and the energy utilization at a single stress event can be found. The higher the increase in specific energy with increasing stress intensity for a certain product fineness is, the more the breakage characteristics tends to a deagglomeration or disintegration process. If the increase in specific energy for a certain product quality is proportional to the increase in stress intensity, the comminution process is a deagglomeration or disintegration process. Since in case of a deagglomeration or disintegration process, the stress intensity has the greatest effect on the specific energy required for a certain product quality, the stress intensity should be chosen very carefully, especially in this case. Thereby, the specific energy requirement is not only important because of the energy costs, but also because of the throughput or capacity of the mill: the higher the specific energy consumption, the lower is the throughput at a given power consumption of the mill. Moreover, if the specific input is higher at one passage through the mill, at a constant power input, the temperature increase of the product suspension inside the mill is also higher. Therefore, in order to obtain a certain outlet temperature, more cooling is required. disintegration rate (%) solids concentration of the suspension (–) diameter of the grinding media (m) mass-based specific energy (J/kg) volume-based specific energy (J/m modulus of elasticity of the grinding media (Pa) modulus of elasticity of the product particle (Pa) energy utilization (m number of media contacts (–) number of feed particles inside the mill (–) number of revolutions of the stirrer per unit time (s probability that a particle is caught and stressed at a media contact (–) mass-based produced specific surface (m stress intensity of the grinding media (Nm) stress intensity with which the product particles are stressed (Nm) stress number (–) reduced stress number in a deagglomeration and disintegration process (–) reduced stress number in case of grinding crystalline materials (–) comminution time (s) grinding chamber volume (m total solid volume of the product particles (m stirrer tip speed (m/s) median size of the product (m) porosity of the bulk of grinding media (–) grinding media density (kg/m filling ratio of the grinding media (–)