Fixation of distal radius fractures via locking plates is an increasingly popular method. However, these plates include variety of complications, such as flexor and extensor tenosynovitis, tendon injury and intra articular screw or peg penetration. Although they offer superior stability and early mobility, if used improperly; they may cause serious complications related to the implant. Proper use of the implant with strict adherence to the fixation principles and close follow up of patients are very important in order to decrease the rate and severity of complications.Over the past decade, there has been a growing trend toward internal fixation of distal radial fractures due to the development of low profile anatomically preshaped implants with locking fixation. The main advantages of locking plates are immediate stability allowing early mobilisation, superior stiffness and axial loading strength compared to standard plates. Enabling secure fixation of distally located comminuted intra articular fractures even with severely osteopenic bones seems like another advantage. Also, the rigid angle bar plate permits a dorsally displaced distal radius fracture to be treated with a palmar approach. Various types of dorsal and volar locking plate systems have been developed and used. Although promising results have been reported, these systems are not without complications. As more studies appeared in the literature, many complications related to this technique have been described. The overall complication rates given for distal radius locking plates are high as 22–27% in the literature. Problems related to tendon irritation seem to be the leading complication in almost all series. Both volar and dorsal plating is blamed to cause tenosynovitis. Tenosynovitis includes a wide spectrum of diagnosis; from asymptomatic mild effusion around the tendons to massive synovitis leading to tendon rupture. As the surgeons became more aware of this complication and use specific imaging tools like ultrasound (USG) for detection, the reported rate of this complication has increased greatly. In a report of prospective study, the authors state that 23% of their operated patients developed extensor tendinitis within the follow-up period. Despite this high rate of extensor tendon irritation, most of these cases were totally asymptomatic, and the diagnosis was made during routine follow up visits. The surgeons’ attitude towards these patients should be no different from patients with symptomatic tenosynovitis. In the light of recent literature, we consider asymptomatic tenosynovitis of long duration as a risk factor for progressive tendon damage and observe it as a complication. Compared to volar fixation, dorsal plating seems advantageous because of the buttress effect of the plate. It strengthens the weakened and crushed area of the cortex, as there is usually a bony contact at the volar side. Also, the dorsal approach provides easy access to the intra articular pathology. The dorsal plate bears much lower axial and bending loads, since it has been applied on the side of cortical comminution. Despite all these advantages, experience with dorsal plating has been discouraging. The most important complications related to dorsal plating are persistent extensor tenosynovitis, tendon ruptures and adhesions, due to the tight anatomical constraints at this area. The 2nd, 3rd and 4th extensor compartments course directly on the surface of the bone for a considerable distance making it problematic to insert a metal plate and screws between bone and tendons. A practical way of preventing extensor tenosynovitis is elevating the fourth dorsal compartment subperiosteally off the distal radius, preserving a thick cuff of soft tissue around the tendons, and inserting the plate on the raw bony surface and cover the exposed surface of the plate with the elevated tissue to provide good coverage between the bone and the extensor tendons. Volar side of the distal radius seems more suitable for application of fixation implants since there is more place between the bone and flexor tendons. The most commonly reported mechanism of extensor tendon irritation is caused due to the prominent distal edges of the screws penetrating dorsal extensor compartments Flexor tenosynovitis due to volar plating has also been reported. Loosening of the plate and screw/peg back out can be seen rarely. Severely osteoporotic bone usually is the main reason of failure. Comminuted fractures, short screws with poor purchase of bone, and screws, which do not engage the dorsal cortex are especially at risk for loosening. Such patients should be told not to force their wrists in early postoperative period. Although locking plate systems provide sufficient early stability of the fracture site, forceful activities early in the postoperative period before bony union is still risky and should not be allowed. Grafting of the comminution site to strengthen the fixation construct may be a logical solution if adequate fixation cannot be achieved intraoperatively. Unintentional intra articular screw/peg placement is seen in patients operated with poor peroperative fluoroscopic control. Very distal fractures with intra articular comminution pose the greatest risk for this complication. The most distal screws/pegs of the system should ideally be inserted underneath the subchondral bone in order to neutralise the forces applied to the articular side for preventing collapse of the articular fractures and eliminating articular step off. Distally placed screws/pegs can easily cut through the subchondral bone and penetrate into joint The most ulnar screw/peg has the highest risk for intra articular penetration. The usual guide is to locate the distal end of the plate proximal or in line with the watershed line of the distal radius but never distal to this line. Failure to achieve proper placement may result with loss of congruity between the volar bony inclination of radius and the plate; resulting dorsal tilt of the distal articular surface and unintentional penetration of distal articular surface by the screws. The majority of radial styloid and distal radio ulnar penetrations occur when the plate is too wide for radius. Proper plate width should be confirmed intraoperatively with use of fluoroscopy. Fixed angle locking plates do not allow the surgeon to manipulate the angle of screws/pegs inserted on bone, so proper placement of the plate on distal radius is very important and should be carefully controlled by fluoroscopy before inserting the distal screws. In order to overcome this limitation, variable angle locking systems have been developed, enabling the surgeons to manipulate the angle of the screws inserted on the subchondral bone. Carpal tunnel syndrome is rare and observed as a late complication. The rate of postoperative syndrome reported in the literature ranges from 0.5% to 22%. CRPS, persistent pain, delayed union, nonunion, and infection are other complications which can complicate the treatment of distal radius fractures. Although locked plates offer superior stability of the fracture fragments providing early safe movement, these systems are not without problems. Exact placement of pre contoured plates with appropriate width and correct length of screws/pegs are essential steps for avoidance of complications. Fracture treatment principles should always be applied properly without any exceptions, and close follow up of the patients should be performed in order to prevent any complications at early phases of its course. There is no conflict of interest.