Biotrickling filters for biogas desulfurization still must prove their stability and robustness in the long run under extreme conditions. Long-term desulfurization of high loads of H2S under acidic pH was studied in a lab-scale aerobic biotrickling filter packed with metallic Pall rings. Reference operating conditions at steady-state corresponded to an empty bed residence time (EBRT) of 130s, H2S loading rate of 52gS–H2Sm−3
                     h−1 and pH 2.50–2.75. The EBRT reduction showed that the critical EBRT was 75s and the maximum EC 100gS–H2Sm−3
                     h−1. Stepwise increases of the inlet H2S concentration up to 10,000ppmv lead to a maximum EC of 220gS–H2Sm−3
                     h−1. The H2S removal profile along the filter bed indicated that the first third of the filter bed was responsible for 70–80% of the total H2S removal. The oxidation rate of solid sulfur accumulated inside the bioreactor during periodical H2S starvation episodes was verified under acidic operating conditions. The performance under acidic pH was comparable to that under neutral pH in terms of H2S removal capacity. However, bioleaching of the metallic packing used as support and chemical precipitation of sulfide/sulfur salts occurred.Biogas produced by anaerobic sludge digestion of municipal wastewater contains hydrogen sulfide (H Acidic pH conditions have been successfully employed in the treatment of low and high H Although the ratio O At laboratory scale, the system performance is normally assessed under steady-state conditions. In the removal of H Under acidic pH conditions, the stratification of the filter bed has been studied during H The aim of this work was to investigate the impact of the H The experimental setup (Fig. S1, Supplementary information) consisted in a conventional, up-flow, counter-current BTF, operated for almost one year at acidic pH conditions (pH 2.50–2.75). The reactor was packed with random stainless steel, 10 An auxiliary aeration unit installed in the recirculation pipe of the BTF was used to provide oxygen directly to the liquid phase. Exhaust air from the aeration unit was passed through the BTF. Then, biogas dilution was taken into account for performance calculations by recalculating the real outlet concentration to that corresponding without the dilution due to air supply. Acid (HCl, 1 The studied BTF was suited with on-line monitoring of pH, oxidation-reduction potential (Crison Instruments, Spain) and DO (oxi340i, WTW, Germany). Also, total dissolved sulfide (TDS According to Janssen et al. After 249 days of steady operation under acidic pH, five experiments were performed (E1–E5), as shown in Reactor response to repeated starvation episodes was studied in experiment E3, which was subdivided into 5 similar experimental runs (E3-a to E3-e) distributed in time up to the end of the operation, with variable duration (7, 8, 14, 7 and 17 days, respectively). E3 consisted in the interruption of the synthetic biogas feeding while keeping other operational conditions unaltered. Thus, during all starvation experimental periods (E3-a to E3-e) only the aeration flowrate was kept at reference values, simulating a real scale operation with interruption of the biogas supply. This operational design allowed measuring the solid sulfur consumption rate. The production/consumption rate of solid sulfur (pS–S The robustness of the studied system was tested by assessing the reactor performance during a sudden increase of the H At the end of the operation, the solid phase accumulated in the packing material was characterized. To this aim, a specific procedure was developed in the present work. First, the content of the filter bed was fully withdrawn from the system and washed with a phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution to detach solids from the packing material. Afterwards, the packing material was separated manually; the suspended solids solution was centrifuged at 7000 The characterization of the HDS was also complemented with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images. Many packing material samples, taken from different parts of the filter bed, were prepared for the microscopy technique as follows. The support with the biofilm attached was firstly submerged in PBS (30 The effect of the EBRT reduction over the reactor performance has been commonly studied in BTFs for H The RE during experiment E2 dropped from 100% at the reference LR (52.3 The maximum EC obtained in the present study (223 Results obtained during the long-term operation at acidic pH, which was defined as the average desulfurization capacity of the reactor excluding punctual experiments, were comparable to those obtained during the previous operation of the same reactor at neutral pH conditions, as reported previously Despite no loss in the RE was found at acidic pH, a larger solid sulfur production was found compared to that at neutral pH using the same packing material The characterization of the solid (CSS and HDS) revealed a high content of inorganic material since a 57% of FSS related to the TSS was obtained. ICP-OES results indicated that large amounts of iron (24%) besides minor percentages of other metals as chromium (1.4%), nickel (1.3%), copper (1.0%), zinc (0.8%), molybdenum (0.4%) and lead (0.02%) were found in the solid. These metals were probably chemically or biologically leached from the packing material at such acidic and oxidizing conditions. Consequently, the dissolved sulfide could precipitate as a metallic salt driving to a lower sulfate production. Moreover, potassium and sodium were also found with ICP-OES analysis (0.25% and 0.85%, respectively). This result indicates that the presence of sulfate-capturing compounds such as jarosite could also be considered since it is a yellowish-brown iron-sulfate mineral formed with potassium, sodium, ammonium, lead and/or hydronium under acidic and sulfate-rich conditions Another reason for such decrease in the SO Finally, TKN analysis revealed that the amount of biomass present in the packing material was 9.5% of the VSS. This result indicates that the low biomass growth rate of desulfurizing bacteria H The H Both Results of the sulfur mass balance during experiment E3-a were correlated with the biological oxidation of the solid sulfur previously accumulated inside the filter bed during experiments E1 and E2 (approximately 23 After 7 days (168 The sulfur mass balance during E3-a to E3-e is shown in Results obtained during recurring starvation experiments E3-a to E3-e are detailed in A sudden increase in the biogas inlet H Looking at the starvation experiments results, it can be inferred that the oxidation capacity of the accumulated solid sulfur inside the bed decreased during the long-term operation, probably as a consequence of the effect of the solid sulfur accumulation inside the bed. It has been reported that the accumulation of biomass inside biofilters and BTFs leads to a lost in performance because of the undesired effects produced mainly by the porosity and tortuosity changes inside the packed bed Overall, results showed that the desulfurization of high loaded H The Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: