Concrete-filled Rectangular Hollow Sections have been tested under large-scale, far-field, air-blast loading for the first time. The concrete-filled, cold-formed steel tubes performed well under the blast loads, with a significant reduction in the global and local displacements compared to unfilled RHS members. The heavily instrumented tests provided a large quantity of response data that was used for the validation of numerical models. Numerical models of the concrete-filled steel tubes were first developed using explicit finite element methodologies. A parametric study was conducted with the validated finite element model to further characterize the response of the concrete-filled steel tubes under air-blast loading. The influence of several key variables on the response of the tubular members was determined and preliminary design guidance is provided. Finally, the test and finite element results were used to develop an idealized single-degree-of-freedom numerical model that is well-suited to future use in design problems.Increasingly, protective design measures, with respect to accidental or malicious blast loading, are being incorporated into civilian infrastructure. Protective design requires an integrated approach that involves engineers, architects, security consultants, and risk analysts, amongst others. Firstly, a risk analysis is completed that determines the threat to a building and potential scenarios. Various architectural defensive strategies are then reviewed. This ultimately results in a loading case for blast design, with an assumed charge-weight and standoff distance for critical locations within and around a structure. Finally, load transfer mechanisms from non-structural components such as cladding are assessed to determine the blast load felt by structural members. The desire to strike a balance between the architectural and protective design requirements necessitates an understanding of typical structural elements subject to blast loading. Steel structural systems, due to the steel's energy dissipating characteristics, have been cited as an ideal choice for protective design [ Current protective design procedures rely heavily on empirical solutions and research that is not publicly available, hence, research is necessary to improve on these design practices. While there has been research on the impact response of small concrete-filled RHS [ The high cost of testing under blast conditions necessitates the use of numerical modelling to expand on experimental results. The most common numerical method for detailed analysis is explicit finite element ( The research on the far-field air-blast response of concrete-filled RHS elements presented herein contains four components: field testing, a finite element (FE) test analysis, an FE numerical parametric study, and the presentation of a single-degree-of freedom ( A series of field blast tests were conducted on concrete-filled RHS elements in flexure, at a test range in the Negev Desert, Israel. Two RHS sizes, RHS120 × 120 × 5 and RHS120 × 120 × 8, manufactured to EN10219 [ The compressive strength of the concrete filling of the RHS elements was tested to EN12390-3:2009 [ An investigation into the composite interaction between the RHS element and the concrete filling was also performed on one of RHS120 × 120 × 5 members. A small section of a tested member which had experienced just elastic loading was sawn from a tested element. A quasi-static push-out test was then conducted in the laboratory and the results are illustrated in The concrete-filled RHS members were placed into the sides of a concrete box reaction structure, with four RHS, two of each size, per load face. The reaction structure had a loading face on each side of the box to enable a quick transition between blast events. Therefore, a total of eight concrete-filled RHS specimens, four per blast event, were tested. Each same-size pair of RHS members was connected together with a cladding panel measuring 1275 mm wide. The cladding consisted of corrugated steel decking and smaller RHS elements. This configuration was chosen to transfer a uniform load to the RHS elements while adding a minimal flexural stiffness to the larger RHS test members. The cladding is necessary to ensure significant deformation in the specimens during far-field blast loading. Without the cladding the blast wave would quickly wrap around the RHS and very little deformation would occur for the test loading. The concrete-filled RHS target was placed adjacent to an identical RHS target containing unfilled RHS members. Concrete blocks, measuring approximately 1 × 1 × 1 m, were placed on the roofs and inverted T-shaped concrete barriers were placed on the sides of the targets to reduce the clearing effects on the blast wave impacting the load face of the targets ( The targets were arranged, along with other unrelated targets, in a blast arena configuration around a hemispherical-shaped TNT charge. Test 1 used a charge weight of 1000 kg and Test 2 used a charge weight of 500 kg. The RHS targets had a standoff for the first test of 27 m, and for the second test it was 15 m. The resulting scaled distances were 2.70 m/kg The data from the tests were recorded using a Hi-Techniques meDAQ data acquisition system running at a sampling rate of 2000 kHz for a duration of 1000 ms. Four parameters were measured: free-field pressure, reflected pressure, displacement, and longitudinal strain. The free-field pressure gauges were mounted on a 1500 mm tall stand and placed at the same standoff distance as the RHS targets ( Each RHS member had a displacement gauge mounted at mid-span, on the tension side of the target, with two strain gauges, measuring longitudinal strain, adjacent on either side of the displacement gauge ( The concrete-filled RHS members had noticeably less deformation than the unfilled members, both globally and locally. Whereas the unfilled RHS members had the majority of their plastic deformation focused on the mid-span hinge, the concrete-filled RHS members exhibited a more gradual deformation pattern ( At the conclusion of the tests the cladding was removed so the RHS test members could be examined more closely. The free-field and reflected pressure and impulse-time histories are shown in The corresponding critical free-field pressure values are detailed in The displacement-time histories are illustrated in During large-scale blast tests, instrumentation is prone to failure due to the significant and sudden forces experienced. Redundancy, when possible, is thus important. Only one (13-T1-5CF-1) of the four displacement gauges provided good data for the first test, hence the missing values in A critical aspect of the field testing arrangement was the ability to directly compare the concrete-filled RHS to equivalent unfilled RHS experiencing the same loading. Strain-time histories are necessary to determine accurate strain-rate data. The strain-rate information is in turn critical to the calibration of material models used in numerical analyses. A linear fit to the strain-time curve up to the yield strain, as outlined in UFC 3-340-02 [ Explicit FE models are often used to analyse blast loading on structures. The field test results are used to validate explicit FE models for further study. LS-DYNA [ Important characteristics of the LS-DYNA models for the blast behaviour of concrete-filled RHS include the element type, strain-rate-dependent material models, and contact properties selection. CAD models were built which incorporated a pair of concrete-filled RHS members, their supports, and the steel cladding. Symmetry was used to reduce these models to a single concrete-filled RHS member. The FE model included the concrete-filled RHS member, the pin and slotted connections welded to the ends, the M24 bolts, the reaction structure knife plates, the small cladding RHS members, and the cladding steel deck ( A mixture of shell and solid elements was used to mesh the FE model. Due to the far-field nature of the blast loading on the members, shell elements were well suited (as proven by mesh studies) for use in the RHS elements and steel decking. All shell elements were modelled as four-noded Belytschko-Tsay shell elements with five integration points through the thickness. The remainder of the elements (concrete, bolts, RHS connections, and reaction structure connections) were all modelled using eight-noded solid elements with a single integration point. The size and shape of the mesh is also critical to the performance of an FE model. The “bias” option in ANSYS was used to refine the mesh of the concrete-filled RHS member at mid-span and the ends. A sensitivity study established that 50 divisions per 700 mm with a bias growth rate of 1.02 was adequate. This mesh sizing was applied to the length, for both the steel and concrete parts of the concrete-filled RHS member. The final meshed FE models each contained approximately 150,000 elements. The RHS component of the CFST was divided into eight parts such that both flat and corner material properties could be incorporated. The Johnson-Cook ( LS-DYNA allows the strain-rate, or dynamic increase factor ( For the RHS steel, the C-S material model was preferred to represent the strain-rate dependency due to its ease of calibration, availability of calibrated parameters, and usage in previous FE studies on RHS elements subject to impact and blast loading. This results in Eq. Since the relationship was originally proposed in 1957 several researchers have produced updated C-S parameters. Although the original parameters are still often used in numerical modelling for cold-formed tubular steel, researchers have also used the values proposed by Marias et al. [ For the FE numerical models, the C-S parameters from the combined [ After a comparison of several concrete models available in LS-DYNA, the Karagozian & Case concrete (KCC) model (MAT_072R3) [ Eq. An elastic steel material model (MAT_001) was used to model the pinned and slotted RHS end connections. A tri-linear stress-strain curve to failure (MAT_024) was used to model the steel decking. The remainder of the elements, which have a negligible deformation compared to the RHS and decking, were all modelled using perfectly rigid materials (MAT_020). LS-DYNA offers several contact properties, three of which were used in the development of the test analysis models. The welded detail between the RHS shell elements and the solid elements of the pin and slotted connections was modelled using *CONTACT_TIED_SHELL_EDGE_TO_SURFACE. The interaction between the concrete-filling and the RHS steel requires careful consideration for a CFST analysis. While some previous research has used a tied connection, similar to the contact mentioned previously [e.g. The symmetric edges of the LS-DYNA model, the steel decking and RHS100 × 100 × 8 elements, had boundary conditions imposed. The connection to the concrete reaction structure was represented with fixed supports imposed on the concrete box connections. LS-DYNA has several options for applying blast loads on structures, including manual time history inputs, charge weight and standoff calculations (*LOAD_BLAST_ENHANCED), and computational fluid dynamic fluid-structure interactions. *LOAD_BLAST_ENHANCED incorporates the UFC 3-340-02 hemispherical surface bursts charge weight and standoff chart. However, to better reflect the test conditions, the average measured pressures are used for the LS-DYNA analyses. Another consideration is the corrugation of the steel decking. When blast waves interact with structures the full reflected pressure is only felt when the blast wave is travelling perpendicular to the structure. When there is an angle between the blast wave direction and the normal to the surface, as is the case with the angled portions of the deck, the pressure felt by the surface will be lower. A formula (Eq. This formula, also used in the blast software ConWep, is used to scale the pressure load due to the angled faces of the corrugated decking. Using Eq.  In any dynamic analysis the period of vibration is an important indicator of the representation of a numerical model. The measured and numerical periods are outlined in  Similarly, The LS-DYNA models were validated through the test analysis and similar numerical models were thus used for a subsequent parametric study. Three parameters were varied independently for the study: the RHS size, the concrete strength, and the scaled distance. The RHS size was varied from RHS120 × 120 × 5 to RHS250 × 250 × 10, all of which are class 1 (or compact) sections. Four thicknesses were used for the RHS120 × 120, and two thicknesses were used for the tubes having other widths. Nominal steel geometry and material properties were used for all cross-sections. The strain-rate effect (flat coupon C-S parameters) and temperature effect terms remained the same as the test analysis models. When necessary, the cladding was modified to accommodate RHS sizes larger than 120 × 120. A small amount of mass was added to the system by lengthening the RHS50 × 50 and M16 bolt elements. Two concrete strengths were chosen for the parametric study, 35 and 70 MPa. This covers the range typically used for concrete-filling applications. Six scaled distances were investigated for each RHS size: 1.4, 1.8, 2.2, 2.6, 3.0, and 3.4 m/kg The remainder of the features from the LS-DYNA test analysis models remained unchanged. This included the RHS member span (3260 mm), tributary width (675 mm), element properties, material properties, contact properties, and boundary conditions. A total of 108 analyses were executed on the same workstation that was used for the test analysis. Several of the displacement-time histories at a scaled distance of 2.6 m/kg Response criteria are often specified in terms of ductility ratio ( Eq.  The ultimate moment capacity for the concrete-filled RHS members was calculated using the theoretical method proposed by Zhao and Grzebieta [ The detailed results confirm the graphical observation, that doubling the concrete strength has a very small influence on the overall response. For the larger sections the reduction is approximately 2% in the maximum deflection and 0.5% in the ductility ratio. The difference increases for the smaller sizes to upwards of 10% in the maximum deflection. Thus, when using CFST for blast applications it is not worthwhile to consider high-strength concrete; the majority of the benefit of the concrete fill comes from the extra mass and added stability provided to the steel tube walls. Firstly, the influence of scaled distance on the response of each concrete-filled RHS member is studied. The relationships are illustrated in These curves can be used as design charts for concrete-filled RHS flexural members subject to air-blast loading, assuming the designed member has a similar cladding and span. Generally, as evident from When choosing a CFST for a particular scaled distance several considerations need to be made. Often there will be architectural constraints, such as maximum member width. In this case it is relatively straightforward to use the corresponding charts ( However, if there are no member width constraints the choice of section becomes more difficult. For members of a similar weight (e.g. RHS120 × 120 × 10 and RHS150 × 150 × 8), the concrete-filled RHS with the thicker wall performs better than the member with the larger width. An additional consideration is the maximum allowable displacement. Certain applications will be constrained by not only the ductility ratio, but also the maximum displacement of the member (e.g. to prevent impacting other structural or non-structural components). In this case the member with the larger width has the advantage because it has a lower absolute displacement. Regardless of the design considerations required, Mass plays a significant role in dynamic analyses and its influence on the CFST response was examined. The relationship between the combined mass of the system and the ductility ratio for several scaled distances is illustrated in A better relationship exists between the combined mass and the peak displacement of the CFSTs. This is because the ductility ratio incorporates the elastic displacement, which is not influenced as strongly by changes in concrete mass. The elastic displacement calculations distort the global trend in the combined mass-ductility ratio response. The combined mass of the system has a stronger relationship to the peak displacement of the CFST member than the ductility ratio. The influence of the ultimate moment capacity on the response of the CFST is illustrated in The combined mass of a CFST member is more strongly correlated to the peak displacement. However, the ultimate moment capacity is more strongly correlated to the ductility ratio. Both relationships have a use in the design of concrete-filled RHS members because both the ductility ratio and peak displacement of a member must satisfy the protective design guidelines and any architectural requirements. The concrete-filled numerical results are compared to similar analyses completed on unfilled RHS members. SDOF analysis is mentioned as a method of structural analysis for protective design in both CSA S850-12 and ASCE/SEI 59-11 and is popular for design and analysis of structural elements subject to blast loads. Its simplicity and relative accuracy make it an ideal method for design engineers. However, with each added complexity, for example concrete-filling, comes additional degrees of freedom and the method must be validated. SDOF models were hence developed for the concrete-filled RHS members and compared against the test results. SDOF analyses simplify a multi-degree-of-freedom (MDOF) system into an equivalent system with only a single degree of freedom. The equivalent SDOF system utilizes a concentrated mass, an elastic-plastic spring, and point loads (see The equivalency factors are determined by equating the energies of the SDOF and MDOF systems. Since the resistance has the same spatial distribution as the applied load, the resistance factor is equal to the load factor. For simplicity, when damping is included, the damping factor is also typically assumed equal to the load factor [ SDOF approximations are well suited to blast loading since the peak displacement of a structural member is generally the primary concern. The process for determining variables of Eq. The mass factor for beams is based on distributed mass. For the analysis of the test specimens this includes not only the mass of the concrete-filled RHS members, but also the mass of the supported cladding elements that move with the RHS members. While damping is not always included in SDOF analyses, the test results showed a decaying response and thus it was included for the analyses of the test specimens. The damping constant, There is not a consensus on the appropriate damping ratio for different elements. UFC 3-340-02 states that a value of up to 5% can be chosen for steel structures. In order to accurately represent the test specimens, the damping ratio was determined using the test responses. Based on engineering judgement, a damping ratio of 2% was chosen for the concrete-filled RHS SDOF models. Similar to the FE parametric study, a bi-linear elastic-plastic resistance function is used to represent the concrete-filled RHS members. For the SDOF analysis, the ultimate moment capacity of the concrete-filled RHS specimens was calculated using the Zhao and Grzebieta [ In order to calculate the dynamic ultimate moment capacity, appropriate DIFs are needed for the steel ultimate strength and the concrete compressive strength. The same DIF functions defined previously, Eqs. The effective stiffness was calculated using the CSA S16-14 formula for composite steel members outlined previously. A representative resistance-displacement function from one of the test specimens is shown in For the SDOF analysis of the blast arena tests, the average measured reflected pressure from each test ( With the input parameters defined, an iterative solver is needed to complete the SDOF analyses. For this study the SDOF analyses were completed using the Single-degree-of-freedom Blast Effects Design Spreadsheet (SBEDS) [ Acceptable input parameters must be back-calculated from the properties of the concrete-filled RHS members outlined in the previous sections. A summary of all the back-calculated properties used for the SBEDS analyses is listed in The mass of the tributary area of cladding, for one RHS test member (104.7 kg/m The Load Area Factor in SBEDS, generally used for primary-secondary framing interaction, can be used to account for the reduced overall load felt by the structure. Based on the measured peak free-field, reflected pressure, and the angle of the slanted deck sections (73°), the equivalent horizontal pressure on the angled sections is 15.1% of the peak reflected pressure for Test 1 and 11.2% of the peak reflected pressure for Test 2. Combining the span and deck angle factors results in a load area factor of 0.716 for Test 1 and 0.705 for Test 2. A summary of the critical values used to determine the SBEDS load area factor is shown in    Similarly, Overall, the LS-DYNA modelling technique described previously is shown to be a superior (more representative of the measured test results) numerical modelling method relative to SDOF, for the composite members studied. However, the SDOF method was still fairly good at capturing the peak displacement, which is often the prime concern in blast design. The SDOF outlined herein is a useful tool for designers to quickly assess concrete-filled RHS members subject to blast loads. Concrete-filled RHS members have been tested in flexure under full-scale air-blast loading. Both explicit FE and SDOF numerical models were validated and calibrated by the experimental results. The FE model was also used to complete a parametric study and further assess the performance of composite RHS when subjected to air-blast loading. The following conclusions can be drawn from this experimental and numerical study: The field-tested, concrete-filled, cold-formed RHS members performed very well (especially compared to unfilled counterparts) when subjected to blast loading. Despite the large deflections, there were no local failures at the cold-formed corners or along the weld seam of the RHS. All members failed in flexure under large plastic deformation. No local buckling effects were observed, indicating that some thinner-wall CFST members, which when unfilled would buckle locally, can exhibit large plastic rotation capacity. This demonstrates the suitability of concrete-filled RHS for protective design applications. Filling an RHS with concrete greatly reduces the global and local deformations experienced during a blast load, relative to its unfilled counterpart. The FE model generally proved to be a significant improvement over the SDOF numerical model for the three parameters considered: period of oscillation, maximum displacement, and final (residual) displacement. Concrete compressive strength of the filler material does not have a significant effect on the blast response. The prime contribution of concrete infill is added mass, as well as retarding local buckling of the surrounding RHS walls. Relationships were developed between the RHS response (ductility ratio) and blast loading (scaled distance) that can be used as simple design tools by assessing the response of similar concrete-filled RHS members. For a given section width, increasing the wall thickness (and thus the steel-to-concrete ratio) improves both the ductility ratio and displacement response. For similar areas of steel, the wall thickness of the RHS tube is more influential than the tube width when considering ductility ratio. As the section sizes get larger or the blast loads get smaller, the influence of the wall thickness lessens. The ultimate moment capacity was a better predictor of the ductility ratio response and the combined mass was a better predictor of peak displacement. The SDOF method provides an acceptable measurement of the peak displacement for concrete-filled RHS members and is a valuable resource for design engineers. However, care must be taken to not over-refine the model and to bear in mind the approximate nature of the method.  Johnson-Cook parameter (MPa) Johnson-Cook parameter (MPa) Cowper-Symonds parameter (s Damping constant Johnson-Cook parameter Young's Modulus of Elasticity (MPa) Effective stiffness of concrete-filled RHS (kN·m Concrete compressive strength (MPa) Steel yield strength (MPa) Steel dynamic yield stress (MPa) Steel ultimate strength (MPa) Moment of Inertia (mm Positive-phase reflected impulse (kPa·ms) Positive-phase free-field impulse (kPa·ms) Damping factor Load factor Mass factor Resistance factor Stiffness (kN/m) Length (mm) Combined mass (kg/m) Total mass (kg) Ultimate moment capacity (kN·m) Johnson-Cook parameter Johnson-Cook parameter Peak reflected pressure Peak free-field pressure Cowper-Symonds parameter Resistance function Maximum resistance (kN) Power curve fit parameter Power curve fit parameter Time of arrival (ms) Positive-phase duration (ms) X-axis variable for power curve fit Theoretical maximum elastic deflection (mm) Scaled distance (kg/m Strain rate (s User-defined reference strain rate (s Failure strain (mm/mm) angle of incidence Ductility ratio Damping ratio (%) Cowper-Symonds Concrete-filled steel tube Circular hollow section Dynamic increase factor Finite element Hollow structural section Johnson-Cook Rectangular hollow section Single-degree-of-freedom Square hollow section Static strength increase factor The authors are appreciative of the financial aid and in-kind support of the Explora Foundation to the