A validated MATLAB code is developed to design a dry cooling unit for a 25 MW solar power plant operated with supercritical CO2 (sCO2) Brayton cycle. Both direct and indirect cooling systems are designed for the power plant and their performance are compared. For direct cooling system, air cooled heat exchanger unit is designed whereas for indirect cooling system, optimum size of shell and tube heat exchanger is selected addressing the retainment of shell side heat transfer correction factor within a reasonable limit. The nonlinear property variation of sCO2 near the critical condition is reasonably well captured by the present code in both shell and tube and air cooled heat exchanger units. The comparative study of direct and indirect cooling system is performed for inlet sCO2 temperature of 71 °C, operating pressure of 7.5 MPa and ambient air temperature from 15 °C to 40 °C. For the same heat rejection, indirect cooling system requires a much higher cooling tower. During high ambient temperature period, direct dry cooling system shows superior cooling performance in terms of lower sCO2 outlet temperature compared to indirect cooling system.area, m specific heat, J/kg K drag coefficient diameter, m friction factor drag force, N mass velocity, kg/s m height, m heat transfer coefficient, W/m shell side heat transfer correction factor thermal conductivity, W/m K loss coefficient length of tower support, m length of finned tube, m mass flow rate, kg/s number of tower supports number of tube rows effective number of tubes per row fin pitch, m transversal tube pitch, m longitudinal tube pitch, m diagonal tube Pitch, m pressure drop, N/m heat transfer rate, W shell side pressure drop correction factor temperature, °C or K fin thickness (mean), m fin tip thickness, m surface roughness, m efficiency dynamic viscosity, kg/ms density, kg/m area ratio Froude number Nusselt number Prandtl number Reynolds number characteristic Reynold number Colburn factor air side cooling tower cooling tower contraction cooling tower expansion control volume heat exchanger inner; inlet outer; outlet log mean temperature difference pseudocritical Robinson and Brigg correlation root supercritical; shell side tube side tower outlet tower support wall temperature Supercritical CO The first ever closed loop Brayton cycle was proposed by Feher Experiments performed to assess the thermal performance of a small natural draft dry cooling tower coupled with 1 MW concentrating solar thermal sCO So far researchers have explored the potential of sCO In dry cooling system, fresh ambient air is used to cool the turbine exchaust and the cooling medium never gets in contact with the working fluid. In indirect dry cooling system shown in In a NDDCT, air travels through the bundles of finned tube heat exchanger unit by means of buoyant force due to the density difference between the warm air inside and the ambient air outside. Various loses are experienced by the air stream due to flow resistances while flowing in different parts of NDDCT. For the analysis of pre-cooler, shell and tube exchanger is employed where water flows in the shell side and the high pressure sCO  Air cooled heat exchanger unit is an essential element in NDDCT where the hot working fluid is cooled by the air stream flowing across the bundles of finned tube exchanger. The air side surface area is augmented by employing transversal circular fins on the bare tubes as shown in For the validation of the present code, Kroger’s one dimensional model of heat exchanger In direct dry cooling system, air cooled heat exchanger unit is employed in the cooling tower to cool the hot sCO On the other hand, for indirect cooling system, shell and tube heat exchanger is employed for the analysis of pre-cooler. The cooling water raises in temperature after absorbing heat from the sCO The traditional method of modelling of heat exchanger are only valid for working fluid with constant properties. Nodal approach is adapted in designing the heat exchanger for sCO All the fixed parameters of heat exchanger and specified geometric parameters of the cooling tower are given as inputs. With an initial assumption of cooling tower height, Next, the code calculates all the loss coefficients With all these calculated values, the code checks the draft equation. If the equation is not satisfied, the code adjusts the air mass flow rate. This required mass flow rate which satisfies the draft equation is used for the analysis of heat exchanger. The dotted box represents the calculation of parameters for each section. For the first section in first row of tubes, both inlet temperature and pressure of sCO The outlet temperature and pressure for sCO For the second row of tubes, air outlet temperatures and pressures are assigned as input air temperatures and pressures respectively. Similarly for third and fourth row of tubes, same procedure is applied. If the mean air outlet temperature leaving the heat exchanger bundles is not equal to the initial assumption of The total heat rejected by the tower is the sum of heat rejection by all 120 sections. Therefore, if the total heat rejection does not meet the desired heat rejection duty requirement, the code changes the cooling tower height, Finally the output parameters are written in a specified file and the code finishes the calculation.  The 4 m tube length offers the lowest tube side pressure drop of 0.64 kPa due to lower mass flow rate and shorter tube length but it requires a higher tower height of 48 m. However, the 10 m tube length requires the lowest tower height of 44 m but the tube side pressure drop is significantly increased to 12.45 kPa due to higher mass flow rate and longer tube length. Although the 10 m tube length requires the lowest tower height, the optimum length of tube is chosen as 8 m with 45 m of tower height, since it offers better flexibility of arranging the heat exchanger bundles on the base of the tower. Also, the tube side pressure drop is within a reasonable limit for 8 m tube length. Therefore for indirect cooling system, 8 m tube length is chosen based on these factors. Multi-pass arrangement of tubes is also considered in the present analysis to investigate the influence of tube pass on the heat transfer mechanism. Double tube side pass with two different tube length of 6 m and 8 m is considered. In both cases, the sCO Bell Delaware All the fixed geometric parameters of heat exchanger are given as inputs. The code starts calculation with an initial assumption of baffle cut, Next, the code calculates outer tube limit diameter The code assume a value of tube pitch, Next, the code calculates If the value of correction factor, Next, the code checks the values of correction factors Next, the code checks the limiting values of the correction factors With this optimized geometry of the heat exchanger, the code assumes values for water mass flow rate, Next, the code calculates For the calculation of next section, the outlet temperatures and pressures are assigned as inputs. For the remaining length of the heat exchanger, same procedure is applied. Next, the code checks the outlet temperature of sCO Finally the code calls the function of NDDCT to check if the water temperature leaving the pre-cooler equals to the inlet water temperature of the cooling tower. The air cooled heat exchanger cools the water inside NDDCT by adapting the nodal approach. The same procedure for direct cooling system is applied here and the code finishes the calculation.  Higher sCO The sCO  Similarly, the variation of local heat transfer coefficient of sCO The sCO The total heat rejection at the end of each row of the heat exchanger bundles is shown in    The change of air side properties is also taken into account by the present code.  The influence of different ambient temperature on the performance of NDDCT for both cooling systems is performed in the present article.   In present article, cooling system is designed and compared for a 25 MW solar power plant. The validated present code is fully capable in predicting the heat transfer mechanism and fluid flow behaviour in the heat exchangers. The rapid property variation of sCO In the present code, the changes of properties for both airside and sCO The required size of the NDDCT for direct and indirect cooling system is proposed. Due to higher initial temperature between two fluid streams, direct cooling system requires smaller tower height in comparison indirect cooling system. Single pass and multi-pass arrangement of tubes are considered in order to explore the effect of tube pass on the heat transfer mechanism and pressure drop characteristics. Multi-pass arrangement of tubes is not favourable for sCO For the analysis of pre-cooler, an optimum size of shell and tube heat exchanger is selected in order to keep the shell side heat transfer and pressure drop correction factors within a reasonable limit. For indirect cooling system, a higher tower height is required due to lower initial temperature difference between water and air in NDDCT. Moreover, at higher ambient temperature, the water inlet temperature in the tower increases which adversely affect heat transfer mechanism in the pre-cooler. During high ambient temperature period, dry cooling system provides better cooling performance in comparison with indirect cooling system in terms of lower sCO This research was conducted as a part of the For a fixed tube sheet heat exchanger, bundle to shell clearance Shell side cross flow area, Let us consider a small control volume located between the centrelines of two adjacent tubes and two adjacent fins in the upstream tube row. The minimum free flow area through this control volume is given by,