Washed fillets of Bombay duck (Harpodon nehereus), a fish having unusually high moisture content (above 90%), were held overnight in cold, 2% (v/w) aqueous acetic acid, which resulted in gelation associated with a 33% increase in weight due to water uptake by the proteins. Gamma irradiation at 3 kGy or repeated freezing and thawing did not affect protein hydration. The presence of sodium chloride in the acid adversely affected protein hydration. The effects of urea, dithiothreitol and o-phenanthroline on water uptake suggested that the imbibed water was held by non-covalent interactions with the fish proteins. Water homogenates of the gel had higher apparent viscosities than native muscle. Temperature significantly influenced the apparent viscosity of the gel. Unlike water homogenates of washed fish, heating of the gel dispersion at 100 °C did not cause precipitation of the proteins. However, the stability of the proteins in the dispersion was adversely affected by sodium chloride or by increase in pH above 5.0. The acid-induced gel was very weak; its hardness could be enhanced by incorporation of certain food additives.Gelation of fish muscle structural proteins has been extensively studied because of its importance in the development of surimi and surimi-dependent restructured products. Gelation of myosin molecules involves partial denaturation, followed by irreversible aggregation of myosin heads through formation of disulphide bonds and helix-coil transition of the tail part of the molecules, resulting in a three dimensional network ( Most of the studies on the gelation of fish proteins have been carried out at near neutral pH conditions ( Bombay duck ( Fresh Bombay duck were purchased from a local market and brought to the laboratory in ice. The fish were washed in running potable water. The washed fish were beheaded, deskinned and the central bone removed manually. The prepared fish fillets were washed in potable water, drained and chilled to 0–2 °C. Two fish fillets were each sealed in polyethylene pouches. The pouches, held in ice, were subjected to gamma irradiation at a dose of 3 kGy in a The fillets were washed by soaking in cold water (<10 °C) for 18 h in a cold room (2–3 °C) to remove soluble components of the muscle. The washed fillets were then drained and transferred to equal amounts of cold aqueous solutions of 2% (v/v) acetic acid. The samples were held for 18 h in the cold room, which resulted in gelation of the meat and uptake of water. In some of the samples containing fish fillets in dilute acetic acid, chemicals, including sodium chloride, urea and dithiothreitol were incorporated at varying concentrations After incubation, the gel fillets were drained. Hydration of meat proteins during gelation was determined by noting the weight of the fillets before and after soaking overnight in the aqueous acetic acid. An amount of 10 g of homogenized gel was centrifuged at 12,100× The gel was homogenized in a ‘Sumeet’ kitchen mixer and the gel mince was collected. The homogenized gel was filled into aluminium trays ((9.0×6.5×2.0 cm), and subjected to steaming for 10 min under atmospheric pressure in a kitchen cooker. After heat treatment, the trays were cooled to ambient temperature (20–21 °C) and stored in a cold room (0–2 °C) until used. In order to improve the texture of the gel, additives, including potato starch, egg white, gum acacia, carboxy methylcellulose, propylene glycol and also shark meat gel were incorporated in the gel at various concentrations. The homogenized gel, containing the additives, was subjected to heating and cooling, as mentioned above. Shark meat gel was prepared from washed shark meat as described by The hardness of the gel before and after cooking was determined in terms of shear force by penetrating it to a breaking point with a laboratory-fabricated five-blade (3×1 cm, each 3 mm apart) metallic probe attached to a Universal Testing Machine (Table model TM Instron Corporation, Canton, MA), using a load cell size CCTM (0–100 kg range). The scale was calibrated to 2 kg ±0.5%. Cross head speed was 10 mm per min. Hardness (N/cm The gelled meat was homogenized in cold water in various proportions by homogenizing it in a kitchen homogenizer to get protein dispersions. The viscosity of the dispersion (200 ml) taken in a 250-ml beaker, held in an ice water bath was measured using a Brookfield synchro-lectric viscometer model RVT(Cooksville, Ontario, Canada) as described by Protein and moisture of the fish were determined according to Evisceration, beheading, and deskinning of whole Bombay duck gave fillets, with a yield of 87%. The beheaded and eviscerated fish muscle had a proximate composition of 93.2±0.1% moisture and 5.8% protein. Washing of the fillets by overnight soaking in cold water resulted in removal of odour bearing compounds. There was about a 5% increase in weight of the fish as a result of the washing treatment. Holding the washed meat in dilute acetic acid resulted in gelation of the meat proteins. While the washed fillets were opaque in appearance, the acetic acid-treated fillets were translucent. There was significant swelling of the fillets as a result of uptake of water during the gelation process. It was of interest to examine the effects of certain agents on water uptake. Hydration of proteins was adversely affected by the presence of NaCl in the 2% aqueous acetic acid. Thus, while the water uptake was 1109 ml per 100 g dry fish, it was only 74.5 ml, when 0.5% NaCl was present in the dilute acid. At 1% acetic acid, there was loss of 104 ml from the initial moisture content, calculated on 100 g dry fish, presumably due to an osmotic effect (  The influence of temperature on the apparent viscosity of dispersions having protein contents of 1.5 mg and 1.2 mg per ml is given in The stability of the proteins in homogenates of washed fish meat as well as gel dispersions is shown in The imbibed water was strongly held in the protein gel, since no water was separated when the gels were centrifuged at 12,100×  Previous studies conducted in our laboratory showed that the high moisture content and formation of excessive drip during storage hampered attempts to extend the refrigerated shelf life of the fish by low dose gamma irradiation. A dip treatment in 10% aqueous solution of sodium tripolyphosphate or sodium chloride was required to reduce drip formation in irradiated fish during storage ( Water-holding capacity is an important functional property of muscle foods ( The presence of sodium chloride adversely affected water uptake by the fillets. At a 1% salt concentration, the fillets, lost water, presumably due to osmotic effects. Increase of pH and/or the addition of salt affected the water holding capacity. Several factors, such as pH, the presence of salts, temperature and comminution influence the ability of myofibrils to hold water and the resultant swelling ( Temperature has a profound influence on water-holding capacity of processed muscle products in the neutral pH range. Water release in comminuted cod muscle was very low, between 5 and 30 °C, which increased at higher temperatures (