ZrO2 particles with different microstructure have been fabricated through an easy method with chitosan of different molecular weights as template. The chitosan of different molecular weights was obtained through synergistic degradation of raw chitosan by α-amylase and H2O2 using microwave hydrothermal method in low concentration acetic acid (1% V/V). The as-synthesized ZrO2 particles were characterized by wide-angle powder X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and N2 adsorption⿿desorption. The possible formation mechanism of ZrO2 particles with different microstructure has been proposed, and the photocatalytic activity of the as-synthesized products was assessed by monitoring the photodegradation of Rhodamine B (Rh B) under UV irradiation. Morphologies of as-synthesized ZrO2 particles changed significantly with the different molecular weight of chitosan. As the molecular weight of chitosan decreased, the morphologies of as-synthesized ZrO2 particles showed aggregate, nano-cubes, and nano-sheets, respectively. The ZrO2 particles prepared with lower molecular weight chitosan as the template showed higher photocatalytic activity. The degradation efficiency of ZrO2 with 3.1ÿ107 and 2.4ÿ104
                     Da chitosan as template was 64.4% and 86.2%, respectively.Semiconductor materials with different sizes and morphologies have received much attention because of their potential applications as active components or interconnection in nanoscale electronic, optical, and optoelectronic devices. As an important semiconductor metal oxide, ZrO Among these methods, the template method has attracted great attention because of its flexibility and mild synthetic conditions. Thereinto, natural polymers might be used as templates in producing metal oxide materials A variety of techniques including chemical hydrolysis, oxidative degradation, and enzymatic hydrolysis can be used to prepare low molecular weight chitosan. Chemical hydrolysis uses both strong and weak acids as hydrolysis agents, thereby leading to some environmental issues. Oxidative degradation has disadvantages because of the chemical structure changes caused by the formation of carboxyl groups, deamination, and even breakage of glucoside ring In our previous work, we reported composites based on magnetic zirconia (Fe Chitosan (degree of deacetylation: 80%; viscosity-average molecular weight: 3100 Chitosan variants with similar degrees of deacetylation but different molecular weights were obtained by synergistic H Chitosan (0.5 Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were measured on a NICOLTE 380 FTIR spectrometer using KBr pellet. Each FTIR spectrum was collected after 40 scans at a resolution of 4 M Intrinsic viscosity, [ The phase of the as-prepared samples was determined by a Rigaku D/Max 2400X-ray diffractometer (XRD) equipped with graphite monochromatized Cu The catalytic degradation of Rh B aqueous solution was measured at room temperature under UV irradiation. Generally, 5 Different M The FT-IR spectra of raw and degraded chitosan are presented on The phase structures of the as-prepared products using chitosan variants as template were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in The morphologies of all the as-prepared ZrO Chitosan is a linear copolymer that contains numerous efficient functional groups to coordinate metallic species. This characteristic is suspected to play a pivotal role during the mineralization process like amino-metal coordination (NH The specific surface areas of the as-prepared products that used M To ascertain the band gap of the samples, UV⿿vis absorption spectra were obtained and shown in The photocatalytic activities for the degradation of Rh B under UV light irradiation using ZrO Chitosan was degraded by synergistic degradation using α-amylase and H This work was financially supported by the