Seeking new solvents for green processing of chalcopyrite at low temperature with low energy and acid consumption as well as low pollutant release is key task in hydrometallurgy of chalcopyrite. In the present study, 1-hexyl-3-methyl-imidazolium hydrogen sulfate ([HMIm]HSO4) aqueous solution was used to leach copper from chalcopyrite at ambient temperature with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as oxidant. The effects of particle size, stirring speed, leaching temperatures, the types of ionic liquids, and the concentrations of H2O2 and [HMIm]HSO4 on copper extraction were systematically examined. A high copper extraction yield of 98.3% has been achieved in 10% (v/v) [HMIm]HSO4 aqueous at 45°C after 120min with 25% H2O2, particle size under 45μm, and solid/liquid ratio of 10g/L. It was found that particle size and temperature, as well as the concentrations of H2O2 and [HMIm]HSO4 had a significant influence on the leaching rate of chalcopyrite, while the stirring speed has little effect. The empirical kinetic model, −ln(1−
                     x)=kt was used to describe the kinetics of copper extraction in [HMIm]HSO4 aqueous solution, the results showed that the leaching process was controlled by a surface chemical reaction with an apparent activation energy of 52.06kJ/mol.Chalcopyrite is the most important and widespread copper-bearing mineral in nature. It accounts for almost 70% of the copper deposits in the world ( In recent years, several hydrometallurgical processes, such as pressure sulfate leaching ( Ionic liquids (ILs) are salts in liquid state at or near room temperature that are composed of particular organic cations and organic or inorganic anions ( Strong oxidative conditions are usually needed for decomposition of the protective layer of chalcopyrite in both acid solution and ionic liquids, due to its compact structure. Moderately high temperatures and pressures, and active oxidants such as H A chalcopyrite concentrate from Dongchuan Copper Mine (Yunnan, China) was used for the leaching study. The sample was crushed and sieved into different sized fractions: − The 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium hydrogen sulfate ([EMIm]HSO An atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) AS-400 (PerkinElmer, USA) was used to determine the soluble copper in the leaching solution. Mineralogical and chemical (elemental analysis) characteristics of the chalcopyrite concentrate and the leaching residues for best condition were assessed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDX) (TESCAN VEGA3 SBH) and an X-ray diffraction (XRD) system (Rigaku Ultima All leaching experiments were performed in a 50 The extraction of copper from chalcopyrite was investigated in four 10% (v/v) aqueous ionic liquids ([EMIm]HSO The leaching tests were carried out on the chalcopyrite in a 10% (v/v) [HMIm]HSO The copper extraction from chalcopyrite was performed in the 10% (v/v) [HMIm]SO The effect of the [HMIm]HSO To investigate the influence of the H The influence of temperature (25, 30, 35, 40 and 45 In a heterogeneous solid-liquid leaching system, there exists many kinetic models to describe the leaching progress ( It is possible to determine values of the reaction half time and the time required for different degrees of chalcopyrite leaching for each temperature. The results and values for different known kinetic models ( The plot of − The SEM images of chalcopyrite concentrate and leaching residues are shown in As discussed above, the effective ionic liquid for leaching chalcopyrite is strongly dependent on the oxidant used. The extraction of copper from chalcopyrite is significantly influenced by the concentration of the ILs and H In summary, we found that the [HMIm]HSO A high copper extraction yield of 98.3% has been obtained after 120 It was also found that the particle size, temperature, and the concentrations of H The kinetics of the copper extraction process in an [HMIm]HSO We thank prof. Jianmin Tao and prof. Yi Rao at Temple University for their proof reading and suggestions. This work was supported by the