In the present investigation, powders of as-cast ingots of Al–25at%Fe and Al–34.5at%Fe alloys close to Al3Fe and Al2Fe intermetallic phases are subjected to high energy ball milling to understand the possibility of formation of amorphous and/or nanocrystalline phases or any other metastable phases. The development of microstructure, evolution of various metastable phases and their stability are investigated by x-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) techniques. Mechanical milling of the alloys, up to 50h, was carried out in high energy planetary ball mill. It resulted in phase transformation from monoclinic and triclinic structures of Al3Fe and Al2Fe, respectively, to orthorhombic structure pertaining to Al5Fe2 phase and structural transformation from crystalline to amorphous phase. Hardness measurements revealed a transition from hardening to softening behavior in these mechanically milled alloys undergoing prolonged milling. The softening effect in the milled powders, having a composite structure involving nanocrystalline and amorphous phases, is attributed to the competing phenomenon of grain size reduction and amorphous phase formation with increasing milling time.Nanocrystalline intermetallic compounds have recently attracted considerable attention because of their improved specific mechanical properties, which make them useful for light weight structural materials. Among these, iron aluminide intermetallic alloys with high aluminum content are excellent candidates In contrast to MA experiments, except the study of the effect of mechanical milling (MM) on the structural evolution of as-cast Al Alloys of nominal compositions of Al–25 An automated D8 Discover Bruker diffractometer, operated at 40 The specimen for hardness measurements were prepared by mixing a required quantity of milled powder with the mounting material, Buehler Epoxicure resin, cured at room temperature and were subsequently polished by diamond paste down to 0.25 The x-ray diffraction pattern of crushed as-cast powders of Al–25 The average crystallite size of the as-milled powders, calculated for each condition from the x-ray diffraction patterns, decreased with milling duration along with a corresponding increase in lattice strain for the Al–25 The XRD pattern of as-cast Al–34.5 The milling process thus clearly demonstrates that under the present milling conditions Al The external morphology of milled intermetallic powders was examined using SEM. The samples were prepared by sprinkling the loose powder on an adhesive stub and then examined using secondary electron imaging mode.  DTA trace of 50 Milling time dependence of Vickers hardness for Al–25 where  Al–25 The authors would like to thankfully acknowledge the help received from Mr. Abhiskek K. Singh of MST Division, CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, in alloy preparation through arc melting process and wish to express their gratitude to Dr. Swapan Kumar Das, Dr. Ravikumar, Mr. Amit Prakash and Mrs. Mosmi of CSIR-NML, Jamshedpur, for their valuable technical assistance. One of the authors (NKM) would like to thank the