In the last years, an appreciable effort has been directed toward developing empirical models to link the relative permeability of gas condensate reservoirs to the interfacial tension and velocity as well as saturation. However, these models suffer from non-universality and uncertainties in setting the tuning parameters. In order to alleviate the aforesaid infirmities in this study, comprehensive modeling was carried out by employing numerous smart computer-aided algorithms including Support Vector Regression (SVR), Least Square Support Vector Machine (LSSVM), Extreme Learning Machine (ELM), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Group Method of Data Handling (GMDH), and Gene Expression Programming (GEP) as predictors and Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm (LMA), Bayesian Regularization (BR), Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG) and Randomized Polynomial Time (RP) as optimizers. To this end, a wide variety of reliable databanks encompasses more than 1000 data points from eights sets of experimental data was utilized in the training and testing steps of the modeling process. The predictors were integrated with optimization algorithms to assign the optimum tuning parameters of each model. The modeling was implemented in two different manners from the standpoint of models inputs: (1) 2-input (saturation and capillary number); (2) 3-input (saturation, interfacial tension, and capillary number). The results of the comparison between these strategies demonstrate more accuracy of the models when employing three independent parameters as the input (3-input). Among the developed models, the MLP-LMA modeling algorithm outperformed all other models with root mean square errors (RMSEs) of 0.035 and 0.019 for gas and condensate phases, respectively. At the end, in a comparison between both 2-input and 3-input MLP-LMA models and five traditional literature models, both smart modeling approaches were established themselves as the most accurate techniques for estimation of relative permeability in gas condensate reservoirs.Producing from the gas condensate reservoirs is associated with complexities from the standpoint of phase behavior and phase distribution in porous media as well as modeling ( During the last decade, modeling the fluid flow in gas condensate and near critical reservoirs has been at the center of much attention. Relative permeability is one of the most significant and widespread parameters in the modeling phase of such complex systems. However, calculation of this parameter in gas condensate reservoirs is associated with difficulties such as the multiplicity of inputs and uncertainty for choosing optimal values for tuning parameters ( Over the last decades, several researchers have attempted to propose empirical models for estimation of gas condensate relative permeability with differences in the parameters employed as inputs. Early models only relied on IFT and saturation variables because meanwhile, the effect of velocity on relative permeability was not understood ( The literature proposed correlations can be divided into two groups ( To deal with the aforementioned challenges, it is essential to apply robust predictive methods. Computer-based simulators and artificial intelligence approaches are breakthrough technologies that have recently acquired a great deal of attention. These approaches have been considered as reliable methods for overcoming widespread challenges in different areas of science including petroleum engineering. These methodologies could connect the input data to output in an unconventional manner, aiming to generating improved predictive models ( In this study, we propose to implement several artificial intelligence techniques to establish reliable models for estimating relative permeability in gas condensate reservoirs by considering two sorts of inputs parameters. To this end, a comprehensive modeling was carried out by applying various intelligent techniques including Support Vector Regression (SVR), Least Square Support Vector Machine (LSSVM), Extreme Learning Machine (ELM), Group Method of Data Handling (GMDH), Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Gene Expression Programming (GEP) as predictors. Furthermore, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm (LMA), Bayesian Regularization (BR), Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG) and Randomized Polynomial Time (RP) were used as optimizers of the aforementioned predictive methods. A wide-range of dataset encompasses various rock and fluid properties and different experimental conditions were adopted from the literature for the modeling process ( The value and the shape of relative permeability curves could be affected by several factors including reservoir rock and fluid properties, experimental condition, and the method of measurement. Therefore, employing a wide variety of reliable databanks is unavoidable for conducting comprehensive modeling. Hence, a widespread databank of gas/condensate relative permeability as a function of saturation, IFT, and the capillary number have been gathered from published literature ( Support Vector Machine (SVM) ( The Kernel function models a non-linear relationship in a linear manner aided with transforming the primary input data to a high dimensional feature space. Hence, solving the problem of Eq. In 1999, Suykens and Vandewalle ( Subjected to the following constraint: Thus, the parameters of LSSVM can be achieved by solving the above system of equations which encompasses 2N+2 equations and 2N+2 unknown parameters ( It is noteworthy that the LSSVM reliability depends mainly on its control parameters namely In 2005, In the sequent stage of the ELM learning, Consequently, an optimum method such as iterative method, orthogonal projection method, Gaussian elimination, and single value decomposition (SVD) are used to solve Eq. Polynomial neural network (PNN) or so-called Group Method of Data Handling (GMDH) approach ( Tuning the constants of the above equation can be carried out by satisfying the following conditions for minimization of the error: Multilayer perceptron (MLP) is a popular type of artificial neural network (ANN) that comprises three layers of nodes including the input layer, output layer, and one or more hidden layers. This feedforward network embedded several nonlinear elements (neurons) in each layer and biases assigned to them along with interconnections/links known as weights connecting between layers ( Gene Expression Programming (GEP) ( The terms As can be seen in In this study, Genetic Algorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm (LMA), Bayesian Regularization (BR), Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG), and Randomized Polynomial Time (RP) were coupled with aforementioned prediction techniques for tuning the model parameters in an appropriate manner. To keep the work concise, and as we have described these algorithms in our previous works, the reader is advised to refer to the literature for a wide outline of the theoretical description of these algorithms ( In this study, a cumulative of 1017 data points including 576 gas points and 441 condensate points were gathered to meticulously predict the gas condensate relative permeability over a wide range of rock and fluid systems using smart modeling approaches. The foregoing data sets encompass various input variables including saturation, IFT, velocity, and capillary number. As aforementioned, the relative permeability primarily changes as a function of saturation. Furthermore, it increases by a decrease in IFT and velocity increment (in low/moderate velocities). The capillary number, which encompasses both effects of IFT and velocity, represents the competition between the capillary and viscous forces for governing the flow behavior. The capillary forces govern the fluid flow in the pore-scale at small capillary number values (high IFT/low velocity). The relative permeability enlarges by viscous force enhancement resulting from capillary number increment. Consequently, the relative permeability (for both gas and condensate phases) increases and its curve tends toward the straight line. A sensitivity analysis was implemented to investigate the abovementioned relevancy of different variables including saturation, IFT, velocity, and capillary number to the relative permeability. For this purpose, the ( According to the abovementioned sensitivity analysis, the modeling was carried out in two different manners from the standpoint of input parameters, namely (1) saturation and Nc (2-input modeling), (2) saturation, IFT, and Nc (3-input modeling). A statistical description of the employed data including Maximum, Minimum, Mean, and Standard deviation (SD) values is represented in Accuracy and validity of each model for estimating the relative permeability of gas and condensate phases were investigated using statistical parameters including root mean square error (RMSE) and coefficient of determination (R However, it should be mentioned that the R-squared is an invalid entity for investigating the accuracy of the non-linear problems, and its values were reported habitually in this study. The values of the aforementioned statistical parameters for all of the models developed in the current study are summarized in A visual comparison between two employed approaches, namely 2-input and 3-input is represented in A comparison between the actual experimental relative permeability points which have been employed for training the testing steps versus predictions made using the MLP-LMA model was represented in In addition to the accuracy assessment, the generated models were evaluated from the standpoints of time and memory requirements. Results of the analysis are represented in In statistics, outliers are unlikely extreme points which are distinguishable from other data points. An outlier may cause detrimental effects on the accuracy of the developed models. Therefore, detecting these abnormal points is an essential step in the modeling procedure ( Finally, the performance of the proposed MLP-LMA model for estimation of gas condensate relative permeability curves was apprised by fitting the predicted points on the exact experimental data ( A comparison between the MLP-LMA model and five literature traditional models ( At the end, the GEP and GMDH models were employed to formulate the optimum explicit relationship between the inputs and the corresponding relative permeabilities in the user accessible mathematical expressions. The GEP-based expressions were developed according the two aforementioned modeling approaches, namely 2-input and 3-input, as follows: Considering the saturation and Nc as the inputs (2-input) Considering the saturation, IFT and Nc as the inputs (3-input) The GMDH-derived mathematical expressions for 2-input and 3-input modeling approaches are as follows: 2-input modeling approach 3-input modeling approach In this study, various smart models were developed to predict the relative permeability of the gas condensate reservoirs by employing more than 1000 data points from eight sets of experimental data. To this end, two different modeling approaches including 2-input (saturation and Nc) and 3-input (saturation, IFT, and Nc) modeling were considered. A comparison between the aforementioned models was carried out to achieve the most reliable algorithm; then the optimum model was compared with five traditional literature models using the statistical parameter of RMSE. These assessments were led to the following results: All of the employed smart models in the current study successfully estimate the relative permeability of the gas and condensate phases with high enough accuracy. Both 2-input and 3-input modeling approaches are seen to be reliable for prediction of relative permeability of both gas and condensate phases. For instance, in the gas relative permeability modeling using the MLP-LMA algorithm, the RMSE parameter corresponds to 0.0717 and 0.0350 values for the 2-input and 3-input modeling strategies, respectively. Furthermore, both 2-input and 3-input approaches demonstrate approximately similar performance from the standpoint of time/memory requirements. Accordingly, the 3-input strategy brings about more accuracy for the scope of the current study. The MLP predictor integrated with LMA optimization algorithm (3-inputs) outperforms other smart models with the RMSE values of 0.035 and 0.019 for the gas and condensate phases, respectively. Both MLP-LMA models which have been developed using 2-input and 3-input approaches demonstrate more accuracy with respect to the traditional literature models. For instance, in the case of the gas relative permeability modeling, the RMSE values are 0.035 and 0.0922 for the MLP-LMA (3-input) and the Two sets of user accessible correlations were developed using GEP and GMDH methods. The RMSE values of 0.0719, 0.1224, 0.0349, and 0.084 are attributed to the GEP (gas), GMDH (gas), GEP (condensate), and GMDH (condensate) modeling approaches, respectively. Hence, the GEP model surpasses the GMDH approach from the standpoint of reliability in developing mathematical expressions.