To improve the fine particle collection efficiency, a bipolar transverse plate electrostatic precipitation (ESP) technology was developed. In this ESP, there are not only the negative wire electrodes and ground plate electrodes, but also the ground wire electrodes and the negative plate electrodes. It has aroused a special interest about the corona discharging effect of the ground wire electrodes. Therefore, the corona currents of the negative wire-ground plate, the ground wire-negative plate, as well as the bipolar wire-plate electrodes have been investigated experimentally. In the experiments, the RS barbed wire and the C-plate are used as the electrodes for the purpose of the industrial application. The experimental results have shown that, when the wire-plate spacing is 200 mm, the corona current of the wire in the smooth side of the ground C-plate is 15% higher than that of curved side, however the corona current of the ground wire is about 30% less than that of the negative wires regardless of the wire is located at different sides of the industrial plate electrode. Moreover, the corona current of bipolar wire-plate electrodes is 30% less than that of the traditional wire-plate electrodes, and an important phenomenon had been discovered from this experimental work that, for the bipolar wire-plate electrodes, whenever the front side of the C-plate faces to the gas flow or not, the VI characteristics curve keeps almost no change at given wire-plate spacing. Last, an experimental setup was established for comparison of collection efficiency. When the negative polarity is applied to the bipolar transverse plate ESP, the collection efficiency increases sharply from 69.1% to 99.1%. Since both electrical forces and inertial forces play important roles in the bipolar transverse plate ESP, the penetration of the bipolar transverse plate ESP is 0.9%, which is substantially less than the penetration of 4.2% of the conventional ESP. The advantage of bipolar transverse plate ESP unit has been proved by successful operation in sintering flue control in China.Rigorous new regulations in dust emission by industrial processes have caused new demands for dust control devices [ A transverse plate ESP with bipolar discharge electrodes is proposed in our previous work [ In the conventional wire-plate ESP, the plates are parallel to the gas flow direction. The ions are generated only by the wires which are connected to the high voltage supply for particulate charging. However, in the bipolar transverse plate ESP, the plates are perpendicular to the gas flow direction, as shown in The bipolar transverse plate ESP not only has the negative wires and the ground plates, but also has the ground wires and the negative plates. The negative wires are located between the ground plates. The ground wires are located between the negative plates. In the field between the negative wires and the ground plates, the particles are negatively charged and attracted to the ground plates by electric force. At same time, in the field between the negative plates and the ground wires, the particles are positively charged and driven to the negative plates by electric force as well [ An understanding about how bipolar transverse wire-plate electrodes influences the collection efficiency is critical during design and operation procedure of bipolar transverse ESP. Thus, the corona discharging and particle collection of bipolar transverse wire-plate ESP were searched. The voltage-current characteristics of a corona discharge in non-uniform field usually is described by Townsend [ It is very obvious from The collection efficiency of ESP, Concerning the effect of the voltage and the current on the collection efficiency, the following relationship is often found in many industrial ESP [ The collection efficiency of inertial particle classifiers, If both electrical forces and inertial forces are considered in series to remove particulates, the total efficiency of bipolar transverse plate ESP, In laboratory or factory, the overall collection efficiency of any gas cleaning device, regardless of its type, η can be determined from the formula: If the collection efficiency is close to unity, the performance can be better characterized via the outlet dust loading by penetration On account of the RS barbed wire (also called pipe and quadruple-spike electrode) and C-plate are commonly used in industrial electrostatic precipitation in China, in order to get convincing industrial results, RS barbed wire and C-plate electrodes were selected as the experimental wire-plate electrodes in this research, shown in It is noticed that two sides of C-plate are not symmetrical. If a wire electrode is located at different side of the plate, the V A BGG-120kV/2.5 mA negative voltage generator was used for voltage supply. The output of the voltage and the current can be read directly from the meters on the BGG voltage generator. When the negative voltage is high enough, in On the contrary, when the plate is connected to the output of the negative high voltage supply and the wire is grounded, as shown in The dimensions of the experimental apparatuses of the bipolar transverse plate ESP and the conventional wire-plate ESP for comparison is shown in In The test dust was talcum powder with the mass median diameter of 11.6 μm, as shown in The experiments were carried out in the laboratory condition. The temperature was about 20 °C. The relative humidity was 40%–50%. It is important to know the corona current difference between the negative wire-ground plate electrodes and the ground wire-negative plate electrodes because both the negative wire-ground plate electrodes and the ground wire-negative plate electrodes are existed in the bipolar transverse plate ESP, such as The experimental comparison results of the V It is indicated that the corona current of the ground wire is about 30% less than that of the negative wire regardless of the wire is located at different sides of the industrial plate electrode. The inception voltage value of negative wire-ground plate electrodes is 16 V, which is lower than ground wire-negative plate electrodes of 22 V. It is well known that, for the same electric potential difference between the corona electrode and grounding electrode, the positive corona has lower corona current than the negative one. It is also found that the shape of C-plate has obviously effect to corona current. For both negative wire-ground plate electrodes and ground wire-negative plate electrodes, the corona current of wire in the front of plate is 15% less than that of wire in the back of plate. This result means that the curved edge can reduce the corona current of wire-plate electrodes. In the bipolar transverse plate ESP, there are the negative wire-ground plate electrodes and the ground wire-negative plate electrodes. Therefore, for the application convenience, two cases should be considered. The front side of the plate faces to the gas flow, shown in The back side of the plate faces to the gas flow, shown in  The comparisons of the V To confirm this phenomenon, the V It is proved from above comparison results that there is no much difference of the V Actually, from In the traditional wire-plate electrodes, the negative wire is located at the middle of two parallel ground plate electrodes, just like The comparisons of the V Case A (or Case B) includes one positive corona wire-plate electrode and another negative corona wire-plate electrode. While in Case C, the negative ions produced by negative wire drift toward both sides ground plates. It has been verified that the negative corona current was better than the positive corona current [ An experimental setup, shown as When the high voltage is applied to the bipolar transverse plate ESP, the collection efficiency increases sharply from 69.1% to 99.1%. And the penetration of the bipolar transverse plate ESP is substantially less than that of the conventional ESP. According to In the bipolar transverse plate ESP, the collection efficiency by electrical forces is 67.1%, which is approximately equal to that by inertial forces of 69.1%. And according to One possible reason is that the particles in the bipolar transverse plate ESP are charged to opposite polarities, which causes the particles to collide and coagulate [ Since all of the developmental goals of bipolar transverse plate ESP were met in laboratory, the approach was installed at Wuhan Iron and Steel Group in China to control the particulate pollutant generated from the head of sinters, with 1100000-m In the last 30 months, the bipolar innovation ESP has met the industrial objectives of operation successfully. The concentrations of the conventional ESP and the bipolar innovation ESP, acquired from online environmental monitoring system, are given in It is indicated that, although the mean flow velocity is 20% higher, the penetration of the bipolar innovation ESP is 30% less than that of the ordinary ESP. According to above experimental results of the corona discharging characteristics of bipolar transverse plate ESP, the following conclusions are drawn: The corona current of the ground wire is less than that of the negative wire according to the experimental results. The corona discharging characteristic is also affected by the location of wire at the different sides of the industrial C-plate electrode. In the bipolar transverse plate ESP, the corona current also decreases significantly when the spacing between wire-plate electrodes increases. There is almost no difference of the V The corona current of the bipolar transverse plate wire-plate electrodes is less than that of the conventional wire-plate electrodes, and its inception voltage value is determined by ground wire-negative plate electrodes. Both electrical forces and inertial forces play important roles in the bipolar transverse plate ESP. Therefore, both in laboratory and industrial application, the penetration of the bipolar transverse plate ESP is substantially less than that of the conventional ESP. Financial support from 863 plan of