An increasing percentage of nickel is being extracted from the laterite ores for which there exists considerable potential for new process development. In the current research, a thermodynamic analysis of the Fe–Ni–Co–Mg–Si–O–H–S–C–Cl system has been performed in order to establish the possible sulphidation conditions for the upgrading of a limonitic laterite ore. The study was performed using the equilibrium module of HSC Chemistry® 6.1, and the data available in the literature were utilised to determine the activity coefficients of the various species employed in the calculations. The effects of variables such as temperature, amount of sulphur and carbon and chlorine additions on both the nickel grade and recovery in the monosulphide solid solution (mss) were determined. Alternative sulphidizing agents were also considered. Nickel recoveries of about 85% could be achieved at a grade of 10% nickel in the mss. Limiting factors in the sulphidation process were the formation of iron sulphide (FeS) and the relatively high stability of nickel oxide in the nickel ferrite (NiFe2O4), in comparison to the other phases, which resulted in excessive sulphur requirements of over 100kg of S/tonne of ore. Methods to overcome these restrictions were discussed and the thermodynamic results were compared to the published experimental values.The world demand for nickel metal continues to increase and nickel production has grown at a rate of about 4% per year since 1950 ( The nickel grade of a conventional sulphide ore is typically in the range of 1–2% and can easily be beneficiated by flotation processes to yield a concentrate containing between 6% and 15% nickel. Subsequently, this concentrate can be treated by conventional pyrometallurgical processes, consisting of roasting, smelting and refining to produce relatively pure nickel. Potential by-products such as cobalt, copper and the platinum group metals can also be recovered. To some extent, the sulphur in the ore can be utilised as a fuel in the roasting process and the sulphur dioxide, which is captured, can be converted into sulphuric acid as a saleable byproduct. On the other hand, the nickel grade of the laterite ores, typically in the range of 0.75–1.5%, with values as high as 2% for some saprolitic ores, is generally lower than the sulphide ores. Cobalt, which may be present at even lower concentrations, can also be recovered. The laterite deposits consist of a number of layers with the limonitic and the saprolitic layers usually utilised for metal extraction. The limonitic ores represent about 70% of the known laterite resources. Goethite (FeO⋅OH) is the major component of the limonitic ores, and the nickel is mainly incorporated into the goethite ( The saprolitic ores are magnesium rich and the majority of the goethite is replaced by serpentine (Mg There are a number of deficiencies of the above mentioned processes and therefore alternative routes for the treatment of the laterite ores need to be developed. As mentioned previously, the pyrometallurgical processes can only treat the saprolitic ores but not the limonitic ores. The HPAL processes for the limonitic ores have achieved some technical successes but scale-up has proven difficult ( In developing a sulphidation process it is very important to understand the thermodynamic factors, which can affect the stability and hence the production of the various species, in particular the formation of a Fe–Ni–Co–S phase. In the present research, firstly the major equilibrium reactions involved in the sulphidation process are developed. Secondly, a thermodynamic analysis of the sulphidation of a typical limonitic laterite ore was performed utilising HSC Chemistry® 6.1. To facilitate the calculations, the activity coefficients of the various species were fitted to equations found in the literature. Thirdly, the equilibrium compositions of the products formed in the Fe–Ni–Co–Mg–Si–O–H system were determined as a function of a number of operating variables including: temperature, sulphur, carbon and chlorine additions. Based on these studies, the conditions required for optimising the nickel grades and recoveries have been determined. Considering the iron and nickel in the ore to be present as nickel oxide and hematite, respectively, the sulphidation reactions are as follows:  Consequently, the reaction for the selective sulphidation of nickel oxide from the nickel ferrite would be as follows: The standard free energy change values for these two equations are also shown in The major objective of the proposed sulphidation process is to produce Fe–Ni–Co–S particulates, which could be recovered by a flotation process. With regards to the Fe–Ni–S system, there are a large number of potential solid solutions that can form below about 1200 The activity of the nickel oxide dissolved in the nickel ferrite spinel (NiFe The Equilibrium module of HSC Chemistry® 6.1 was utilised to calculate the multi-component equilibrium composition using the Gibbs free energy minimisation method ( The monosulphide solid solution (mss) ((Fe,Ni,Co)S) was assumed to consist of FeS, NiS and CoS in varying proportions. The monosulphide has been modelled as a quasi-regular solution by There is no information available for cobalt, which is present in the ore in very small amounts, so it is assumed to behave in a manner similar to that of nickel: The sulphate phase (FeSO The oxide phase (FeO–NiO) was considered to be a quasi-subregular solution with the following activity coefficients: For the spinel phase, the model proposed by Using these activity equations and including the effect of temperature by assuming: The composition of the nickeliferous limonitic laterite ore (on a dry basis) used in the calculations was (in mass%): 1.57%NiO, 0.14%CoO, 95.37%FeO⋅OH, 0.26%MgO and 2.66%SiO   The amount of sulphur added should play an important role in determining both the amount and the composition of the mss.  The composition of the mss as a function of the sulphur addition is shown in   One possible alternative for the sulphidation process, would be to create a more reducing atmosphere which should facilitate the sulphidation of the nickel and cobalt in the ferrites. The reactions describing the selective sulphidation of the ore in the presence of carbon are given below: The standard free energy change for this reaction is also given in The addition of carbon monoxide (CO  The effect of sulphur additions on the nickel grade and recovery both with and without carbon is shown in Another possible reagent to be added in the sulphidation process is chlorine, and the equation describing the selective chlorination of iron in the presence of sulphur is as follows: Again the standard free energy change as a function of temperature is given in In the equilibrium HSC Chemistry® 6.1 calculations, the following species were added to the gas phase: Cl  Alternative sulphidizing agents can be considered as follows: sulphur dioxide (SO The standard free energy change values for these reactions are given in    A thermodynamic analysis shows that the selective sulphidation of nickel oxide from a nickeliferous limontic laterite ore is feasible, as given by the following reaction: Consequently, the grade and the recovery of nickel in the mss will mainly be determined by both the activity of NiFe Using activity coefficient information available in the literature, a thermodynamic model has been developed using HSC Chemistry® 6.1 and the effects of variables on the grade and the recovery of nickel and cobalt in the mss were determined. With regards to temperature, the effect is relatively minor with a small decrease in the amount of FeS at higher temperatures and therefore a slight increase in the amounts of NiS and CoS in the mss. By limiting the amount of the sulphur addition, high NiS grades can be achieved but recoveries are restricted because of the low activities of NiFe The authors thank the