The standard JK drop weight test breaks single particles at five size fractions each at different energy levels by dropping a given weight from a certain height. The progenies of all particles at a given energy level are sieved and the degree of breakage of all those particles at that energy level is presented as t10% (percent passing 1/10th of original size). This method assumes that all of the particles in a single size fraction have the same mass and experience a similar degree of breakage and calculates the average breakage characteristics of an ore domain from impact loading. Hence, this standard approach does not capture the breakage variability that exists among ore particles. To investigate the breakage variability of ore, the drop weight testing method has been extended where the energy applied and the degree of breakage for each particle within the sample are measured separately. Therefore, the degree of breakage for the ore domain is expressed as an envelope of t10% vs energy curves. This approach provides some insight into the intrinsic variability of the response to impact loading within an ore domain. Several rock types were tested by the extended DWT testing approach and the implications of ore breakage variability for a SAG mill treating these materials are simulated for a standard SAB circuit using the JKMRC grinding models.Heterogeneity is a common feature of rocks, but the degree of heterogeneity depends on many factors, such as alteration, oxidation, stress history etc. as well as variations in grain size and concentrations of mineral grains. Heterogeneity is a key factor in defining rock breakage characteristics and introduces variability into the rock mass, which can pose challenge in mining operations from blasting to grinding. This heterogeneous feature of rock translates into breakage variability when particulates of a given rock type are broken at the same conditions. This implies that variable breakage behaviour among these particles might be representative of the variability within an ore type. Size reduction of rocks and ores is a fundamental process in most mining and mineral processing operations and the energy required to break ore particles to a certain size fraction depends on the ore characteristics, type of size reduction process (or circuit), size and installed power of equipment ( Despite the fact that breakage characteristics of ores vary, most of the current ore testing methods do not capture this variability and plant designs and process performance predictions are made using only average values. Hence, the inherent variability that exists within an ore domain is not characterised and translated into likely variation in process performance. This variation can cause unstable performance of grinding circuits ( This paper, proposes an approach to extend the standard JKMRC drop weight testing method to quantify the breakage variability of an ore domain for impact breakage. In the course of experimental development, we will address considerations necessary during the new test work. The extended DWT breakage testing approach was conducted over a broader range of input energies to determine breakage percentile curves for the tested samples. One aim of this work is to investigate how breakage variability may affect SAG mill performance through running several simulations using the JKSimMet software. This approach has the potential to characterise comminution characteristics of complex orebodies and transition ore domains that by nature impose large uncertainty on process design and performance. To investigate the patterns of energy utilisation in single particle impact breakage studies, The original ore impact breakage test was invented by In the standard testing approach, 15 sets of particles selected at random from five size fractions are broken at three energy levels. The products of each set are collected and sized. Therefore, breaking 15 sets of particles at estimated energy levels generate 15 average coordinates, expressible as t The degree of fragmentation or the breakage function of an ore is described by ‘t The relationship between the specific comminution (     The A × b value known as impact parameter is the slope of the curve at zero input energy and can be used to characterise the amenability of the material to fragmentation by double sided impact ( The JKDWT approach is used by industry as one of the standard approaches to design, operate and optimise SAG mill circuits. The JK breakage model does not account for the particle size effect on the breakage intensity ‘t The accuracy and precision of the A × b value of the JKDWT are of prime importance as the impact parameter is a key input in selection and design of AG/SAG mills. Furthermore, plant optimisation exercises also rely on the accuracy of A × b value to improve the performance of an existing grinding circuit ( The standard JK drop weight test breaks single particles at five size fractions each at different levels of input energies by dropping a given weight from a certain height. The progenies of all particles at a given energy level are sieved and the breakage intensity of all those particles at that energy level is presented as t The breakage characteristic of an ore in the standard approach is based on 15 averaged coordinates on the plot, namely (t Variations in drop height and weight, which are considered minimal. Residual height (i.e. the height that the drop weight has gone down for each particle after breakage). In the standard approach, residual height is measured for only ten particles for each size fraction and the mean residual height from these ten particles is used to estimate actual input energy for each size fraction. Variation in particle mass: Particles within a certain size fraction do not have the same mass, because there is a variation in size (and volume) and density between the particles. The variation due to density is an intrinsic property that depends on their mineralogical composition. The standard approach uses the average mass for each size fraction and therefore calculates the average specific energy based on the drop weight and height. Determination of t The other limitations include the DWT device itself, mechanical breakage limitation (in particular at higher levels of input energies) and particle shape irregularity. The above limitations of standard JKDWT test masks the breakage variability of ore, hence the extended DWT testing approach has been developed. The extended single particle impact breakage testing approach is based on measuring the breakage behaviour of each particle within each size range and energy input ( In the extended DWT, the following measurements are made for each particle: The mass of each particle within a size range is measured. Particles within each size range were broken individually in a range of input energies. The residual height after breakage is measured for each particle, thus the specific energy for each particle is calculated by using Eq. The progenies for each particle are sieved on a set of sieves whose apertures were chosen equivalent to t It has to be noted that the proposed approach calculates the specific comminution energy differently than the standard JKDWT approach. In the standard JKDWT approach, In the extended DWT approach, the specific comminution energy for each particle Substituting Eq. By comparing Eqs. As the particles’ masses are not the same, the values of Overall, in the standard JKDWT, the The extended DWT testing approach was conducted on four rock types. For each rock type, 90 particles (30 particles per energy level) were broken at three levels of energy such as 0.1, 0.25 and 0.5 kWh/t. The test was repeated again with another set of samples from the same rocks to test the repeatability of the approach. The results shown in Analysis of variance (ANOVA) between the two tests showed that at 95% confidence level, there is no difference between the two for all the rock types; hence, it is assumed that the new testing approach is repeatable. The extended DWT was conducted on four rock types for a wider range of input energies to determine the breakage percentile curves. The means for t The JKMRC model (Eq.  The product size distributions reflect the expected behaviour regarding limitations inherent in mechanical breakage of rock at high levels of input energies that restricts achieving very high reduction ratios in a single impact ( The extended DWT approach measures variance in resistance to breakage within each size fraction of an ore sample. If – as this initial suite of ore tests suggests – that the degree of variance itself varies substantially between ore types, these results may provide some insight into the intrinsic variability in terms of A × b value of an ore type. This information could be used to estimate implications of ore breakage variability for a SAG mill performance throughout simulations. As explained (refer to The JKMRC breakage model fitted to the data with As a demonstration of the potential of this approach, the breakage curves for the four rock types from the extended DWT tests were used to understand the maximum potential impact of breakage variability on the SAG mill performance. In practice, the expected variations for mixed distributions should be much smaller. The simulations were conducted using the JKMRC SAG mill model ( As the SAG model in JKSimMet does not take account of the variation in breakage rates at different mill loads, the SAG mill load for different The amount of variation in the SAG throughputs in tonnage compared to the base case is presented in These simulations estimate the potential impact on SAG mill throughput The intrinsic heterogeneity within an ore domain affects the performance of SAG mill. Currently, this risk is not very well understood and the extended DWT provides some insight into the intrinsic ore variability and its impact on SAG mill performance. The extended DWT approach described the breakage variability as an envelope of A × b values for four different rock types. Based on the simulation results, the potential impact of ore competence variability upon the SAG throughput is notable. Results show that for the 6.25% and 93.5% fitted curves, the predicted SAG throughput may decrease by 32.5% and 22.5% for the Rock Types 3 and 4, respectively. On the other side, the soft end of these rock types can achieve an increase in throughput up to almost 71.5% and 40%, respectively. The same discussion is valid for a narrower envelope for each rock type with 25% and 75% fitted curves. As demonstrated through simulations, the ore intrinsic variability not only imposes penalties (the most competent particles below the average curve) but also offers opportunities (the weakest particles above the average curve). It has to be noted that the very competent-end generally is a major driver in plant design and its performance and has a pronounced impact on the project viability. Therefore, an increased knowledge of ore breakage variability can help in handling the associated risks within the comminution circuits. In the JK standard method, the The main conclusions made are summarized as follows: The extended DWT testing approach provides a better quantitative insight into the intrinsic variability of an ore type, which can be applied to the particle size fractions used in the standard JK drop weight test. As a database of these variances is accumulated, it may be that the magnitude of such variances can be used to enhance the reliability of prediction of comminution equipment performance. Based on simulation results, the additional information about the breakage variability might be used to assess its impact on the grinding performance, but this work is still in early stage. A t Work in progress: The extended DWT allows the progeny of the particles in each percentile group to be tested further. This work is in progress and will be reported in due course. Applying the extended DWT approach for five size fractions, each being broken at three levels of input energies. The authors would like to express thanks to The University of Queensland and JKTech Pty Ltd. for sponsoring this research. The authors extend their sincere appreciation to Prof. Tim Napier-Munn and Prof. Malcolm Powell for their valuable advices on this research.