In view of the fact ceramic composites have an established niche in tribological applications, research efforts were invested in assessing and understanding the tribological properties of the recently developed ZrO2–30vol.%ZrB2 composites against bearing steel. As part of the tribological investigation, fretting wear tests under varying load (2–10N) were conducted on ZrO2 composites, presintered at 1400°C in argon for 1h followed by HIPing at 1400°C under 110MPa argon pressure for 1h. Under the investigated fretting conditions, sinter-HIPed ZrO2 composites/steel couple exhibits higher COF of 0.5–0.8. At higher load of 10N, lowest COF of 0.5 is commonly measured with all the tribocouples. The abrasion is commonly observed as the dominant wear mechanism in the investigated composites. However, the occurrence of transfer layer formation with occasional spalling is also noted. An important result of our research is that the wear rate decreases with increasing toughness and the sinter-HIPed ZrO2–ZrB2 composites exhibit lower wear rate (∼10−7–10−8
                     mm3/Nm) against steel.There has always been a major impetus to develop tougher and harder ceramics for the tribological applications and extensive research efforts had been put forward to evaluate and understand the tribological properties The friction and wear properties of composites depend on material parameters (matrix, reinforcement chemistry and volume, hardness, toughness), counterbody material, operating parameters (sliding speed, load, humidity etc.) and hence are system dependent. The effect of particulate additions on the tribological performance of composites is also reported The influence of grain size on wear of Y-TZP monoliths was investigated by He and co-workers Although the detailed tribological study was conducted largely on ZrO In the tribology experiments, ZrO The fretting experiments were performed using a computer-controlled fretting machine (model TR281-M, DUCOM, Bangalore, India), which produces a linear relative oscillating motion with ball-on-flat configuration. By a stepper motor, the flat sample is made to oscillate with a linear displacement of constant stroke and frequency. An inductive displacement transducer monitors the displacement of the flat sample and a piezoelectric transducer is used to measure the friction force. Variation in tangential force is recorded and the corresponding coefficient of friction is calculated on-line with the help of a computer-based data acquisition system. The use of this fretting machine has been made in our recent research, which are reported elsewhere Prior to the fretting tests, both the flat and ball were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone. The fretting experiments were performed on different grades of Sinter-HIPed ZrO The wear volumes of the developed HIPed composites are computed by measuring wear scar diameter in the transverse direction on the worn samples and following the Klaffke’s equation [1]: From the estimated wear volume, the specific wear rates [Wear volume/(load The friction and wear properties of the Sinter-HIPed ZrO The severity of material removal from the fretting interface is assessed by measuring wear scar diameter (transverse direction) and further computing specific wear rate. The wear scar diameter, measured in the transverse direction on the worn composite samples, are presented in The specific wear rates, calculated based on the wear volume, load and total fretted distance, are plotted in In order to understand the details of the wear process, worn surfaces of individual samples after testing at varying conditions were coated with a conductive gold coating and observed using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). As a representative image to illustrate how the worn scar on a fretted composite would appear, the overall topography of the worn scar after fretting at 10 The influence of variation in load on the wear of different composite grades is illustrated in the series of SEM images given in The wear mechanisms, as revealed by critical analysis of the morphologies of the worn surfaces and wear data, are of major importance as far as the tribological applications of the developed composites are concerned. SEM images of the fretting pits of the worn surfaces (see As far as the fretting wear of the investigated ZrO From the SEM observations of the worn surface topography, it is noted that significant cracking of the ZrO Considering the fact that hardness varies in the range of 15–20  Tribology studies reveal that the Sinter-HIPed ZrO All the investigated composites exhibits low wear rate (∼10 The abrasive wear is identified as the dominant wear mechanism. Also, some localized spalling is often observed. The transfer layer formation and presence of finer debris entrapment on the abrasive grooves were noted for some of the investigated tribocouples. A study of the phenomenological wear model reveals that high resistance to brittle fracture and severe wear of sinter-HIPed ZrO The authors would like to express sincere gratitude to Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India for the financial support. The authors also thank Dr. Lokesh Pathak and Dr. G.C. Ray, Scientists at NML, Jamshedpur for their help in Sinter-HIP experiments.