Particle size reduction is a crucial factor in transportation logistics as well as cellulosic conversion. The effect of particle size on enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated Miscanthus x giganteus was determined. Miscanthus was ground using a hammer mill equipped with screens having 0.08, 2.0 or 6.0mm sieve openings. Particle size distribution and geometric mean diameters were determined for all samples. Ground samples were subjected to hot water, dilute acid or dilute ammonium hydroxide pretreatment. Enzyme hydrolysis was conducted on washed pretreated solids; sugar generation was used as a measure for pretreatment efficiency. Glucose and xylose concentrations were monitored using HPLC. Glucose and xylose profiles were generated and hydrolysis rates estimated. Glucose, xylose and total conversion yields were determined by comparing final sugar concentrations obtained to amounts present in pretreated biomass. Geometric mean diameters were the smallest from 0.08mm sieve screen (56μm) followed by 2.0mm (301μm) and 6.0mm (695μm) screens. An increasing trend in percent total conversion was observed with decreasing mean particle size. Across all pretreatments, biomass ground using 0.08mm screens resulted in highest total conversion. Enzyme hydrolysis of unpretreated biomass samples also resulted in increased total conversions as particle size decreased, although mean conversions (10–20%) were much lower than for pretreated biomass samples (53–94%), indicating the need for chemical pretreatments in biomass conversion.Utilization of ethanol, a renewable biofuel, can reduce dependence on foreign oil, increase economic growth and alleviate climate change by decreasing greenhouse gas emissions. In 2011, U.S. produced 13.9 billion gal ethanol from 5 billion bushels of corn ( Lignocellulosic feedstocks primarily consist of three major components: cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin ( Due to extensive bonding and crosslinking of lignin and hemicellulose with cellulose, there is limited accessibility of enzymes to degrade polysaccharides and release fermentable monosaccharides. The inherent chemistry of the biomass such as crystallinity index, lignin and hemicellulose content also effect enzymatic hydrolysis ( Irrespective of methodology, the first step in biomass conversion is size reduction. Particle size may have an effect on pretreatment as well as mass and heat transfer (  From an economic standpoint, chemical pretreatments are necessary for efficient enzyme hydrolysis ( The objective of this study was to determine the effect of particle size on enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated   Enzymes used for hydrolysis were Accellerase 1500, Accellerase BG, Accellerase XY and Accellerase XC obtained from Genencor International (Palo Alto, CA). Accellerase 1500 enzyme complex has the ability to hydrolyze lignocellulosic carbohydrates into fermentable monosaccharides. Accellerase 1500 contains exoglucanase, endoglucanase, hemicellulase and beta-glucosidase activities produced from a genetically modified strain of Samples were pretreated in steel pipe reactors using a fluidized sand bath similar to methods described by  Samples ground using the 6 and 2 Each pretreatment was conducted at fixed conditions; parameters were selected from previously reported studies. Pretreatments were conducted at 10% solids (d.b.) with a loading of 1 Pretreatment parameters for hot water pretreatment were 200 Dilute acid pretreatments were performed at 160 Conditions for dilute ammonium hydroxide pretreatments were 160 After addition of reaction contents, tubes were capped and placed in the fluidized sand bath (IFB-51 Industrial Fluidized Bath, Techne Inc., Burlington, NJ) along with the tube reactor fitted with thermocouple. The sand bath was set 20 Following pretreatment with hot water, dilute acid or dilute ammonium hydroxide, enzyme hydrolysis was conducted similar to procedure discussed in NREL LAP-009 ( Hydrolysis was performed on all reaction, substrate blank and enzyme blank flasks in a water bath (Gyromax 939XL, Amerex Instruments, Inc., Lafayette, CA) set at 50 Samples were filtered through a 0.2 Particle size analyses were conducted in triplicates. Particle size distributions were generated and geometric mean diameters compared among samples. Each pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis was carried out in triplicates. Glucose and xylose profiles were generated for all samples. Hydrolysis rates were calculated from linear portions (0–24 Experimental setup was randomized, with analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher's least significant difference test (SAS) used to compare geometric mean diameters, final sugar concentrations, hydrolysis rates and conversions. Level of statistical significance was set at 5% ( Particle size distributions were determined and histograms plotted for all samples ( Particle size reduction had an effect on glucose concentration, glucose release rate, glucose yield and total conversion ( Most investigators reported no effect of particle size reduction on sugar or ethanol yields of hot water pretreated biomass ( An increase in glucose yield and total conversion was observed when biomass size was reduced prior to dilute acid pretreatment ( A number of studies have been conducted to determine the effect of particle size on dilute acid pretreatments using various size ranges and biomass types ( Size reduction had an effect on enzyme hydrolysis of dilute ammonium hydroxide pretreated biomass samples but no differences were observed between the two larger sizes (  Samples ground using different sieve screens were evaluated for sugar release from enzyme hydrolysis without any chemical pretreatment, to evaluate the effect of size reduction alone. Glucose and xylose concentrations were highest from 0.08 Across all pretreatments, an increase in total conversion (16–32%) was observed when particle size was decreased from 6.0 Increased percent conversion could be attributed to increased surface area and improved mass and heat transfer. Unpretreated samples ground using 0.08