Background
                  Optimal surgical management of displaced femoral neck fractures (dFNFs) in subjects 45-65 years old is unclear. We evaluated days out of work (dOOW), medical and indemnity costs, and secondary outcomes at 2 years between internal fixation (IF), hemiarthroplasty (HA), and total hip arthroplasty (THA) among workers’ compensation (WC) subjects with isolated dFNFs aged 45-65.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively identified 105 Ohio Bureau of WC subjects with isolated subcapital dFNFs aged 45-65 with 2 years of follow-up. In total, 37 (35.2%) underwent IF, 23 (21.9%) THA, and 45 (42.9%) HA from 1993 to 2017. Linear regression was used to determine if surgery type was predictive of dOOW postoperatively and to evaluate inflation-adjusted net medical and indemnity costs at 2 years.
               
                  Results
                  IF subjects were younger (52.9) than THA (58.5, P < .001) and HA (58.4, P < .001) subjects. Mean dOOW for THA subjects at 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years was 90.8, 114.6, and 136.6. This was significantly lower than IF (136.3, 182.0, 236.6) and HA (114.6, 153.3, 247.6) subjects at all time points. Medical costs were similar. Mean indemnity costs were 3.0 and 2.4 times higher among IF (P < .001) and HA (P = .007) groups compared to THA, respectively. Rates of postoperative permanent disability awards were 13.0%, 43.2%, and 35.6% for the THA, IF, and HA groups (P = .050). IF and HA subjects had a 24.3% and 11.1% revision rate. Overall, 77.8% and 100% of the IF and HA revisions were conversions to THA.
               
                  Conclusion
                  WC subjects aged 45-65 with dFNFs treated with THA had fewer dOOW, lower indemnity costs, and less disability at 2 years. Longer follow-up will help determine the durability and long-term outcomes of these surgeries.Optimal surgical management of displaced intracapsular femoral neck fractures (FNFs) in middle-aged patients remains unclear. Current treatment options include closed vs open reduction and internal fixation (IF), total hip arthroplasty (THA), and hemiarthroplasty (HA). A number of studies support arthroplasty over IF in older patients with displaced FNFs, reporting lower reoperation and complication rates as well as less pain and improved function, even out to long-term follow-up [ Furthermore, when IF fails and a conversion THA is performed, the risk of complications such as periprosthetic infection and instability is higher. Patients may have inferior clinical outcomes when compared to patients who underwent THA as their index procedure for their displaced FNF [ Unfortunately, there is a relative paucity of studies specifically targeting middle-aged patients. A recent large retrospective study out of the Norwegian Hip Fracture Registry demonstrated a higher reoperation rate after IF and better patient-reported outcomes after both THA and HA with medium term follow-up in patients aged 55-70 with displaced FNFs [ Furthermore, the workers’ compensation (WC) population is a clinically distinct subset of patients, as WC status has been cited numerous times as a risk factor for worse outcomes following orthopedic surgery across multiple subspecialties [ We utilized the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation’s internal database to identify 689 subjects who sustained hip fractures between 1993 and 2017 using International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision codes. We then excluded a total of 584 subjects who had any additional injuries, a hip fracture other than a subcapital or transcervical FNF, a non-displaced FNF, age less than 45 or greater than 65, fewer than 2 years of follow-up, or incomplete data in the database. A combination of International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Current Procedural Terminology codes, and chart review consisting of radiologist reads of injury radiographs and surgeon operative reports were used to finalize our study population of 105 subjects. Within this population, 23 were treated with THA, 37 with IF, and 45 with HA ( The primary outcome we measured was dOOW at 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years after surgery. These were calculated as the number of days between the last day worked and an RTW date within each follow-up period postoperatively. Up to 38% of workers who have an initial RTW will have a future absence from work in the short term following musculoskeletal injuries [ The highest percent permanent partial disability award, if present, was collected as were the rates at which subjects had any degree of permanent disability awarded to them within 2 years after surgery. We evaluated how many WC subjects within each treatment group obtained some form of legal representation postoperatively and how this association affected outcomes. Prior studies in the WC population have associated legal representation following injury with worse clinical outcomes [ For our analysis, we used chi-squared tests when comparing categorical variables. For continuous variables, we used 2-sample At the time of their index surgery, mean age in the THA group was 58.5 (standard deviation [SD] 1.3), 58.4 (SD 0.7) in the HA group, and 52.9 (SD 0.8) in the IF group. Compared to THA and HA groups, the IF group was significantly younger (   See  See Currently, a relative lack of literature exists evaluating optimal surgical treatment for displaced FNFs in middle-age patients [ The THA group demonstrated significantly fewer dOOW at 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years, lower rates of disability, similar medical costs, lower indemnity costs, and overall fewer postoperative complications. Within the first 6 months postoperatively, the HA group was OOW fewer days compared to the IF group, which was nearing statistical significance. At 1 and 2 years, the HA and IF groups had similar dOOW. In total, 11.1% of the HA group was converted to a THA within 2 years postoperatively due to a painful HA. Although not as high as the IF group, the HA group also had a higher rate of permanent partial disability compared to the THA group. Indemnity payments were also higher in the HA group compared to the THA group. Data were collected on subjects who underwent surgery between 1993 and 2017. During this time period, THA was more frequently performed in later years. Furthermore, subjects who sought out legal representation postoperatively were associated with worse outcomes. This has already been reported before in the literature as a predictive factor for inferior clinical outcomes [ One limitation of this study is that it is a cohort of WC patients, who have proven themselves to be clinically distinct from the general population with reports of overall worse outcomes across multiple orthopedic subspecialties [ The study is also limited by its retrospective and non-randomized design with a large burden of selection bias. In forming our study population, we excluded a number of potentially confounding factors. However, other variables not adjusted for in the population and/or our analyses could be affecting the reported results. Due to the limitations of the data, it is not clear how the patients were assigned to the IF, HA, or THA groups. Although the fractures were displaced, we did not have quantitative data on the degree of displacement or fracture comminution that may have influenced the surgical decision making, nor did we have data on associated co-morbidities. These factors may have had a confounding effect on the outcomes. Regarding our medical cost data, it includes fees for all medical services deemed appropriate by the BWC. We did not have data on private insurance. Theoretically, a subject may have been denied WC coverage for a medical service and they may have obtained it through private insurance. This is less likely, especially in light of lost work and potential lost wages, since seeking a private payer to cover a denied service could result in a higher incurred cost by the patient. Furthermore, a large number of subjects were excluded from the study, leaving a relatively small study population. This may have resulted in type II error due to being under-powered. This is potentially present in our data on the impact of labor-intensive occupations. For example, dOOW was increased within the IF and HA groups among those who had labor-intensive jobs. Indemnity costs were elevated among laborers in each group. However, none of these were statistically significant. Additionally, the revision rate of the IF group was 24.3% compared to 11.1% of the HA and 4.3% of the THA groups, which was not statistically significant. Additionally, the completeness and accuracy of our data may have been limited by that of the Ohio BWC’s administrative database. However, this database has been used for a number of previously published studies [ In a population of gainfully employed WC subjects with isolated, displaced FNFs between the ages of 45 and 65, we demonstrated that undergoing THA was associated with significantly less time OOW at 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years postoperatively compared to IF and HA. THA frequency increased over time within the study population. Additionally, THA subjects had lower rates of postoperative disability, major reoperations, complications, and indemnity payments when compared to subjects who underwent IF or HA. Subjects who underwent IF had a 24.3% rate of revision surgery within the first 2 years following index surgery. Further prospective studies with long-term follow-up are yet needed to identify the optimal treatment for middle-aged patients with displaced FNFs. 