Complex stochastic systems require the control of their stochastic distributions (i.e., the shape of their output probability density functions (PDFs)). This paper will address both modelling and control of such systems and will consist of a brief survey of the recent developments and the description of a detailed design procedure on an iterative learning-based output PDF control algorithm. In this context, a radial basis function (RBF) neural network is used to approximate the output PDFs, and the system dynamics is represented by a mathematical model between the weights of the RBF neural networks and the control input. The whole control horizon is divided into a number of batches, where within each batch fixed RBFs are used. However, between batches, iterative machine learning for the shape update of the RBFs is developed so as to improve the closed loop performance batch-by-batch. A simulated example is given so as to demonstrate the design procedure.Stochastic systems are widely seen in control engineering practice. This is because almost all the control systems are subjected to random signals such as those originated from the system parameter variations and sensor noises, etc. As such, one of the important issues in the controller design for practical systems is to minimize the randomness in the closed loop system. This has therefore motivated studies on minimum variance control whose purpose is to ensure minimum contained uncertainties in the controlled system outputs or the tracking errors. Indeed, even nowadays most of the stochastic control design has been focused on the control of the mean and the variance of stochastic systems. In general, these developments are largely based upon the assumption that the system variables are of Gaussian types. Such assumptions, albeit strict to many practical systems, allow control engineers to make use of the well-established stochastic theory to deal with the required controller design and closed loop system analysis. Indeed, the rather rich literatures of the treatment of Gaussian systems have always been regarded as a natural basis for the design and analysis of stochastic control systems. The control of the whole shape of the output probability density function (PDF) for complex stochastic systems has been studied in response to the increased demand from many practical systems This type of control is termed as the stochastic distribution control (SDC), which is a new research area where simple and practical solutions for industrial processes are required. In comparison with the traditional stochastic control theory where only output mean and variances are of concern, SDC can offer a much better solution and are of course not restricted to Gaussian input cases. Indeed, this is a challenging problem and such systems are seen in many material processing industries. With the fast development of sensing technology, the output PDFs of these systems are now becoming measurable Another example is the combustion system shown in Moreover, the system image represented in This is again an output PDF control problem where the inputs are the chemical and mechanical variables in the paper machines, whilst the output is the PDF of the grey level distribution. In this regard, the target distribution should be characterized by a narrowly distributed Gaussian shape. The problem of controlling the output PDF is long standing. However, the first real-time control strategy was developed by the author at UMIST in 1996. Since then, fast developments have been seen and at present there are around 15 research groups in the world actively seeking solutions to the controller design and their applications. Special sessions and special issues have been seen in various international control conferences and refereed journals. In general, the so-far developed methods can be classified into the following three groups: Output PDF control using neural networks. Output PDF control using system input–output models. Output PDF control using Ito differential equations. The algorithms on SDC can be generally classified into two groups, namely either the SDC when the output PDFs are measurable or the SDC when the output PDFs are not measurable. In this section, a brief survey on both groups of algorithms will be made together with other relevant issues such as minimum entropy control, filtering and fault diagnosis. The use of neural networks for the output PDF control is the first group of approaches for SDC, where neural networks are used to approximate the instant output PDFs, and the neural network weights are dynamically linked to the control input. Once the structure of the network is selected the control of the PDF shape can be regarded as the control of the weights and biases of the considered network. As such, many existing control methods can be directly used to formulate the required control laws for the weights control. In particular, when the dynamics is linear and the output PDF is approximated by a B-Spline neural network, a compact solution can be generated which minimizes the following performance index: Depending upon the dimensions of the system, the neural networks can be either MLP type or even RBF types. So far several B-spline-based methods have been developed; examples are the square root B-spline PDF models and rational B-spline PDF models The key requirement on this group of methods is that the output PDFs should be measurable. This would normally generate a feedback type of control law, where the weighted and measured output PDFs are used as the feedback signals to the controller. Once the closed loop system is formulated, the stability and performance analysis can be readily made using standard stability analysis tools such as Lyapunov theory, etc. However, the problem with the above neural network-based approach is that the model for the controller design does not have a direct physical meaning. Also, the neural network size can be very large if the output PDF shape is complicated, leading to a high-dimensional dynamics between the neural network weights and the control input. To solve this problem, a general input and output physical model of the system can be used as follows: Formulate the PDFs of the output in Minimize performance function in The first step involves the use of probability theory where the standard formulation of the PDF of a function of a random variable will be required. This can be classified into two cases. In the first case it is assumed that function When function The advantage of using When a continuous time system is considered, the following In the case that the targeted PDF is not available, the aim of the closed loop control for the stochastic systems would be to reduce the randomness of the system. In this case, entropy should be the index to be minimized during the controller design. This has led to the recent development on minimum entropy control for stochastic distribution systems In the minimum entropy control, the control algorithms can again be classified into two cases, one for measurable output PDFs and the other for un-measurable PDFs. When the output PDFs are measurable, the neural network-based approaches can be used where the neural networks approximate the measured output PDFs and the dynamics of the concerned system is represented by a set of differential or difference equations that link the neural network weights with the control input. When the output PDFs are not measurable, Eq. Another application of the PDF shaping idea is its potential use in general filtering design. For example, in the well-known Kalman filtering algorithm the actual result of the filtering is to realize a minimum variance residual. This has always been based upon a Gaussian noise assumption with nicely structured linear systems. When non-Gaussian systems are considered, the minimization of the variance for the residual will not generally produce the required filtering effect. In this context the filtering design should be to realize either a Gaussian distribution of the residual signal or a minimized randomness of the residual. The former is in fact a PDF control problem where the filtering design is to select filtering parameters (i.e., the gain matrix of the filters), so that the PDF of the residual is made to follow a narrowly distributed Gaussian PDF. The latter can be classified as a minimum entropy issue where the entropy of the filtering residual should be minimized during the filtering design In parallel to the development of various control strategies, fault detection and diagnosis for the SDC systems have also been studied in recent years where the input and the output PDFs of the SDC systems have been used to construct the required algorithms. In comparison with the existing fault detection and diagnosis techniques, the residual of the fault detection and diagnosis for SDC systems takes a totally different form where the distance between the estimated output PDFs and the measured PDFs has been used The aim of using ILC in this work is to manipulate the shape of radial basis functions (RBFs) which are used to approximate the output PDF in each iteration in order to improve the closed loop performance batch-by-batch. The scheme of method is illustrated in As a result, the following three stages of the control algorithm operation can be obtained: Identify the parameters necessary for the calculation of control input within each batch when the basis functions are fixed. Calculate the control input and apply it to the process within each batch. Update the parameters of the basis functions in the RBF neural networks between batches and go to stage (1). This means that the whole control horizon is divided into a number of batches and the iterative tuning rules are applied to tune the shapes of the RBF. This would be different from the existing iterative learning control where the control input is tuned between each batches directly. It has been shown in Assuming that With the definition of the RBF in In Assuming that the ( As indicated in As a result, parameter vector in The initial values for the parameter vector are selected as the last set of values in the previous batch, and Once the parameters in model This control input is applied to the process in the For the RBFs defined in In For the convergence of the iterative tuning rule This means that the closed loop tracking performance gets improved batch-by-batch. It must be noted that As a result, As a result, the sufficient condition for convergence is summarized as This means that the iterative tuning rule Both Within a batch, In order to show the effectiveness of the proposed method, a case in which the output PDF of the system is approximated using four Gaussian basis functions is considered with the following initial conditions over its definition interval [ Using The dynamic relationship between the independent weights and the control input in the For the simulation purposes, 300 uniformly distributed samples of the output were used. In addition, the desired output PDF was chosen so that the following equations hold: In As mentioned before, in the ILC scheme the closed loop performance is supposed to be improved batch-by-batch. To observe such an improvement, the responses of the performance index function (i.e., An ILC-based method for the shape control of output PDFs for nonGaussian stochastic systems has been proposed. In this method, the output PDF approximation is based on an RBFNN, and the whole control horizon is divided into a number of batches. Within each batch the output PDF control is realized using the techniques in In comparison with the work where the B-Spline functions were used to approximate the output PDFs, the use of RBFs has a clear advantage in terms of its generalized expression of its tuning parameters. The simulation example has further confirmed the expected result of the proposed algorithm. However, as it has been shown that in some cases the output PDF could be partly negative when the linear approximation in This work is supported by the UK Leverhulme Trust and Chinese NSFC grants (60534010, 60674051) and the 111 project (B08015). These are greatly acknowledged.