This study evaluates different bioleaching treatments of a molybdenite concentrate using mesophilic and thermophilic bacterial cultures. Further studies on the chemical leaching and the electrochemical behavior of the MoS2 concentrate were carried out. Bioleaching tests showed a progressive removal of chalcopyrite from the molybdenite concentrate with an increase in temperature. Chemical leaching tests support the idea of an indirect attack of the concentrate. Electrochemical tests indicate that chalcopyrite dissolution is favored when molybdenite is present. Therefore, this type of bioleaching treatment could be applied to purify molybdenite flotation concentrates by selectively dissolving chalcopyrite.Mineral bioleaching research has been a great success for the mining industry. As a result of this work, a significant number of commercial applications have emerged and are able to compete with conventional processes. Furthermore, bioleaching treatments have the great advantage of being environmental friendly. Bioleaching is defined as the use of different types of bacteria (mesophiles, moderate thermophiles and extreme thermophiles) to dissolve valuable metals from mineral sulfides The role of bacteria in bioleaching is to catalyze the oxidation of metal sulfides. Two mechanisms of bacterial action have been suggested: (a) a direct attack of the bacteria on the mineral surface and its oxidation through enzymatic reactions; and (b) an indirect attack, where the bacteria regenerate the oxidizing agent of the mineral by means of the oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) via thiosulfate or polysulfide depending on the type of mineral Molybdenite (MoS The aim of the present work is to study the different possibilities that bioleaching offers when treating a molybdenite concentrate. For this purpose, a comparative study has been carried out using three different types of acidophilic bacteria: mesophiles at 35°C, moderate thermophiles at 45°C and extreme thermophiles at 68°C. In order to determine the role played by microorganisms, chemical leaching tests were performed at the different temperatures using ferric iron as a leaching agent. Finally, the electrochemical behavior of both the unattacked and the attacked mineral was examined. The substance used was a molybdenite concentrate from Rio Blanco (Chile). The chemical composition was as follows: 47% Mo, 3.2% Cu and 2.7% Fe. X-ray diffraction showed molybdenite (MoS Three different mixed cultures of acidophilic bacteria were used: A mesophilic culture (at 35°C) was obtained from water used in the mining industry along the Tinto river (Huelva, Spain). This culture was grown on a specific medium in order to isolate the acidophilic bacteria A moderately thermophilic culture (at 45°C) was also obtained from the drainage waters of the Rio Tinto mines (Huelva, Spain) A thermophilic culture (at 68°C), originally The cultures were originally grown on a chalcopyrite concentrate as an energy source. 9K medium without FeSO Bioleaching tests were performed in an orbital shaker at 150 rpm, with a pulp density of 20 g l Chemical leaching tests with ferric iron were carried out under the same conditions, at 35°, 45° and 68°C, by adding 10 g l Furthermore, control tests were performed with ore and nutrient medium under sterile conditions. The electrodes were prepared from both the as-received molybdenite concentrate and the bioleaching and chemical leaching residues. In order to start with a compact electrode, 0.1 g of mineral sample was mixed with 0.9 g of a conductor material (graphite) in 5 ml of chloroform. Time was allowed for the chloroform to evaporate. Prior to the electrochemical test, the paste electrodes were softly polished with the appropriate paper. The electrolyte used in the experiments at different temperatures was Norris medium without chlorides at 45° and 68°C. The remaining tests were carried out at room temperature applying a 9K medium which was diluted 10 times. The electrochemical measurements were performed in a typical cell magnetically agitated with the following three electrodes: the working electrode (molybdenite concentrate), the counter electrode (Pt spiral wire) and the reference electrode (Ag/AgCl), which was provided with a Luggin capillary tip and placed as close as possible to the working electrode. Potential and current values were controlled with a potentiostat and a voltage scanner. All the potential values in the text refer to the Ag/AgCl electrode (+207 mV vs. SHE at 25°C). The electrochemical experiments consisted of obtaining potentiodynamic polarization curves initiated from the rest potential of the working electrode in the nutrient medium.  At 35°C ( At 45°C ( At 68°C ( The bacterial population was counted at the end of the chemical leaching tests with Fe In addition to copper and iron analysis, concentrations of molybdenum were determined. The amount of molybdenum in solution remained very low. Molybdenum dissolution in the tests with mesophiles at 35°C and with moderate thermophiles at 45°C was lower than 1%, and with extreme thermophiles at 68°C lower than 0.5%. The same results were obtained for the chemical leaching tests confirming that ferric iron is not oxidizing enough to dissolve molybdenite. According to these results it could be concluded that Fe Therefore, the bioleaching of the molybdenite concentrate at the different temperatures applied leads only to the dissolution of chalcopyrite, which is favored by the presence of molybdenite. Based on an electrochemical mechanism, molybdenite, with a higher rest potential, should behave cathodically against chalcopyrite, with a lower rest potential. This has been confirmed by measuring the rest potentials of samples of high-purity chalcopyrite and the as-received molybdenite concentrate under the same conditions (1/10 of 9K medium at pH 1.5 and at room temperature) in powder electrodes. The measured rest potentials were about +200 mV for the chalcopyrite electrode and +500 mV for the molybdenite electrode. The latter value was similar to the as-received molybdenite concentrate after extracting the chalcopyrite. Electrochemical tests were carried out in order to establish the mechanism, by which oxidation of the molybdenite concentrate was taking place and, at the same time, to justify the formation of a galvanic couple chalcopyrite–molybdenite with chalcopyrite dissolving anodically. In this study, different anodic polarization tests at room temperature were performed on the following samples: as-received concentrate and bacterial and chemical leaching residues. Additionally, anodic polarization was carried out on the as-received ore at different temperatures (room temperature, 45° and 68°C) in order to determine the influence of such a variable in the molybdenite dissolution mechanism. Finally, an anodic scan was applied consecutively to the as-received concentrate to characterize the possible formation of passive layers.  The polarization curves show clear differences among the residues attacked chemically or biologically. When chalcopyrite was completely dissolved, as shown for the treatment with extremely thermophilic bacteria, no peak corresponding to this compound appeared in the polarization curve. In this case, there was only molybdenite (peak B) present. Furthermore, when the chalcopyrite attack increases, the molybdenite decomposition potential shifts towards more positive values and its dissolution becomes even more difficult.  Products that are generated electrochemically at high potentials, which are above the molybdenite decomposition potential, do not exert any barrier effect on the dissolution process (data not shown). Thus, it is expected that in the molybdenite dissolution process a limiting effect due to the formation of a passive layer does not take place.  Chalcopyrite dissolution reached 50% with mesophiles and moderate thermophiles and 100% with extreme thermophiles after 3 weeks of treatment. Molybdenite dissolution was very low for all bioleaching tests. These results are closely related to the oxidizing potential reached during the tests: 675, 650 and 500 mV for the mesophilic, moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic microorganisms, respectively. In the latter case, a lower potential is required to reach a copper extraction of 100% in less than 10 days. Chemical leaching tests with Fe Chalcopyrite is a refractory ore, but in the presence of molybdenite its dissolution is sped up due to the formation of a galvanic couple. According to the electrochemical tests carried out, the decomposition potential for chalcopyrite and molybdenite is +730 mV and +925 mV, respectively. The latter potential is very high and is virtually impossible to reach using the bioleaching processes. This is the reason why molybdenum concentrations in solution were very low. Molybdenite dissolution is very sensitive to temperature changes and the dissolution rate increases with temperature (from room temperature to 68°C). Bioleaching treatments would be a way to purify molybdenite flotation concentrates by selectively dissolving chalcopyrite. This work was financially supported by the Spanish Government.