The aim of this study was to compare effects of estrogen depletion (ovariectomy) and exposure to 3,3′,4,4′,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) on bone strength and bone tissue composition in the rat. Half of the rats were ovariectomized (n=20) and the remainder were sham-operated. Ten of the ovariectomized rats and ten of the sham operated were exposed to PCB126 (ip injections) for 3 months (total dose, 384 μg/kg bodyweight), while those remaining received the vehicle. The humerus and femur were used for analysis of torsional strength and biochemical studies, respectively. Both sham-operated and ovariectomized animals showed a significantly shorter bone length, lower water content and a decreased torsional stiffness when exposed to PCB126. Sham-operated rats exposed to PCB126 had lower maximum torque when compared with sham operated controls. The PCB126-exposed rats also exhibited a significantly lower collagen concentration, but showed a higher pyridinoline concentration of cortical bone. PCB126 exposure decreased the hepatic level of vitamin A but increased vitamin A levels in serum and kidneys. Ovariectomy per se increased bone length and organic content and decreased the inorganic content significantly, but did not affect any of the tested biomechanical parameters. In conclusion, this study showed that the common environmental pollutant PCB126 impaired bone strength and altered bone composition. It is hypothesized that these effects might partly be explained by PCB-induced retinoid disturbances.Bone mineral disorders have been reported in different wild mammals, such as grey seal ( In human populations, the age-adjusted rate of osteoporotic-related fractures has increased dramatically in the western world since the second world war ( There are a limited number of experimental studies showing lesional effects of organochlorines on bone tissue. In vivo effects of a commercial PCB-mixture (Aroclor 1254) on rat femur characteristics include decreased femur length, a narrowing of the femur marrow cavity and a weaker bone ( Both excess and deficiency of vitamin A The retinoid system has been addressed as an important target for adverse effects of organohalogens such as dioxins, PCBs, chloroparaffins and DDT ( A most important task for long bones is to provide support for the limb. It is essential, therefore, to measure to what extent the mechanical properties of the bone might be altered by qualitative and quantitative changes that might occur following exposure to skeleto-toxic agents. In the present follow-up study to our earlier observations ( The animal material and general experimental design has been described elsewhere ( The humeri were dissected and cleaned and the total length and waist (the diameter of the narrowest part of the humeri) were measured using an electronic sliding caliper to the nearest 0.01 mm. The determinations of bone composition of the right humeri were performed as described elsewhere ( The left humeri were wrapped in plastic film and stored at −20°C pending biomechanical testing. A few hours before the biomechanical testing, the humeri were completely thawed at room temperature. Prior to the mechanical testing, the soft tissues were carefully removed. Both bone ends were placed in purpose made aluminum potting fixtures with a height of 10 mm each. The fixtures were then filled with plastic padding (Plastic Padding Elastic, Sweden) ensuring that the bone ends became immovably embedded, while leaving the remaining section of the humeri between the fixtures free for testing. A custom jig was used to ensure correct alignment of the bone axis along the loading axis of the testing machine. All specimens were tested to failure in torsion at room temperature on an electromechanical testing machine (Avalon technologies, Rochester, MN, USA) at a rate of 4°/s, with no axial load during the testing ( Values for angulation and torque were collected 50 times per s until failure using software provided with the testing machine (Testware II). The collected data were stored as datafiles including the variables time, angulation and torque. Based on the collected data maximum torque, torsion at failure (angulation at failure) and torsional stiffness were calculated. The torsional rigidity was calculated by using the angulation and torque data to define a slope, after which the tangent of the maximal slope for each sample was used to define the torsional stiffness. The left femurs were dissected free and an electronic sliding caliper was used to measure the length from the top of the femur head to the distal point of the medial condyle to the nearest 0.01 mm. A 200-μm thick transversal section was cut from the femoral diaphysis at a point 50% distal to the top of the femoral head by a precision saw (Exakt-Apparatebau, Otto Herrmann, Norderstedt, Germany). The sections were placed on a slide, projected onto a screen by a projection microscope (magnification×20). The projected picture was scanned into a computer and the cross-sectional area and medullary area were calculated (Jandel Scientific Software, St. Rafael, CA, USA). Furthermore, a 1-mm thick cylinder was cut just proximally to the 200 micrometer section and defatted in acetone for 72 h, freeze dried for 24 h, weighed and hydrolyzed in 6 N-HCI (110°C) for 16 h. The hydroxyproline content of these hydrolyzed samples was determined in duplicate as previously described ( The pyridinoline collagen cross-links were determined on the same samples, and analyzed as described elsewhere ( Retinoids in liver and kidney homogenates (20% w/v in water) were extracted using diisopropyl ether, essentially according to a procedure described previously ( Retinol, retinyl acetate (internal standard used for quantification) and retinyl palmitate were detected with a JASCO 821-FP fluorescence detector ( Serum retinol and retinoic acids from the ovariectomized rats were determined with a gradient HPLC system ( The data recorded were evaluated by one and two-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Fisher's PLSD. Differences were considered significant when In ovariectomized, but not in sham operated rats, PCB126 attenuated the increase in bodyweight ( Ovariectomy resulted in increased length of the humeri, increased organic content, but reduced inorganic content ( The effect of ovariectomy on bone length was inhibited in PCB126-exposed rats. As seen in The sham operated animals that had been exposed to PCB126 had a lower maximum torque to failure and a higher average torsion at failure compared with the sham operated controls ( The femur length was significantly reduced in PCB126-exposed sham-operated rats compared with sham-operated controls ( The hydroxyproline and collagen concentrations of the mid-diaphyseal femur were significantly decreased in rats exposed to PCB126, but the concentration of pyridinoline collagen cross links (hydroxyl-lysyl-pyridinolines and lysyl-pyridinolines) was increased ( Compared with controls, PCB126-exposed rats had significantly lower hepatic and significantly higher kidney levels of retinyl palmitate ( In this study, we present new findings concerning effects of the ubiquitous environmental contaminant PCB126 on bone tissue. Major findings included decreased maximum torque, decreased torsional stiffness and increased torsion at failure, as well as changes in composition of the organic matrix of the long bones. PCB126 did not affect the bone mineral density, but caused an increased organic content, a decreased collagen content and an increased concentration of pyridinoline cross-links in the collagen. The analyses of collagen and of organic content were not performed on the same bone (femur and humerus, respectively) but there are no reasons to believe that the PCB126-response differs between any of the long bones. Cross-links between collagen molecules improve the mechanical stability of the collagen fibers. Accordingly, a reduction of pyridinoline cross-links in rat femur collagen has been shown to be related to a decreased bone bending stiffness ( Prior to mechanical testing the bones in the present study were kept deep frozen. Previous studies have shown that such storage between necropsy and mechanical testing will reduce the maximum torque and stiffness by 4–6%, while it has no effect on torsion at failure ( A decreased torsional stiffness is generally believed to be associated with an increase of the collagen content in relation to the amount of mineralized bone. The findings of this paper, i.e. decreased torsional stiffness and decreased collagen content; appear to be in conflict with these ideas. The elastic qualities of bone tissue are probably not independent of collagen content, but the overall effect of PCB126 on bone collagen (decreased content and structural changes of the collagen molecule) is expressed as decreased torsional stiffness on a functional level. Results obtained in vitro have demonstrated retinol to cause a dose-dependant inhibition of collagen synthesis in organ cultures of fetal rat calvaria ( A common cause for reduced collagen synthesis in vivo is vitamin C deficiency, as in scurvy. Both hypo- ( In our previous paper ( Although the exposure level of PCB126 used in this experiment is relatively higher (total dose, 384 μg/kg bodyweight) no signs of severe general toxicity were found. This is in accordance with results presented by In conclusion, this study showed that the common environmental pollutant PCB126 impaired bone strength and altered bone composition. It is hypothesized that these effects might partly be explained by PCB-induced retinoid disturbances. We thank Eva Kjeld Mikkelsen, Charlotte Ausum Knaehus, Linnea Sjöblom, Ulla Svensson and Kristina Trossvik for excellent technical assistance. The present study received financial support from Helge Ax:son Johnsons Foundation, Foundation for strategic environmental research (grant 98657), Karolinska Institutets foundation and Inga Britt and Arne Lundbergs foundation.