Sodium aluminate solutions were exposed to an electromagnetic field (0<
                     H
                     <250kA/m) for a short time. The electrical conductivity and the structure of the exposed aluminate solutions were then measured as a function of magnetic field intensity. Furthermore, the influence of magnetic field on the gibbsite precipitation from sodium aluminate solution was also investigated. It is found that the electrical conductivity of the sodium aluminate solution with low caustic molar ratio of Na2O to Al2O3 varies with the intensity of the applied magnetic field and reaches a maximum in the presence of a magnetic field ranging from 50 to 70kA/m. In addition, the electrical conductivity of sodium aluminate solution does not return to the initial value after shutting off the magnetic field, and the memory of magnetic treatment extends beyond two days. IR spectra of sodium aluminate solutions suggest that magnetic field treatment modifies the structure of the aluminate solution. Moreover, the gibbsite precipitation from sodium aluminate solution would be promoted when the aluminate solution was magnetically treated with a magnetic field of 52kA/m. SEM and PSD results of the gibbsite products show that the precipitates are made up of globular particles in uniform size. It is concluded that the precipitation of gibbsite from sodium aluminate solution could be promoted by adjusting the structure and the physicochemical properties of aluminate solution by introducing a suitable magnetic field.The low rate of the precipitation of gibbsite from seeded caustic sodium aluminate liquors in the Bayer process has bothered researchers and producers of alumina for many years. Considerable efforts have been devoted to uncovering the mechanism of gibbsite precipitation in order to find out ways to accelerate the precipitation process ( The low efficiency of gibbsite precipitation from seeded supersaturated aluminate solution can be partly attributed to the existence of competing species present in the aluminate solution and their influence on the precipitation mechanism ( From the methods given above it is apparent that external fields are favoured by researchers because of their low investment and high efficacy. Ultrasonic conditioning was applied to Al(OH) Distilled water was used to prepare all aluminate solutions. Aluminum hydroxide (industrial grade, from Zhongzhou Alumina Refinery of China) was used as crystallization seed. Supersaturated sodium aluminate solution was prepared by dissolving aluminum trihydroxide in hot NaOH solution. After aluminum trihydroxide had completely dissolved, the solution was filtered twice and then diluted to the required concentration. The experimental equipment for magnetic processing of sodium aluminate solution for gibbsite precipitation is illustrated in Electrical conductivity of the aluminate solution was measured by conductivity meter (DDSJ-308 A, Shanghai Precision Scientific Instrument Corporation). The IR spectra of aluminate solution were recorded by the attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR 6700, Nicolet Co., USA) with the resolution of 4 One liter sodium aluminate solution treated by magnetic field was transferred to a 2 Samples were taken periodically from the crystallizer and subsequently centrifuged. Optically clean solutions were used for aluminum and alkali concentration analyses. The liquor composition was determined by the titration method. All the titration experiments were repeated three times and the final result is presented by the average value. Details of the analysis methods can be found in the work of Electrical conductivity is one of the most important physicochemical properties of aluminate solutions, and there is an intrinsic relationship between the electrical conductivity and the structure of sodium aluminate solutions ( It can be seen from The changes of the electrical conductivity showed in Experiments were performed to investigate the reason for the electrical conductivity change of aluminate solutions with the application of a magnetic field. The aluminate solutions with a certain concentration were diluted separatively by nonmagnetically and magnetically treated water. There was no obvious difference in the electrical conductivity between aluminate solutions diluted by nonmagnetically and magnetically treated water, but the electrical conductivity of the aluminate solution diluted by nonmagnetically treated water had a great increase after introducing a magnetic field, indicating that water was not the most important factor influencing the electrical conductivity of the magnetized aluminate solution. It has been shown previously that the transference number of the aluminate anions declines with the increasing degree of polymerization of aluminate anions, and The magnetically treated aluminate solution was kept for a period of time at room temperature after the magnetic field was removed. The changes in electrical conductivity were measured over time after the magnetic field was shut off. It can be seen from The electrical conductivity of sodium aluminate solution can be changed by applying the magnetic field, and intrinsic relationship between electrical conductivity and the structure of sodium aluminate solutions has been shown to exist. The ion structure of aluminate solutions exposed to magnetic fields of different intensities was determined to investigate the effects of magnetic field on the structural changes of aluminate ions. The electrical conductivity of a sodium aluminate solution is most closely related to the concentration of It can be seen from In the previous study ( Sodium aluminate solution (Na In the electrical conductivity researches, no obvious differences are found in the electrical conductivity of the aluminate solution (Na It can be seen from   The electrical conductivity of sodium aluminate solution varies with the magnetic field intensity and reaches a maximum in the presence of a magnetic field ranging from 50 to 70 The structure of aluminate solution is changed by introducing a magnetic field and the concentration of Gibbsite precipitation from sodium aluminate solution would be promoted by 2–3% if a magnetic field of 52