The majority of the world's copper reserves are bound in the sulphide mineral chalcopyrite (CuFeS2), but supply of the copper is hindered by the recalcitrance of chalcopyrite to (bio)leaching. The main reason for the slow rate of chalcopyrite dissolution is the formation of a layer on the surface of the mineral that hinders dissolution, termed “passivation”. The nature of this layer and the role of microorganisms in chalcopyrite leaching behaviour are still under debate. Moderately thermophilic bioleaching of a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate was mimicked in an electrochemical vessel to investigate the effect of the absence and presence of microorganisms in copper dissolution efficiency. Data from the redox potential development during bioleaching was used to program a redox potential controller in an electrochemical vessel to accurately reproduce the same leaching conditions in the absence of microorganisms. Two electrochemical experiments were carried out with slightly different methods of redox potential control. Despite massive precipitation of iron as jarosite in one of the electrochemically controlled experiments and formation of elemental sulphur in both electrochemical experiments, the efficiencies of copper dissolution were similar in the electrochemical tests as well as in the bioleaching experiment. No passivation was observed and copper recoveries exhibited a linear behaviour versus the leaching time possibly due to the galvanic effect between chalcopyrite and pyrite. The data suggest that the main role of microorganisms in bioleaching of a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate was regeneration of ferric iron. It was also shown that the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy measurements on the residues containing bulk precipitates cannot be employed for a successful surface characterisation.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS There are many factors involved in chalcopyrite passivation such as temperature, acidity, type and concentration of the oxidant and the redox potential of the solution. Redox potential has a prominent effect on the rate and extent of chalcopyrite passivation and is one of the most researched factors ( This model suggests that the redox potential has to be low enough for reduction of chalcopyrite in the first step and high enough for oxidation of chalcocite in the second step. Consequently, there is a range of oxidation potential in which the chalcopyrite dissolution rate is optimum ( One successful method to overcome the slow rate of chalcopyrite leaching is the Galvanox This reaction can be written as two half-cell reactions; an anodic half-cell reaction (Eq. The limiting step is reported to be the reduction of iron (Eq. Bioleaching is considered to be an attractive process for extraction of copper from low grade copper sources. Bacterial heap leaching of secondary copper minerals (covellite and chalcocite) is currently practiced on an industrial scale, while its use for chalcopyrite is limited, mostly due to the passivation problem ( In the present study, redox potential data from moderately thermophilic batch bioleaching of a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate was used to mimic the redox potential development using an electrochemical cell equipped with an automatic redox potential controller. This reproduced the same leaching conditions in the absence of microorganisms and made it possible to investigate the role of microorganisms on chalcopyrite leaching efficiency. This is the first study of its kind to investigate chalcopyrite leaching under controlled, variable redox potentials. A copper concentrate from the Boliden owned Kristineberg mine in Sweden was used. The concentrate contained 23.6% copper, 34.7% iron, 37.5% sulphur, 2.1% zinc, 0.7% lead and 1.1% silica. X-ray diffraction analysis could only reveal the presence of chalcopyrite and pyrite in the concentrate since other species were too low in concentration. SEM photographs showed that the pyrite and chalcopyrite grains mostly exist as separate grains. Calculated mineralogy gave the approximate composition as: 68% chalcopyrite, 26% pyrite, 3.2% sphalerite and 0.8% galena. In the bioleaching and electrochemically controlled varying redox potential experiments, the concentrate was ground in a ring mill to a particle size with d A mixed culture of moderately thermophilic acidophiles was grown in mineral salt medium (MSM) ( A batch bioleaching experiment was performed in a 2 Two controlled redox potential experiments were carried out in an electrochemical cell as described by To investigate the effect of concentrate ageing on the dissolution rate of copper, a constant redox potential leaching experiment was conducted within a week after receiving the concentrate from Boliden Mineral AB. The experiment was repeated after three months. During the three month gap, the concentrate was kept on a shelf inside a plastic bag under ambient conditions. The experiments were carried out at a redox potential range of 435–450 Dissolved iron and copper were analysed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS; Perkin Elmer, Analyst 100). Total iron was analysed by mixing equal volumes of representative pulp samples with concentrated HCl for dissolution of precipitated iron. The resulting pulp was filtered and then analysed by AAS. Cyanolysis was used to determine the elemental sulphur content in three representative samples in each of the final residues ( 5 All XPS spectra were recorded with a Kratos Axis Ultra DLD electron spectrometer. A monochromated Al K The bioleaching experiment (Bio) redox potential development was divided into three periods and each period was fitted with a third degree polynomial equation ( The electrochemical experiments were carried out in the cathode side of the vessel where a constant flow of oxygen was used. During the first period, the role of oxygen was to increase the redox potential continuously by oxidising the ferrous ions (Eq. When the redox potential exceeded the set value defined by the mathematical equation at any given time, an electrical current was automatically applied to reduce the ferric ions to ferrous (Eq. In the absence of microorganisms, ferrous oxidation by oxygen (Eq. The final copper recoveries were similar in the Bio, EC1 and EC2 experiments, ranging from 47% to 50% ( Another feature worth noticing in  The calculated amounts of dissolved pyrite shown in Precipitation of iron as jarosite is a common phenomenon in chalcopyrite bioleaching systems in the presence of high concentrations of ferric ions as well as monovalent alkali cations such as K By comparing the difference between the concentrations of total (dissolved plus precipitated) and dissolved iron, precipitation of iron is relatively small at the end of the bioleaching (8.7% of total iron) and EC2 experiments (0.3% of total iron) ( Despite the decrease in iron concentration in experiment EC1 after day 21 which was mostly as ferric as the redox potential was over 600 Furthermore, in spite of bulk jarosite precipitation in the EC1 experiment, passivation was not observed (see similar copper recoveries in Sulphur analysis revealed However, in the absence of microorganisms, the elemental sulphur, which is a systematic product of chalcopyrite and sphalerite oxidation, accumulated in the EC1 and EC2 experiment residues. XRD also confirmed the presence of sulphur in the EC1 and EC2 experiment residues (  Elemental sulphur concentrations in EC1 and EC2 residues amounted to 13.7% This huge amount of sulphur in the electrochemical experiments did not hamper copper dissolution and implies that bulk formation of elemental sulphur did not obstruct the transportation of ions to and from the chalcopyrite surface. Neither did it impair the necessary contact between chalcopyrite and pyrite for formation of the galvanic couple. Atmospheric oxidation of chalcopyrite has not been studied as often as its oxidation in other media and has been recently reviewed ( The S 2p and Fe 2p Despite the complexity of the obtained spectra, it was possible to identify peaks related to oxidised species in the sulphur and iron spectra of aged and fresh samples: a very distinct sulphate component at a BE of around 169.0 XPS measurements have been also carried out on the leach residues of Bio and EC1 experiments. Corresponding S2p spectra are shown in One very clear feature in the S 2p spectra is higher ratio S The redox potential development in a moderately thermophilic bioleaching of a pyritic chalcopyrite concentrate was mimicked accurately for the first time in the absence of microorganisms in an electrochemical vessel. It was shown that both recovery and rate of copper dissolution in the presence of microorganisms were the same as in their absence. Copper dissolution curves in all the experiments were linear. The dissolution rates were lower after the redox potential passed 550 The leaching experiments of the aged and fresh concentrate under identical conditions indicated that the copper dissolution was significantly lower in the leaching of the aged concentrate. Appropriate measures must be taken in laboratory investigations to produce similar initial surface characteristics during a campaign of experiments. The authors wish to express their gratitude for financial support from the