Anaerobically-digested sludge called fresh sludge (F), composted sludge (C) and thermally-drying sludge (T), all from the same batch, were applied to the surface of a calcareous Udic Calciustept with loamy texture. Dosage equivalent was 10tha−1 of dry matter. The concentration of mineral nitrogen (ammonium and nitrate) in the soil was measured in order to estimate the effects of the post-treatments to which the different kinds of sewage sludge are subjected in relation to the availability of N in the surface layer of the soil. The most significant differences in NH4–N and NO3–N concentrations due to the transformation of the organic matter were observed during the first three weeks following soil amendment. Thermally-dried and composted sludge initially displayed higher concentrations of ammonium and nitrate in soil. Five months after the amendment, soil applied with fresh sludge showed the highest concentrations of NH4–N and NO3–N (6.1 and 36.6mgkg−1, respectively). It is clear that the processes of composting and thermal-drying influence the bioavailability of nitrogen from the different types of sewage sludge.Sewage sludge is widely used as soil fertilizer due to its nutrient contents, specially N and P. For restoration purposes, they are applied as source of organic matter and activator of soil microbial activity running as soil amendment. Their mineralization liberates large amounts of nitrogen as ammonium, which may turn into nitrates ( Despite the advantages of amending soil with digested sludge, it is advisable for them to undergo an additional stabilization treatment in order to prevent the accumulation of some harmful chemical components, reduce the amount of volatile organic matter which produces unpleasant odours that are a source of attraction for vectors, and limit the density of pathogenic micro-organisms ( The contribution of sewage sludge to the soil provokes a temporary modification of some of its edaphic properties, as it increases the general levels of nutrients ( In this paper we try to ask if composting and thermal-drying post-treatment modifies the pool and stability of nitrogen in a sludge-amended soil regarding to the parent dewatered (fresh) sludge. The aim of this study was to check during a year the effects of a surface application, in a soil with a loamy texture, of three types of digested sludge: fresh partially dewatered (F), composted (C), and thermally-dried (T) on the organic carbon and nitrogen content, the kinds of mineral nitrogen (NH The experiments were carried out in an area located in the centre of Catalonia (NE Spain), at a height of 590 The climate is sub-Mediterranean with a continental tendency. The mean annual temperature is 12.5 Twelve plots (three plots for treatment: one control without sludge and three types of sewage sludge treatments) 20 Once the plots had been amended, they were sown with a mixture of Gramineae ( Composite soil samples (0–20 Normality and homocedasticity of data were checked using the StatView Normal Data Template tool. The effects of the different kinds of sludge on the concentrations of organic carbon, total nitrogen, NH A summary of the statistical analyses and the meteorological data of differences between sampling periods of the more relevant parameters are shown in In the soil of all plots treated with sludge, a significant increase of organic carbon content was observed and the differences were maintained in the three sampling times ( At the same time, the three sludge types provoked an increase in total nitrogen content (  In sampling 1, the concentration of NH With regard to vegetation development ( During the first weeks after the surface application of the sludge there were 14 rainfall events, but none of them produced runoff nor were they very intense. This indicates that during this period the cycles of wetting and drying were mild and all the rainwater was absorbed by the soil. Atmospheric and soil temperatures and relative air humidity in this period (spring) meant that water availability in the soil was good. This favoured the mineralization processes of the organic matter and, above all, of the nitrogenated compounds ( During the period between sampling 1 and 2 (125 days), which coincided with the hottest part of the year, numerous rainfall events also occurred and, as a result, there were a large number of wetting and drying cycles of the soil. To be precise, there were four runoff events and the vegetation cover went from <20% to 90% in the plots treated with sludge and reached 36% in the control plots ( The majority of the surface runoff events occurred between the second and third samplings. During this period the runoff coefficient showed a tendency to decrease. This was probably due to the high degree of vegetation cover (approximately 100% in S3 on the sludge-amended plots, and 50% in the control plots, data from The main transformations of organic matter from sludge occurred during the first three weeks (S1) after the soil was amended. Substantial differences were detected in the NH On the other hand, the composted sludge had an initial greater concentration of NO Subsequently, in sampling 2, it was the fresh sludge which had the highest concentration of NH The results show that thermal-drying of sewage sludge modifies its behaviour as a source of nitrogen when applied to soil. As consequence, mineral nitrogen concentrations (NH The composted sludge displays slightly lower concentrations of organic nitrogen which, moreover, is found in a biological more stable form than the original fresh sludge. For this reason, the concentrations of ammonium and nitrate in treated Soil do not display such pronounced variations. This project was financially supported by the Department of the Environment of the Autonomous Government of Catalonia (ECOFANGS project) and by the AGL2002-03297 project of the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science.