Experience obtained with a new hydrocyclone control system is reported. As command variable of the control serves an optical sensor detecting the underflow shape (rope or spray). These signals are transmitted to the computer and the control loop is completed with the pump power input, pressure in the feed and in the overflow. A volume split control of the hydrocyclone is performed by regulation of the overflow using a control valve. Groups of hydrocyclones can be controlled by installing only one control valve in a collecting pipe of all overflows. This control system stabilizes the separation at the transition point between spray and rope discharge at the cyclone underflow which in most cases is the operational optimum. One of the first applications was the regeneration of bentonite suspensions in tunnel driving. Since excavation of the material is discontinuous the solids content of the hydrocyclone feed varies over a wide range. By controlling the 150mm hydrocyclone group it was possible to compensate for feed fluctuations and to stabilize the separation.The hydrocyclone is a favored classifying device for solids separation, where cut-sizes (d50C) are between 10 and 100 The advantages of the hydrocyclone include its structural simplicity, ease of operation, high volumetric throughput and the relatively low capital, operating and maintenance costs. Since it has no moving parts it is truly a static system. However, the major disadvantages of the hydrocyclone are problems associated with varying feed conditions. Uniform feed properties are a precondition for high separation efficiency of hydrocyclones. Varying feed conditions may lead to considerable fluctuations of cut-size and separation sharpness. Therefore, much effort has been undertaken recently to compensate these difficulties by hydrocyclone control. Various methods and equipment have been employed in the intention to control the volume split of the hydrocyclone ( An important function of a process control system in a hydrocyclone plant is stabilization of the cut-size or slurry density in the overflow for a feed with varying solids contents and particle size distributions. Depending on feed conditions various process states may be observed. In dilute flow separation with a typical spray discharge, a widening air core spreading to the underflow can be observed. The resultant separation may present a high solids recovery to the underflow, which may be regarded as an advantage, but at low solids concentrations this may result in more fines being misdirected to the underflow. In dense flow separation (high percentage feed solids content) sediment may hold up dynamically in the conical part of the hydrocyclone. Then, coarse particles may move too much towards the overflow thereby reducing solids recovery to the underflow. It may also happen that the air core does not extend over the complete hydrocyclone length and oscillates intensively or be otherwise unstable. The underflow shape is determined by the suspension rheology. At high dynamic viscosity the free vortex collapses and the underflow discharge may assume the shape of a rope. This behavior is influenced by particle size and shape distribution as well as by surface conditions and swelling properties of the solid phase. For a given solid phase the dynamic viscosity is dependent on the solids content. Rope discharge is characterized by high solids content with less fines. Although it is not often the case, this situation might be considered advantageous. A transition state between spray and rope discharge may show the advantages of high solids recovery as well as high solids content in the underflow. This is the objective of the subject control system. Hydrocyclone monitoring includes methods and devices which enable save operation and/or process control. Special means have been developed for the identification of wear and clogging in the underflow ( To serve as a command variable of process control, a monitored parameter of the hydrocyclone performance has to fulfill the following parameters: sensitivity; non-invasive sensing; on-line sensing with a sampling time <1 robust sensor that is insensitive to blinding and mechanical stress; cost effective instrumentation. The detection of the overflow quality is often applied. The state of the art offers the following measurements: Density or solids content in the hydrocyclone overflow ( Viscosity in the hydrocyclone overflow ( Particle size in the hydrocyclone overflow ( These signals can serve as basis for the process control if empirical models are elaborated which deliver dependencies with the result of the separation ( An alternative is the measurement of the process state of the hydrocyclone. These signals deliver the following measurements: Shape of the underflow discharge ( Geometry and movement of the air core ( Vibration of the apparatus ( Different monitoring methods have been tested and evaluated by Capacitance sensor for direct spray discharge detection. Gravitational method applying a weighing procedure of the hydrocyclone filling. Vibration measurement. Optical detection of the shape of the underflow using an IR-beam. Up to now, the best results in our hydrocyclone control were obtained using optical detection of the shape of the underflow. This optical monitoring has the advantage of providing an indirect, non-invasive method. The schema for the process control is shown in The overflows of all hydrocyclones are collected in a special pressure chamber where a collecting discharge pipe with a control valve is installed (see For high solids content (rope discharge) the system is controlled by adjusting the throttle valve and the feed pump speed. The control mechanism actuated by stepwise throttling intensifies the pressure inside the hydrocyclone. Consequently, the underflow discharge increases until the point of breakthrough of the air core is reached. Then, the sensor detects spray and opens the control valve resulting in again more sediment being discharged (rope discharge). In the following, a new control interval starts. Thus, the process steadily changes between spray and rope discharge. Actually, this transitional state is an unstable operating point. However, using fuzzy logic enables the stabilization of the separation in the transitional range. As can be seen from The control concept was initially applied in bentonite regeneration for tunnel driving ( High solids contents >1000 The solids recovery The subsequent classification of the 150 The volume split control of hydrocyclones by overflow throttling is characterised by some remarkable improvements. Every control should not affect the operation and maintenance of the apparatus. Therefore, any manipulation at the cyclone itself was avoided. As command variable serves the angle of the spray discharge in the underflow which is detected by an infrared beam. The sensor is installed at about one meter distance from a splashing cyclone discharge. The sensor delivers a yes/no – signal of a selected spray angle. Changing this angle by an appropriate adjustment of the beam enables the variation of the cut-size within certain limits. A control device at the overflow implements advantages compared with measures at the underflow or the feed side regarding accessibility, wear of the control valve and a combined throttling of a cyclone group. Hence, even small diameter cyclones – assemblies can be controlled effectively. The control valve is installed in the collecting pipe behind the cyclone or the cyclone group. Danger of blocking at the underflow even at high solids contents is avoided because throttling of the overflow leads to increased pressure at the apex and accelerates the underflow. Thus, this control is connected with an increase of the discharge capacity at the apex enabling the combination of two hydrocyclone stages. A special progress presents the control concept by operating the cyclone at the optimal operational point. Usually this is the transitional point between spray and rope discharge. Optimization criterion is the product of solids recovery and solids concentration in the underflow. In fact, this is an instable point. However, a fuzzy treatment of the optical signals of the sensor enables a correct adherence of the transitional point. Operating hydrocyclones at the transitional point spray/rope is particularly recommended in closed circuit grinding.