It has been argued that fragmentation is an energy-consuming process, which cannot increase landslide mobility. This argument fails on three counts. (1) Most energy in landsliding is expended in friction between grains in grain flow, but grain flow is the origin of landslide mobility. Thus, if fragmentation were shown to reduce frictional resistance between grains, it would increase their mobility if it were less energy-consuming than is resistance without fragmentation. A companion paper contends that the overall frictional resistance when grains are being broken is less than when no grains are being broken. (2) Energy calculations for relevant landslide processes, whether on not they be energy sinks, shows that the cumulative energy in repeatedly stressing and de-stressing grains in a grain flow is orders of magnitude larger than the cumulative increase in surface energy through comminution. (3) Surface energy is inherent in the existence of material interfaces and is not a landslide energy loss, because the increase in surface energy arises because there are more atoms exposed at surfaces; it does not arise because any form of “latent heat” has been added. Griffith fracture theory takes an energy-balance approach to present a criterion for fracture propagation; to induce a “Griffith crack” to propagate in the interior of a material, it proposes that a force must be applied within the material to pull molecules apart against the force of their mutual attraction. Griffith loosely stated that this force “went to surface energy”, which stems from molecular attraction across material interfaces. In point of fact, it goes to elastic strain energy in the material, to exactly oppose the molecular attraction across the future crack plane. If this elastic-strain energy is increased above the minimum needed to balance the attraction, the crack enlarges; thus it provides a quantitatively accurate criterion for failure to occur. Griffith fracture theory is incorrect about what happens to elastic energy upon completion of a through-going fracture, when the separation is far too great for any molecular attraction to need opposing. The elastic energy is almost fully recovered in kinetic energy, and is not lost to surface (interfacial) energy.The energy involved in comminuting rock masses currently is a frequent topic in geoscience literature, with surface energy often presented as a significant energy sink. Seismologists and earthquake geologists discuss the energy used to fracture rock in fault rupture to form gouge (for example see The origin of the energy-loss thinking is directly traceable back to an unfortunate choice of words in Grain-surface area has long featured prominently in comminution studies; it takes energy to fracture rock; the finer it is fractured, the more energy it takes. Simple geometry dictates that the finer a solid material of a given mass is crushed, the greater is the total grain surface area. So, the minimum energy expenditure and hence cost of crushing a given material to a given level of fineness is accurately assessed by reference to the amount of energy that must be expended to create a given unit of surface area; this amount is more-or-less constant for a given material under a relatively wide variety of conditions, and is a constant for a given set of conditions. This was known and used in the design of explosive charges in the Napoleonic wars ( Scientific understanding of the science concepts involved in fracture of materials advanced greatly in World War I, leading to the classic publication of The concept of surface energy arises because the physical distribution of energy across an interface between two materials is gradational, and not an abrupt step function as might be expected for materials of differing energy levels simply abutting one against the other. The surface energy of Knowledge of the nature of interfaces between materials has advanced since the ideas of Gibbs and Griffith were developed. In particular, their ideas are now integrated with ideas developed in Germany, relating to crystallography and the nature of interfaces. Some of the “surface-energy” concepts utilised by Griffith are now understood differently; in particular, We will now discuss the conceptual differences between surface energy and interfacial energy in relation to comminution, and show why the creation of new grain surface area is not one of the many energy sinks in comminution.  Surface energy is a long-established concept in physical chemistry which arises from the molecular nature of matter and its behaviour in bulk, specifically its behaviour at interfaces with other matter. There are no gas–gas interfaces, so surface energy is a concept limited to interfaces involving at least one solid or liquid. It quantitatively describes the characteristic of matter to bind (to some degree) with other matter in direct contact (very close contact at a molecular scale, as distinct from influencing at a distance through gravity, magnetism, electrical charge or electromagnetic radiation). The energy stems from the attractive forces of the individual atoms in the material. These forces of attraction vary with distance from the atom. There also are repulsive forces between atoms, and the normal distance between atoms is at a point of balance between the attraction and repulsion. The interatomic distance varies as a function of the overall energy of the system, and hence as a function of both temperature and stress. It also varies as a function of the atoms present and the nature of the link may be ionic or covalent. Surface energy deals with the distribution of energy across interfaces between one material and another, and hence it does not deal with the distribution of energy where there is no interface. This does not mean that there is no distribution of energy where there is no interface; it only means that such a distribution is not called “surface energy”. Surface energy (interfacial energy) and non-surface energy are both energy; they are part of the same continuum of energy distribution throughout matter, with surface energy representing the necessary transition from one energy distribution to another across a change in material composition. If the energy distribution within any one material changes, it will influence the energy distribution in adjacent materials, and the distribution of energy across their interface will also change. The change in material composition need not be a change in chemical composition; a change in crystal structure is sufficient. It is a curious anomaly that surface energy is only attributed to the lower energy side of the interface, treating the higher energy side as if it were non-existant. Interfacial energy considers the distribution on both sides. In the specific instance of the criterion for expansion of a Griffith crack, however, there is no interface in the area of concern; there is only a potential for an interface to form. We come now to comminution and its effect on surface energy. Comminution axiomatically increases the quantity of matter that is at an interface, and decreases the quantity of matter that is not adjacent to an interface. As the quantity of matter at interfaces increases, so too must the quantity of “surface energy”. The relationship is simply a requirement of geometry, and does not imply any peculiar property of a crack that adds energy. Surface energy is often considered to The arrangement of internal energy defines the strengths of materials, how easily they deform, and the work that must be done to deform them, and to render them apart through breakage. It also determines the amount of thermal energy needed to cause a change of phase between solid, liquid and vapour. Chemical surface and internal energies are related — they differ only in the presence or absence of a surface. Note that there is chemical surface energy associated with interfaces between all mineral grains within all polycrystalline rocks, even within monominerallic rocks. In detail, it relates to the termination of crystal lattice structures in polymolecular crystals. The prevailing geological thinking on fracture-surface energy is well summarised in the assertion in “Nature” that “fracture energy is a form of latent heat” ( Surface energy and fracture-surface energy appear to be related in Griffith fracture theory, but this theory determines only a criterion for micro-cracks (now called Griffith cracks) to propagate within a material The energy for crushing is applied through a force causing deformation. When a brittle solid is deformed beyond its elastic limit, it breaks; if deformed rapidly, stress builds up faster than cracks can propagate, so cracks bifurcate, and the brittle solid breaks into many pieces. This applied energy is mechanical, not chemical. Mechanical elastic strain energy is stored in the mass, and molecular distances are changed systematically, differently in different directions depending on the directions of applied stresses and crystal anisotropy. For a brittle elastic solid, there is a limit beyond which molecular distances cannot be stretched without mechanical separation. The force on the solid that achieves this mechanical separation is the elastic limit. Many materials deform plastically above their elastic limit, until they reach a plastic limit, when full mechanical separation occurs. In a truly brittle material, there is no plastic range of deformation, and in a truly ductile material, there is no elastic range. When complete mechanical separation occurs, the elastic strain energy is lost, and the fragments return to the shapes they had before the stress was applied, but they cannot return to occupy the same space because the lost elastic strain energy returns to kinetic energy in the fragments and they move apart, often rapidly, so that the original mass has become two or more smaller masses occupying a different space. The sequence can repeat many times, and the mass is crushed finer and finer. As the grain mass becomes more finely crushed, the total grain surface area increases, and so the total interfacial energy increases — linearly with the increase in surface area as is required by the geometry of the mass. The increase in chemical, Griffith fracture theory presents a How are the molecular attractions across a potential crack opposed? They can only be opposed by elastic strain in the body of the material completely surrounding each micro-crack. An amount of elastic strain in the material is needed for every increment of crack enlargement, and it needs to be maintained only so long as the there is residual molecular attraction. As the molecular attraction across the crack diminishes with separation distance, less force is needed to keep the crack open. It is now recognised that in silicates and other polymolecular crystals, chemistry is also involved in cracking, because anhydrous silicates are chemically unstable and so the crystal lattice needs to be terminated by bonding with another material, usually water. Many of what Griffith postulated as “randomly oriented micro-cracks” start as fluid inclusions, and enlargement of these as micro-cracks releases (usually) water to bond with the silicate structure at crack tips as cracks propagate. The amount of energy to initiate crack propagation is undiminished, but less is needed to keep the cracks open, because some of the molecular attraction goes to covalent bonding with hydroxl groups to terminate the silicate structure and some is to monomolecular layers of water adhering to the crack surface. This is why growth of micro-cracks in rocks is largely irreversible in the absence of an energy-consuming annealing process. Griffith recognised the real Griffith cracks were not infinitely thin, but had finite widths, which varied as the applied stress varied. However, the Giffith fracture criterion correctly deals with truly “infinitely thin cracks”; it deals with the criterion to extend Griffith cracks into solid material, and so it has no quantitative requirement to consider crack width, or crack-surface chemistry, because there is no crack in the material to which the criterion is applied. All the above deals with a fully internal crack, and the criterion that must be met to enlarge it through body forces. When failure is complete, there is no requirement to maintain the body forces, because there is no requirement to extend the crack. The elastic strain that was maintaining the body forces is released (as kinetic energy). Thereafter the interfacial energy does not require to be opposed to keep the crack open. Hence, fracture-surface energy is not ultimately consumed as surface energy, it is always released as kinetic energy (including heat). The energy, W, per unit volume involved in causing an intact piece of rock to crush is a function of only 2 variables ( Hence to strain every grain once to the point of failure in a large rock avalanche of volume V necessarily involves a total amount of strain energy of We use the example of the Falling Mountain rock avalanche, which involved collapse of about 55 What is different if a grain fragments, as distinct from other modes of the force-chain failure needed for granular flow to persist? The other modes (grain slip, grain rotation, and force-chain buckling) are unidirectional. When they occur, the energy is released in a single direction. When a grain fragments, the energy is released in all directions and is largely unopposed radially to the axis of principal compression of the force chain in which failure occurs. Core to the argument of If we use typical values used for fracture-surface energy of rocks (10 J/m It is evident that most of the potential energy lost in the fall from the flanks of Falling Mountain was not consumed in the effective work of moving the debris mass across the landscape, nor in the conventional energy view of the increase in the grain-surface area. Much more of it was spent in repeatedly straining the granular materials up to their crushing strength, in order to break them and generate the observed grain-size distribution. Heat is generated in both the elastic strain, and strain-release cycles, and most of the potential energy lost is dissipated as heat energy. For simplicity, we assume that the strain energy in the source mass was essentially the same as that in the deposit mass, and so we ignore both in an energy budget. If the energy loss was all to heat, it was enough to raise the temperature of the landslide debris by 6.12 °C (for an estimated heat capacity of 800 J/kg, appropriate to quartz). If 1.3 GJ were to have gone to interfacial energy, the temperature rise would have been 0.01° less. Clearly, the concept of fragmentation being an energy-consuming process in rock avalanches ( In physical chemistry, To get a material to split, its When the split occurs, the added mechanical internal energy is released and it goes elsewhere, and does other things - it was never attached to the new surface. Chemical This research was supported by the New Zealand Foundation for Research, Science and Technology through the Public-Good Science Fund. We thank the organisers of the JTC-1 Workshop on the mechanics and velocity of large landslides, Courmayeur, Valle de Aosta, Italy, September 2006 for the opportunity to develop and present these ideas. We especially thank Ze'ev Reches for his insightful comments and questions, and those of our good colleagues who stimulated the need to develop these ideas.