In this study sawdust was used as reductant for sulphuric acid leaching of manganese ore. Effects of pulp density, amount of acid, temperature, particle size of ore and amount of sawdust were studied. Manganese extraction of ∼98% was achieved under the conditions: leaching time 8h, 5% H2SO4 (v/v), 10% pulp density, 90°C and 5% sawdust (w/w), i.e. 0.5g/g ore. Other Mn containing materials like low grade manganese ore, manganese nodule and Mn-nodule leach residues were tested and all these materials responded well giving more than 98% Mn extraction.Depletion of high grade Mn-ores has made low and medium grade ores to be the future raw material for the extraction of manganese especially for the growing requirement of steel industry, dry cells and chemical industries. Manganese dioxide ores are stable in acid or alkaline oxidizing conditions so the extraction of manganese must be carried out under reducing condition. Manganese can be extracted from oxidic ores either by reduction roasting followed by leaching ( Carbohydrates are non-hazardous and low cost reducing agents that may be used under mild conditions ( In a recent study, sulphuric acid leaching of low grade high iron containing Mn-ore using sawdust and lactose has been reported ( Aim of the present study was to extract manganese from medium grade high siliceous manganese ore using sawdust in H Manganese ore collected from Gujarat mineral development corporation (GMDC) contained Mn 38.2%, Fe 4.9%, Cu 0.01%, Zn 0.01%, Ni 0.02%, Co 0.01%, and acid insoluble 25.4%. The ore was crushed, ground and screened to provide material with a particle size of 100% Leaching experiments were carried out in 250 Overall reaction for MnO Initially experiments were carried out by varying the pulp density and particle size. Amount of ore was varied from 5 Effect of ore particle size was studied by varying size fractions from (−300  Effect of the above parameters on the extraction of manganese was studied using 10% pulp density (w/v) and −100 Increasing acid amount from 3.5 Leaching time was varied from 2 Other manganese containing materials such as Indian Ocean Mn-nodule, Mn-nodule leach residue (obtained from Mn-nodule pilot plant, Udaipur) and low grade Mn-ore were tested at 90 Sawdust is a potential reducing agent for land/sea based manganese ores of various grades. The response of sawdust assisted leaching was good even for high silica containing ore. Irrespective of manganese content in the ore/residue ∼98% Mn can be dissolved within 4 to 8 The authors are thankful to Prof. B.K. Mishra, Director, IMMT, Bhubaneswar, for his kind permission to publish this paper. We are thankful to Dr. R.K. Paramguru, Head, Hydrometallurgy Department. The authors are also thankful to GMDC for financial support.