The application of microfiltration to biological systems is hindered by membrane fouling that results in a decrease in the filtrate flux and solute transmission with time. In this work, the effects of transmembrane pressure, cross-flow feed velocity, biomass structure and feed composition, on membrane fouling during cross-flow microfiltration of Polyporus squamosus fermentation broth, were investigated. The results of cross-flow trials with 0.2μm aluminum oxide membrane showed the existence of the optimal operation transmembrane pressure and cross-flow velocity, in respect of membrane fouling, for examined range of operation conditions. It was noticed that the process of membrane fouling was moved from a predominantly surface layer phenomenon to internal membrane fouling as the cross-flow velocity was increased. Comminution of the fungal biomass prior to microfiltration to reduce particle size showed a beneficial effect on the transient flux. The steady-state flux and the transmission of solutes were not significantly affected by the biomass comminution. The observations of the filtrate flux and the transmission of solutes indicated a decrease in the rate of fouling with decreasing content of soluble components with large molecular weights in the feed.The downstream processing of cell cultures and the isolation of the biosynthetic substances produced represents one of the main tasks of bioengineering. Conventional methods of biomass separation, e.g. centrifugation and dead-end filtration, which were commonly used in the past, are expensive and time-consuming. An alternative to these approaches, which has been developed over the last several years, is cross-flow microfiltration. The advantages of cross-flow microfiltration over conventional separations and recovery techniques are the simplicity of operation and processing at the ambient temperature. The feasibility of cross-flow microfiltration to separate cells and/or cell debris from fermentation broth, in order to obtain a clarified or sterile filtrate containing the product, has been demonstrated with bacteria The objective of the MF of fungal fermentation broth in our investigations was to separate biomass from supernatant fluid and obtain biomass-free enzyme solution for further isolation of pectinases. The production of pectinases by direct fermentation of The MF trials were carried out with a single tube ceramic module type T1-70 (Membralox, SCT) made of 316 stainless steel. The module was equipped with composite ceramic tube (alpha-alumina) with diameter of 7/10 The fermentation broths were produced by batch cultivation of  All cross-flow MF trials were conducted at 25°C. The feed volume was 1.2 The transmembrane pressure was increased stepwise from the initial 31 to 51, 71 and 101 In order to study the effect of biomass structure on membrane flux and selectivity, two trials were conducted. In the first trial, fresh fermentation broth was used as the feed, while the second trial employed previously comminuted fermentation broth. The comminution of biomass was provided by circulation through the unit (without the membrane module) for 200 After each MF trial, the additional measurements were performed in order to investigate the membrane fouling. These measurements enabled the calculation of flux regeneration defined as The water permeability Measurements of fluxes of distilled water through the clean membrane at 25°C in the pressure range 10–100 The membrane was cleaned according to the recommendation of the manufacturer: (1) flush with water at 25°C for 10–15 Feed tank samples of 10 The pectin and total protein transmissions are defined as Endo-pectinase transmission is defined as Relative specific endo-activity is defined as the ratio between the filtrate specific endo-activity and the feed specific endo-activity.  As the cross-flow velocity increased, the filtrate flux gradually increased. The results showed optimal cross-flow velocity of 0.8 Flux regeneration after trial 3 For obtaining biomass-free pectinase solution, the optimal operation conditions, in respect of membrane fouling, for this type of membrane proved to be: the TMP of 31 During the circulation of fresh fermentation broth through the unit, the fungal particle sizes were reduced from 6–550 to 6–37 Although the patterns of the flux decline were different for fresh and previously comminuted feed, the fluxes converged to about the same steady-state value. Afterwards, the cross-flow velocity was increased to 1.1 The values of flux regeneration after trials with fresh and previously comminuted feeds, along with the variations of filtrate flux and solutes transmission during the MF ( Transmission of solutes and flux values during MF of fermentation broth with removed biomass (trial 6) were considerably lower than those observed during the MF of fresh fermentation broth ( It has been demonstrated that the removal of large molecular weight compounds, especially protein aggregates, by prefiltration or other means, results in an improvement in the filtrate flux In order to investigate the influence of solute size on membrane fouling, the prefiltration of fresh fermentation broth was performed ( The effect of removal of large molecular weight soluble proteins on filtrate flux and membrane selectivity is shown in The values of filtrate flux during MF of prefiltered fermentation broth were considerably higher (approximately 100%) than those in the case of fresh fermentation broth. As was the case with fresh fermentation broth, the values of final filtrate fluxes were fairly similar during the increase of the TMP. Prefiltration of fermentation broth also resulted in an improvement in solutes transmission, especially for total protein (about 30%). Further, the decrease of solute transmission with increasing pressure was considerably lower. It should be noticed that the fouling was reduced by prefiltration of fresh feed inspite of the absence of “protective” role of biomass. These results indicate that large molecular weight soluble components of fermentation broth play an important role in membrane fouling, especially on the front surface of the membrane. Although the filtrate flux and solute transmission were significantly improved by prefiltration, the results indicate that fouling within the membrane structure was still considerable. Namely, after the reduction of pressure to the initial value of 31 Transmission of total protein during MF of the prefiltered feed was higher than the enzyme transmission resulted in about 30% lower relative specific activity than in the case of the fresh feed ( Fouling of 0.2 The results confirm that the membrane fouling, and consequently the filtration performance of the broth, is directly affected by the components of the fermentation broth. If the membrane fouling is considerable for a broad range of membrane types, it is unlikely that significant performance improvement can be made by further optimization of the MF. Thus, the appropriate modification of the fermentation process is necessary. Such investigations are best facilitated by integration of the upstream and downstream process research groups.