In an increasingly cost conscious management of health care, estimating the cost of treatment of distal radial fractures has significant relevance. We studied 100 distal radial fractures, prospectively, from their presentation to eventual discharge. On an average, £320.50 were spent on each patient during 1997. Ninety percent of the costs were seen to be service costs and only 10% were those of consumables. A proportion of costs incurred due to remanipulations could have been saved by supervised primary treatment. Also, lack of protocols resulted in increased use of clinic time, physiotherapy sessions and radiographs. In-patient treatment was seen to account for the bulk of the expenditure. We have identified certain guidelines to improve the primary treatment of these fractures and the possibility of treating them in designated sessions in the day surgery unit. This is likely to reduce the overall cost of treatment of these very commonly sustained fractures though this will need to be proved in a future validated study.Osteoporotic fractures especially those of distal forearm, hip and vertebrae constitute a major public health problem The present study seeks to provide an estimate of the cost of treatment of these fractures, and explores methods to reduce the expenditure. It also aims to provide the doctors with costing information with the hope of changing their clinical behavior. We collected detailed cost data on 100 consecutive distal radial fractures in people over the age of 60 years, prospectively between 1 February and 31 August 1997 treated as part of existing practice. These patients were first assessed in the A&E by the senior house officer (SHO) who manipulated these fractures under a haematoma block if it was felt appropriate. Due to logistical difficulties and the perceived difficulty in manipulating, some of these fractures were left till the next day for operation on a trauma list. Each patient was followed from the time they were first seen in the A&E department to the time they were discharged from the fracture clinic. At each visit, the data regarding the use of radiographs, change of plaster, in-patient admission, surgical procedures, referral to physiotherapy and all other factors influencing the cost were collected. The collective cost of all of these variables for 100 patients was then calculated and an average cost for one patient was worked out. Cost estimates were based on the financial information provided by the hospital including the GP fund holder pricing for 1997. Amongst the 100 distal radial fractures, 98 were of the Colles' type whereas 2 were Smith's fractures. There were 92 women and 8 men in our study. The age distribution of our patients was as shown in All injuries were sustained due to trivial falls except one patient who was assaulted. There were three associated injuries that increased the hospital stay They have been enumerated in Forty-eight patients were treated in plaster without manipulation as the position was deemed to be acceptable. Fifty-two patients needed a manipulation of their wrists to achieve an acceptable position. Twenty-one of these 52 patients subsequently required operative intervention (18-K wires, 2-buttress plating and 1-external fixator). Number initially manipulated by SHO: 40 (76.9%); Number that required remanipulation from this group: 15 (37.5 %); Number initially manipulated by the registrar: 12 (23.1%); Number that required remanipulation from this group: 1 (8.3%); The estimated service costs have been shown in Analysis of costs showed that services accounted for 90% of the costs and consumables to a much smaller portion of 10%. In-patient costs contributed to 40.9%, theater time to 24.4%, physiotherapy to 13.3% and staff wages to 15.4% of the total costs. Due to several variables involved such as differing salary scales of the staff member's etc, these costs at best can only be approximations. In the era of resource management and cost containment, there is an increasing emphasis on the need to make the best possible use of available resources. We have selected distal radial fractures for our study, as these are one of the most common group of fractures encountered in orthopaedic practice. The incidence of wrist fractures in women increases linearly between 40 and 65 years of age and then stabilizes Studies are increasingly being reported on costs of primary total joint arthroplasty reflecting the increasing cost consciousness We attempted to calculate the costs of treating 100 consecutive distal radial fractures taking into account the various services involved and the consumables utilized (All costs were corrected to the nearest whole numbers). Consumables contributed to only 10% of the total costs and thus savings in these areas are not likely to make significant differences to the total costs. Attention must be directed to reducing the in patient stay and the theater and staff time costs. Although one could argue that these service costs exist irrespective of whether or not there are patients, these could be utilized to treat more patients thus increasing efficiency and reducing overall costs. Some factors responsible for these figures have been identified. Being a common fracture, they are often taken for granted and their treatment relegated to inexperienced junior staff. This some times resulted in poor initial decision making as to the appropriate line of management. In our study, 37.5% of the fractures manipulated by SHOs without supervision required remanipulation, whereas only 8.3% required remanipulation when a member of middle grade staff did the primary manipulation. Review of the radiographs revealed that a position far from optimum was accepted when a junior member of the staff carried out the manipulation. Potentially unstable fractures with dorsal comminution if identified earlier may have been more suitable to be manipulated and fixed primarily with a K-wire under an anaesthetic in the operating theater under consultant supervision. Eighteen of the remanipulations subsequently required to be stabilized by wires. Similarly, the two Smith's fractures which were manipulated and put in a below elbow cast needed buttress plating at a later stage, which could have been performed as the primary procedure. Also one severely comminuted fracture required an external fixator after a failed initial manipulation. All procedures performed in the theatre were supervised by a consultant. Lack of a fixed protocol for outpatient treatment resulted in unnecessary clinic visits, radiographs and plaster changes, especially in certain undisplaced fractures that were likely to be stable. There were a total of 486 clinic visits. Regulating the number of clinic visits could free outpatient sessions that may be better utilized for patients with other problems. While every opportunity must be given to the junior doctors to learn the skills of manipulation of this common fracture, a set of guidelines could go a long way in helping the decision making as to the appropriateness of their manipulation in the A&E setting. These observations prompted us to come up with certain guidelines for our practice. All SHOs are to be taught the management of distal radial fractures early in their Orthopaedic posting. Undisplaced distal radial and styloid fractures, in patients with good bone quality are placed in a back slab and are reviewed at 1 week and at 6 weeks. Those with intra articular extension, dorsal comminution, and those with associated ulnar fractures are to be informed to the registrar for planned manipulation. Open injuries and those with median nerve symptoms are dealt with even out of hours. Displaced fractures with none of the above are manipulated, if possible under haematoma block by the SHO with previously supervised experience. They are brought to clinic at 1 week with a check X-ray. No X-rays are done at a later stage unless clinically warranted. On removing the plaster the patient is to be discharged to the care of the physiotherapist who would refer the patient back in case of further problems. One of the options being explored is the possibility of manipulating all those fractures without immediate threat to skin or neurovascular structures, on two designated sessions in a week in the day surgery unit. This will provide appropriate senior assessment as well as supervised training. Although this may pose some logistical problems such as theatre and personnel time, it may reduce the overall costs by reducing the time spent in hospital and the need for repeated manipulations. This strategy will have to prove its value and usefulness in clinical practice in a prospective validated study. To our knowledge, these cost estimations provide the best baseline data available to date on the economics of a major public health problem. It is hoped that providing doctors with costing information can change their clinical behaviour and reduce medical costs. This analysis demonstrates that proper primary treatment could yield substantial cost savings by lessening the need for secondary procedures and reducing the psychosocial inconvenience to the patients.  Manipulation under anaesthesia (MUA): 8, Kirschner (K) wiring: 18, buttress plating: 2, ext. fix.: 1 and repair of EPL tendon: 1. Theater times cost £999.00 for a 3 Uncomplicated cases required <5 sessions of physiotherapy and complicated cases between 5–10 sessions (approximately). Cost for each of these patients has been calculated for an average of 5 sessions. Staff wages calculated using middle of pay scales. SHO wages @ 24/h, Registrar @ 30/h and D grade nurse @ 18/h. These are based on 80 h of SHO (orthopaedic and anaesthetic) time, 68 h of Registrar time (including clinic time) and 40 h of nursing time (clinics). The costs are 11p for a roll of wool, 75p for a 6″ roll of plaster, 22p for a bandage and 2.30p for a roll of Scotch cast K wires: Anaesthetic consumables: Propofol @ 4.23 per ampoule (200 mg in 20 ml), Fentanyl @ 0.16 per ampoule (100 μg in 2 ml), Prilocaine @ 1.10 per vial (50 ml), Lignocaine @ 0.55 per amp. Nitrous oxide @ 6.43 (1800 l), oxygen @ 1.86 (680 l), Isoflurane @ 35.25 per bottle. Laryngeal mask @ 2.00, filter @ 3.80, IV Cannula @ 0.71, Airway @ 0.27 20 ml syringe 0.09 2 ml syringe X 3: 0.09 intubation @ 1.95 circulator @ 3.50 face mask @ 3.70 haematoma blocks: 27 @ 1 amp 2%