The calcination of gibbsite to alumina is the last major step in the Bayer process. Despite its commercial importance, little attention has been given to determining the gibbsite thermal dehydration reaction pathway under conditions of relevance to this commercial process. Results from this study show that, at the temperatures and high heating rates relevant to the Bayer plants, gibbsite dehydrates mainly via chi alumina, which then reacts to gamma alumina, theta alumina and alpha alumina. Dehydration via boehmite is a minor reaction pathway. Experimental results are also presented that indicate chi alumina can react to gamma alumina at low heating rates.
                  It was shown that the phase compositions of different refinery smelter-grade aluminas, formed in fluid-bed calciners (FBCs), could be reproduced with laboratory-calcined aluminas by controlling the calcination time.The Bayer process is used for the preparation of alumina from bauxite ore and is of considerable commercial importance. An important intermediate step is the drying and calcination of the gibbsite precipitate to smelter-grade alumina (SGA), in either a rotary-kiln calciner (RKC) or a fluid-bed calciner (FBC). Reaction pathways for the dehydration of gibbsite are presented in However, Ingram-Jones et al. In this paper the gibbsite dehydration pathway, at conditions relevant to the alumina industry, was determined by studying accurate phase composition data obtained at different calcination times ranging from 8 The relevance of the calcination procedure to the industrial scale will be considered by comparing the phase composition of the final (laboratory) product with that of SGA samples prepared using refinery (industrial-scale) calciners. A pseudo-radial gibbsite, similar in size and morphology to that found in the Bayer plants, was used in the calcination studies. A scanning electron microscope image of a “typical” gibbsite grain is shown in Refinery SGA samples were obtained from various refineries around the world operating either rotary-kiln or fluidised bed calciners. Laboratory calcinations were conducted in a muffle furnace. Two nickel crucibles, each containing 1 The laboratory procedure is not intended to be a small-scale physico-chemical model to simulate a refinery calciner. There was no direct control of the water vapour pressure or heating rate. However, by using a small quantity of gibbsite, in a small nickel crucible, it was possible to achieve the rapid heating rates found to be necessary to simulate the calcination process chemistry. XRD traces of the powdered samples (ground for 2 Quantitative analysis of the XRD trace used in-house software, which models the contribution of the boehmite, and the chi, gamma, theta, kappa and alpha alumina phases to the XRD trace and estimates the concentration of each phase in the alumina. Pure-phase aluminas, or mixtures containing known amounts of impurities, were prepared by a number of methods (e.g. The concentration of alpha alumina in an alumina sample was also determined from the intensity of the alpha alumina (0 The accuracy of this technique was checked using synthetic mixtures of pure alumina phases made up to a known composition. The results in The sensitivity of the calculated phase concentrations to the software parameters was determined by deliberate variations on the XRD correction factor, and the relative peak widths of the theta and alpha alumina. The effects are illustrated in It is possible to obtain accurate values for most of these software parameters and they will therefore have minimal impact on the calculated phase compositions. However, it is difficult to determine the relative theta alumina peak width in any sample, yet this parameter can influence the calculated concentrations of chi, gamma and theta aluminas ( A limitation of the method is that it does not allow for any variation in the XRD traces from those of the pure-phase standards used. Thus, it is unable to accommodate changes in the crystal structure occurring between samples, such as changes in the degree of preferred orientation or changes in crystal structure with temperature. The latter could be important if gamma alumina transforms to theta alumina in a displacement mechanism, in which the pores in gamma alumina merge to reduce the stacking faults (as suggested by Zhou and Snyder The current method, however, avoids the need for accurate crystallographic models—the absence of a reliable crystal structure for chi alumina severely limits the use of Rietveld refinement of the XRD trace for quantifying chi alumina/gamma alumina mixtures. The current method also avoids the difficulties in modelling peak anisotropy (i.e. variation in peak widths with ( The measured phase compositions at various times over the first few minutes of calcination at 970 The sample calcined at 970 The results in Results obtained at longer calcination times are shown in The presence of a diffraction peak occurring at ∼2.1 An alternative—although unlikely—reaction pathway is that gibbsite dehydrates via boehmite, and then via a “distorted” gamma alumina, and that it is this phase which fortuitously generates the peak in the XRD trace at ≈50° 2 Approximate crystallite sizes, or sizes of the ordering domains, of boehmite, gamma alumina and alpha alumina were determined by the application of the Scherrer formula The diffraction peaks of the initial gibbsite sample display mild anisotropy and the widths suggest diffracting domains larger than 600 The crystallite sizes of boehmite, present in the samples obtained after 12, 15 or 22 The gamma alumina displays significant peak anisotropy and the crystallite sizes estimated for the (2 The peaks from the alpha alumina, which do not appear to vary with ( It was not possible to obtain Bayer refinery aluminous materials that had been calcined for the short time periods (∼30  The similarities in the phase composition of the numerous laboratory- and refinery-prepared aluminas suggest—but do not prove—that the majority of the refinery SGA forms via the chi alumina pathway. The phase compositions of some refinery SGAs, prepared in a RKC, are shown in It is generally accepted (e.g. Candela and Perlmutter It is uncertain how, or where, gibbsite dehydrates to boehmite in the laboratory system used in the current work. However, XRD data indicates a reduction in the crystallite sizes in going from gibbsite to boehmite, but that there is no significant variation in boehmite crystallite size for calcination times between 8 and 30 Candela and Perlmutter Wilson The observation of a fine, lamellar (0 Zhou and Snyder These results, and the gradual sharpening and splitting of the diffraction patterns as gamma alumina transforms to theta alumina reported by Zhou and Snyder Levin et al. Wen and Yen Kao and Wei Kogure The majority of references indicate that chi alumina reacts via kappa alumina (e.g. When gibbsite is subjected to high heating rates, typically 4700–15,000 Experiments conducted in this study examined the reaction of chi to gamma alumina by subjecting an aluminous material, containing significant (66%) chi alumina, to the same heating conditions as previously employed for the gibbsite. This material was prepared by heating gibbsite from room temperature to 400 However, there is also evidence to suggest that chi alumina reacts to gamma alumina at lower heating rates. Although not explicitly stated by Gan Further experiments using the chi alumina-rich material described above, confirmed that chi alumina can react to gamma alumina at relatively low heating rates. Heating this aluminous material from 400 to 700, at 0.5 In another experiment supporting the transformation of chi alumina to gamma alumina at a slow heating rate, a material consisting of 91% chi alumina and 9% boehmite, prepared by heating Alcoa Hydral gibbsite from room temperature to 400 The dehydration of a refinery gibbsite has been studied in a laboratory furnace at 970 The phase composition was determined for a number of refinery SGA samples. For each refinery SGA sample, calcined in a FBC, it is possible to obtain a laboratory-calcined alumina with a similar phase composition. These similarities suggest—but do not prove—that the majority of the refinery SGA forms via the chi alumina pathway. An aluminous material, containing significant (66%) chi alumina, and gibbsite were subjected to the same heating conditions and the variation in phase compositions with time were observed to be similar, confirming that relatively high heating rates favour the reaction of chi alumina to gamma alumina. Evidence was also presented showing that chi alumina can react to gamma alumina at lower heating rates. Sincere thanks go to the industrial sponsors of the AMIRA P575 project for both their financial support and their active participation throughout the project, namely: Alcoa, Worsley Alumina, QAL, Comalco, Alcan Nabalco, Lurgi, Norsk Hydro, Billiton Aluminium, and Pechiney. Special thanks go to Steven Rosenberg of Worsley Alumina for his contributions to the project. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the Australian Government’s Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy.