Located at the northwestern border of the Bohemian Massif in the European Variscides, the Erzgebirge is one of the most important Sn–W–Mo, Ag, Cu–Zn–Pb–In, U, and Bi–Co–Ni metallogenetic provinces in Europe. The ca. 1100 silver-base metal veins in the Freiberg metamorphic core complex are characterized by two principal types of late-Variscan polymetallic vein-type mineralization: (1) Quartz-bearing As(–Au)–Zn–Cu(–In–Cd)–Sn–Pb–Ag–Bi–Sb polymetallic sulphide association (‘kb’ ore-type), and (2) Carbonate- or quartz-bearing Ag–Sb polymetallic sulphide association (‘eb’ and ‘eq’ ore-type). High indium concentrations in the Freiberg silver-base metal vein district and other base metal and tin-polymetallic deposits suggest that the Erzgebirge is among the largest In-enriched ore provinces known worldwide. The first modern geochemical bulk ore and microprobe analyses addressing In distribution in the Freiberg district are presented in this paper and are compared with published data.
                  Polymetallic veins in the Freiberg district show a wide range of In concentrations up to 0.15 wt.% with an average of 176 ppm (n
                     =82). The ‘kb’ ore-type veins in the ‘Freiberg’ (up to 1560 ppm In, mean 253 ppm, n
                     =36), ‘Muldenhütten’ (up to 785 ppm In, mean 284 ppm, n
                     =10), and ‘Brand’ ore fields (up to 638 ppm In, mean 156 ppm, n
                     =15) occur the highest In resources in the Freiberg district. Two types of In concentration can be distinguished, based on microanalytical study. The first type was found in sphalerites of the Zn–Sn–Cu sequence (as presented in one of the figures in this article) which show In contents up to 0.38 wt.%, significant Cd up to 1.11 wt.%, and Ga contents up to 0.17 wt.%. Iron-rich sphalerites (mean 12.9 wt.% Fe, n
                     =202) from a representative Ag-base metal vein are characterized by In contents between 0.03 and 0.38 wt.% (mean 0.16 wt.% In, n
                     =202). A negative correlation exists between (Zn+Fe) and Cd, and (Zn+Fe) with In, reflecting structural substitution of In and Cd in sphalerite. The second type of In enrichment was identified as microscopic Zn–Cu–Sn–In–S grains in pyrite of a Cu-rich ‘kb’ vein. Quantitative electron images of these grains (up to 6 μm) shows high levels of Zn (5.6 to 52.8 wt.%), Cu (4.1 to 19.6 wt.%), Sn (0.3 to 17.2 wt.%), and In (1.3 to 2.9 wt.%). In the ternary (Cu+Ag)–(Sn+In)–(Zn+Fe) diagram, compositions of the Zn–Cu–Sn–In–S phase in a representative Cu-rich ‘kb’ ore-type sample fall along a linear compositional trend between Fe–Cu–In-rich sphalerite (Zn0.76Fe0.11Cu0.06In0.01S) and the ideal fields of petrukite and sakuraiite (Cu0.29Zn0.08Fe0.32In0.02Sn0.13S). Both types of In enrichment support that the In-mineralization is associated with the Zn–Sn–Cu sequence (‘indium stage’) of the ‘kb’ ore-type association. Based on mineralogical, geochemical, isotopic, fluid inclusion, age relationships and structural data, the high In concentrations in base metal veins in the Erzgebirge may indicate an influence of fluids expelled from magmas during emplacement of post-collisional lamprophyric and rhyolitic dikes. The high In concentration of Cd- and Fe-rich sphalerites from Ag-base metal and Sn-polymetallic deposits in the Erzgebirge is an additional argument for a genetic link between these mineralization stages. Such evidence is significant for exploration of magma-affiliated In deposits in post-collisional settings.A wide variety of indium-bearing ore deposits is described in the literature (cf. The elements In 1885, an unknown mineral was found at the Himmelsfürst mine in the southern part of the Freiberg district. Hydrothermal Ag-rich base metal vein-type deposits ( Indium, cadmium, and other trace metals in sphalerites from different ore-types of the Freiberg district have been analyzed in the past by optical emission spectroscopy (e.g., The Erzgebirge (Saxonian Erzgebirge and Bohemian Krušné hory) is part of the metamorphic basement of the internal Mid-European Variscides on the NW-border of the crystalline Bohemian Massif core complex ( Late Variscan acidic and lamprophyric (sub)volcanics intruded into the Erzgebirge metamorphic core complex and the older stage of postkinematic granite intrusions. The evolution of the postkinematic magmatism is related to late- and post-collisional extension on the NW-borderline of the Bohemian Massif. The post-collisional magmatism is controlled by deep fracture zones (cf. The polymetallic vein-type deposits in the Freiberg district are subdivided into certain mining areas (ore fields) including the North (Obergruna, Kleinvoigtsberg, Mohorn), Central (Halsbrücke, Freiberg, Muldenhütten), and South sub-district (Zug, Brand–Erbisdorf The base metal veins of the Freiberg district are characterized by two principal types of late-Variscan polymetallic sulphide mineralization ( Quartz-bearing As(–Au)–Zn–Cu(–In–Cd)–Sn–Pb–Ag–Bi–Sb polymetallic sulphide vein-type mineralization [according to Carbonate- and quartz-bearing Ag–Sb polymetallic sulphide vein-type mineralization [according to In the Freiberg district, gneisses, mica-schists, and amphibolites are rarely significant altered in a distance of more as 2 m from the ore veins. The wall rock alteration zone of the ‘kb’ veins is characterized by silification, sericitization, and more or less occurrence of disseminated sulphides (mostly pyrite and arsenopyrite; Mineralogical description of 82 representative vein-type samples (‘kb’, ‘eq’, and ‘eb’ ore-type) from the Freiberg district is included in Representative slabs of bulk ore samples from typical Ag-base metal veins of the study area ( The studied samples are typically ores from ‘kb’, ‘eb’, and ‘eq’ veins ( Mineral identification and relative age relationships were obtained from the examination of polished thick and thin sections in reflected and/or transmitted light. Based on bulk geochemistry, In-rich samples were selected for detailed mineralogical and electron-microprobe analyses. Electron-microprobe analyses were carried out on a JEOL JXA 8900 electron microprobe at the TU Bergakademie Freiberg under conditions of 20 kV and 25 nA, and a beam diameter of 2 to 4 μm. Reproducibility of the results is better than 2%. Natural minerals, and synthetic mineral equivalents were used as standards (e.g., the ‘In The first modern geochemical bulk ore analyses of the Freiberg district are presented in this paper ( The highest In concentration occurs in the ‘kb’ ore-type veins of the Freiberg (up to 1560 ppm In, mean 253 ppm; On average, sphalerite-bearing polymetallic ores from the Freiberg district are enriched in Cd ( The highest average Au contents were analyzed from samples of the ‘eq’ ore-type (up to 9 ppm Au, mean 1.9 ppm; Two types of In concentration can be distinguished, based on microanalytical study. The first type is characterized by microprobe analyses of representative sphalerites (222, 50437-1) which show an In average of 0.16 wt.% ( The second type of In concentration is related to microscopic Zn–Cu–Sn–In–S grains in pyrite of a ‘kb’ ore-type sample ( Indium concentrations in the polymetallic veins in the Freiberg district show a wide range (0.1 to 1560 ppm In, mean 176 ppm, Statistical evaluations of In concentrations in polymetallic Sn-base metal deposits have shown that chalcopyrite-rich sphalerite ores generally contain the highest In concentrations (cf. Indium concentrations are also related to microscopic Zn–Cu–Sn–In–S grains in sulphides (e.g., pyrite; Hydrothermal Ag-rich Sn-bearing base metal veins and vein-like metasomatites of other districts in the Erzgebirge (Marienberg, Wolkenstein, Jáchymov) and the Moldanubian terrane (Kutná Hora, Havlíčkův Brod) are comparable to the ‘kb’ ore-type of the Freiberg district ( Significant In mineralization is reported from Sn-polymetallic vein- and greisen-type deposits worldwide (France, Japan, Bolivia, Russia, Canada; cf. High In contents were measured from sphalerites (up to 4.7 wt.% In) of the volcanic-hosted epithermal Au–Ag-base metal vein-type deposit Prasolov, Kuril Island Arc, Russia ( High-temperature (up to 940 °C) gases (e.g., HCl, HF) of active magmatic systems (e.g., Kudryavyi and Merapi volcanoes) are transporting In and elements such as Zn, As, B, Tl, Pb, Sn, Mo, W, Cd, Cu, Ag, Te, Au, As, and Se ( Obvious correlations with magma-affiliated Sn-polymetallic, hydrothermal Ag-rich base metal, epithermal Au–Ag-base metal, Cu(–Mo) porphyry and VMS deposits, and the occurrence in fumaroles in active volcanic systems may suggest the magmatic origin of In in these ore deposit types ( Magmatic volatiles may be responsible for unusual trace element compositions of ore deposits containing In, Sn, Se, and Bi, perhaps also because of high concentrations of potential metal ligands (i.e., fluorine, chlorine). In hydrothermal solutions, In(III)chloride complexes such as InCl The following mineralogical, geochemical, isotopic, fluid inclusion, age relationship, and structural features indicate a genetic link to a magmatic-(mantle-) related source of late-Variscan Ag-base metal mineralization stages: Typically for ‘kb’ ore-type veins are quartzes with low-salinity (up to 9 wt.% NaCl equivalent) primary fluid inclusions which show homogenization temperatures between 250 and 410 °C into liquid and minor into vapor state ( High-temperature hydrothermal systems are also indicated by the occurrence of ‘chalcopyrite diseases’ in Fe-rich sphalerites with significant In concentrations ( Another possible indication for high-temperature fluids is the occurrence of Bi-minerals (e.g., aikinite; see Using a temperature of 370 °C for ‘kb’ ore-type quartzes, and 250 °C for ‘eb’ ore-type carbonates, the means of calculated At the Freiberg district all Ag-base metal sulphide The major group of Pb isotope ratios of galena-bearing ores and galena-separates from Ag-base metal and Sn–W–Mo–Bi–Cu–Li–F mineralization stages in the Erzgebirge form a distinct cluster ( Relatively and absolutely age and spatial relationships suggest a genetic link between Ag-base metal veins and lamprophyric magmatism in the Erzgebirge ( The similar paragenetic, geochemical, isotopic, and fluid inclusion characteristics of the ‘kb’ mineralization stage in the Freiberg district and those in the Kutná Hora and Havlíčkův Brod districts (Moldanubian Terrane/central Bohemian Massif) attest to limited wall rock control on the mineralizing processes ( Based on temporal, mineralogical, geochemical, fluid inclusion, as well as S and Pb isotope data, a genetic link between Sn-polymetallic and Ag-base metal ore deposits in the Erzgebirge is postulated ( The ‘eq’ veins in the North sub-district show mineralogical (e.g., pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, arsenopyrite, electrum?) and geochemical (Ag, Au, Zn, Pb, Cu, Sb, As, Hg) similarities to low-sulphidation epithermal-style Ag–Au mineralization (cf.  The Freiberg base metal vein district and other late-Variscan base metal and Sn-polymetallic greisen-, vein- and skarn-type deposits (e.g., Zinnwald/Cínovec, Ehrenfriedersdorf–Geyer, Pöhla) show that the Erzgebirge is among the largest In-enriched provinces worldwide. The economic In potential is indicated by bulk ore concentrations of up to 3000 ppm In in the Freiberg, Marienberg and Annaberg districts. Sphalerite from the Zn–Sn–Cu sequence of the ‘kb’ ore-type is the most important host mineral for In in the Freiberg district. Indium concentrations are also related to microscopic Zn–Cu–Sn–In–S grains in sulphides of the Cu- and Sn-rich ‘kb’ ore-type. The significant In concentrations in sphalerite from Ag-rich base metal (vein-type) and Sn-polymetallic (vein-, greisen, and skarn-type) deposits in the Erzgebirge indicates a genetic relationship between these late-Variscan mineralization stages. Both deposit types are potential In hosts in the Erzgebirge, and may account for several hundred tonnes of In metal. Indium-rich base metal veins in the Erzgebirge (e.g., Freiberg, Marienberg) and the Moldanubian Terrane (e.g., Kutná Hora), and In-rich Sn-polymetallic mineralization in the Erzgebirge show spatial-time relationships to lamprophyric and A-type granitic intrusions. This close relationship may be interpreted in the way of mantle-derived magmatic origin of In-rich fluids. The Erzgebirge may represent a key district for the identification of mantle-derived In mineralizing processes in the geological past. Lamprophyric and/or anorogenic granitic intrusions could be significant for the exploration of high-temperature In-enriched polymetallic sulphide ore deposits. Highest concentrations of Au (up to 9 ppm), Sb (up to 2.14 wt.%), and Hg (up to 16.4 ppm) occur in the low-indium ‘eq’ ore-type samples which show mineralogical and geochemical similarities to epithermal-style Ag–Au mineralization. We express our gratitude to U. Schwarz-Schampera for fruitful discussions and constructive comments to the manuscript. We gratefully acknowledge K. Rank for providing sample material from the ore deposit collection of the TU Bergakademie Freiberg, M. Drechsel for technical support and friendly comments, and P.M. Herzig for organizational support. We are very grateful to M. Štemprok and Ch. Gauert for their detailed reviews and valuable constructive comments that improved the manuscript. The authors thank the editor N.J. Cook for his helpful and friendly comments. This work has been financially supported by the Bergbau-Berufsgenossenschaft Bochum and Gera through a grant to TS and the Leibniz program by the DFG through a grant to P.M. Herzig and his working group.