The third meeting on “Coal Research and its Applications”, organised by the Coal Research Forum, was held at Aston University in September, 2000. Following the format and pattern established by the previous meetings in this series held at Loughborough University (1996) and the University of Nottingham (1998), the aim of the meeting was to bring together the university-based research community and those in industry who also carry out coal research or have an interest in the applications of such research. Over 70 delegates attended the three day meeting to receive over 60 presentations consisting of three keynote lectures, some 40 other lectures and half as many posters. The keynote lectures covered the status of cleaner coal technology (Richard Tabberer, Powergen UK) meeting emissions legislation for power generation from coal (Nick Burdett, (TXU Europe) and modelling of coal combustion (Alan Williams, University of Leeds). These lectures provided overviews of the present position in important areas which form the basis of current coal research needs. Not surprisingly, in view of the clear indication that pf combustion of coal will remain a major source of power generation in the near future, pulverised coal combustion was the subject of the largest number of the presentations. Coal handling and beneficiation, advanced power generation, carbonisation and fundamentals, conversion and characterisation were the subjects of the remainder. The first session of the meeting was on coal handling and beneficiation. It included contributions on coal cleaning by both chemical and physical methods, characterisation of coal handleability and particle-size distributions, and problems associated with discharge from hoppers and the conveyance of coal in practice. Advanced power generation was addressed in presentations covering a wide range of problems from ammonia formation in fluidised-bed gasifiers to co-combustion of waste wood with coal. The effects of coal-particle size, gasification rates for coal chars, lignite gasification and the behaviour of coal minerals, especially the trace elements, in combustion processes were also covered. Carbonisation drew only three papers and clearly a main requirement in this area lies in the characterisation and evaluation of coal blends incorporating non-traditional components so as to reduce the cost of the coke without any significant loss in coke quality or causing possible damage to the coke ovens. Fundamentals, conversion and characterisation covered contributions ranging from ‘new’ analytical and characterisation methods based on microwave chemistry, column chromatography, image analysis and the drop tube furnace, to PAH emissions, coal as an adsorbent and char formation. However the continued significance of pf combustion was demonstrated with a host of papers ranging from studies, based on CFD, advanced software control and modelling, of low NO All the presentations were of a high quality and ensured good discussion took place both during the sessions and afterwards outside of the lecture theatre. The poster session, which had contributions in most of the above mentioned topic areas, was held in conjunction with a reception sponsored by Powergen, Innogy, TXU and Rio Tinto. If the volume of noisy discussion is a true criteria, then this session was undoubtedly highly successful. The majority of the attendees were from UK universities but more than one fifth came from industry. It is also a pleasure to record that representatives were present from Spain, Portugal, Greece, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Holland, Japan, USA and Australia. Thanks to the organisers and the contributors of presentations, the attendees were treated to informative and knowledgeable presentations, 18 of which are presented in this Special Issue, and were able to participate in some most enjoyable and lively discussions.The success of the meeting ensures the continuation of this series and a fourth meeting to be held at Imperial College, London, is already planned for September 2002.