The AEI cavity of SAPO-18 catalyst was modified with zinc cations with the conventional ion exchange procedure. The cavity modification effectively tunes the product selectivity, and shifts the products from mainly propylene to comparable production of ethylene and propylene in methanol to olefin (MTO) reaction. The incorporation of zinc ions and the generation of bicyclic aromatic species in the AEI cavity of SAPO-18 catalysts introduce additional diffusion hindrance that exert greater influence on the relatively bulky products (e.g. propylene and higher olefins), which increase the selectivity to small-sized products (e.g. ethylene). It appears that the incorporated zinc cations facilitate the generation of lower methylbenzenes which promote the generation of ethylene. The cavity modification via incorporating zinc ions effectively tunes the product selectivity over SAPO molecular sieves with relatively larger cavity, which provides a novel strategy to develop the potential alternative to SAPO-34 catalysts for industrial MTO reaction.Light olefins, including ethylene and propylene, as important chemicals, have a plethora of applications in the current petrochemical industry. In the regions with a plenty of coal and natural gas, the methanol-to-olefin (MTO) reactions have attracted great interest [ It is widely accepted that the cavity structure and pore size of molecular sieve exert great impacts on the product selectivity in the methanol to hydrocarbons (MTH) reaction [ As a potential alternative MTO catalyst, various approaches such as the synthesis of MeASPO-18 [ SAPO-18 was synthesized via hydrothermal crystallisation from aluminophosphate-based gel. H-SP18 was exchanged with NH X-ray diffraction (XRD) were carried out in PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer using a Cu tube equipped with monochromator ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was conduct with Hitachi TM3000 operated at 15 kV [ Nitrogen adsorption-desorption measurements were carried out over Micromeritics ASAP 2020 at –196 °C. Before the analysis, the samples were evacuated at 350 °C under vacuum. The total surface area was evaluated based on the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) equation. The surface area and microporous volume were calculated by the t-plot method [ The bulk chemical composition was determined with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analyses carried out on a Philips Magix-601 spectrometer [ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on Thermo ESCALAB 250Xi. with a monochromatic Al The temperature-programmed desorption of ammonia (NH The The catalytic test was carried out in a quartz tubular fixed-bed reactor. The sample (1000 mg, 40–60 mesh) loaded in the fixed-bed reactor was activated at 500 °C in an Ar flow for 1 h. Then the temperature was decreased to 480 °C. The methanol aqueous solution with a H Typically, 50 mg catalysts loaded in the quartz tubular reactor were activated at 600 °C for 30 min, subsequently the temperature was decreased to the reaction condition (480 °C). Flowing He (12.42 mL/min) was bubbled in methanol at 14 °C, which gave a WHSV of 2.0 h The chromatographic method was adopted to analyse the diffusion properties of probe molecules in the catalyst bed. The samples were activated at 500 °C under helium for 30 min. Pulse containing probing molecules (ethylene 4.87%, or 1-butylene 4.90%, helium gas as the background gas) was diffused into the catalyst bed of fresh or coked catalysts for just 0.6 s, then the concentration of probing molecules was recorded via Mass Spectrometer Gas Analyzer (Pfeiffer Omnistar GSD 301 T3) [ The ethane adsorption isotherms were carried out in an intelligent gravimetric analyzer (IGA 100) from Hiden Isochema Ltd. Typically, the sample (100 mg) was loaded into the microbalance bag. Before the adsorption measurements, samples were degassed at 400 °C for more than 10 h. The ethane isotherms were obtained at 20 °C. The curve of mass changes during the uptake process was determined at 10 mba [ The coke amount of catalysts was determined by thermogravimetry using SDT Q 600 analyzer in the temperature range from 25 °C to 900 °C under flowing air. And catalysts after MTO reaction for 2 min at 480 °C were maintained isothermal at 150 °C for additional 0.5 h so as to completely remove the adsorbed water [ The carbonaceous species confined in the catalysts were analysed according to the dissolution/extraction process [ The XRD patterns of the H-SP18 sample confirm the pure phase of SAPO-18 (Fig. S1), and H-SP18 sample are composed of cubic crystals with sizes ranging from 1–2 μm (Fig. S2). After zinc cations modification, no phases related to ZnO are observed, implying the homogeneous distribution of zinc species in Zn-SP18 [ As shown in The Si distributions in H-SP18 as well as the Zn distributions in Zn-SP18 are further investigated by a combination of XPS ( As shown in The products distribution as well as the ratio of C The correlation of product selectivity and carbon number over H-SP18-2min and Zn-SP18-2min are analysed. As shown in The influences of the cavity modification via zinc ions in the product distribution in the initial period of MTO reaction are deeply investigated. As shown in The acidities of the as-prepared samples (H-SP18, Zn-SP18) are analyzed by NH In addition, as shown in For SAPO-34 catalyst, with the proceeding of MTO reaction, owing to the accumulation of large-sized carbonaceous species confined in the CHA cavity, the products suffer from increased diffusion hindrance, leading to remarkable product shape selectivity and enhanced selectivity to light olefins, especially ethylene [   As seen in Furthermore, the diffusion property of ethylene and 1-butylene in Zn-SP18-2min and H-SP18-42min was compared in depth. By contrast to Zn-SP18-2min, much sharper RTD profile are observed over H-SP18-42min, implying that markedly enhanced diffusion limitation are encountered for the generated products over H-SP18-42min compared with Zn-SP18-2min during the diffusion out of the AEI cavities to the effluent phase. Therefore, higher selectivity to ethylene and light olefins ought to be observed over H-SP18-42min compared with Zn-SP18-2min. Nevertheless, in our study, close product distributions are observed over H-SP18-42min and Zn-SP18-2min (Fig. S3), implying that factors in addition to the increased diffusion hindrance account for the enhanced selectivity to ethylene for zince modified SAPO-18 catalysts IGA is also applied to investigate the diffusion property of probing molecule in fresh catalysts (H-SP18 and Zn-SP18), as well as catalysts with close product distributions after MTO reaction (Zn-SP18-2min and H-SP18-42min). Ethane is adopted as probing molecule considering the similar diffusivity relative to ethylene [ Moreover, H-SP18-42min exhibit decreased saturation adsorption capacities of ethane compared with Zn-SP18-2min. The diffusion properties of ethane in the crystals are attained from the Fick's second law (Eq. S1) [ The carbonaceous species retained in catalysts are extracted and analyzed by GC-MS. As seen in Furthermore, enhanced amount of hydrogen-deficient bicyclic aromatic compound such as naphthalenes and methylnaphthalenes are observed over Zn-SP18-2min. Therefore, the incorporated zinc cations promote the generation of naphthalene and derivatives, and enhanced the diffusion limitation, which effectively tune the product selectivity and switch the major formation of propylene to comparable production of ethylene and propylene. The relationship between the selectivity of light olefins and the amount of carbon deposit are analyzed and shown in The AEI cavity of SAPO-18 catalyst was modified with zinc ions with the conventional ion exchange procedure. The zinc ions accommodation as well as the generation of bicyclic aromatic species in the AEI cavity of SAPO-18 catalyst introduce additional diffusion hindrances that exert greater influence on the bulky products, which increase the selectivity to small-sized products such as ethylene, and shifts the products from mainly propylene to comparable production of ethylene and propylene in MTO reaction. The incorporated zinc ions facilitate the generation of lower methylbenzenes which favours the ethylene formation. An effective strategy via cavity modification to switch the product selectivity and enhance the selective to ethylene and light olefins is thus proposed, for SAPO molecular sieves with relatively larger cavity in the MTO reaction, which provide a potential direction to develop the alternative to SAPO-34 catalysts for industrial MTO application.