A new area of application of Fracture Mechanics methods is proposed: the determination of surface deformation induced by internal volume change (e.g. due to underground hydrocarbon extraction). The finite layer-like zone of volume alteration is modelled as a crack, that is as a continuous distribution of dislocation loops. This approach allows the determination of surface deformation and can serve as the basis for monitoring of the volume alteration from surface measurements. In a limiting case of nearly uniform deformation of the reservoir boundaries the model consists of a single dislocation loop (an inserted cylindrical body of a constant height) in half-space and results in simple approximate expressions for the normal and tangential displacement components of the free surface. For the example of subsidence in the Groningen gas field the proposed method produces more realistic results describing reality better than the traditional models based on representing the reservoir as a collection of independent dilation centres. Also, analytical expressions are proposed for the nuclei – the basic Green’s function type expressions that allow representation of a planar horizontal reservoir layer of an arbitrary shape as a distribution of infinitesimal dislocation loops. For the case of a cylindrical reservoir, the nuclei integration recovers the exact distribution of the surface displacements.Models of displacement field at free surface caused by material/resource extraction or pore pressure alteration inside the body are necessary for both the direct determination of surface deformation (the direct problem) and the reconstruction of internal volume deformation based on surface measurements (the inverse problem). While traditionally the main area of subsidence modelling is petroleum engineering, subsidence can also be caused by mining (e.g., Given that the reconstruction of deformation of an internal part of the rock mass involves solving inverse problems, developing simple (even approximate) models of surface deformation is paramount. The classical approach used in geotechnical and geological applications is based on the representation of the zone of volume alteration as a distribution of non-interacting dilation centres, e.g., Geertsma Essentially, the paper hopes that the philosophy and mathematical tools of Fracture Mechanics can be used in geotechnical applications for prediction and mitigation of the related safety hazards, not directly related to fracture initiation and propagation. Hereafter we will use the geotechnical problem of surface subsidence (surface deformation) associated with reservoir depletion as an example of this non-traditional Fracture Mechanics application. The modern inversion to determine underground reservoir deformations from surface displacement data and modern analysis of 4-D seismic signatures in overburdens of hydrocarbon reservoirs are based on the numerical non-linear inversion schemes. Frequently they are using the analytical Geertsma's These analytic and semi-analytic approaches to describing free-surface subsidence induced by underground fluid extraction such as a production of hydrocarbons, Here The parameters of the reservoir usually differ from those of the surrounding medium. The quantity Expressions Segall To obtain an expression for free surface displacement describing real situations, solutions For example, expression (11) of This simple result is in contradiction with the notion that the main term of asymptotics Let us assume that the reservoir layer is thin enough, so that the perturbations of the field quantities in this layer can be represented by their values at the reference depth. Moreover, we can neglect the depth diffusion of the pore pressure in the reservoir, because it is thin and the boreholes are distributed approximately homogeneously in its body. Suppose that due to fluid injection/extraction, pore pressure perturbation The vertical stress Moreover, the pore pressure perturbation is related to the pore-fluid volume increment per unit rock volume (see e.g., Eq. 2.176, The fluid volume extracted or injected, Finally, we express the total reservoir strain produced by the fluid operations through the displacement of the free surface, This equation disagrees with Eq. As an example let us consider the case of the Groningen gas field in the Netherlands (Geertsma Groningen gas field has approximately the scale of 30 × 30 km. Its depth is approximately 3 km and its thickness is less than 0.3 km. This is a very thin reservoir being one of the reservoirs with the largest area. Thus, it is one of the best examples for using the 1-D asymptotics (the depth is one order smaller and the thickness two orders of magnitude smaller than the lateral extension). The values of subsidence that we obtained here should be understood as an estimate of the subsidence caused by poroelastic strains expected for corresponding thickness of the productive reservoir. Moreover, recent measurements of the strain in a specially instrumented borehole in the Groningen reservoir and their comparison with geodetic measurements of the subsidence at the borehole (see e.g., Fig. 4.26 in Cannon and Kole The reason for such a disagreement with Geertsma solution as follows. As shown in a straightforward consideration by Rudnicki The subsidence is ultimately caused by pore pressure decrease. However, this cannot be reduced to the emergence of (negative) strain nucleus (dilatation centres), as assumed by Geertsma In other words, the Geertsma's nucleus-of-strain cannot provide a correct 1D asymptotics for the free surface displacement because by its derivation the free surface effects are neglected and the reservoir is modelled as a superposition of independent sources of isotropic pure volumetric strains (i.e., multiple interaction effects between these centres are completely neglected; such multiple-scattering type interactions are also affected by the boundary conditions and cannot be taken into account by a collection of independent isotropic sources in an infinite continuum). The Geertsma’s result might only be applicable for nearly point-like deep reservoirs. Our paper proposes a new approach to the problem of subsidence based on the dislocation model. We will also compare the results with the Geertsma Let both the reservoir and host (overburden) rocks be isotropic with Young’s moduli Initially, we only consider the limiting case when the displacement of the reservoir boundaries is uniform over the biggest part of the reservoir area. Therefore, the displacement of the reservoir boundaries is assumed to be (a) uniform and (b) dominated by its normal component. This configuration is shown in Effectively the reservoir is split into equal elements, each producing vertical displacement. The distribution of such elements is not immediately determinable. For that reason, we first consider a case when these elements are distributed uniformly producing uniform deformation and then extend the results to the non-uniform displacement. This will reduce the subsidence problem to an elastic problem of a dislocation loop (an area with a specified constant displacement discontinuity) in an elastic half-space. We will show that this approximation gives the correct 1D asymptotics. Assuming that the displacement is much smaller than the reservoir dimensions we will model the reservoir as a thin disc of radius The solution of a problem for elastic half-space with free boundary and a dislocation loop (the edge dislocation loop) characterised by the above Burgers vector can be found in Ohr Here τ =  For determining the radial It is easy to see from Eq. Integrals In our quest for simple expressions for subsidence we consider separately asymptotics of near lateral, ρ ≪ 1, and far lateral, ρ ≫ 1, zones For ρ ≪ 1, given that the Bessel functions The first integral in The second integral in For ρ ≫ 1, replacing the variable of integration Here the last equality is taken from Prudnikov Combining these asymptotics (Eqs. For τ = 0 Thus point τ = 0, ρ = 1 ( Now using expressions From Eqs. Furthermore, since the first lines of formulas From here the asymptotics for displacements of the surface above the centre of a shallow reservoir can be obtained by setting It is important to highlight that the above considerations assume that the reservoir thickness,  The above asymptotic expressions, Since the dislocation loop is infinitesimal, its dimensions are much smaller than any reservoir depth, therefore asymptotic expressions We note here that the corresponding Geertsma’s nuclei can be obtained from Eqs. Returning to the dislocation model, displacement and stress fields from an infinitesimal dislocation loop expressed through the dislocation moment are independent of the loop shape (e.g.,  Therefore expressions Furthermore, for deep planar reservoirs of any shape  For the asymptotics of shallow reservoir For general depths of the reservoirs, at On the other hand, the non-interacting dilation centres model So, the solutions are different in the coefficient and the second terms.  A mechanical reason for the difference is that the combination of non-interacting force dipoles (the strain nucleus in Geertsma’s terminology or centre of dilation, e.g., Segall et al. The character of the difference between the dislocation-based and the non-interacting dilation centres solutions, Representing fractures via distributions of dislocations or dislocation loops in half space has been previously used in Fracture Mechanics (e.g., In the model presented here we used a dislocation loop of a circular shape. The results presented and analysed in this paper demonstrate that such a presentation has its merit. Of course other shapes can also be considered (e.g., The proposed approach can be applied to expressing deformation induced by a horizontal hydraulic fracture with constrained opening, that is a large fracture with bridges distributed all over it, He et al. While the full modelling of subsidence requires the use of numerical methods, the need for simple formulae still remains, especially in the view of using it for inverse problems associated with reservoir monitoring based on measurements of surface deformation. We propose a Fracture Mechanics approach for subsidence modelling based on approximating a deforming reservoir by a dislocation loop – an area over which the displacement undergoes uniform jump (displacement discontinuity). In the approach developed in the paper the displacement of the reservoir boundaries becomes a composite variable representing the effect of both pore pressure and the reservoir stiffness reduction and ultimately controlling subsidence. In essence, this model reflects the deformation nature of large slim reservoirs parallel to the free surface, whereby the displacement component normal to the reservoir dominates. We proposed a simple single dislocation loop model, which express the free surface displacements in terms of integrals of Bessel functions. We also developed simplified elementary function expressions that provide a reasonable approximation. This approximation provides a healthy balance between the accuracy and simplicity. In the limiting case of long thin shallow reservoirs our solution coincides with the one obtained in a 1D limit of an infinite layer. This is in contrast to the well-known non-interacting dilation centres (Geertsma's) solution, which does not reproduce this limiting case. Moreover, in practical situations like the Groningen gas field, our solution provides more realistic estimates of the subsidence. The subsidence for shallow reservoirs is smaller, while for deep reservoirs is larger than those predicted by the Geerstma’s model based on replacing the reservoir with a uniform distribution of isotropic pressure centres. In addition to an exact formulation we propose simple approximate expressions for the vertical and horizontal displacement components of the free surface for all its points. Also analytical expressions for the point-like nuclei (the basic Green’s function type expressions) have been derived based on representation of a planar horizontal reservoir of an arbitrary shape as a distribution of infinitesimal dislocation loops. This allows very efficient computations of the free surface deformation due to resource extraction and fluid operations in a planar horizontal reservoir of an arbitrary shape. For a particular case of a uniformly deformed cylindrical reservoir, the method recovers the single dislocation loop model. The proposed approach opens up new avenues of applications for Fracture Mechanics community. In this approach the fracture mechanics methods are applied to interacting giant crack-like objects for which the induced deformations rather than their propagation are important. It can be used for monitoring of a range of engineering situations The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper We thank the sponsors of the