Standard stability analysis in geomechanical rock slope engineering for open-pit mines relies on a simplified representation of slope geometry, which does not take full advantage of available topographical data in the early design stages of a mining project; consequently, this may lead to nonoptimal slope design. The primary objective of this paper is to present a methodology that allows for the rigorous determination of interramp and bench face slope orientations on a digital elevation model (DEM) of a designed open pit. Common GIS slope algorithms were tested to assess slope orientations on the DEM of the Meadowbank mining project's Portage pit. Planar regression algorithms based on principal component analysis provided the best results at both the interramp and the bench face levels. The optimal sampling window for interramp was 21×21 cells, while a 9×9-cell window was best at the bench level. Subsequent slope stability analysis relying on those assessed slope orientations would provide a more realistic geometry for potential slope instabilities in the design pit. The presented methodology is flexible, and can be adapted depending on a given mine's block sizes and pit geometry.The creation of rock slopes in open-pit mines results from the inputs of planning, production, and geomechanics groups. According to The planning group now routinely uses software tools for assessing geology, mineral resources, ultimate pit, and mine planning to provide plans and layouts to the production group. The geomechanics group's contribution is not fully integrated in the workflow of rock slope creations because of the inability to perform stability analysis with compatible software tools. Some efforts have been made to integrate geomechanical design into commercially available mine design tools, such as the Stereonet Viewer and Terrain modules in Datamine ( A more complete representation of pit geometry should comprise the three main components of an open-pit slope design: overall slope angle, interramp angle, and bench face angle ( In hard rock open-pit mines, the most common slope stability issues at the bench and interramp levels are structurally controlled. Typical stability analysis involves kinematic and limit equilibrium analysis for planar, wedge, and toppling failure modes ( Currently, geologists and mining engineers use block modeling at the prefeasibility, feasibility, and full mine production stages in assessing mineral resources, mining reserves, and final pit layouts. At prefeasibility and feasibility stages, the best practice lays in obtaining structural information from outcrop, drillcores and oriented drillcores mapping. This information is used to build a structural model of the pit area. At these design stages, the target levels of data confidence for structural models are 40–50 and 45–70% for prefeasability and feasibility, respectively ( Adequate slope orientation determination is necessary to better integrate the work of the geomechanical group into the slope creation process. This paper will present a formal methodology to compute slope orientation at the interramp and bench levels within mine design software tools relying on block modeling. The applicability of the most commonly available GIS algorithms for determining slope orientation will be reviewed from a mining engineering perspective. The Meadowbanks open-pit case study will be used for validating the applicability of the various algorithms and for evaluating the most appropriate methods. The slope orientations thus obtained would arguably be the best suited for assessing slope stability in subsequent stability analyses of pit slopes. This section presents the most common slope algorithms used to compute slope orientation as a local property of the DEM. Slope orientation may be defined in various ways. The vocabulary used by geologists, mining engineers, geotechnical engineers, and GIS specialists can differ significantly. This paper uses mining rock mechanics engineers' terminology ( Most commonly, the orientation of a plane may be defined by two angles: Dip: the maximum inclination of a plane to the horizontal. Dip direction: the direction of the horizontal trace of the line of dip, measured clockwise from north. Alternatively, two angles defining a line can be used: Plunge: the dip of the line with a positive plunge below the horizontal. Trend: the direction of the horizontal projection of the line measured clockwise from North.  The method of The first partial derivative of cell The first partial derivative of cell Dip and dip direction are then calculated according to the following relationships: The method of The first partial derivative of cell The first partial derivative of cell Dip and dip direction are then calculated according to Eqs. The methodology proposed by The first partial derivative of cell The first partial derivative of cell Dip and dip direction are then calculated according to Eqs. As stated previously, the method proposed by In this paper, principal component analysis (PCA) was used to fit a planar regression that minimizes the perpendicular distances from the elevation data to the fitted plane. With principal component analysis, a large number of independent variables can be systematically reduced to a smaller, conceptually more coherent set of variables ( In this approach, the sampling window is not limited to nine cells but can be of any size. The sampling window is centered on the cell where the slope orientation is computed. In this paper, we use the PCA methodology, presented in the Matlab statistics toolbox ( The following equation was solved: The first two columns of the PCA matrix ( The various algorithms presented in The Portage deposit is in highly deformed, magnetite rich iron-formation rocks. The Portage gold deposit is defined over a 1.85 Pit optimization was performed to define the ultimate pit for the Portage project. The ultimate pit is simply the pit limits presenting the greatest net present value (NPV). This type of optimization is performed in standard mine design software tools. Besides economic parameters, such as mining and milling costs and selling price, geometrical parameters must be defined as input parameters in any pit optimization analysis. During the initial optimization of the Portage pit, different slope angles were used for different regions of the pit based on the results of preliminary slope stability analyses. These angles were used as upper bound angles during the optimization process.  Using the final pit DEM defined by 106,354 cells, slope orientations at the interramp and bench face levels were assessed. The block size defining the block model is 2.5 Slope orientation was first assessed at the interramp level. Four methods were used to assess these orientations on the entire pit. The  A stereographic approach was then used to compare the results.   From A more formal way of comparing distributions is a Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (KS test). A 5% significance level was selected to accept or reject the null hypothesis that two distributions are from the same continuous distribution. This test was first used to compare dip direction distributions. All distributions obtained with the various algorithms were compared with the others. A total of 171 KS tests were performed. The results are presented in the lower portion of The results of the dip distribution comparison using the KS test are presented in the upper part of Another systematic method for comparing results commonly used in GIS approaches is the root mean square error (RMSE). This method is used on a cell-by-cell basis over the entire DEM. A resulting grid is compared to a reference grid to produce an output of differences between true and calculated slope orientation. RMS can be calculated for these differences in order to estimate the error in interramp orientation values. Usually, RMSE is computed for slope dip only. In this paper, to have a better representation of overall slope orientation, the differences are computed by measuring the acute angle between the pole of the true slope orientation and the pole of the calculated slope orientation. The acute angle is computed on a cell by cell basis according to For this paper, the true value for slope orientation is not known. From the previous sections it could arguably be stated that within a range of 17×17- and 25×25-cell windows, plausible interramp orientations are obtained. Accordingly, RMSE analyses were performed using three different grids for “true” orientation: 17×17, 21×21, and 25×25. The results are presented in Based on the RMSE, KS test, histogram, and stereonet analysis results, it can arguably be stated that interramp slope orientations can be calculated adequately on the DEM of a final pit layout from PCA planar regression algorithms. For the Meadowbank case study, a window size of 21×21 cells, or 52.5 A slope orientation map can be produced on a cell-by-cell basis, and this was elegantly done by An approach similar to the one used for interramp slopes was used to evaluate slope orientation at the bench level. The algorithms presented in  The results of an RMSE analysis are presented in  Standard practice in geomechanical rock slope engineering for open-pit mines relies on the simplified representation of slope geometry, which does not take full advantage of the available topographical data. This may lead to nonoptimal slope design. Furthermore, the geomechanical group often works “offline” with their own set of tools during the slope-creation process. The primary objective of the paper was to present a methodology allowing for rigorous evaluations of interramp and bench slope orientations on the DEM of a designed open pit. The proposed approach leads to improved workflow in integrated slope creation through the use of a common software tool for all slope design aspects. First, the slope orientations obtained provide a rigorous assessment of slope orientation at both the interramp and the bench levels. Second, less frequent slope orientations within the final pit can be identified easily. Third, the various slope orientations can be located on a map of the pit, thus allowing an adequate spatial representation. Finally, subsequent slope stability analysis relying on those defined slope orientations offers a much better concordance between the as designed and the as-built slopes. The methodology was validated with a case study: the Meadowbank Portage pit. The results suggest that for this particular pit, planar regression using PCA is better suited for slope orientation determination at both the interramp and the bench levels. The optimal sampling window for interramp was 21×21 cells while 9×9 cells are best suited at the bench level. The methodology is flexible, and depending on a given project's block sizes and pit geometry, the optimal window size can be assessed, and slope orientation determined rapidly and consistently. Furthermore, the proposed methodology can consider a change in the initial planned pit topography both rapidly and efficiently. The DEM can be modified at any stage, based, for example, on new topographical information gathered through surveying, or modified based on new pit layouts dictated by new economic or production constraints. The new DEM will arguably be different from the previous one. Thus slope orientations at both interramp and bench levels will be affected. A new slope orientation assessment will be performed. The initially defined window size will in most cases be adequate for the new pit geometry. Nevertheless, if the mining method is modified substantially, for example, by using double or triple benching, the optimal sampling window can be reassessed rapidly using a the proposed PCA planar regression analysis methodology. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada. The authors are also grateful to Pierre Matte, Daniel Leblanc, and Julie Bélanger of Agnico Eagle Mines for providing the data and constructive comments.