Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a well-characterized bioactive lipid mediator, which is involved in development, physiology, and pathological processes of the cardiovascular system. LPA can be produced both inside cells and in biological fluids. The majority of extracellularLPAis produced locally by the secreted lysophospholipase D, autotaxin (ATX), through its binding to various β integrins or heparin sulfate on cell surface and hydrolyzing various lysophospholipids. LPA initiates cellular signalling pathways upon binding to and activation of its G protein-coupled receptors (LPA1-6). LPA has potent effects on various blood cells and vascular cells involved in the development of cardiovascular diseases such as atherosclerosis and aortic valve sclerosis. LPA signalling drives cell migration and proliferation, cytokine production, thrombosis, fibrosis, as well as angiogenesis. For instance, LPA promotes activation and aggregation of platelets through LPA5, increases expression of adhesion molecules in endothelial cells, and enhances expression of tissue factor in vascular smooth muscle cells. Furthermore, LPA induces differentiation of monocytes into macrophages and stimulates oxidized low-density lipoproteins (oxLDLs) uptake by macrophages to form foam cells during formation of atherosclerotic lesions through LPA1-3. This review summarizes recent findings of the roles played by ATX, LPA and LPA receptors (LPARs) in atherosclerosis and calcific aortic valve disease. Targeting the ATX-LPAR axis may have potential applications for treatment of patients suffering from various cardiovascular diseases.Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) is a bioactive lipid mediator required for the maintenance of homeostasis in multiple physiological functions and pathological processes. LPA possesses a glycerol backbone with an aliphatic fatty acid chain attached at sn-1 or sn-2 position ( LPA has important pro-atherosclerotic, pro-inflammatory, and pro-thrombotic properties during development of various diseases. Functions of LPA are driven through the activation of specific G protein-coupled transmembrane LPA receptors (LPARs). So far six LPARs have been identified and named LPA1-6 ( Intracellular produced LPA works not only as a precursor or an intermediate in the synthesis of cell phospholipids, but it can also serve as an intracellular signalling molecule. LPA can be produced inside cells through sequential hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by a phospholipase D (PLD) and a phospholipase A (PLA) LPA produced in the circulation acts in an autacoid way. Autotaxin (ATX) is responsible for the production of extracellular LPA using various lysophospholipids as substrates ( There are three isoforms of ATX, namely ATX-α, -β, and -γ. ATX has a broad tissue expression such as in brain, kidney, and lymphoid organs; and ATX can be produced locally by a plethora of cell types Plasma LPA was originally reported to be produced by activated platelets, especially under pathological conditions such as inflammation and atherosclerosis Research findings on LPARs expression in blood cells/vascular bed cells and LPA-induced functional responses in context of cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are summarized in LPA contributes to the regulation of three endothelial cell-dependent processes: leukocyte recruitment, angiogenesis, and vascular functions (  Endothelial cell dysfunction is a characteristic of CVDs that is crucial to the initiation and development of atherosclerosis. LPA influences some of endothelial cell functions that affect the structure and the properties of the vascular endothelium. LPA stimulation decreases endothelial cell confluence Smooth muscle cells are a major cell type in the hyperplasic vascular lesions seen in atherosclerosis LPA stimulated smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration LPA also modulates monocyte recruitment and activation ATX as well as the LPA-induced functional responses have been extensively studied in various pathological conditions. Comprehensive reviews on the roles of lysophospholipids in the development of atherosclerosis and other CVDs have been published previously LPA plays an important pro-thrombotic role and contributes to the development of atherosclerotic plaques. Atherosclerosis is a slowly progressing arterial disease that is characterized by inflammatory and regenerative processes, resulting in vascular remodelling and formation of atherosclerotic plaques. Although plasma LPA level is in low µM range, unsaturated long chain acyl-LPA species can be predominantly accumulated in the atherosclerotic lipid-rich core The primary location of newly generated LPA at the cell surface can be in proximity to its receptors Within the digestive tract, lysophospholipids coming from the diet are hydrolysed by ATX to produce LPA in the intestinal lumen Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a life-threatening complication of atherosclerosis. In ACS, most of the infarction is due to the formation of an occluding thrombus on the surface of the atherosclerotic plaque. LPA has been suggested to increase the susceptibility of atherosclerosis and its complications. For instance, a cross-sectional study of consecutive patients showed a significant relationship between plasma LPA concentrations, especially long chain unsaturated LPA species, and ACS Calcific aortic valve stenosis (CAVS) is the most common chronic and multifactorial valvular disorder among the calcific aortic valve diseases (CAVDs). Pathological changes associated with CAVD include progressive fibrosis, large mineral deposits in the lipid-rich area of aortic valve, leading to gradual obstruction of the aortic valve orifice. Fibrosis and valve mineralization are two intertwine factors that play crucial roles in the pathological hemodynamic changes of CAVDs In addition to lipoproteins transported ATX, human explanted mineralized aortic valves express high levels of ATX compared to non-mineralized valves. A 60% increase in ATX enzymatic activity and a 1.5-fold increase in the levels of LPA in human mineralized aortic valves were reported, respectively So far, no treatment targeting the ATX-LPA axis in CVDs has been fully developed. However, pharmacological approaches targeting this pathway in other pathological conditions, such as pulmonary and liver fibrosis, have been suggested (summarized below and in Several ATX inhibitors have been evaluated in animal models and phase 2 clinical trials ( A phase 2 clinical trial of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis has been completed using the ATX inhibitor GLPG1690 Systemic injection of anti-LPA antibodies was shown to reduce inflammation and neurodegeneration in a zebrafish and in a mouse model of spinal cord lesion A genome-wide study highlighted a relation between CADs and the PPAP2B gene coding for LPP3 The LPA1/3 antagonist Ki16425 has been used to study LPA signalling in CVDs Other LPAR antagonists have been evaluated in clinical trials. The LPA1 antagonist BMS-986020 was used in a phase 2 clinical trial for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis Taking together, emerging evidence shows that the ATX-LPA axis is involved in CVD development through: (1) production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators, (2) neointima formation, (3) immune cells recruitment, and (4) oxidized phospholipids uptake. All those actions are involved in and associated to atherosclerosis development and increased risk of atherothrombosis. Therefore, ATX and LPARs, especially LPA1, are potential targets to mitigate the development of CVDs. Since the ATX-LPA axis is druggable, future studies should evaluate whether ATX inhibitors and LPAR antagonists represent promising strategies for preventing CVDs such as atherosclerosis and CAVD. This project was supported by a research grant from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (MOP-142210). YZ is supported by the scholarship from The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.