This paper presents the results of an experimental study on the early age strength and changes in the self-desiccation process of cemented paste backfill (CPB) that contains blast furnace Slag (Slag-CPB) and sulphate. Slag-CPB samples with different initial sulphate concentrations (0, 5000, 15,000 and 25,000 ppm) are prepared and cured in well-sealed molds at early ages (1, 3, 7 and 28 days) in room temperature (∼23 °C). Mechanical and hydraulic conductivity tests are performed on the samples, in which the suction and electrical conductivity of the Slag-CPB specimens are monitored. Furthermore, microstructural analyses are conducted on the Slag-CPB and slag-cement paste samples. The results show that sulphate can have a positive or negative effect on the early age strength and self-desiccation of Slag-CPB, i.e., cause an increase or decrease in strength and acceleration or reduction in the amount and rate of self-desiccation, depending on the initial sulphate content and curing time. This study also shows that an understanding of the positive or negative effect of sulphate on the early strength and self-desiccation of Slag-CPB is critical for designing cost-effective CPB structures with high early strength, speeding up mining cycles or assessing the deterioration of CPB caused by high sulphate attack to ensure safety in mining.Cemented paste backfilling is one of the most extensively used methods in mining engineering for mine waste disposal and ground support. This technology can provide both economic and environmental benefits by increasing the extraction rate of ore and minimizing environmental problems [ Up to 75% of the cost of CPB can be attributed to binder consumption [ Early age (≤28 days) strength is one of the most important performance properties of CPB. High early strength can significantly reduce or eradicate the risk of liquefaction and increase mine productivity [ One of the frequently found factors that affect the strength of CPB is its initial sulphate content. Sulphate is commonly found in CPB systems [ Suction development is another important performance property of CPB. One of the main important causes of suction development in CPB systems is the reduction in the internal relative humidity or self-desiccation [ Previous studies [ Therefore, the main objective of this paper is to experimentally study and present the results of the early age strength development and self-desiccation of Slag-CPB with different initial sulphate concentrations. Artificial tailings (silica tailings, ST) were used in the experiments. The main objective for choosing ST is to eliminate the uncertainties related to minerals and chemical elements (e.g., pyrite) found in natural tailings that cannot be controlled, which may affect the cement hydration process and thus affect the interpretation of the results. The mineralogical composition and physical characteristics (grain size) can be controlled with the use of ST. ST consist of almost all quartz (99.8 wt.%) and contain about 43 wt.% fine particles (diameter < 20 μm), and thus can be classified as medium tailings. ST have a similar particle size distribution as the average of nine types of Canadian mine tailings ( PCI blended with blast furnace slag (Slag) with a weight ratio of 50/50 was used as the binder in all of the samples. Distilled water (DW) was used as the basic water to obtain an accurate sulphate concentration. Specific amounts of ferrous sulphate (FeSO With a constant binder content of 4.5 wt. % and water-cement (w/c) ratio of 7.6, the required amounts of tailings, binder and mixing water were mixed for about 7 min to obtain a homogeneous CPB mixture. Then, the prepared CPB samples were placed into plastic cylinder molds that are 5 cm in diameter and 10 cm in height. Manual vibration was used to remove the entrapped air from the molded CPB samples. After that, all of the CPB samples were well sealed with a plastic cover and tape to avoid the evaporation of water. Samples of Slag-cemented paste (Slag-CP), with a constant w/c ratio of 2 (to simulate the high water content of CPB), were also prepared for microstructural analysis by using the same procedure described above. In addition, larger plastic cylinders (10 cm in diameter and 20 cm in height) were used for the monitoring tests. All of the Slag-CPB, Slag-CP and monitored samples were cured at room temperature (23 °C) at early ages (1, 3, 7 and 28 days). After curing was carried out for the required length of time, various tests were performed on the Slag-CPB and the Slag-CP samples. UCS tests were carried out by following ASTM C 39 and performed on the Slag-CPB specimens at different early ages (1, 3, 7 and 28 days). The loading capacity and loading rate of the press machine are 50 kN and 1 mm/min, respectively. Each test was repeated at least twice to ensure accuracy and the average value was regarded as the strength of the tested sample. To study the effects of the initial sulphate concentration on the pore structure, such as the coarseness and connectivity, and the cracking of the Slag-CPB, which can affect the strength, stability and fluid transportability or permeation properties of CPB structures, saturated hydraulic conductivity tests were performed on the Slag-CPB samples with various sulphate contents and cured for 28 days. The hydraulic conductivity tests were conducted in accordance with ASTM Three microstructural analysis techniques were used to assess the effect of sulphate on the microstructural properties (e.g., pore structure, binder hydration products) of Slag-CPB at early ages. All of the samples for the microstructural analysis were first dried in an oven at 50 °C to remove the free water. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis tests were conducted on slag-cement paste samples to analyze the effect of sulphate on the mineralogical composition of the hydration products of the Slag-CPB samples. A Scintag XDS 2000 x-ray diffractometer was used. Thermal gravity (TG) and differential thermal gravity (DTG) analyses were also performed on the Slag-CP samples to determine the effect of sulphate on the cement hydration products formed in the Slag-CPB. In an inert nitrogen atmosphere, the weight loss of the samples along with the thermal treatment was simultaneously recorded at the rate of 10 °C per minute up to 1000 °C. Mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) tests were performed with a Micromeritics Auto-Pore III 9420 mercury porosimeter on the Slag-CPB specimens to analyze the effect of sulphate on their pore structure. Suction monitoring was performed on the larger Slag-CPB samples (10 cm in diameter and 20 cm in height) with initial sulphate contents of 0, 5000 and 25,000 ppm to examine the effect of sulphate on the changes in the self-desiccation process of Slag-CPB at early ages. A matrix water potential sensor (MPS-6) was placed in the center of the Slag-CPB samples. As indicated in Section Electrical conductivity monitoring is an effective means of evaluating the progress of cement hydration, and tracking the structural changes that occur within the hydrating cementitious materials [  In This argument of the sulphate induced inhibition of cement hydration is in agreement with the monitoring results shown in The results presented in  First, the inhibition which has been demonstrated by electrical conductivity monitoring and discussed in Section Secondly, the coarsening of the pore structure of Slag-CPB caused by the formation of excessive amounts of expansive minerals such as ettringite is an additional factor that contributes to the decrease of early age strength. The excessive crystallisation or expansive pressure developed by the ettringite could lead to physical damage, and thus decrease the strength. This coarsening of the pore structure is supported by the results presented in The presence of ettringite is evidenced through the TG/DTG ( Finally, sulphate absorption by the C-S-H which can lead to the formation of lower quality C-S-H gel, should be considered as an additional factor that contributes to the reduction of the early age strength of Slag-CPB with sulphate. This is also in agreement with work by Jelenić et al. [ However, First, it is well known that slags are chemically activated not only by CH (generated by the hydration of the clinker phases), but also by the sulphate ions [e.g., Secondly, the precipitation of an adequate amount (not excessive) of expansive minerals (ettringite) within the pores of the CPB sample with 5000 ppm of sulphate results in the reduction of the total porosity of the CPB, and thus in the increase of its strength. This argument is consistent with the conclusions of several previous studies on the effect of sulphate on the microstructure of CPB samples [e.g.,  The results show that a sulphate concentration of 5000 ppm has a negative effect on the suction development in the CPB for up to 4.8 days of curing time. After 4.8 days, the sulphate significantly increases the suction or increases the self-desiccation of the CPB (positive effect). Furthermore, The significant increase of suction and rate of increase of the suction observed for the samples with 5000 ppm of sulphate after 4.8 days of curing indicates that this concentration significantly promotes self-desiccation during this period of time due to the activation of sulphate ions in the Slag. The mechanisms for the activation of Slag by sulphate have also been described and discussed above. It should be noted that the effect of the sulphate activation on the self-desiccation of Slag-CPB with 5000 ppm of sulphate is relatively significant. For example, the sample obtained a suction value of 49.6 kPa (55.3% higher than that of the sulphate-free sample) at 7 days and 72.1 kPa (36.7% higher than that of sulphate-free sample) at 28 days. This finding is very important with respect to the cost-effective design of CPB and barricades as well as optimizing the mining cycle. The results on the strength and development of the self-desiccation of Slag-CPB with different initial sulphate concentrations at early ages presented and discussed above provide useful technical information for stability assessment and design of CPB, and also have practical implications. On the one hand, a sulphate content of 5000 ppm appears to have a positive effect on the early age (7 and 28 days) strength and self-desiccation of the studied Slag-CPB samples. High early age strength and suction gain are beneficial to the increase of effective stress and promotion of the arching effect of CPB. This improvement can contribute to the reduction in the liquefaction susceptibility of CPB structures and the early opening of barricades, which contribute to speeding up the mining cycle. This is obviously associated with better underground mine safety and economic benefits for mines. On the other hand, considering that high sulphate concentrations cause reduction of self-desiccation and decrease of early age strength development in Slag-CPB, adequate measures should be taken to ensure work safety in underground mines in which CPB with high concentrations of sulphate is used. Furthermore, high sulphate concentrations will delay the opening of the barricades and thus slow down the mining cycles. This will obviously result in the reduction of mine productivity. This paper presents the experimental results of research work that assesses the early age strength and changes in the self-desiccation process of Slag-CPB with various sulphate concentrations. Slag-CPB samples with different initial sulphate concentrations (0, 5000, 15,000 and 25,000 ppm) are prepared and cured in well-sealed molds for 1, 3, 7 and 28 days at room temperature (23 °C). Mechanical tests are performed to assess the early age strength development of Slag-CPB and the microstructural analyses provide technical information about the effect of sulphate on the microstructural evolution of CPB at early ages. The electrical conductivity monitoring provides additional results for a better understanding of the hydration process of a slag-cement-sulphate system. The suction monitoring results present important findings on the development of self-desiccation in Slag-CPB with different sulphate concentrations. The obtained results reveal that the initial sulphate content is a determinant of whether sulphate has a positive or negative effect on the early age strength and self-desiccation of Slag-CPB. It is found that a comparatively low sulphate content (5000 ppm) has a negative effect on the strength of Slag-CPB after 1 day and 3 days, and positive effect after 7 and 28 days of curing. However, high sulphate concentrations (15,000 and 25,000 ppm) lead to strength reduction at all early ages and the magnitude of the negative effect is increased with increases in the sulphate concentration. It is found that a sulphate content of 5000 ppm can inhibit and delay binder hydration for up to 3 days after mixing and then significantly contribute to the activation of the Slag which leads to additional formation of C-S-H and ettringite and denser microstructures. Nevertheless, high sulphate concentrations result in strong inhibition of the binder hydration and cause excess formation of ettringite, sulphate absorption by C-S-H and coarsening of the pore structure of Slag-CPB and decrease of the suction within the CPB. It is also observed that in Slag-CPB systems that have sulphate, there is competition with respect to binder hydration between the two following mechanisms: (i) the sulphate activation of Slag for producing additional secondary C-S-H and ettringite (strength increasing factor); and (ii) the retardation or inhibition of cement hydration by the sulphate ions (strength increasing factor at early ages). For a given binder content, the dominant factor will depend on the initial sulphate content in the Slag-CPB system. The results in this paper will provide a better understanding of the behavior of Slag-sulphate CPB at early ages. Application of the results will aid mine engineers with the designing of a better backfill structure while reducing the cost of backfilling operations and enhancing mine productivity. The authors would like to thank the