Rare earth elements (REE) are key components of many emerging green technologies. This leads to an increase in demand for REE, hence to the development of new deposits, such as the Niobec carbonatite rare earth deposit in Quebec, Canada. One of the valuable minerals in this deposit is monazite, one of the primary sources of REE. Although there has already been previous research investigating monazite flotation, most of these are focused on monazite from heavy mineral deposits. Since minerals from different deposits may behave differently, it is important to investigate the flotation behavior of monazite from carbonatites as well. This work investigates the surface properties of monazite from carbonatite deposit through zeta potential analyses. Electrophoretic zeta potential measurements were conducted to identify the interaction of monazite and dolomite, a gangue mineral commonly associated with carbonatites, with different collectors (namely sodium oleate, organic phosphoric acid and benzohydroxamic acid). Floatability of the minerals were analyzed through microflotation tests, to obtain the potential conditions for effective separation. Zeta potential measurements of monazite and dolomite showed that the isoelectric point (IEP) for both minerals occur at a pH of approximately 5. Sodium oleate, benzohydroxamic acid and Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) have been shown to adsorb on to monazite at pH 7. The results suggest that benzohydroxamic acid can be selective at neutral pH condition, sodium oleate can be potentially used in reverse flotation of monazite in acidic condition and Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) can be a potential collector for monazite. However, the use of reagents such as activators and depressants is suggested to achieve a more selective separation.The rare earth elements (REE) consist of yttrium (Y) and the lanthanides, which can be further divided into light REE (La to Eu) and heavy REE (Gd to Lu, and Y) ( Monazite (REPO In general, oxhydryl collectors (e.g., carboxylates, phosphoric acid esters and hydroxamates) have been the focus of rare earth mineral flotation studies due to their efficiency ( General classification of collector adsorption mechanisms is physisorption and chemisorption ( In this study, the surface properties of monazite (from carbonatite) and dolomite in the presence of Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) were investigated through zeta potential measurements and microflotation tests. These were compared to the minerals’ behavior in the presence of conventional REM collectors such as sodium oleate (carboxylate) and benzohydroxamic acid (hydroxamate). For a good introduction to zeta potentials and for the relevance to mineral flotation, the reader is referred to Monazite from Eureka Farm 99 (carbonatite deposit) in Namibia was purchased from the Mineralogical Research Company (U.S.A). Dolomite from Sterling Hill Mine in New Jersey, the gangue mineral investigated, was obtained from Ward’s Science (U.S.A.). Benzohydroxamic acid was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Canada), sodium oleate was obtained from Fischer Scientific Company (Canada) and Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) was provided by Clariant (Canada). The frother (F150) was provided by Flottec (Canada). The potassium chloride that was used as supporting electrolyte for zeta potential measurements was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Canada); while the hydrochloric acid and the potassium hydroxide that were used as pH modifiers, were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Canada). The purchased minerals were not pure, thus concentration steps (such as gravity and/or magnetic separation) were conducted prior to surface chemistry and flotation experiments. Since these methods are particle size dependent, mineral samples were first pulverized to 100% passing 212 Purified mineral samples were first pulverized using a Planetary Monomill Pulverisette (Fritsch, Germany) to obtain a particle size smaller than 10 Microflotation tests were carried out using a modified Partridge-Smith cell ( Mineral samples within the particle size range of – 106 X-ray diffraction analyses of the mineral samples were conducted using Bruker D8 Discovery X-Ray Diffractometer (Cobalt source). The diffractograms of the samples before and after purification are presented in Zeta potential curves of monazite and dolomite with 1 x 10 The zeta potential measurements of dolomite (  Among the three collectors, Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) appeared to have the greatest effect on the zeta potential values of the two minerals. After addition of this collector to suspensions of monazite or dolomite, the resulting zeta potential values were comparable to one another. Although these indicated adsorption of the collector on the surface of the minerals, the small difference of the zeta potential values suggested a challenging separation between the two minerals if they were to coexist in a flotation system. With sodium oleate, the zeta potential values of monazite and dolomite have significant differences at acidic pH. This observation would suggest that at these pH conditions, sodium oleate has a certain degree of selectivity between monazite and dolomite. Microflotation of monazite and dolomite was conducted using increasing dosages of collectors as presented in The recovery of each mineral at different pH conditions is shown in  In The results of microflotation tests using Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) are presented in The results have showed that dolomite flotation results with sodium oleate and Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) follows a decreasing floatability trend with increasing pH. For dolomite flotation with sodium oleate, at pH values below the IEP, it has been suggested that the mechanism of adsorption of the collector is by hydrogen bonding between the oleic acid molecules (RCOOH) and the H The trend for dolomite flotation with Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) can also be explained by the speciation of dolomite and the mechanism of collector adsorption. It was proposed that the mechanism of adsorption of this collector with calcium minerals involves the formation of coordinate bond between P Benzohydroxamic acid did not float dolomite, which is expected due to weak Ca-hydroxamate complex formation. Moreover, dolomite is a sparingly soluble mineral with a K For monazite flotation, the three collectors appear to have achieved a good floatability at a pH at approximately 7. From the speciation diagram of monazite ( The surface chemistry of monazite and dolomite has been investigated through electrophoretic zeta potential measurements and microflotation tests with different collectors – benzohydroxamic acid, sodium oleate, and Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid). The IEPs of dolomite and monazite both occur at pH around 5. This suggests that well-chosen chemisorbing flotation reagents are necessary to separate this two minerals in a mixed flotation system. In this study, the zeta potential measurements after addition of collectors have indicated significant collector adsorption at certain pH conditions. These results corresponded well with the microflotation results. It was found that direct flotation of monazite can be achieved using benzohydroxamic acid at pH 7. Reverse flotation of monazite can also be possible using sodium oleate at pH 4; and Flotinor 1682 (organic phosphoric acid) at pH 4 and 7. However, it is suggested that depressants or activators are necessary to obtain a more effective separation. The trends of dolomite and monazite floatability were explained by the speciation of these minerals in solution and the mechanism of collector adsorption. Both dolomite and monazite flotation behaviors were affected by their solubility. For dolomite, it was greatly affected by the solubility of metal cations – Ca The authors would like to acknowledge