Materials education in the United States and Europe is today provided to students by a wide range of departments, programs and institutes. Only a small fraction of these are what we term “core MSE” departments. These departments practice the discipline of MSE, providing undergraduate and graduate education in, and carrying out research on, the four elements of the field and their interrelations. The elements are structure, processing, properties and performance. Viewing this MSE as a discipline (while simultaneously as a part of a larger discipline) provides new directions for, and freedom in, curriculum reform. It also provides a framework for developing a focus for our research efforts and guiding their direction.Three technologies are widely recognized today as key to future prosperity of developed nations, and are already major driving forces for global economic growth. These are information technology, biotechnology, and materials science and engineering. Materials science and engineering (MSE) enables the other two key technologies and affects our lives directly in many ways, by lowering the cost and improving the performance of manufactured goods, by leading to development of new structures and devices based on new materials, and by providing means for ecological remediation and protection. Materials have been central to the growth, prosperity, security, and quality of life of humans since the beginning of history. Only in the last 30 The broad field of materials science and engineering seeks to explain and control one or more of the four basic elements: The structure and composition of a material; including the type of atoms and their arrangement as viewed over the range of length scales (nano-, meso-, micro-, macro-scale). The synthesis and processing by which the particular arrangement of atoms is achieved. The properties of the material resulting from the atoms and their arrangement, that make the material interesting or useful. The performance of the material, that is, the measurement of its usefulness in actual conditions, taking account of economic and social costs and benefits. These four elements were shown in the 1989 Materials Study Various ways have been employed in the past to categorize the materials of interest to practitioners of our field. A recent benchmarking study of the National Academy of Science Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP) divided the field into the ten major subfields shown in Practitioners of materials science and engineering receive their education in a wide range of academic departments and programs. At the undergraduate level, it is taught in schools of engineering, in departments with purely materials titles (e.g. “Materials Science and Engineering”, or “Metallurgy and Materials Science”), and in departments in which materials is combined with another discipline (e.g. “Materials and Chemical Engineering”). Also included are materials programs housed in departments of other disciplines (e.g. “Mechanical Engineering”). A recent National Science Foundation/SRS Survey lists approximately 1100 metallurgy/materials bachelor's degrees awarded each year in the recent past (1990–1995) by materials departments At the graduate level, materials science and engineering is taught in the above materials departments. It also comprises a part of the graduate program of most engineering departments, physics, chemistry, and now biology. Approximately 600 master's degrees and 450 doctorates in metallurgy/materials were awarded each year during 1990–1995 from materials departments. Based on rough estimates of the 1989 Materials Study The different academic departments have come to the multi-disciplinary materials field from quite different vantage points. Chemistry departments have historically been interested in individual atoms and molecules and their interactions, but increasingly they are turning to condensed phases. The trend was accelerated by the NRC report of 1985, “Opportunities in Chemistry” Solid-state physicists, perhaps even more than chemists, begin by tackling fundamental problems, and then choosing materials on which to work. They too have moved their major focus from individual atoms to condensed phases. They may begin with interest in the long-standing question of the behavior of highly correlated electron states, but then end up being interested in high temperature superconductivity. Or they may start trying to understand how to build from fundamental atomic properties to properties of materials, and then become interested in properties of real electronic or optical materials. Chemical engineering, once primarily focussed on the large primary chemical and oil refining industries, is turning strongly today to downstream industries, to technological areas of growing industrial and societal importance including many in the materials field, biomaterials, electronic and optical-photonic materials, polymers, etc. Recent reports on future directions for chemistry and chemical engineering emphasize the opportunities in the materials field for members of these disciplines Materials departments today have mostly evolved from former metallurgy, or mining and metallurgy, departments. These departments have the distinction of being the ones that provide (most of them) an undergraduate program focussed on one or more materials, emphasizing the four elements of the field and their interrelationships. With regard to the USA, we are concerned here primarily with a segment of these materials departments, with those that have a broad materials focus and have an undergraduate as well as graduate academic program leading to the doctorate. These are referred to in this paper as “core MSE” departments. The organization of universities in Europe is extremely variable, and so both comparisons and valid statistics are hard to come by. British universities are organized in academic departments, just like those in the USA and Canada, and a substantial number are called nowadays by names in which the word “materials” has pride of place. Universities in India and Australia are organized on the same pattern. On the Continent of Europe, however, with a few minor exceptions, the unit of organization is the “institute”, which is frequently highly specialized (e.g. “materials forming”), and several institutes in the same university may jointly constitute what in the “Anglo-Saxon” world (to use a term beloved by French politicians) would be a single department. Those institutes are sometimes linked in a faculty—the Germans use the term “Fachbereich”; thus in the renowned University of Göttingen, a number of separate physics institutes (some simply called the First, Second and Third Institute of Physics) are linked in a Faculty of Physics, which would not happen in the Anglo-Saxon academic world. Some institutes, taking Germany as an example, have names such as “Materialkunde” and “Werkstoffwissenschaft”; together these two are closely comparable with MSE. Many institutes have more specific titles, such as for instance “Eisenhüttenwesen und Giessereikunde” (even more unwieldy), which means “steelmaking and science of casting”. Gradually such services as technical libraries are being combined for a group of institutes. In Italy, it appears it is current government policy to merge institutes into departments, though in the Netherlands there is evidence of a contrary trend. The history of the names of specific institutes can mirror a change of attitudes over decades. Thus in Göttingen, an Institute für Metallkunde was renamed, by a new professor, Institut für Metallphysik und Allgemeine (i.e. general) Metallkunde and eventually only Metallphysik remained. After another change of professor, it has become Institut für Materialphysik. Some years ago, the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Materialkunde investigated the scientific/technological character of various materials-related institutes in German universities and published the results In France, the nomenclature of academic divisions was mostly settled in the eighteenth century: names such as “physiologie animale” and “physiologie vegetale” can still be read on some academic doorways. This has posed difficulties in some areas, such as molecular biology, which was not widely familiar 200 In some other countries, for some reason, the study of materials has lagged behind the rest of Europe. Thus, in Spain, according to a recent Europe-wide survey, there are only five relevant institutes, and in Sweden (in spite of its distinguished and sustained contributions to world metallurgy) there are only four. But in assessing such numbers, one must bear in mind the populations of different countries; Sweden, for instance, though large in area is sparsely populated; its record in materials science education (metallurgy is still to the fore) is particularly distinguished. The dispersion of academic organization in most Continental countries into specialized institutes no doubt owes something to the ultraflexible nature of academic study in past centuries. Thus, in the past undergraduates in Germany could wander from professor to professor (each institute was associated with a single “ordinary” professor; there were also some “extraordinary” professors, subsidiary posts despite the lofty adjective. Not only that, students could also migrate from one university to another and eventually take their degree at their final port of call. There was no overarching strategy to a course of study. Today, an undergraduate is expected to stay in a single university throughout, and in many places he has to choose his institute at the start and stick to that; in others, there are possibilities of migrating from one institute to a neighboring one. The ASM Of the foregoing, 41 are departments which have “materials” in their title, provide bachelor's through Ph.D. degree programs and are not combined with another discipline (e.g. have titles including the words “Materials Science and Engineering”, or “Metallurgical and Materials Engineering”). These are the “core MSE” departments. There are in addition two such departments that do not provide a doctorate and which are graduate only. There are six independent materials departments, which grant only graduate degrees, and 14 departments, which are joint with another discipline (e.g. “Chemical Engineering and Materials Science”). There are 27 materials programs within other engineering departments or simply school-based, and 14 materials-specific academic departments (e.g. “Polymer Science and Engineering”, or “Metallurgy and Mining”). The foregoing comprise the 104 US Metallurgy/Materials departments and programs. The 41 core MSE departments comprise the heart of our field with respect to engineering education. These are the departments, which collectively take on the task of formulating and delivering a broad materials education at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, and across materials classes. They do not have a special bias towards other disciplines as they would if they were embedded in, or allied with, departments peripheral to the materials field. Thus, it is these departments which define our portion of the field of engineering within academia. If we are ultimately to be able to view our materials departments as more than a part of a broad multi-discipline, it is to these core MSE departments we must turn for leadership. The core MSE departments provide the lion's share of undergraduate materials degrees in the USA A tally of data from the ASM “Metallurgy Materials Education Yearbook” indicates that in 1997, these departments awarded 955 bachelor's degrees, had some 2600 graduate students in residence, with an estimated 619 full-time, departmentally based faculty members. It is very gradually becoming possible to obtain moderately reliable information, both specific and statistical, about academic departments and institutes on the Continent of Europe. (We shall use the word “institute” to represent both kinds of divisions). There is now a Federation of European Materials Societies (FEMS), bringing together 19 societies in 17 countries (not including Russia) Further complication results from the fact that in 1992, a group of advanced educational institutions in Britain known as “polytechnics” were all turned into independent universities. Before this happened, degree courses and doctoral research programs in polytechnics were vetted and approved by a central organization of experts in London, but afterwards they became free to approve their own courses and research programs. A number of what are now called the “new universities” have departments concerned with materials. This sudden change makes statistical before-and-after comparisons unreliable. The best estimate we can reach of the current number of closely materials-related departments in Most modern materials departments have their roots in early departments of mining and/or metallurgy. These were being formed as early as the latter half of the nineteenth century, when modern engineering education was born with the formation of MIT, RPI, WPI and other technological institutions. After the end of the Civil War in 1865, the United States was still largely an agrarian society, but change toward an industrial economy was rapidly occurring. Large-scale timber and mining companies were soon exploiting the natural resources of newly opened areas of the country. At the beginning of the Civil War, America produced no steel rails. By 1873 production was 115 000 The country needed skilled engineers to build the roads and bridges, manufacture the machines needed for the new industrial economy and of course provide the iron and steel to make it all possible. Mining and metallurgy departments in our fledgling technological universities provided these engineers. It is easy to forget that these departments have been evolving ever since. From the view of faculty in the departments, the changes have often been wrenching. Over the years, mining became of less importance, then mineral beneficiation. New sciences intruded on the art of the field, and then after the Second World War the departments began a trend, still with us, to include a range of materials broader than metals alone in their curriculum, and to look for new opportunities for graduates, and new areas for research. The decline in industrial importance of the basic materials industries in the 1980s and the end of the Cold War in the 1990s brought major changes in the milieu for materials education and research. Pressures on MSE departments in America for change are in no way lessening. The need to educate students across all materials classes continues to put pressure on the curriculum. Students must be prepared to enter a wide range of industries that did not exist when many of us entered the field, notably the microelectronics, photonics and biotechnology industries. We and our students have important roles to play in ecological issues and in industrial competitiveness. Technical developments from other fields shift our own field perceptibly with each passing year. Examples include the stunningly rapid pace of change in information technology, biotechnology, and in our ability to manipulate structure at the nano and atomic levels. Meanwhile, other departments, notably those of chemical and mechanical engineering, physics and chemistry, are apt to see materials science and engineering largely as a subset of their own field and are inclined to wonder if MSE departments should exist at all. As will be seen later in this paper, our view is that MSE departments represent a vital discipline that should indeed continue to exist. The discipline is one that provides undergraduate and graduate education focussing on structure/properties/processing/performance relations of materials with the necessary engineering science at one end of the spectrum and engineering practice and societal impact at the other end. No other engineering or scientific field emphasizes all these elements and their interrelationships, and it is the exploitation of these interrelationships that is of vital and growing engineering importance. Based on NSF/SRS statistics (Division of Science Resource Studies, Directorate of Social, Behavioral and Economic Studies, National Science Research Foundation), the number of US bachelor's degrees awarded in metallurgy/materials underwent little change in the ten years from 1966 to 1976. It increased somewhat in the early part of this period and then decreased, as did degrees in other engineering fields as a result of the difficult economic and social times of the early 1970s. After 1976, the number of MSE undergraduate degrees increased at a healthy rate (along with that of other engineering degrees) until 1984, when it went into a decline from which it has not yet recovered ( What led to this abrupt change in slope of A very recent official exercise by the Higher Education Funding Council for England (i.e. excluding Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland), a report entitled The European database mentioned above also includes searchable record cards for 1459 individual researchers, with several research projects for each one. Further, there are compilations of research in book form for some countries, for instance the annual We do not, in this paper, deal with graduate MSE education in detail. Certainly it is appropriate at the graduate level, at least the doctoral level, to focus more specifically on a narrow aspect of the field of MSE than is the case at the undergraduate level. The United States doctoral programs remain nearly unique in their inclusion of considerable coursework and examinations, as well as thesis study, in requirements for a doctorate. Europe does not have graduate schools in the specific sense found in the USA, and there are no universities (like for instance Chicago) which are very largely or wholly graduate-based. In some countries (e.g. France) students with first, bachelor-type degrees are required first to take a further one-year course of instruction plus a miniature research project before they are qualified to become candidates for a doctorate. In others (e.g. Britain) there is no such obligation (although some students nevertheless do it and their numbers are growing), and the amount of required coursework undertaken during the doctorate program is very variable from country to country. This means that a doctorate in Britain is expected to be completed in 3 A further peculiarity of the European continental systems is that in many countries, not Britain, a special qualification (e.g. a “higher” doctorate) has to be attained before the candidate is legally qualified to teach Repeated attempts have been made in Europe to enable students of MSE (and other disciplines) to combine studies in two or more universities, in different countries. The European Union put some funds into a scheme to help students to finance such enterprises. For instance, the Universities of Sussex and Surrey in Britain for some years sent candidates for a scientific bachelor's degree to the Continent for a year to learn about German (or French, or Spanish) customs, law and history, as well as practice the local language, as part of their degree courses; some of these students were specializing in metallurgy or MSE. Such graduates were especially suited for employment in multinational companies. Other pairs of universities have sought to link scientific education in two countries into a coherent undergraduate course. However, the course duration, examination structures, scientific bias and legal constraints of universities in different European countries differ so extensively, and language problems are so severe, that not many such schemes have succeeded, and those that have done well were all scrupulously arranged between specific pairs of institutions. Nevertheless, our inquiries indicate that vigorous efforts are currently under way to establish, at least, shared programs of graduate courses for doctoral students involving some universities in several countries. This is a relatively modest initial objective, and to be welcomed. Whether the steady drift towards political federation in Europe will lead to attempts in Brussels, or indeed in the universities themselves, to “harmonize” the organization of university education across the Continent is at present unclear. The problems in doing this, if indeed the attempt is ever resolutely made, will be formidable, and the result perhaps even undesirable, given the organically evolved differences between a number of distinct cultures. The academic scene in the UK includes the Open University (OU), which received its Royal Charter in 1969. This remarkable university concentrates on “distance learning” for mature students who cannot attend a normal university, because they are in full-time employment, or married with children, or (most commonly) do not have formal school-leaving qualifications. The founding fathers of the OU laid it down that “we take it as axiomatic that no formal academic qualifications would be required for registration, and only failure to progress adequately would be a bar to continuation of studies”, and this principle has been adhered to for 30 Study involves the use of purpose-written printed study modules (special, distinguished products of the Open University system), frequent TV programs broadcast by the BBC at times when other demand for TV is at a minimum, regular face-to-face meetings with regional tutors, and an annual week of seminars or laboratory work at friendly “regular” universities. Students also take written examinations (multichoice questions, regular problems and essays). Metallurgy, later Materials, has been a field of study almost from the beginning. One of us (R.W.C.) was involved as an adviser and examiner in the early stages. The “course modules” deal with a limited field of MSE (e.g. semiconductors and devices), and contain many passages designed for self-assessment by the students. MSE courses (“units”) are available in the different years at various levels. The “Materials Discipline”, as it is formally called, is part of a large Technology Faculty and students simply take a degree in Technology, with various mixes of units. Hundreds of students every year take one or other of the Materials Modules. One serious problem for faculty members is where and how to undertake experimental research, and for this purpose some nearby “regular” universities have offered laboratory facilities. Others prefer to undertake theoretical research or focus on issues of science policy. Distance learning (DL) is now developing rapidly in many parts of the world, perhaps foremost in the United States. It is propelled by many of the same needs that led to the Open University 30 An example of asynchronous DL is the Florida Engineering Education Delivery System (FEEDS). For this program, graduate classes (including classes in the field of materials), while being taught to on-campus students, are videotaped and sent overnight to graduate students in industry or academia across the state. The students view the tapes on their own, but do the homework or other assignments at the same time as students attending the live classes. They also take the exams and tests at the same time as the on-campus students. A local proctor or mentor administers the exams. Some faculties also set regular office hours for phone calls and questions. About 60 000 of the DL students in Florida also take some campus-based classes in traditional classrooms. For research, students can come to the campus for a concentrated research period, or may do their research under the co-supervision of an industrial collaborator. For the latter case, the co-supervisor must have appropriate credentials to be appointed as an adjunct faculty of the department. The materials department at the University of Florida has recently graduated several masters and Ph.D.s through this program. The major impediment to the doctoral degree program is the extended period of intense study required to pass the qualifying exam. An example of synchronous DL, and also of a new kind of global academic partnership is the Singapore–MIT Alliance (“SMA”), directed on the MIT side by one of us (M.C.F.). Beginning in July 1999, the first class of students will begin their studies in SMA, in one of two programs. One of these, the Advanced Materials Program will be co-chaired in Cambridge by Professor Subra Suresh; his co-chair in Singapore will be Professor Chua Soo Jin. In subsequent years, three additional programs will be instituted. Students will enroll in one of three degree programs: a professional master, research master, or research doctorate. Students will receive an SMA certificate; the Singaporean University hosting the program (either National University of Singapore, NUS, or Nanyang Technological University, NTU) will award degrees. This ambitious joint venture will be made possible by state-of-the-art communications technology that allows faculty and students to interact and collaborate closely even when separated by 10 000 The broad field of materials science and engineering is certainly a multi-discipline. The COSMAT Study correctly concluded this in 1974. The study pointed out that universities have evolved in the past along the disciplinary lines of physics, chemistry, metallurgy and so on, and then went on to state that: “The field [of materials science and engineering], broadly speaking, consists of a multidisciplinary matrix of those disciplines which are related through the structure/property/processes/function/performance linkage of materials” But looking at this from the perspective of an MSE Department in 2000, an important question arises. If materials departments are multi-disciplinary departments, what are the disciplines? In the 1970s when the COSMAT Report was written, the fields of metallurgy, and even ceramics could be viewed as disciplines, in the sense that each could claim strong professional societies, a recognition of degrees in the field by industry, and a cohesive intellectual arena sufficiently broad to merit scholarship. We could still comfortably view ourselves as metallurgists or ceramists, or polymerists embedded in a multi-disciplinary department, but it is not easy to do this today. Metallurgy and ceramics are fast becoming absorbed in our thinking into the broader field of MSE, just as nonferrous metallurgy, ferrous metallurgy and extractive metallurgy became subsumed in metallurgy a generation or more ago. Moreover, if metallurgy and ceramics are the disciplines and not sub-disciplines, what are the disciplines of practitioners in our MSE departments of electronic materials, or of biomaterials or of others whose research and teaching straddle a range of materials classes? Clearly, it is time to view the core of our field as a discipline itself. The rationale for this is the intellectual cohesiveness the field has developed over the past 30 The discipline is one that provides an undergraduate and graduate educational program focussing on structure/properties/processing/performance relations of materials, with the necessary engineering science at one end of the spectrum, and engineering practice and societal impact at the other end. Various diagrams have been used at various times to show this intellectual underpinning of our field diagrammatically. No other engineering or scientific field emphasizes all of these elements of the tetrahedron and their interrelationships, and it is the exploitation of these interrelationships that is of vital importance to so many industries today, and will be more so in the future as we continue the trend toward engineering of structures of finer and finer scale. Large numbers of well-educated MSE undergraduates and graduates will be needed by industry, and this alone should be ample reason to strive to maintain the viability of core MSE departments. But there is another reason as well. It is hard indeed to imagine MSE graduate departments surviving in the future without a strong undergraduate program to provide the academic focus and to supply a segment of the graduate student population. There may be those who will insist that the engineering of MSE is not yet a discipline, in spite of the industrial recognition, the societies and the growing intellectual cohesiveness of the field. To those, we might reply that the survival of MSE for these past several decades is proof enough. In the words of one of us: “Disciplines have their own distinct university departments and, even more importantly perhaps, those departments have earned the right to award degrees in their disciplines. Perhaps it is through academic infighting that disciplines win their spurs” Cahn There are several implications of viewing MSE as a discipline that are salutary for the present and future of core MSE departments. The first is that it provides new directions for, and new freedom in, curriculum reform. No longer need materials-specific subjects be taught at the undergraduate level. The discipline to be taught is not metallurgy or ceramics or electronic materials but materials, and the subject matter should deal with the intellectual core illustrated in A second implication of viewing MSE as a discipline (while it simultaneously remains a part of the larger multi-discipline) is that it provides a framework for developing a focus for our efforts, for deciding what is, and what is not, properly in our area of academic responsibility, and of where the areas appropriate for collaborative efforts with other disciplines are. We have learned that condensed-matter physics is at the boundary of, but not within, our discipline. We have learned that very much of the properties, processing and performance of electronic materials lie within our field. Perhaps we are not yet sure how much of polymer science and engineering belongs to us. And we have certainly not yet resolved how biotechnology best fits into the tetrahedron defining our field, or in what part of the field we should strive to exert leadership. But the view of MSE presented above should help us define our field and guide its direction in a way that will serve our students and society. Viewing the field as a single discipline should help tidy up other things as well. For example, there should be no need at any degree level to give degrees with specific materials labels (e.g. “Metallurgy” or “Polymers”). Of course, one might emphasize study of a specific material in a graduate program, but the degree should be a disciplinary one, with a “Materials” specification. Although the definition of our field given above limits it slightly, the field still remains one of great breadth. We will need to continue merciless condensation or elimination of curricular matters, just as our predecessors eliminated mining engineering and mineral dressing from course titles years ago and caused nonferrous metallurgy to become a part of broader metallurgy subjects, or as in recent years chemical analysis was dropped from metallurgical curricula. The science, engineering science, and other technical content of our curriculum need to be closely scrutinized to assure that they deal with what will be most useful to future practitioners of the field. For example, where should be the tradeoff between including curricular material on crystallography, metal smelting and phase-diagram theory on one hand, or mathematical modeling, biomaterials technology, and information technology on the other? Our fundamentals, of course, are structure and chemistry, synthesis/processing, properties and performance or, in our shorthand notation: structure, processing, properties and performance. We emphasize relationships among these elements more than do other academic departments. Our appropriate research area overlaps with science departments notably physics, chemistry and biology, and research collaborations with members of these science departments are proving most fruitful. But we differ from the approaches of most science departments in that we tend to focus to a greater extent on real materials and on their industrial relevance, and are often more focussed on the relationships among the elements of our field, than on discoveries related to the elements themselves. We distinguish ourselves from our peers in chemical engineering (who have largely taken over extractive metallurgy) by our expertise in structure and structure–property relations as well as our breadth across materials classes. We similarly distinguish ourselves from mechanical engineering by our focus on the internal structure of materials, specifically on atoms and molecules. The new tools coming into our hands today provide much opportunity for us, with our expertise, to enter into new fields and contribute in new ways to old fields. We have the ability now to build structures atom by atom, or atom layer by atom layer. The vast computer power at our disposal increasingly permits computer modeling of structure and properties starting only with fundamental properties of the atom. On a performance/price basis, that power has increased by a factor of more than 10 000 in 20 Of all subfields of MSE, the one that has proved hardest to integrate with the rest is that of polymers. Polymer chemistry has remained entirely distinct, with large numbers of its own journals. Papers on the physics, mechanics and processing of polymers do occasionally make it to the broad-spectrum MSE journals, but even there, most papers still appear in specific polymer journals, the number of which has soared in the past two decades as research on polymers, and their range of uses, have maintained their relentless rise. There are a number of less obvious linkages. For instance, many polymer mechanics papers appear in journals devoted to rheology or in those concerned with biomedical materials: the authors' choice of journals may be more decided by the nature of the application than by the nature of the phenomenon being discussed. Many universities have found polymers difficult to integrate into MSE curricula since many concepts of polymer science seem remote from those of traditional inorganic materials. It may well be that the long-term strength of MSE as a discipline will depend on how well it eventually succeeds in integrating polymers into its academic program. It may well be that the long-term strength of materials science and engineering as a discipline will depend on how well it eventually succeeds in integrating polymers into academic education in MSE. Many studies and commentators, following on findings of the 1989 Materials Study The impact of computer simulation on MSE during the past quarter of a century has been quite remarkable. Computer simulation as a technical skill goes back to Los Alamos during and just after the Second World War, as beautifully described in a recent historical book It is rather more than a game with words to wonder whether computer simulation has arrived as an intermediate domain between (real) experiment and analytical theory. Just as combinatorial chemistry, which began as a branch of pharmacology, is beginning to make inroads into materials science (as a quick means of testing thousands of chemical reactivities) and spreadsheets are standard fare on Wall Street, so a quick change of a variable inside a computer can economically test a possible change in chemical, micro- or macroscopic structure and consequent changes in properties, or economically test a change in a driving force for transport phenomena and consequent changes in materials behavior in processing. All this of course depends on the building up of trust in computer methods among traditional experimentalists and analytical theorists; that seems to be well under way. The multi-disciplinary field of materials science and engineering is rich with opportunities, expanding in its range of disciplines involved, and benefiting from our growing ability to apply underlying principles across materials classes in our education, research, and engineering. Materials education and especially materials research play an increasing role in many academic departments in both schools of engineering and schools of science. Industrial opportunities for students, research support, and perceived national needs indicate that those materials departments to prosper best will concentrate on materials broadly, rather than one or a few materials, and will seek to involve themselves in materials of importance to developing industries, as well as to those of a more traditional nature. MSE has become accepted in universities on the basis of experience of what materials scientists have achieved in industry, and a careful examination of the history of a number of other upstart disciplines