The dissolution kinetics of ulexite in perchloric acid solutions was investigated. The effect of perchloric acid concentration, particle size, stirring speed and reaction temperature on the dissolution rate of ulexite was determined. It was found that the rate of dissolution increased with increasing perchloric acid concentration, stirring speed, reaction temperature and with decreasing particle size. The dissolution rate may describe the Avrami model. The activation energy was calculated 19.12 kJ mol−1.Boron is found in nature in the form of metal borated, mostly as sodium, calcium and magnesium borates. Boron compounds are widely used in many branches of industry such as cosmetic, leather, textile, rubber, paint and glass industries as well as medicine. Recently, the use of boron compounds has increased greatly because of its increasing demand in nuclear technology, in the glass and ceramic industries, as abrasives and refractors, in the production of heat-resistant polymer, as catalysts, etc. Among boron minerals, ulexite is one of the most common and is found in great amounts in Turkey. Ulexite is a sodium–calcium borate hydrate mineral Na The dissolution kinetics of ulexite in ammonia solutions saturated with CO The ulexite samples used in this study were obtained from Kirka, Eskisehir, Turkey. The material was first cleaned of visible impurities, crushed and ground. After cleaning, samples were sieved to obtain different particle size fractions. The ore sample was analyzed and it was determined that the mineral contained 42.08% B The experimental procedure was as follows: a total 200 mL of an perchloric acid solution was placed in the glass reactor. The reactor jacket was heated to the desired temperature and stirring speed was set. A given amount of solid sample was added to the solution. The dissolution process was carried out for various reaction times. At the end of reaction the contents were filtered and the amount of B The dissolution reaction between ulexite and percholoric acid can be written as follows ( To investigate the effect of the acid concentration on dissolution rate, experiments were carried out 0.050, 0.075, 0.100, 0.200 mol L The effect of the particle size was determined using the − To observe the effect of the stirring speed on dissolution rate, experiments were carried out 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 rpm. During experiments, the concentration, particle size, and reaction temperature were kept constant at 0.075 mol L The effect of the reaction temperature on dissolution rate was determined at 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, and 45 °C. During experiments, the concentration, particle size, and stirring speed were kept constant at 0.075 mol L The rate of a reaction between a solid and a fluid such as the system considered here can be expressed by homogeneous and heterogeneous models (  In addition to these models, homogeneous models may be used to determine the rate equations in such systems, The application of the above models to the experimental data will help to find the kinetics of the dissolution process. Experimental data did not fit to surface chemical reaction and film diffusion controlled heterogeneous rate models. Data fit to the diffusion control through the ash or product layer model. However, particle size variation is not well represented by this model. Furthermore, during the dissolution process ulexite is completely dissolved and no precipitate is left after the dissolution. Hence, the model may not be adequately representing the physical system. Also, the data did not fit first and second order reactions. Avrami model satisfactorily represented the data as seen in The dependence of the rate constant on the concentration, particle size, stirring speed and reaction temperature may be given by In this work, the dissolution kinetics of ulexite in perchloric acid solutions was investigated. It was determined that the dissolution rate increased with increasing concentration, stirring speed, reaction temperature and with decreasing particle size. The dissolution process was described by the Avrami model. The mathematical form of the model is: To determine the compatibility of the model with the experimental data, a plot of theoretical conversion versus experimental conversion is given in  Fractional conversion of B Perchloric acid concentration, mol L Particle size, mm Stirring speed, s Temperature, °C Reaction time, s Reaction time for complete conversion Activation energy, kJ mol Reaction rate constant, s Frequency or pre-exponential factor, s Constant