This paper presents a methodology to assess the seismic safety of concrete gravity water intake structures of typical hydroelectric facilities. Water intake structures are characterized by large voids for the gates and penstock embedded in concrete. In practice, the well-known Westergaard formulation (WF), assuming a vertical rigid wall, is most often used to represent hydrodynamic pressures. However, the validity of the WF for water intake structures has not been addressed in the past. A parametric analysis is performed herein using four 40m high intake structures with upstream opening void ratio, χ, ranging from 0% to 30% of the concrete surface in contact with water. Three-dimensional finite element models (FEM) with potential-based incompressible fluid elements are used in steady-state and transient seismic fluid–structure interaction (FSI) analyses to consider water in the penstock as well as in the reservoir. Modification factors which depend on χ are derived from the 3D FEM such that a Westergaard modified formulation (WMF) is proposed to represent adequately FSI. Simplified structural models using beam-column elements with section properties accounting for the presence the penstock opening and the proposed WMF are used as an efficient alternative to complex 3D FEM. A seismic safety assessment of an intake considering ground motions of return periods ranging from 200 to 10,000 years are used to assess the safety level of the intake structure. The internal forces and residual sliding displacements are computed. It is shown that the proposed WMF and the simplified stick model formulation provide hydrodynamic thrust within approximately 10% of the reference 3D FEM. The seismic response (i.e. base shear) is also adequately predicted using the proposed simplified modeling strategy.The May 12, 2008 Wenchuan earthquake in China of Magnitude 7.9 has emphasized the importance of safety assessment for dams subjected to large ground motions This paper first investigates the effect of penstock surface openings in contact with the reservoir on the hydrodynamic pressure of four 40 Three existing gravity water intake structures located in Canada, shown in The interaction between a reservoir and an intake structure makes the dynamic analysis of such systems complex This formulation is based on incompressible water, an infinite upstream reservoir and a rigid vertical wall in contact with water. It is however still widely used in practice because of its simplicity. Moreover, it has been shown to be accurate as compared to more rigorous FE fluid formulation for low frequency seismic motions The Eulerian method is used in this study as implemented in the computer program ADINA Wilson Four FE models, D1-0 to D4-30, described in The geometry of the intake models is created in a CAD software, and then imported in the ADINA finite element software Simplified 2D “stick” models operating in the upstream–downstream directions are constructed for each intake structure using series of prismatic beam-column elements in SAP2000 At each section, the area of the water conduct is computed. The area is then converted into a tributary mass by multiplying it with its tributary height and water density. Rigid links are used to connect the concrete center of gravity and the water center of mass. Alternatively one can lump the tributary water mass in the conduct to the concrete mass considering also the rotational inertia. A parametric analysis is conducted to propose and validate a Westergaard modified formulation (WMF). The objective is to avoid the use of fluid finite elements and better represent the variation of the magnitude and distribution of hydrodynamic pressure acting on the different intake structures using added masses in time domain dynamic analyses. Water compressibility was therefore not considered in this study. Steady-state analyses are performed on the four 3D finite element intake models to establish reference solutions. Water pressures at the face of the intakes are computed using a low frequency cyclic loading with a 1 The difference in steady-state structural response, as indicated above, may not be as important in the case of seismic excitations due to the presence of broad frequency content. To assess the seismic safety of the intake structures, a series of ground motion records corresponding to recurrence periods ranging from 200 years to 10,000 years were developed as indicated in A first series of linear dynamic time history analyses are conducted using the 2500 years return period ground motions. A progressive methodology for seismic safety assessment of gravity dams has been presented by Ghrib et al. In this section, as an application example of the proposed simplified intake structure modeling, an incremental dynamic analysis (IDA) is performed using model SWMF4-30 (largest water conduct opening). Two performance indicators are studied, the base sliding safety factor (SSF) (Eq. This paper proposed a simplified method to assess the seismic safety of concrete gravity water intake structures using a “stick” model made of beam-column elements. A Westergaard modified added mass formulation (WMF) accounting for a penstock opening in contact with the reservoir was developed. 3D-FEM were developed as reference solutions using incompressible potential-based fluid elements with upstream opening void ratio, The classical Westergaard formulation is an adequate method for practical FSI modeling if the dam (intake) structure has very small openings. The results show that the WF slightly overestimates the pressure along the complete face of the dam. Eqs. The classical Westergaard added mass formulation can be used as a FSI modeling for intake structures with openings, but it results in an overestimation of the hydrodynamic pressure, especially at a lift joint near the opening (30–40% difference in hydrodynamic shear force in Hydrodynamic pressure distribution and intensity along the intake upstream face is to be divided into three zones. For each zone, the correction factors, The presence of reservoir and water inside the intake elongates the dry structure fundamental period by an average of 16% for typical intake structures ranging from 12 A simple beam-column “stick” model combined with the WMF can be used efficiently instead of a complex FEM using fluid element to study the response of a water intake structure. Six earthquake records were used to illustrate an application. However, guidelines require the use of a much larger number of records to quantify the mean response and its dispersion to assess the seismic safety of a hydraulic structure. It is then apparent that the use of the proposed simplified model is efficient in a number of ways. First, the required modeling and computational resources are less demanding than in the case of a 3D FEM of an intake structure. Secondly, the representation of lift joints with a single node reduces the interpretation complexity of the output results. Pending additional studies, it appears reasonable to use the proposed correction factors for water intake structures with The financial support provided by