In this work, the use of mechanical milling for the remediation of heavy metals in synthetic soils and tailings sampled from the mining area of “Barraxiutta”, SW of Sardinia, Italy is investigated. Specifically, Pb(II) contaminated synthetic soils of sandy, bentonitic and kaolinitic type are taken into account following the results obtained in previous works. Suitable sequential extraction procedures have been performed on both untreated and treated synthetic soils. It is found that mechanical loads which occur during collisions among milling media and soils are able to modify the distribution of Pb(II) onto the different solid fractions of contaminated synthetic soils. Specifically, for sandy soils the milling treatment induces a significant increase in Pb(II) content in the Fe–Mn oxides fraction. On the other hand, for bentonitic and kaolinitic soils, Pb(II) content in both carbonate and Fe–Mn oxide fractions is augmented after treatment. Such phenomena may contribute to Pb(II) immobilization efficiency since the heavy metal trans-speciation occurs in favor of fractions characterized by stronger bonds and lower solubility.
                  As for the heavy metals contaminated tailings, their immobilization is obtained using both ball and attrition milling devices under specific ball to powder ratio values. The degree of metals immobilization is evaluated by analyzing the corresponding leachable fraction obtained through the Synthetic Precipitation Leaching Procedure (SPLP) proposed by EPA. X-ray diffraction and granulometric analyses revealed no significant alterations of the intrinsic character of the tailings after milling except for a relatively small increase in particles size.
                  The increase in immobilization efficiency when tailings are mechanically treated may be due to specific phenomena induced during milling such as entrapment of heavy metals into aggregates, solid diffusion of metals into the crystalline reticulum of soil particles, the formation of new fresh surfaces onto which heavy metals may be irreversibly adsorbed as well as metal trans-speciation onto tailings fractions characterized by stronger bonds and lower solubility.As a consequence of industrial activities, such as metal mining, smelting and refining, atmospheric deposition, land application of sewage sludge and industrial by-products, gasoline processing, storage, distribution and production of painting materials and their use, heavy metals are widespread in urban and industrial areas The remediation of heavy metals contaminated soils is still recognized nowadays to be one of the most difficult problems to be solved even if few, albeit costly, technologies may be employed Immobilization processes are generally preferred for the treatment of heavy metals contaminated soils due to the intrinsic limitations of extractive techniques Recently the effect of mechanical treatment on the immobilization capacity of heavy metals contaminated soils has been addressed Since the results obtained by Montinaro et al. In the second part of the work, the applicability of the ball milling technique to real contaminated soils is evaluated. Specifically, heavy metals contaminated tailings and soils sampled in the mining area of “Barraxiutta” (Sardinia, Italy) are mechanically treated using both ball and Attritor Mills devices. High purity CaCO Synthetic soil contamination was carried out in a temperature controlled shaker at 25 Sequential extractions were then performed both on unmilled and milled soils with the purpose to assess whether the mechanical treatment could have led to changes in the distribution of heavy metals among the different soil fractions. The five-step sequential extraction scheme developed by Tessier et al. The second part of the work was dedicated to the evaluation of the capability of the mechanical treatment to immobilize heavy metals within real contaminated soils. To this aim, soils and tailings contaminated by heavy metals were sampled from the overburden mining area of “Barraxiutta” in the SW of Sardinia, Italy. The area is nowadays abandoned and heavy metals are continuously leached by surface and filtrating waters and thus mobilized far away from the site, thus potentially threatening sensitive targets around such as rivers, lakes or population. Soils sampled from this area were named “B”, while tailing samples were named “DSF”. Solid samples were sieved at 2 Once characterized, the contaminated samples were mechanically treated by ball milling using a Spex Mixer/Mill mod. 8000. Specifically, 4 In order to evaluate the scaling-up of the proposed technology from the laboratory scale results, further mechanical treatment experiments were carried out by using an Attritor Mill mod. 01HD/01HDDM. In fact, the latter one allows to perform experimental trials using larger amount of contaminated soil with respect to the Spex Mixer Mill thus providing more appropriate information about the industrial scale applicability of this technology. The Attritor Mill is operated at the standard milling frequency of about 4200 Unmilled and milled soils were then submitted to the “Synthetic Precipitation Leaching Procedure (SPLP)” reported by USEPA In order to evaluate possible immobilization mechanisms and verify if significant soil alterations occurred during mechanical treatment, further analyses were performed. The identification of crystalline phases in solid samples was obtained by X-ray diffraction (XRD) through a RIGAKU GEIGERFLEX diffractometer by employing Cu Kα Ni-filtered radiation ( The possibility to immobilize heavy metals such as Pb(II), Cd(II) and Zn(II) which contaminate synthetic sandy and clayey soils through mechanical treatment was demonstrated by Montinaro et al. In order to clarify the mechanisms which determine the increase in the immobilization capacity of the contaminated soils once mechanically treated, a sequential extraction was carried out both on milled and unmilled soils. In particular, synthetic soils mechanically treated for 7 In On the contrary, for the bentonitic (SB) and kaolinitic (SK) soils, a different behaviour may be observed. In particular, for these soils mechanical treatment results in a remarkable decrease in Pb(II) bound to carbonate fraction and in a simultaneous increase in Pb(II) amount bound to oxide fraction. These results highlight that mechanical treatment strongly influences the Pb(II) distribution between the different soil phases. This phenomenon may probably contribute to the increase in immobilization efficiency observed for milled soils. In fact the increase in immobilization efficiency deriving from mechanical treatment of SS soil may be probably ascribed to trans-speciation of Pb(II) which preferably binds to oxides fraction under milling. Since the bond to oxides is stronger than that one to the exchangeable fraction, such a trans-speciation may result in a decreased leachability of Pb(II). Moreover lead oxides are characterized by low solubility. For the SB and SK soil, the trans-speciation occurs from the carbonate fraction (PbCO While, chemical and physical mechanisms involved during the mechanical treatment of soils may be the subject of further investigation, the results obtained so far further confirm that immobilization of heavy metals in synthetic soils may be achieved through the proposed technology. In order to evaluate the possibility of scaling-up the latter one to the industrial level, in the second part of this work, real contaminated soils and tailings, sampled from an overburden mining area of Sardinia, Italy, were subjected to mechanical treatment. As mentioned above mechanical treatment trials were performed by using either the Spex Mixer/Mill or the Attritor Mill. In fact, the latter one allows to treat a mass of soil per batch 28 times greater than that one of the Spex Mixer Mill thus providing more detailed information about the possible industrial application of the proposed process. Moreover, the same ball to powder ratio (BPR) ratio used in the Spex Mill is maintained, thus evaluating whether the BPR could represent a suitable scale-up factor. To this aim mechanical treatments were carried out using the same treatment times and ball to powder ratio (BPR Once milled, soil and tailing samples have been extracted from the mills and submitted to the SPLP leaching procedure. Concentrations of heavy metals released from the treated soil sample “B” in the leachate from SPLP test are shown in From From the analysis of As for the tailings sample named “DSF”, results obtained from milling trials are shown in From In The results obtained when treating DSF samples, suggest that the mechanochemical technology is able to promote heavy metal immobilization also in tailing sample when both the Spex or the Attritor Mill are used. Furthermore, the results from the trials carried out with the DSF sample confirm that the BPR ratio may be assumed as the main scale-up factor for the application of the technology to the real scale. In order to further elucidate the mechanism which determines the increase in the immobilization capacity of the contaminated soil and to verify if mechanical treatment causes drastic alterations of the original soil properties, further analyses on untreated and treated soils were performed. Specifically, XRD analyses on untreated and mechanically treated (10 In particular, it is apparent from On the contrary, from This result is probably due to the thermal conversion of PbCO Finally, the analysis of the full In From It has recently been shown by Montinaro et al. In this work it is found that another phenomenon, related to specific chemical transformation, may contribute to the increase in immobilization efficiency observed when the soils are mechanically treated. In fact, a significant change in chemical distribution of heavy metals among soil's phases is observed when the solid samples are subjected to mechanical treatment. In particular, an increase in the less leachable heavy metals complexes is achieved. When mechanical treatment is applied to real contaminated soils and tailings very promising results are obtained. In fact, after relatively short milling times, leachable fraction of heavy metals was reduced under the EPA regulatory limits for drinkable water for both soil and tailing samples. No significant alterations of the original properties of soil and tailings samples were detected under the milling regimes and the milling times investigated. These results demonstrate the applicability of this technique for the remediation of heavy metals contaminated soils and tailings. Moreover the trials performed by using an Attritor Mill confirm the possible applicability of the proposed technology at the industrial scale. Finally, the simplicity of the proposed process which makes use of classical comminution devices makes it quite interesting also from the economic point of view. In fact, from a preliminary evaluation performed in order to verify the economic sustainability of the process, the estimated cost of the technology, including electricity, labor and installation is of about 40–60 The financial support of Ministero dell’Istruzione dell’Università e della Ricerca (MIUR), Italy, through the project “Nuove tecnologie per la bonifica e il ripristino ambientale di siti contaminati–PON Ricerca Scientifica, Sviluppo Tecnologico, Alta Formazione 2000–2006”, is gratefully acknowledged. This work was also carried out with the financial contribution of the Sardinian Regional Authorities.