Carbon onions have been known since Iijima first observed them in 1980 It has previously been demonstrated that gold and silver nanoparticles react with halocarbons leading to the complete leaching of the metals along with deposition of carbon in an amorphous form Chloroauric acid and trisodium citrate were purchased from CDH fine chemicals, India. (3-amino) propyl trimethoxysilane (APS) and tetra methoxysilane (TMS) were purchased from Aldrich and were used without additional purification. Ethanol and 2-propanol were purchased from E. Merck. CCl Gold nanoparticles of size 15 nm were prepared using the Turkevich reduction method The reaction between the metal core and CCl The plasmon absorption of the Au@SiO The solution thus obtained was dropped onto a copper grid supported carbon film and the solvent was allowed to evaporate leaving the particles dispersed on the carbon film and was examined using a JEOL 3010 UHR TEM equipped with a Gatan Imaging Filter using both High Resolution TEM imaging and energy filtered imaging with both plasmon-loss and core-loss electrons. The infrared spectrum was acquired with a Spectrum One infrared spectrometer from Perkin–Elmer. Mass spectra were recorded using a Voyager DE-PRO MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer of Applied Biosystems. UV/Vis spectra were taken with a Perkin–Elmer Lambda 25 UV/VIS spectrometer. The starting Au@SiO An attempt was made to produce energy filtered images of such particles using the Si–L edge at 99 eV but this did not result in any clear image with reasonable signal to noise ratio, perhaps due to the fact that this edge usually shows a gradual onset, combined with the fact that the shell is very thin in comparison to the thick and heavy metal core. Energy filtered imaging using this edge has been found to be problematic in other materials too. However, if energy filtered images are recorded with inelastically scattered electrons from the low-loss regions, specifically using a plasmon energy loss of 15 eV with an energy selecting slit width of 5 eV, then the shell appears very bright in comparison to the core and the carbon support film. Such plasmon loss imaging has previously been used to give image contrast between different phases in AlGe  The amount of material synthesized is very small; in fact after centrifuging the solution containing the nanoshells, the quantity obtained in a normal synthesis is of the order of milligrams. As a result, bulk characterization such as XRD was not attempted. It would also not be expected to yield any additional information as the shell is known to be amorphous. The formation of the onion structures inside the shells provides certain important information regarding the shell itself. It appears plastic in nature; hence it stretches and accommodates the carbon onions formed. Even after the formation of the onion like structures inside the shell, it does not rupture immediately. The cavity left behind after the removal of gold is smaller than the dimension of the leached out metal implying that catalytic destruction of the halocarbon occurs and more carbon per metal ion is generated. The novelty of this work is that, it provides a room temperature solution phase method for generating carbon onions inside an inorganic matrix. In order to make sure that the onion structures are formed as a result of the carbon deposited by the reaction, we studied the silica shells formed by the cyanide removal method The shells show characteristic Si–O–Si asymmetric stretching at around 1100 cm We present a novel solution phase process by which carbon onions can be formed within silica shells. It is believed that confinement of carbon formed within the nano shells forces its conversion to onions. The halocarbon mineralization process is catalytic producing more carbon per metal ion removed. This appears to bring carbon atoms together leading to the formation of onions. This would imply that larger shells do not yield onions as confinement may not be adequate to force the reaction; it may be noted that free shells are seen with bigger particles T.P. acknowledges equipment support from the Department of Science and Technology under the nanoscience initiative. I.M. is indebted to the German Federal State of Hessen for the financial support of his research fellowship.