Friability of rocks and ores can be determined by brittleness tests. A test apparatus to determine friability value has been designed to suit limestone strength characteristics used in cement production. The friability values of barite, marble, limestone and bauxite have been determined and compared with the corresponding Bond work index (W
                     
                        i
                     ) and grindability index (G) of these materials. The physico-mechanical properties of the tested materials have also been determined to investigate their effect on friability and grinding. The relationships obtained between the indices were in surprisingly good agreement, with high correlations (0.99 and 0.97). The Bond work index and the grindability index can therefore be estimated from the friability value, which can be determined more rapidly than from the Bond test.Comminution in a mineral processing plant, or mill, involves a sequence of crushing and grinding processes ( Goltas limestone, Ilmen barite, Seydisehir bauxite, and Mugla marble were tested in the study. Their physico-mechanical properties were first determined. These properties were unit weight, uniaxial compressive strength, tensile strength and point load index. The physico-mechanical properties, grindability indices, work indices and friability values were compared. Test results are given in Section The standard Bond grindability test is a closed-cycle dry grinding and screening process, which is carried out until steady state conditions are obtained ( Seven hundred cm “Work Index, The friability value The tested rock sample of a 500 The results are given in The friability value ( A linear relationship between grindability index, The relationship between friability value ( Very high correlations, of 0.99 and 0.97, were found between friability value and grindability and brittleness indices. The grinding characteristics of ores can therefore be studied by the brittleness test, designed to suit material properties and strength. The Bond method of grindability determination is time consuming and a constant value of ore grindability is only achieved after several grinding periods. In contrast, the brittleness test is very rapid and the friability value is obtained in a much shorter time. The tensile strength of ores correlates better with work index than with compressive strength and point load index. Many factors influence the grindability of ores and it is very difficult to find analytical relationships between them. Therefore empirical results determined from brittleness tests are very useful in studying the grinding characteristics of various ores.