In this study advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), UV/TiO2, UV/ZnO and photo-Fenton, were applied in order to degrade C.I. Reactive Red 45 (RR45) dye in aqueous solution. The effects of key operating parameters, such as initial pH, catalyst and hydrogen peroxide dosage as well as the effect of initial dye concentration on decolorization and mineralization extents were studied. Primary objective was to determine the optimal conditions for each of the processes. The influence of added zeolite on the process efficiency was also studied. UV/vis spectrophotometric and total organic carbon (TOC) measurements were performed for determination of decolorization and mineralization extents. It has been found that photo-Fenton process was the most efficient with 74.2% TOC removal and complete color removal achieved after a 1h treatment.Organic synthetic dyes represent relatively large group of organic chemicals, which are present in practically all spheres of mankind daily life. Dyes are all around us, they make our world beautiful, but they also bring pollution and therefore the community has to be focused on possible environmental problems caused by dye industries. The manufacturing and the processing of dyes involve the handling and the production of many organic compounds that are toxic and hazardous to human health Reactive azo dyes are the largest group of organic dyes with –N The principal objective of this study was to investigate the application of UV/TiO C.I. Reactive Red 45 (RR45) was purchased from Ciba-Geigy and used without any purification. The chemical structure of studied reactive dye is shown in All experiments were carried out in a batch waterjacketed photoreactor with the total capacity of 0.8 The initial and final pH values were measured by handylab pH/LF portable pH/conductivity-meter, Schott Instruments GmbH, Mainz, Germany. Decolorization of RR45 model solution was monitored at According to the literature and our previous investigations Preliminary experiments where RR45 model solution was irradiated by UV light, partial decolorization, 30.3%, and negligible mineralization, 3.0% of TOC removal, were obtained. Further experiments were conducted in the dark due to the investigation of color removal by simple adsorption on TiO With the purpose to improve photochemical process of RR45 decolorization and mineralization TiO Series of experiments were conducted in order to optimize initial pH and TiO Due to the amphoteric behavior of most semiconductor oxides, an important parameter governing the rate of reaction taking place on semiconductor particle surface is the pH of the dispersions since it influences the surface-charge properties of the photocatalysts. Therefore, the reactivity of UV/TiO The pollutant concentration is also very important parameter in the wastewater treatment. The effect of various initial RR45 dye concentrations on photocatalytic decolorization by UV/TiO Degradation of organic pollutants present in wastewater can be also accomplished by photocatalytic process using ZnO as an alternative to TiO The advantage of ZnO in comparison to TiO Similarly like for UV/TiO Further investigation was directed to determination of optimal pH for RR45 degradation by UV/ZnO process at above established optimal catalyst dosage, [ZnO] Like in the case of UV/TiO The next applied UV-based process for RR45 degradation in this study was UV enhanced Fenton process. Generally, Fenton type processes are proven to be rather efficient for degradation of various types of organic pollutants in colored wastewater. Those processes are considered as homogeneous catalytic processes due to the catalytic role of iron in Fenton reagent (Eqs.  The equilibrium of ferrous/ferric ions and consequently generation of OH radicals are pH dependent. Therefore, pH is an important parameter influencing efficiency of Fenton type processes. In this study the effect of initial pH, in the range 2–6, on decolorization and mineralization of RR45 model solution by photo-Fenton process was investigated ( Like in previous experiments of photocatalytic degradation of RR45 by UV/TiO Due to the specific properties of synthetic zeolites and their ability to act as catalysts and/or adsorbents, the intention was to investigate whether ZSM-5 type of zeolite can act as a photocatalyst in UV/ZSM-5 process or cause a synergistic effect in a heterogeneous mixture with photocatalyst, which can contribute to the overall effectiveness of investigated UV-based AOPs. In Due to the complete decolorization of RR45 obtained by photo-Fenton process, influence of zeolite on overall process efficiency was estimated on the basis of TOC removal ( Applied UV-based AOPs, UV/TiO The financial support from the Ministry of Education, Science, and Sport (Croatia) (project #0125–018) is gratefully acknowledged.