The new theory presented in the preceding paper, which models the dynamic comminution of concrete due to very high shear strain rate, is now compared to recent test data on the penetration of projectiles through concrete walls of different thicknesses, ranging from 127 to 254mm. These data are analyzed by an explicit finite element code using the new microplane constitutive model M7 for concrete, which was previously shown to provide the most realistic description of the quasi-static uni-, bi- and tri-axial test data with complex loading path and unloading. Model M7 incorporates the quasi-static strain rate effects due viscoelasticity and to the rate of cohesive crack debonding based on activation energy of bond ruptures, which are expected to extend to very high rates. Here model M7 is further enhanced by apparent viscosity capturing the energy dissipation due to the strain-rate effect of comminution. The maximum shear strain rates in the computations are of the order of 105
                     s−1. The simulations document that, within the inevitable uncertainties, the measured exit velocities of the projectiles can be matched quite satisfactorily and the observed shapes of the entry and exit craters can be reproduced correctly.The preceding Part 1 ( In the present part 2, the theory is being applied to the problem of penetration of missiles through concrete walls of various thicknesses. Fitting of previously published impact test data is used to calibrate and validate the new theory. Because of the complexity of triaxial softening damage in concrete, the microplane model is selected as the constitutive law, to be enriched by the comminution rate effect. The microplane model has already been used with great success for the simulations of various dynamic effects on hardened concrete structures, including the effects of explosions, impact and groundshock. In contrast to plastic and other tensorial constitutive models, various microplane models have been shown capable of predicting the correct entry and exit crater shapes of penetrating missiles ( However, prediction of the exit velocities of perforating projectiles proved to be much more challenging. Recently a new model based on the microplane model M4, called the high-rate brittle microplane model, has been developed at U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( The internal friction in materials is usually modeled as a relation between the first stress invariant and the second deviator invariant, without any reference to the direction of slip. This is not realistic. The plastic or frictional slip occurs in fact only on planes of a certain specific orientation. Likewise, almost all of the other inelastic deformations in concrete microstructure, such as tensile cracking and compressive axial splitting, occur on planes of well defined orientations. These orientations can be captured by the idea of In the early 1980s, it was realized ( Compared to the classical tensorial constitutive models based on tensorial invariants, the microplane concept has a number of advantages: (1) It is conceptually simpler, since the strain vectors on the microplanes can be intuitively related to crack opening and slip. (2) The orientation of cracking and slip can be captured. (3) The so-called vertex effect is automatic, while being beyond the capability of the tensorial constitutive models. (4) Apparent deviations from normality in the sense of tensorial plasticity models are represented, thanks to the fact that the microplane model is equivalent to a large set of simultaneously active yield surfaces intersecting at the same point of the stress space, for each of which the normality rule can be satisfied (this is particularly important for dynamic loading, with highly nonproportional loading paths). (5) The kinematic constraint of the microplanes of different orientation automatically simulates the cross effects such as the shear dilatancy and pressure sensitivity. (6) Combinations of loading and unloading on different microplanes provide a complex path dependence and automatically reproduce the Bauschinger effect and the hysteresis under cyclic loading. (7) The dependence of the current yield or strength limits on the strain components (rather than on scalar hardening–softening parameters) is easy to take into account. (8) In cyclic loading, fatigue is automatically simulated by accumulation of residual stresses on the microplanes after each load cycle. (9) Finally, though not important for concrete, anisotropy can be easily captured. Early on, the microplane model was computationally too demanding for full structures. But thanks to the rise of computer power, the microplane model is now being used in systems with tens of millions finite elements. Many progressively improved versions of the microplane model, now labeled M1, M2,…,M7, have been developed for concrete, and so have other variants for fiber-reinforced concrete, fiber–polymer composites, sandstone, shale, clay, rigid foam, shape memory alloy and some soft tissues. Model M4 ( Let us now briefly review the basics of microplane formulation. According to the kinematic constraint, the normal component of the strain vector on a generic microplane of orientation defined by its unit normal The inelastic softening behavior is in microplane model best characterized by means of separate strength limits, or stress–strain boundaries, on the microplane stress components. Within the boundaries, the behavior is considered to be elastic, and it should be noted that in spite of that the macroscopic response represents the pre-peak nonlinearity because different microplanes enter the strain softening behavior at different moments of loading. The inelastic behavior, defined on the microplanes in terms of Accordingly, the tensile strength limit for normal microplane stresses, which governs tensile fracturing, can be defined as (see Fig. 2a and Eq. (23) in The microplane frictional yield surface is expressed as (see Fig. 2d and Eqs. (26)–(32) in Based on extensive calibrations by test data for many concretes, the stress–strain boundaries are in M7 characterized by five free parameters Based on the given elastic modulus The thermodynamic requirement of non-negative density of energy dissipation is discussed in detail in Numerous earth penetration simulations in the literature have used the Eulerian coordinates, which are the coordinates of the current state and do not allow keeping the memory of the initial virgin state of the material. This approach is suitable for plastic materials. However, for brittle or quasibrittle materials, and particularly for the microplane model of concrete, memory of the initial virgin state is essential. Therefore, the updated Lagrangian approach, in which the material points are characterized by their coordinates in the initial state, must be used. Calculations show that the predicted geometry of the exit crater, as well as the deceleration of projectile prior to exit, depend strongly on the softening damage behavior of the material, whose characterization depends on the initial virgin state. Given the complexity of concrete behavior, the constitutive law has been verified against a large set of experimental data covering virtually all the distinct types of experiments that characterize concrete, whose number is about 20 ( The same free model parameters, namely The fits are performed by taking into account the meaning of the coefficients in terms of various particular aspects of the mechanical behavior of concrete. This kind of fitting procedure is more tedious than the automatic procedures such as the Levenberg–Marquardt optimization algorithm or the genetic algorithm but the resulting optimum values of the parameter preserve the robustness of the model in simulating general stress states. Complex automatic fitting procedures often yield parameter values that correspond to very close fits but almost always such parameter values render the model unstable in simulations of multiaxial states of stress. This is because it is not entirely possible to convey the meaning of each model parameter to the automatic fitting procedure. Slabs made of normal strength concrete, called the WES-5000 concrete, were perforated by projectiles at the Geotechnical and Structures Laboratory of the U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC), Vicksburg ( To obtain material data, standard cylindrical specimens of the same WES-5000 concrete were tested under both conventional and unconventional triaxial load paths ( As is clear from the preceding Part I ( Another way to generate rate effects in fracture modeling is through dynamic crack propagation and crack branching (e.g. One quasistatic rate effect, already introduced into microplane model M4 ( The ratio The macroscopic strain softening may be imagined to be the result of the openings of many parallel cohesive cracks. Denoting by Substituting Since Function It is logical to assume that the normal and deviatoric boundaries adhere to Eq. The viscoelasticity (or creep) of concrete is properly taken into account at the microplane level. The creep is fully characterized by the compliance function Since long-time creep is not of interest here, the entire Maxwell chain is not needed. Therefore (in similarity to the approach of Assuming that, during each time step Numerous test data on the apparent unconfined compressive strength under uniaxial compression of various concretes show that, with increasing strain rate, the apparent strength increases sharply (see Fig. 1 in The confined compression behavior at high strain rates of concrete is of interest for perforation of concrete slabs by projectiles as well as explosions. Next, using model M7 calibrated for the “MB50” concrete used in these tests, the axial stress–strain response of that concrete to high strain rates is extracted, as shown in The sharp increase of the strength amplification factor for strain rates above A series of finite element calculations of projectile perforation have been performed using model M7 with only the quasi-static strain rate effects. The results are shown as the dashed curve in It should be mentioned that these velocities could roughly be obtained by calculations with an enhanced friction coefficient. However, assuming a higher friction coefficient for high slip rates is questionable since other experimental evidence shows the friction coefficient to decrease with an increasing slip rate. Also, a blunter nose profile different from the one used in the tests could help to reduce the penetration velocity. It was also examined whether the effect of the frictional boundary, which can greatly increase with the confining pressure, could suffice to explain the drop of exit velocities for thicker walls. However, the calculated confining pressure was not high enough. Actually, in absence of large enough pressure on the missile sides, the dynamic sliding leads to a reduction of friction. Thus, although the rate effect is here applied also at the microplane frictional boundary, it is ineffective in reducing the missile speed and cannot explain the observed exit velocities. In Another significant parameter of the perforation of concrete slabs is the shape of the projectile tip. Intuitively, a blunt projectile would be less effective than a sharp one in perforating slabs. The projectile tip has been specified in The impossibility of predicting the correct exit velocities of the projectiles with the same quasi-static rate-dependent microplane constitutive law and the same element sizes revealed that there must be a different type of rate effect that dissipates far more energy than the quasi-static rate effect. In the preceding companion paper (  basic M7 for quasi-static multiaxial behavior of concrete; M7 enhanced by the quasi-static strain rate effects (which include the crack opening rate and viscoelasticity); and M7 with the comminution rate effect and the quasi-static rate effects. Model M7 including all of these rate effects has been coded into VUMAT subroutine of ABAQUS. The finite element analysis of the perforation of concrete walls was performed in the sense of crack band model. In these perforation simulations, the slabs are discretized uniformly using 4-node constant strain tetrahedral elements of size approximately 7.5 The boundary effects, such as wave reflection at the boundary of the mesh, have been removed in some of the simulations by attaching a single layer of infinite (or wave transmitting) finite elements at all exterior boundaries. But the removal of these boundary effects has resulted in negligible changes in both crater formation and exit velocities. By contrast, in explosion simulations, the boundary effects are known to play a crucial role in the degree of damage inflicted upon a concrete slab. The crater geometries in three dimensions and a half of the projectile are shown in Fig. The overestimation of the exit velocity of the thin slabs might not be an error of the present theory. It might be caused by various extraneous factors. For example, since the thinner slabs dry faster, the thin slab must have had a lower specific moisture content than the thicker one if the curing type and durations were about the same. Hopkinson bar tests reported in There are further factors that could have skewed the result. From So it is at present impossible to conclude whether the overestimation of the exit velocity of the thin plate, seen in  If only the quasi-static rate effects due to crack opening rate and to viscoelasticity are taken into account, the observed exit velocities in the perforation of concrete slabs by projectiles cannot be matched by computer simulations. Missile penetration can produce strain rates on the order of 10 Comminution of concrete at such extremely high strain rates can explain the additional dissipation needed to match the exit velocities of perforating projectiles. The simulation results agree with the theoretical prediction that the comminution is equivalent to additional shear stresses of concrete proportional to the 2/3-power of deviatoric strain rate, which is in turn equivalent to a deviatoric (shear) viscosity proportional to the −1/3-power of the deviatoric strain rate. Including in the calculations a comminution due to rate of volume expansion has almost no effect on the exit velocities of the projectiles. Hence, the comminution must be explained in terms of the shear strain rate. Including a strain-rate dependent friction between the projectile and the surrounding concrete cannot help to explain the additional dissipation needed to match the exit velocities. The underestimation of the exit velocity of the thinnest slab might be explicable by taking into account the Hopkinson bar tests indicating that a drier concrete has a lower strength, and thus less resistance to missile penetration. However, the data are too scant for meaningful calculations. The underestimation could easily be explained by possible defects in the design and control of the experiments and by missing data on water content, age, curing, etc. The microplane model M7 coupled with both the comminution rate effect and the quasi-static strain rate effects can correctly predict the geometries of the both the entry and exit craters and gives overall a satisfactory match of the observed exit velocities of the projectiles. The first author gratefully acknowledges the financial support from