The technology of solvent extraction in the hydrometallurgical industry typically consists of two circuits, an extraction circuit and a stripping circuit, coupled by a common solvent. Process flow patterns regularly range from single-solvent circulation loops to schemes employing solvent and aqueous bypass or intermediate solvent recycle. The design of these processes using graphical methods runs into a series of complications produced by the coupling of the flow loops. In this paper, a graphical method is developed for the preliminary analysis of different flow structures for these coupled circuits. The method is simple and can be performed by hand. Several examples are presented to illustrate the utility of the proposed method.Solvent extraction is one of the most frequently used technologies in modern hydrometallurgy, as well as in some water recycling processes. The technology has been applied to the extraction of numerous metallic elements The fact that these operations represent two coupled circuits introduces characteristics into their design procedure that do not arise in systems having only a single circuit of equilibrium states. The present study presents a simple graphical representation that provides a way to develop preliminary designs of solvent extraction circuits for hydrometallurgy. Here, the graphical representation is developed, several examples of circuits are presented, and its use in determining the various stage compositions is illustrated. In overview, hydrometallurgical solvent extraction circuits The extraction and stripping steps depend on the kinetics of mass transfer, and, typically, the extraction efficiency is accounted for by the use of apparent equilibrium curves. These curves must be experimentally determined. Consider as an example the circuit of the lower diagram of In these equations, These difficulties are improved by employing a new concentration coordinate The upper part of The coordinate transformation In order to develop multistage circuits, some iteration may be necessary to determine the concentrations and flows required to carry out a given metal extraction. The concentration, Again, consider the scheme presented in Circuits are represented in the diagram by determining for each extraction and stripping stage the positions of its equilibrium point and its two feed points. The equilibrium point ( The operating line is fixed by the selection of three more degrees of freedom. These are in addition to The diagram offers an immediate indication of the range of organic flowrates which are feasible for a given For countercurrent flow patterns, the familiar cascade “staircase” pattern is traversed on each side of the operating line. However, other general flow patterns are represented as easily by locating the stage feed points accordingly. In cases where a feed is to be mixed from two source streams, the feed point can be located on a mixing tie line between the source streams. With selected values for  Estimates are made of The The   An estimate is made of The The  Sometimes it can be advantageous to bypass some of the total aqueous or organic flow around one or more of the stages. The object is usually to reduce the mass load in the stage(s). When the two equilibrium lines have significantly differing slopes, this technique can sometimes be employed without requiring an increase in the total number of stages. The graphical representation of bypass cases is accomplished by constructing an additional operating line segment for the stages that are bypassed. In a number of situations, it is advantageous to recycle the organic from an intermediate stripping stage to an intermediate extraction stage and vice versa. For example, this may enable reduction of the number of stages needed in the circuit, or may provide more flexibility of plant operation Intermediate recycles are represented in the diagram by dividing the main operating line into connected segments of different slopes. The slope of each segment is given by the value of The following series of examples serve to demonstrate the application of the ( This example was studied in This example demonstrates a circuit composed of two extraction stages and one stripping stage, This example demonstrates a circuit composed of two extraction stages and two stripping stages, This example demonstrates a circuit composed of two extraction stages and two stripping stages, This example demonstrates a circuit composed of one extraction stage and two stripping stages, This example demonstrates a circuit composed of one extraction and three stripping stages, This example demonstrates a circuit composed of two extraction stages and two stripping stages, This example demonstrates a circuit composed of two extraction stages and two stripping stage, The ratios between aqueous and organic flows are generally limited by the requirements to maintain the continuity of the desired phase during operation, the characteristics of dispersion and coalescence, the level of purity of the desired product, and the capacity and percentage of extraction desired. However, it is possible to use the graphical representation presented to carry out the analysis of the effect of these ratios on the percentage of metal extracted and the capacity of the circuits. For example, In the examples studied, it can be seen that the number of extraction stages has a greater influence on the percentage of metal extraction (% The graphical representation shown can be utilized for the study of different configurations of solvent extraction and stripping circuits, coupled by a common solvent. It provides a rapid and simple way of determining the various stage compositions and thereby of obtaining material balances. Analysis of the effects of using different ratios between the aqueous and organic phases can also be performed. Aqueous volumetric flow in extraction stages Amount of metal extracted in the leaching step and recovered in the recovery step Organic volumetric flow. Aqueous volumetric flow in stripping stages Metal concentration in the aqueous phase in extraction stages ( Metal concentration in the organic phase in extraction stages ( Metal concentration in the organic phase in stripping stages ( Metal concentration in the aqueous phase in stripping stages ( Transformed metal concentration coordinate in the aqueous phase in stripping stages ( The authors wish to thank CONICYT for financing of FONDECYT PROJECT # 1990956 of which the present study is a part.