The petroleum coke is the main raw material for the preparation of pre-baked anode materials for aluminum electrolysis. However, the presence of vanadium in petroleum coke negatively affects its properties. In the present study, microwave-ultrasonic assisted leaching is used to enhance the removal of vanadium from petroleum coke. The leaching efficiency of vanadium can reach above 90%, under the optimum conditions: ultrasonic power of 1000 W, microwave power of 500 W, temperature of 95 °C, NaOH concentration of 150 g/L, Na atomic ratio of NaOH and Na2CO3 of 3. The results showed that the contact angle and the surface tension between leaching solution and petroleum coke were notably reduced, resulting in an improved leaching efficiency.Petroleum coke is a by-product of oil obtained from coking reaction of residual oil in the refinery ( Vanadium leaching can be mainly classified to acid leaching ( Dissolution of V The method of alkali leaching for vanadium removal from petroleum coke was used in the present study. The impact of microwave and ultrasonic-assisted leaching during vanadium separation from petroleum coke was studied systematically. The influence of different factors on leaching efficiency and mechanism, such as microwave and ultrasonic power, reaction temperature, concentration of leaching agent, and sodium atoms ratio has been investigated and discussed. The petroleum coke used in this study was from a chemical plant in Shandong Province, China. After crushing, grinding and sieving, the petroleum coke (under 40 mesh) was collected for experimental studies. The vanadium content in the samples was up to 846 ppm, as determined by ICP-OES (OPTIMA 8000) after microwave digestion. Leaching experiments were conducted in a microwave-ultrasound extraction apparatus (XH-300B), except for the comparative leaching experiments which were carried out in a heating water bath. In each experiment, a certain quantity of petroleum coke (particle size: 0.125–0.150 mm) was mixed with a certain amount of leaching agent, oxidizing agent (30 wt% H The experiments were designed to determine the optimal conditions. The effects of microwave power (300–700 W), ultrasonic power (600–1200 W), temperature (35–95 °C), NaOH concentration (50–180 g/L), and Na atomic ratio of NaOH and Na Leaching efficiency (η) computation formula is expressed as follows: The leaching efficiency, by employing bath heating, microwave heating and microwave-ultrasound assisted heating, was determined. The microwave power was 500 W, whereas the ultrasonic power was 1000 W. The rest conditions, i.e. temperature 95 °C, NaOH concentration 150 g/L, Na atomic ratio of NaOH and Na  To determine the effect of microwave and ultrasonic power, several experiments were performed. In particular, the microwave power varied between 300 and 700 W, whereas the ultrasonic power was in the range of 600–1200 W, at a leaching time of 60 min. The rest conditions remain the same as described above. The effect of microwave-ultrasound power on the leaching efficiency of vanadium is also shown in The effect of NaOH concentration, Na atomic ratio of NaOH and Na It is evident that the leaching efficiency of vanadium is enhanced with the increase of leaching agent concentration, reaction time and temperature. These results indicate that higher leaching efficiency could be obtained at temperature of 95 °C, NaOH concentration of 150 g/L, and Na atomic ratio of NaOH and Na Comparing these three processes, the reaction time was greatly reduced at the same leaching rate under the same condition by microwave-ultrasonic heating. It speeds up the circulation and improving work efficiency.  With the decrease of pH value, the condensation degree of polyvanadate increases. After 120 min, the peak is divided into the asymmetric stretching vibration (V To a certain extent, the physico-chemical properties of leaching liquor reflect the effectiveness of the leaching process. Different parameters, such as the surface tension, the contact angle, the conductivity and the viscosity were determined during the application of the different leaching methods under the optimal conditions. The results are shown in In the hydrometallurgy process, the increase of viscosity is not favorable for leaching. Microwave is a kind of electromagnetic wave, and its effect on polar molecules is obvious. It can polarize polar molecules and produce microwave heating. In the leaching system, leaching agents such as NaOH and H By employing microwave - ultrasonic heating, a shortest reaction time is required to achieve high leaching efficiency of vanadium. The optimal leaching conditions for vanadium leaching are as follows: temperature 95 °C, NaOH concentration 150 g/L, Na atomic ratio of NaOH and Na This work was financially supported by