The production of latex or bulk rubber from guayule has been pursued at various times since guayule rubber ceased being an article of commerce more than 60 years ago. Hypo-allergenic guayule latex has been prepared in 25–50-kg laboratory batches. Dilute latex was first washed from ground shrub and then concentrated by a combination of multi-stage centrifugation and creaming steps. This material was used to fabricate prototype medical products. A total of 8.8t of dry guayule rubber was produced by simultaneous extraction of rubber and resin with a mixed organic solvent, followed by fractionation of the polymer stream. This material was tested in aircraft and light truck tires. At present, those seeking to process guayule must be prepared to meet several challenges: increasing the bulk viscosity of the rubber polymer, reducing the level of entrained resin and assuring oxidative and thermal stability. From this standpoint, latex process development remains in its early stages, whereas processing guayule for bulk rubber has been more thoroughly and successfully evaluated.Commercial production of The history of guayule processing has been the subject of several earlier reviews ( The physical and chemical properties of the rubber isolated from guayule are artifacts of the polymer structure as formed in the latex-bearing cells and of the method by which the polymer is extracted from shrub tissue. Especially in the case of solid guayule rubber, it is the production process that ultimately determines the polymer's molecular weight distribution and its content of non-rubber components. These characteristics influence in turn the ability of the rubber product to resist oxidative and thermal degradation, form chemical cross-links during vulcanization and develop desirable stress–strain or other performance characteristics in finished goods. Unlike Guayule latex rubber generally has a lower bulk viscosity than the rubber in NR latex ( From a product applications standpoint, resin is an undesirable component of guayule rubber. The low-molecular weight resin components act as plasticizers, so that dry films of high-resin guayule rubber can be less firm and more easily distorted than NR films ( Coagulated directly from ground shrub, dry guayule rubber can contain as much as 20–40% resin by weight ( Guayule rubber lacks the proteins and reactive functional groups present in both NR latex and bulk NR. As a result, guayule rubber is less stable to oxygen and heat. Bulk NR undergoes storage hardening with an increase in bulk viscosity when stored over long periods of time ( On the threshold of pilot-scale production, guayule latex has been prepared in 25–50-kg laboratory batches. A dilute latex dispersion is produced by milling freshly harvested shrub in water or other aqueous medium at a liquid to solids ratio of about 5:1 to 20:1 ( The optimum conditions for concentrating guayule latex may differ from those used for the production of NR latex. At any given concentration above about 20% solids, guayule latex tends to be more viscous than NR latex ( Two general methods have been used to produce bulk guayule rubber: flotation and solvent extraction. Flotation processing, basically the coagulation of the latex in aqueous base, was used to produce the high-resin commercial product of the early 20th century ( Two types of solvent extraction have been evaluated as selective means of removing the resin: sequential extraction and simultaneous extraction. Sequential extraction involves deresination of ground shrub with a polar organic solvent such as acetone, followed by rubber removal with a less-polar solvent such as hexane ( The most successful of recent pilot-scale operations, the Bridgestone/Firestone facility in Sacaton, Arizona, produced a total of 8.8 In the Bridgestone/Firestone process, incoming shrub was first chopped into 3–4-cm pieces, and then passed through a flaker to compress and shear the shrub tissue, rupturing the rubber-bearing cells. The flaked shrub was then mixed with extraction solvent at 50 Rubber fractionation was actually a multi-stage operation involving a series of five mixer–settler units. In the first stage, miscella was mixed with a stream of acetone to coagulate the rubber, which precipitated out and settled to the bottom of the mixer–settler. The lighter liquid phase containing most of the resin was pumped continuously from the top of the unit. The coagulated rubber was then pumped through the downstream mixer–settler units, where a mixture of pentane or hexane and acetone capable of dissolving both resin and low-molecular weight rubber was pumped counter-current to the rubber-containing phase. This stripped the rubber phase of its resin and low-molecular weight rubber components. The solvent-swollen, high-molecular weight rubber phase was pumped from the bottom of the fifth-stage mixer–settler unit. The stream containing the extracted resin and low-molecular weight rubber was decanted from the top of the second-stage mixer–settler. Finally, the swollen rubber phase passed through a twin-screw extruder-devolatilizer that used a combination of heat and reduced pressure to strip off the solvent. The extruded rubber product was compressed into solid rectangular bales weighing 30–35 A measure of successful process development is the performance of the product. The extent to which recent operations have produced rubber suitable for the fabrication of finished goods has been documented for both latex and bulk polymer. Guayule latex produced in accordance with the More than 3.3 Another 2.1 The quality and performance of guayule rubber in whatever form it is produced must be competitive with that of NR and synthetic polymers. Some of guayule's shortcomings as a process feedstock may eventually be overcome by developments in breeding or agricultural production. In the meantime, those seeking to process guayule must be prepared to meet several challenges: increasing the bulk viscosity of the rubber polymer, reducing the level of entrained resin and assuring oxidative and thermal stability. From this standpoint, latex process development remains in its early stages, whereas processing guayule for bulk rubber has been more thoroughly and successfully evaluated. Some of the work described here was supported in part by funding from the Department of the Navy (NAVAIR) under contract 53-3142-7-6005 administered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Office of Critical Materials, funding from the USDA-ARS under Specific Cooperative Agreement 58-5344-4-510 and funding from the University of Arizona under a subcontract of USDA-CSREES-OAM grant 92-COOP-1-7238. I am especially grateful to C.A. Bailey (USDA-CSREES-OAM-SP) for documentation relating to bulk rubber processing and testing and to W.M. Cole (Bridgestone/Firestone Inc.) for comments on the operation of the Sacaton prototype processing facility.