In this study, the distinctive sintering performance of 100% limonitic laterite was investigated through sinter pot tests, industrial data comparison, theoretical analysis and mineralogy determination. The optimum sinter indices including tumble index, productivity and solid fuel rate were attained at 1.4 basicity as follows: 45.87%, 0.97 t·m−2·h−1 and 140.52 kg/t, respectively. The limit of liquid phases at lower basicity and diffusion of low-strength binding phases, deterioration of SFCA structure and weakened consolidation between hercynite and liquid phases at higher basicity were observed, which was deleterious to sinter. However, the optimum sintering performance of limonitic laterite was far poorer than that of ordinary iron ores, attributed to only 8.78% of acicular SFCA, higher sinter porosity of 48.92%, poorer wettability of high viscosity liquid phases on hercynite and extensive formation of high melting liquid phases and solid phases. It is crucial to develop effective technologies to improve sintering performance of this refractory limonitic laterite.Due to the worldwide strong demand for stainless steel products and dramatic depletion of nickel sulfide resources, mining of nickel laterite with basic reserve of 44.4 billion tons, has become extremely attractive in recent years [ The pyrometallurgical processes of lateritic nickel ore mainly includes Rotary Kiln-Electric Furnace (RKEF) process and sintering-blast furnace process [ Meanwhile, some researchers [ In this paper, based on the characterization of the used limonitic laterite ore, the granulation, pilot sinter pot tests, theoretical analysis and mineralogy of product sinter of 100% limonitic nickel laterite were conducted for better understanding of the sintering performance and consolidation mechanism, which will help to develop an innovative process to improve the sintering performance of limonitic laterite ore. The raw materials include nickel laterite ore, solid fuel and fluxes for the sintering pot tests. Limonitic laterite ore was imported from Philippines. Flux-A, anthracite and burnt lime were supplied by Chinese steel mills. Chemical compositions of raw materials and industrial analysis of anthracite are documented in   The microstructure of limonitic laterite ore shown in Limonitic laterite ore as the only iron-bearing raw material and anthracite as the high-quality solid fuel were adopted for sintering tests conducted in pilot scale pot. The ratios of return fines and flux-A were maintained at 30% and 1.5% on a total dry mix basis respectively. Burnt lime was used not only as a binder to improve granulation of sinter mixture but also as a flux to adjust basicity of sinter mixture from 0.6 to 2.2. The detail methods of the sintering process were similar to the references [ All the raw materials in the required proportions were blended and mixed manually by adding 15–21% water, then loaded into a granulation drum with a diameter of 600 mm and a length of 1400 mm. And granulation of the sinter mixture was carried out at 25 rpm for 5 min. Some of the granulated sinter mixture was sampled to measure the moisture, size distributions and permeability. Subsequently, about 30 kg granulated sinter mixture was loaded into the sinter pot with 200 mm in diameter and 700 mm in height. The ignition was controlled at 1100 °C for 1.5 min. The ignition and sinter suction were strictly controlled at 6 and 10 kPa respectively. The hot sinter was subjected to cooling for 5 min at 5 kPa. Finally, the productivity, size distributions and tumble index of sinter were measured after cooling according to the references [ The product sinter samples were collected to determine their chemical compositions, metallurgical characteristics and mineralogy. The chemical compositions were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). The metallurgical performances including low temperature reduction degradation (RDI) and reducibility (RI) were carried out according to the international standards of ISO 4696-2-1998 and ISO 4695-1995. The mineral phase identification was investigated by using X-ray diffraction (XRD) which was operated at 40 kV in step mode with 0.02° 2θ step and a count time of 0.5 s per step over a 2θ range from 10° to 80°. The microstructure of all product sinter samples was demonstrated by means of the optical microscope (Leica DM4500P) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (FEI Quanta-200 scanning electron microscope). In this study, the effects of anthracite dosage, sinter mix moisture and basicity on the sintering performance of 100% limonitic nickel laterite were investigated to reveal the distinctive sintering performance of limonitic laterite ore.       The chemistry of product sinter of limonitic laterite and ordinary iron ores is given in The phase diagram of the CaO-Al  As evidenced in peak of fayalite (2FeO   When sinter basicity was increased to 1.0, hercynite mainly occurred in granular ((Fe, Mg)Fe At 1.4 sinter basicity, it can be seen that the distribution of three types of hercynite was scattered mostly and a clean-cut separation existed between bonded grains ( With sinter basicity further risen up to 1.8, SFCA was extended to the interior of sinter along the edge of the pores and existed mainly porphyritic and dendritic ( As evidened in images of product sinter at 2.2 basicity, sinter binding phases were mainly composed of SFCA, 2CaO·SiO As indicated in Meanwhile, the migration of Fe As in the case of hercynite, Mg and Al appeared to substitute for Fe from the olivine phases favoring the formation of eutectic types of structures [ In summary, product sinter of limonitic laterite at 1.4 basicity possessed optimum sintering performance. However, its tumble index and productivity were much poorer due to higher porosity, less amount of acicular SFCA and poorer wettability of high viscosity liquid phases on hercynite. And solid fuel rate was extremely higher attributed to higher crystal water content and the formation of a great amount of high melting solid phases and eutectic liquid phases compared with those of ordinary iron ores. Hence, it is essential to improve sintering performance of limonitic laterite. Based on the sintering pot tests of 100% limonitic laterite ore including optimization of granulation and sintering parameters, measuring metallurgical performance and mineralogy, the sintering performance and consolidation mechanism were studied and the conclusions were drawn as follows. The nickel laterite used in this paper assaying 0.86% Ni, 3.45% Cr The distinctive sintering performance of limonitic nickel laterite was studied in the sinter basicity range of 0.6–2.2. The optimum sinter indices were obtained on the conditions of anthracite dosage of 7.5%, sinter mix moisture content of 18% and basicity of 1.4, i.e. tumble index of 45.87%, productivity of 0.97 t·m Although product sinter of limonitic nickel laterite had excellent metallurgical properties with RI of 81.34%and RDI The consolidation of sinter was dominated primarily by the consolidation between hercynite and liquid binding phases. And the optimum sinter basicity was recommended at 1.4 significantly differing from that of ordinary iron ores. As sinter basicity was higher than 1.4, sinter strength was markedly worsened by the higher porosity, increasing amount of 2CaO·SiO Declaration of Competing Interest There is no conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript. Financial support from the