The strength of coal is usually determined by the tumbler tests and shatter tests. The strength index is an empirical and its numerical value cannot be used to predict the extent of breakage in a bulk handling circuit. A new drop test procedure has been developed to measure the strength of the coal based on the extent of the breakage due to repeatedly drop from a predetermined height. The lump size coal breaks in the tumbler drum by volume breakage and surface breakage; the extent of one affects the extent of other. Tumbler index is not directly related to any fundamental material property but depends on the number of lifters in the drum and material parameters, which include particle size and strength. The rate of degradation is higher on larger lump sizes coal compare to smaller lump size. At small drop heights, the stress of impact experienced by the sample sizes is comparatively smaller and resulting in a much lower extend of volume breakage and increase the significant of surface breakage.Degradation of the lump raw materials such as coal, iron ore, blast furnace sinter and coke occurs due to the drops at conveyor transfer points, stockpiling and reclaiming, and flow in bins. The degradation products have reduced the value in many ways such as the smaller sizes of the degraded products reduce the permeability and loss the productivity in the blast furnace, the degraded products also cause a large recycle load in sinter plant production. The cold strength of lumpy materials has been accepted as an important property for the problem of degradation. The aims of this work were to develop a procedure to measure the cold strength of material by using tumbler drum and drop test. The size of lump material can be reduced by two main mechanisms, i.e. volume breakage and surface breakage as shown in The volume breakage is the process, where a particle completely breaks or fractures along the line of weakness to produce a number of fragments with a substantially smaller mean size. The surface breakage is the process, where the wear of a particle occurs on its surface by abrasion or chipping resulting to rounding of the particle. Strength is essentially a function of the measurement technique and procedure. Degradation is generally defined as the percentage of an unwanted size fraction that results from coal handling and transport. In this case, it is more important to simulate the actual forces experienced by the coal. The handling of the lumpy materials may involve many drops from heights significantly more than 2 Fracture toughness and tensile strength are two important measures of the strength of solids. Actual determination of these quantities involves the testing of a large number of replicate samples and it is not uncommon for a wide distribution of values to occur. Moreover, both tests are generally applicable to homogeneous materials only and are limited use to highly heterogeneous materials like coal, iron making coke and sinter. Instead, empirical indices of strength are frequently determined by various tumble drum or shatter tests. The theory of volume breakage index is presented in the treatment of volume breakage as a first order process. Waters et al. Integrating Eq. For drop tests, degradation events are discrete, not continuous stated by Teo et al. Therefore, Similarly, for the second drop, For The numerical value of The tumbler drum test is to measure the resistance of the coal to breakage upon impact and abrasion as the coal rubs together and against the walls of the transportation vehicle during handling of the coal at the Gladstone port. The tumbling mill consists of one cylindrical cast iron jar with uniform dimensions of 184 Samples of South Blackwater coal were collected from the stockpiles of Gladstone Port, and sieved to obtain −76.2 A mass of 1 In one series of experiments, only the material remaining in −76.2 In another series of experiments, all the undersized material produced during tumbling as well as the original sample size −76.2 The smaller fragments were removing during tumbling test with “no undersized material” to measure the non-cushioning effects of material and it was compare with the cushioning effect of material during tumbling test with “undersized material”. There are two types of breakage occurs during the tumbling, i.e. volume breakage and surface breakage. The curve of different sizes shown in Initial breakage rate is the initial slope of the curve due to the volume breakage, which appears in the curve during 4 Final breakage rate is the final slope of the curve due to the surface breakage, which appears in the curve during 4–20 Experimental drop tests were performed to measure the volume breakage constant ( The sample of size fractions −76.2 The coal samples of mass 10 and 15 A drop tower of the 10 Any coal sample that did not remain in the initial sample size fraction after the drop was screened out and the sample only remaining in the initial size fraction was redropped to verify the theory behind the volume breakage constant ( After 4 The degradation characteristics of two different sample sizes of South Blackwater coal tested with “undersized coal” and “no undersized coal” are shown in the  This result prove that the larger size of coal lumps degrade faster than the smaller size lump. Hence, the large coal lumps were weaker than smaller a lumps, which is contradictory to Norgate et al. Initially, there was a high rate of degradation due to the volume breakage along the existing cracks. The rate of the volume breakage decreased after 4  Coal lumps breaks down in a tumbler by two mechanisms, i.e. volume breakage and surface breakage; the extent of one affects the extent of the other. Tumbler index is not directly related to any fundamental material property but depends on the number of lifters in the drum and material parameters, which include particle size and strength. The validity of the first order volume breakage constant of South Blackwater coal samples is shown in  At 5 The conclusion from the These results show that a representative sample of the lumpy material containing all size fractions cannot be used for the volume breakage test, because the size distribution of the sample would change throughout the duration of the test. Hence a size fraction most frequently represented is used for the test. It is proposed that as a result of mechanical stress, coal lump carry a certain amount of in situ cracks, which may cause the coal lumps weaker during initial stages of handling.  The curves between log( The conclusion from the results of the  When the smaller mass of sample is dropped from a given height, a higher percentage of particles impact on the steel plate, which is at the base of the drop tower. Whereas, with a sample with a larger mass is dropped from the same height, the higher percentage of particles to fall on other particles that have not achieved a static state after impact. Thus the collision of particles in a dynamic state possibly results in a smaller impulse force than the collision of particles on a steel plate. Hence, the degradation rate is higher in smaller mass coal samples. An obvious conclusion is that real breakage is a complex in nature. This is same finding of Teo et al. The tumbler drum strength tests are empirical size degradation of the sample tested in the drum is due to both volume breakage and surface breakage. Therefore, tumbler indices cannot measure the both mechanisms independently. A new drop procedure has been developed to overcome the limitation of tumbler drum tests and attempt to measure the volume breakage of lump material, which is more applicable to the bulk material handling circuits such as coal, sinter, coke. The lump coal dropped from lower height does not follow the first order breakage. The rate of degradation is higher in larger lump size coal compare to smaller lump size. The volume breakage decreases with the increases of the sample mass. The authors wish to thank the management of Gladstone Port Authority for funding and using their coal samples for this research work. The authors are also grateful to Queensland Government to arrange this scholarship through the Port Authority.