The electrochemical behavior of Ni–WC composite coatings on mild steel substrate has been evaluated. WC particles of average size 5 μm were co-deposited with Ni on a mild steel substrate using a Watts bath at 50 °C. The effect of plating variables on deposition behavior was studied. The weight percentage of WC in the deposited layer decreased and plating efficiency increased with increasing current density from 0.1 to 0.3 A/cm2. The potentiodynamic polarization behavior of Ni–WC coating samples was compared with that of pure Ni in freely-aerated 0.1 mol/l sulfuric acid solution. The passive current density increased and the passivity range decreased for the composite coatings as compared to pure Ni. The amount of WC in the coating did not exert any significant influence on the polarization behavior. The poor passivation properties of the Ni–WC coatings have been attributed to the presence of carbides in the coating.Metal–matrix composites are materials in which the properties of a metallic host material are modified by the addition of a different type material (for example a ceramic). Electrodeposition of composite coatings, based on hard particles dispersed in a metallic matrix, is gaining importance for potential engineering applications The average size of WC particles, determined using a Fritsch particle size analyzer was 5 μm. Mild steel plate (1.5 cm×1.5 cm) was used as the substrate and pure Ni as anode in the electrodeposition experiments. Both sides of the substrate were plated and, therefore, the area of deposition was 4.5 cm The microstructures of the coating cross-sections were studied in an optical microscope (Axiolab A, Zeiss, Germany) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JEOL JSM 840A). Electrochemical polarization studies were conducted using a Perkin–Elmer potentiostat (model 263A). The tests were conducted in freely-aerated 0.1 mol/l H The effect of bath temperature on the coating at a fixed current density of 0.2 A/cm The effect of bath loads (2, 5, 8 and 10 g/l) was studied, maintaining all other deposition parameters constant (current density 0.2 A/cm  Ni–WC composites coating have been electrodeposited using a Watts bath. An adherent deposit was obtained at a deposition temperature of 50 °C. However, agglomeration of WC particles was noted for temperature above 50 °C. The distribution of the carbides in the deposit layer was uniform using 2 g/l bath load. The amount of WC particles in the composite coating decreased with increasing current density of deposition (0.1–0.3 A/cm RB acknowledges the grant of equipment (potentiostat) by the Alexander von Humbold Foundation.