In this study, it was aimed to remove boron, one of the major impurities of MG-Si (metallic grade silicon), in molten silicon by a steam plasma method utilizing EMC (electro magnetic casting) process. In order to effectively remove boron, less volatile than silicon, plasma injection gas was systematically varied. As a result, the most effective way to remove boron was additionally injecting hydrogen gas and steam with argon gas, which is a reactive gas of a general plasma injection routine. Although mass loss of silicon increased with increase in plasma injection time, the refining effect of boron and several metallic impurities like aluminium and titanium was improved significantly.Solar energy will shortly be in great demand since it is infinite and cleaner than any other conventional energy resources. Because the dramatically growing photovoltaic industry is based on silicon solar cell technology, it is most important to save the production cost of SOG-Si (solar grade silicon). Silicon material accounts for 70% of total silicon solar cell cost. Hence, in order to economically produce SOG-Si from commercially available MG-Si (metallic grade silicon) for silicon solar cell application, the removal of impurities from silicon has come to be a significant issue in photovoltaic industry. Impurities in silicon shorten the lifetime of excited carriers in silicon solar cell and disturb electric generation In this study, it was tried to remove boron, one of the major impurities of MG-Si, by forming boron containing compounds possessing high vapor pressure. In order to achieve this goal, a steam plasma melting method utilizing EMC process was tried. Since boron is less volatile than silicon, plasma injection gas was systematically varied, that is, hydrogen gas and steam were additionally injected with argon gas, which is a reactive gas of a general plasma injection routine. EMC process was expected to enable rapidly continuous growing of multi-crystalline silicon ingot, preventing the problems of contamination from crucible wall and crucible consumption The experimental apparatus was composed of a plasma torch for boron refining and a segmented Cu cold crucible for EMC process application. Dummy bar was made of graphite. During the refining process, the liquid silicon bath was observed not to make contact with the crucible inner wall owing to the electromagnetic repulsive forces. Hydrogen gas and/or steam were additionally injected with argon gas for removing boron, less volatile than silicon. The flow rates of the reactive plasma gases were changed from 7 to 10 In this study, hydrogen and/or steam were used as reactive gas for the plasma refining method, since boron is less volatile than silicon. Their boiling points are 2820 and 2540  The effect of plasma injection time on the removal of boron is shown in   Argon gas mixed with hydrogen and steam was observed to be the most effective in removing boron from molten silicon in the plasma refining method utilizing EMC process. The refining effect of boron and several metallic impurities like aluminium and titanium was significantly improved with increase in plasma injection time. On the other hand, mass loss ratio of silicon also increased with increase in plasma injection time. The authors wish to acknowledge the