The seismic potential of serpentinites at high pressure was investigated via deformation experiments on cored natural serpentinite samples, during which micro-seismicity was monitored by recording Acoustic Emissions (AEs). Deformation was performed at pressures of 3–5 GPa, using a Deformation-DIA device, and over a wide range of temperatures, both within and outside antigorite's stability field. Below 400 °C, serpentinite deformation involves “silent” semi-brittle mechanisms, even in cases where strain localization is observed. At high temperature (i.e., above 600 °C), despite conditions propitious to dehydration embrittlement (i.e., fast strain rates and reaction kinetics), joint deformation and dehydration lead to ductile shear, without generation of AEs. Brittle behavior was observed in a narrow temperature window ca. 500 °C. In this latter case, AEs are consistently observed upon faulting and extremely sharp strain localization is observed in recovered samples. The resulting microstructures are consistent with the inverse ductile-to-brittle transition proposed by Proctor and Hirth (2016) in antigorite. This may therefore be a source of seismicity in subducting slabs at mantle pressures and temperatures from 500 to 600 °C. However, the acoustic signal observed here is orders of magnitude weaker than what is obtained at low PT conditions with brittle failure, consistently with low radiation efficiency of serpentinite faulting (Prieto et al., 2013) and suggests that other mechanisms are responsible for large intermediate-depth earthquakes. In fact, the present results are in line with a recent study (Ferrand et al., 2017), that suggests that intermediate earthquakes are likely induced by mechanical instabilities due to dehydration in partly hydrated peridotites.The origin of intermediate-depth earthquakes, which occur at depths of 60–300 km in subducting slabs, remains enigmatic. Although increasing pressure (P) and temperature (T) conditions are expected to promote ductile deformation of rocks, earthquakes are recorded as deep as 700 km ( In fact, the release of fluids upon serpentine breakdown was long considered a possible triggering mechanism, via dehydration embrittlement. In particular, the dehydration of antigorite (the Mg-rich variety of serpentine stable at high PT) was considered as a good candidate to explain lower WB plane seismicity. More recent experimental studies challenge this classic fluid-embrittlement theory by showing that faulting of serpentinites, related to dehydration, occurs in an aseismic manner. This was shown by the absence of both associated acoustic signal ( In order to address the paradox raised by these contradictory experimental results, and assess the seismogenic potential of both dehydrating and stable antigorite, we extend here the work of  2.1 mm in diameter and 2–3 mm long samples were cored from a serpentinite block from Patrimonio (Corsica, France). This material has already been used in ( The samples were fitted in a Boron Nitride (BN) sleeve and sandwiched between two densified Al A total of ten samples were deformed in the D-DIA at pressures of 3 or 5 GPa. Experimental conditions are listed in In all experiments, the acoustic signal was monitored in order to identify brittle mechanisms possibly associated with deformation and/or dehydration reactions of antigorite. The AE setup used here consists in an improved version of the one used in  The samples were first cold-compressed to a hydrostatic pressure (mean stress) of 3 GPa, except for 2 experiments, where a pressure of 5 GPa was achieved. In order to compare the mechanical behavior and micro-seismicity of dehydrating and non-dehydrating samples, deformation was then performed over a wide range of temperatures. Pure shear on the samples was obtained by driving the top and bottom anvils inwards with a constant speed on the differential rams, which eventually translates a constant strain rate after a few % strain ( After stage 1, some samples were heated up to higher temperatures, ranging from 500 to 720 °C, at rates varying from ≈0.03 to 0.1 °C s Three experiments, S1–S3, correspond to low-temperature deformation of stable antigorite (stage 1 only), and five experiments, T1–T5, were performed in a transitional temperature window (450–550 °C); two of these latter ones were conducted with a stage 2. All samples were quenched before decompression. We present here the results of ten deformation experiments performed at 3–5 GPa. The conditions and results of each experiment are listed in  Six experiments were performed with in situ measurements of differential stress and dehydration reaction advance. Upon deformation stage 1, i.e., at constant temperature, an apparent steady state – corresponding to a stress plateau – is achieved. The peak strengths (maximum differential stress,  When comparing strength at a given temperature, Datasets by  In experiments D1 and D2, when the temperature was increased beyond the thermal stability of antigorite (i.e., above 600 °C), full dehydration was observed in the diffraction patterns (  At low temperature (experiments S1 and S2), XRD data give insights into the deformation mechanisms of stable antigorite. We observe a progressive decrease in the spottiness of the diffraction lines (Fig. S5) that initiates upon cold compression and continues during deformation. A smoother distribution of the diffraction intensities with azimuthal angle indicates grain size reduction. Here, the use of a broad X-ray beam ( Although cold compression was made as hydrostatic as possible, (Fig. S5), high stress levels may be unintentionally generated due to the design of the cell. At the contact between grains, these stress concentrations can result in comminution ( Similar to the samples deformed at lower temperature, samples deformed at 500 to 550 °C also show intense grain size reduction accompanied by a strong LPO development on the basal (001) plane ( The appearance of the talc-like phase likely affects the strength of the sample. In all experiments indeed, a drastic stress drop is observed upon heating, which results in a strain rate increase, as observed in the  Observations on recovered samples S1, S2 and S3, deformed at the lowest temperatures, i.e., within the stability field of antigorite, are consistent with mechanisms characteristic of the semi-brittle flow ( Samples deformed between 500 and 550 °C exhibit sharp conjugated faults ( As can be seen in Similarly, our AE data clearly show that, despite low temperatures and fast strain rates, strain localization in stable serpentinite takes place in a ductile manner. No more than one AE was detected during “low”-temperature deformation experiments (S1, S2 and S3; see At temperatures ranging from 450 to 550 °C, a small burst of AEs was recorded in each of the deformation experiments. In T1, six triggered AEs were collected at axial strains of ∼30–40%, after the softening and the presence of talc-like were observed. Unfortunately, due to insufficient pre-trigger recording, arrival times of these events could not be picked and AEs could not be located. However, detailed examination of the continuous waveform (i.e., streaming) data shows that the first AE has, by far, the largest amplitude and that this main event is followed by a few events that are one to two orders of magnitude smaller (see supplementary material, Fig. S2). The main event is likely related to the propagation of a fault evidenced on the recovered sample. We note that faulting occurs with low differential stress, which prevents from measuring any associated stress drop. This behavior showed good reproducibility. In total, five experiments were performed, where samples experienced faulting accompanied by a handful of AEs. The ones that could be located have a source in the sample volume or within uncertainty (Figs. S3 and S4). The AEs detected in this temperature range attest of the brittle nature of faulting, thus confirming the microscopy observations. It is only ambiguous for sample T1, where an additional fault propagated through the lower piston and extended within the sample where it offsets a former corner-to-corner fault. In this particular case, we therefore cannot exclude that the AEs originate from faulting of the piston. Interestingly, as mentioned above, corner to corner faulting was also evidenced in sample S1, deformed at the lowest temperature (230 °C) and using a fast strain rate of  Dehydration embrittlement, may occur at low pressure (in the order of 100 MPa) via the establishment of mode-I cracks ( For experiment D2, conditions most propitious to faulting were achieved, with elevated strain rates (and therefore elevated pre-dehydration stress) and fast heating rates (  With increasing temperature, our antigorite samples undergo an inverse ductile-to-brittle transition around 450–500 °C. This was first described occurring in stable antigorite ( Previous studies have explained the inverse ductile-to-brittle transition by invoking variations of the friction coefficient in “thermally stable” antigorite, which seems to drop dramatically with increasing temperature ( In any case, brittle behavior was confirmed both by observations of extremely localized strain along narrow conjugated faults and by the detection of an associated acoustic signal. Interestingly, However, the energy radiated during serpentinite deformation remains low compared to the case of quartz. Differences in the AEs frequency content, possibly resulting in a narrower overlap with the frequency window of the transducers, may contribute to this gap but are unable to explain the observed differences. In solid-state confining pressure cells like here, it is also possible that stick-slip and fault propagation are partly inhibited at higher pressure due to the surrounding pressure medium. However, examination of the samples (  Deformation of antigorite-serpentinite at low temperatures is aseismic. Even when large amounts of shear are applied, silent, ductile faulting (localized deformation) is observed. This was supported here by the absence of AEs during high PT deformation. Similarly, at high temperature, the absence of AEs upon syndeformational dehydration further confirms recent results of On the other hand, AEs were detected at ∼500–550 °C and pressures exceeding 3 GPa, in agreement with the inverse ductile-to-brittle transition of antigorite. This behavior may translate a decrease in the internal friction coefficient of antigorite. However, in the present case, it may also be related to the partial breakdown of antigorite to the talc-like phase (and water). As discussed above, the early appearance – in terms of temperature – of the talc-like phase may be due to low water activity and presence of iron. It is also possible that minor amounts of dehydration are caused by shear heating during deformation. In a recent study, Regardless of the mechanisms involved, the acoustic signal obtained suggests that antigorite-rich serpentinites become brittle, even at great depths, when approaching their dehydration temperature. However, the applicability of this embrittlement process to intermediate-depth seismicity in nature has yet to be demonstrated. It was proposed that scaling between experiments and nature can be done by comparing the relative heating and deformation rates involved, using a thermo-mechanical factor, Here, even for samples that experienced a stage 2, no AEs were recorded when ramping the temperature from ca. 450 to 500 °C (i.e., In any case, AEs associated to the inverse ductile-to-brittle transition of antigorite appear weak compared to the ones that serve as analogues to shallow earthquakes. An interesting question would be whether or not it is also the case in nature. In other words, are intermediate earthquakes weaker than the shallow (and deep focus) ones? To compare the relative magnitudes of the different types of earthquakes, we have used the USGS database to extract magnitude and depth information for all the earthquakes that occurred along the Izu–Bonin subduction zone since 1900. The occurrence of these earthquakes ( The dramatic decay in terms of radiated energy from shallow to intermediate conditions is essentially related to a decrease in the occurrence rate with only a minor shift in the magnitude distribution ( The nature of the faulting itself also plays an important role in generating acoustic signal. Recent experimental results evidenced dynamic weakening and melting on the fault plane during antigorite frictional sliding ( Our observations confirm the existence of a brittle and micro-seismogenic temperature window for antigorite around 500–550 °C, whereas deformation was aseismic both at low temperature (≤400 °C) and upon dehydration (≥600 °C). However the present experiments suggest that the “seismogenic” potential of serpentinite is weak relative to what is observed for shallow earthquakes analogues. Therefore, the inverse ductile-to-brittle transition in antigorite, which is causing this mechanical instability, seems unable to explain the largest intermediate earthquakes, the magnitude of which should compare with the one of their shallow counterparts. This is consistent with recent results from both seismology and experimental studies, which point out to low radiation efficiency of intermediate earthquakes related to serpentinite faulting. In addition, the present results remind that less energy can be stored in fully serpentinized rocks due to their lower strength. In experiments here, as well as in nature ( JG's work at GSE-CARS/University of Chicago was funded by Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.