In this work, NaY zeolite was synthesized by an inexpensive raw material i.e. silica extracted from rice husk ash by using two-step seeding process. It was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR), Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET), Barrett-Joyner-Halenda (BJH) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The results confirmed that the well-shaped zeolite Y with high crystallinity and proper porosity was formed. Then, the zeolite NaY modified carbon paste electrode was used as a platform for preparation of silver nanoparticles (AgY/CPE). The FE-SEM confirmed the formation of Ag nanoparticles on the surface of electrode. The modified electrode was used for electrocatalytic reduction of H2O2 in phosphate buffer solution (pH=7.0). The proposed sensor could detect the H2O2 in the linear range of 0.02–5.0mM with a detection limit of 1.4μM at a signal to noise ratio of 3 and response time of 5s. The sensitivity of the sensor was 650.7μAmM−1
                     cm−2. Furthermore, it exhibited no interference with some biological species such as glucose, ascorbic acid, sucrose and uric acid.Hydrogen peroxide (H Various methods like titrimetry Zeolites are porous crystalline framework materials. Most of them have aluminosilicates structures in which the Si and Al are in SiO In this work, the silica was extracted from rice husk ash and then utilized for preparation of zeolite Y using a two-step seeding technique. After that, a zeolite modified carbon paste electrode was used as a platform for preparation of Ag nanoparticles (AgY/CPE) for measuring of H Hydrochloric acid (37%), sodium hydroxide (98%), silver nitrate (99%), Hydrogen peroxide (35%), graphite powder (particle size <50 The elemental composition of the extracted silica was determined by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF, PHILIPS, model PW 1480). In order to confirm the structure and crystallinity of as-prepared zeolite, an advance Bruker D8 XRD using Cu K In order to preparation of the amorphous silica needed for synthesis of zeolite Y, rice husk was first burned at a controlled temperature (550 The procedure for synthesis of the zeolite NaY was according to the method proposed by Ginter, et al. For the preparation of (AgY/CPE), the adsorption of Ag The elemental composition of extracted SiO The XRD pattern of the as-synthesized zeolite was depicted in In SEM image of synthesized Y zeolite was shown in After immersing the NaY/CPE in 0.1 Moreover, the FE-SEM of the electrode surface ( Welch and coworkers constructed similar assemblies on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode. They have assumed each of the nanoparticles aggregations as a microelectrode Which the total current for assemblies of microelectrodes was achieved by: Then they calculated the peak current for each macro and micro-electrodes using assumptive values in aforementioned equations and indicated the total current for a supposed 1 In According to previous studies, the mechanism of H It has been proposed that the electro-reduction of oxygen on the electrode take place through the following mechanism Then the reaction will be continued through one of the following routes:  The amperometric response of the AgY/CPE in 0.1 In order to load various amounts of Ag particles onto the electrode surface, four electrodes with different immersion times in 0.1 The FE-SEM micrographs of the AgY20 and AgY40 illustrate that, in comparison to AgY20 (  The stability of the sensor was investigated by measuring the CV current response of the AgY/CPE at different days. The current response for 1.0 Zeolite Y due to some unique features such as higher accessibility of its crystals to different materials was selected as a platform for fabrication of Ag nanoparticles in carbon paste electrode. Mentioned zeolite was synthesized by natural source i.e rice husk ash and characterized by different methods such as FT-IR, XRD, SEM, and BET. The FE-SEM images confirmed the formation of Ag nanoarrays assemblies which were located separately on the electrode surface. This AgY/CPE possessed high electrocatalytic ability in the reduction of H Financial assistance from the