Metallic ore grades are falling globally as the higher grade reserves are exploited first and are progressively depleted. At the same time, the demand for primary metals extracted from these ores is expected to increase, despite increased levels of dematerialisation and recycling. Sustainability concerns have highlighted the need to meet these demands while at the same time minimising resource consumption and environmental emissions. A study was therefore undertaken using life cycle assessment methodology to examine various alternative processing routes for extracting metal from low grade ores (down to 0.1% metal), particularly those of copper and nickel, in terms of their life cycle-based energy consumption (embodied energy) and greenhouse gas emissions. The processing routes examined included conventional concentrating and smelting, direct ore smelting, heap leaching, pressure leaching and in situ leaching. This paper presents the results of this study.Present supplies of metals can be primary, secondary or both. Primary or “new” metals are extracted from newly mined ores then added to the existing inventory of metals (i.e. “metals in use”) for the first time. Secondary (recycled) metals having once entered the metal inventory as primary metals experience service lives of varying duration, at the end of which they are either wasted, recycled or re-allocated. Wasted metals are lost from the inventory, whereas recycled and re-allocated metals combine with the supply of primary metal to enlarge the inventory. Despite increased levels of dematerialisation and recycling, it can be expected that there will be an on-going need for primary metals well into the future as the world population increases and more people strive to achieve a higher standard of living.  In an earlier paper ( As the focus of this paper is primarily energy consumption and associated greenhouse gas emissions for primary metal production, it is of interest to compare the theoretical and actual energy consumptions for metal extraction, as this comparison gives an indication of the likely scope for reducing energy consumption in practice. Metals are generally extracted from either oxide or sulphide ores. The oxides and sulphides of the important industrial metals are chemically stable and significant energy is required to break the chemical bonds to produce metal. Gibbs free energy is the ultimate measure of chemical stability, but the heat of formation normally dictates the minimum energy requirements for metal extraction processes ( Actual energy values are influenced by process technology route (e.g. pyrometallurgical versus hydrometallurgical – see later), although attempts have been made to compare the same processing route for any particular metal in Metals are generally extracted from ores by either pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical processing routes. The former involves smelting of the ore or concentrate at high temperatures, while the latter involves leaching the ore or concentrate at relatively low temperatures, including ambient. These two broad processing paths may be broken down further into the following routes, as shown in  concentration and smelting; direct smelting of ore;  in situ leaching of ore; heap or pressure leaching of ore or concentrate. Unlike the other processing routes shown in About 80% of the world’s copper comes from copper sulphide and copper–iron sulphide ores, with chalcopyrite (CuFeS Life cycle assessment has become a widely accepted methodology for assessing the environmental impacts of the production or provision of products or services, and essentially involves the compilation of an inventory of relevant environmental exchanges during the life cycle of the product or service and evaluating the potential environmental impacts associated with those exchanges. The full product life cycle is usually divided into the following stages: cradle to entry gate (raw material extraction and refining); entry gate to exit gate (product manufacture); exit gate to grave (product use, recycling and disposal). Based on impact assessment, two types of LCA can be distinguished; problem-oriented (mid points) or damage-oriented (end points). In the problem-oriented approach followed here to assess the various ore processing routes, the environmental loads quantified in the inventory analysis were classified into the environmental impacts to which they contribute using appropriate equivalency factors. Individual “cradle-to-gate” LCA spreadsheet models of each ore processing route for copper and nickel production were set up, with each flowsheet being constructed at a level of detail consistent with processing data available in the literature. The inventory data used for each processing route were typical process data averaged over a number of sources where possible. This generally resulted in a flowsheet of 3–5 process steps, e.g. mining, mineral processing, smelting and refining. The main environmental impact category considered was greenhouse gas emissions (i.e. global warming potential (GWP)), with the intergovernmental panel on climate change (IPCC) characterisation model being used to calculate this impact category. The gross energy requirement (GER), also referred to as embodied energy or cumulative energy demand, which is the cumulative amount of primary energy consumed in all stages of a metal’s production life cycle was also included in the LCAs. It was assumed that electric power was generated from black coal in all cases, at a generation efficiency of 35%. The inventory data and underlying assumptions used in setting up these spreadsheet models have been reported previously for most of the processing routes considered ( While data, however brief in some cases, have been reported in the literature for most of the processing routes considered, this was not the case for the direct smelting route, as this process is not used commercially for the production of copper or nickel metal from their ores as pointed out earlier. Therefore it was necessary to conduct process modelling studies of the direct ore smelting route in order to derive mass and energy balances that could be used to provide LCA inventory data for this processing route. Thermodynamic modelling of the process was initially performed using CSIRO’s MPE (multi-phase equilibrium) model ( The conventional pyrometallurgical processing route of copper and nickel sulphide ores involves the following stages: beneficiation of the ore by grinding and froth flotation to produce a concentrate; smelting of the concentrate to produce a high-copper or nickel matte (copper or nickel-enriched molten sulphide phase); converting the molten matte to produce blister copper or an upgraded nickel matte; refining of the blister copper and nickel matte to produce high purity copper and nickel metal. As mentioned earlier, the effects of declining ore grades and finer grind sizes on the life cycle-based energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions of copper and nickel metal production by this route were reported by Rather than beneficiating the ore by grinding and flotation to produce a concentrate for smelting, an alternative is to smelt the whole ore directly. While this processing route eliminates the beneficiation stage and its associated impacts (including energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions), more solid material has to be handled and heated up to smelting temperatures (typically 1250 Many copper mines have waste sulphide dumps containing significant amounts of iron sulphides (pyrite and pyrrhotite). Using this material as a flux and fuel source (the oxidation of sulphides is exothermic) in the direct smelting route has the potential to reduce the fossil fuel-based energy requirements of the process as well as disposing of a waste that can give rise to acid mine drainage (the outflow of acidic water from mine sites). This option was included in the process modelling outlined earlier and the results indicated that no external fossil fuel was required for the smelting and converting stages. However, this was offset by additional electrical power requirements for the smelting stage due to the additional amount of feed material to be treated, as well as for the acid plant to convert the additional amount of sulphur in the furnace off-gas into sulphuric acid. The effects of declining ore grades on embodied energy and greenhouse gas emissions from the direct smelting of copper ore are shown in The conventional hydrometallurgical processing route of copper oxide and sulphide ores and nickel laterite ores involves the following stages: leaching (heap or pressure) of copper or nickel from crushed and/or ground ore or concentrate to produce an impure copper or nickel-bearing aqueous solution; transfer of copper or nickel from this impure solution to pure, high-copper or nickel electrolyte using solvent extraction; electrowinning pure copper or nickel from this electrolyte. Heap leaching was originally developed to process copper oxide ores, but was subsequently modified to accomodate an increased contribution from sulphide minerals in the ore ( Nickel can be solubilised from laterites using sulphuric acid at atmospheric pressure, however this requires a large amount of acid ( Pressure leaching of nickel laterite ores using sulphuric acid in autoclaves at around 250 Pressure leaching has also been applied in recent years to the extraction of copper from chalcopyrite ores. Direct leaching of these ores has limited application, mainly because the kinetics of chalcopyrite dissolution is extremely slow even in very strong oxidising leaching media as pointed out earlier. A number of processes are in varying stages of development, from pilot plant through to commercial facility. One such process is the total pressure oxidation process ( The effects of declining ore grades on embodied energy and greenhouse gas emissions from the pressure acid leaching of chalcopyrite are also shown in In situ leaching, also known as solution mining, involves leaving the ore where it is in the ground, and using a lixiviant (liquid medium) which is pumped through it to recover the minerals out of the ore by leaching. Consequently there is little surface disturbance and no tailings or waste rock generated. However, the orebody needs to be permeable to the liquids used, and located so that they do not contaminate ground water away from the orebody. In situ leaching occurs prolifically in nature, but usually over a long time span. Commercial applications of in situ leaching seek to greatly accelerate and improve the recovery of metals over these natural forms of in situ leaching. In situ leaching has been used commercially for the extraction of uranium, copper and gold, with around 16% of the world’s uranium production being by this method ( The energy requirement for in situ leaching varies over a wide range because geochemical conditions, depth of ore body, number of wells, operational life of each well and ore properties vary widely. The embodied energy and GWP results for all processing routes are compared in In the case of copper, if no additional grinding of the ore is required as the ore grade falls then concentrating and smelting is the preferred route where pyrometallurgical processing can be applied. However, if fine grinding is required (down to 5 It should be noted that the above results are dependent on the metal recoveries assumed for each processing route, as the lower the recovery assumed, the higher the embodied energy and greenhouse gas emissions per unit mass of metal produced. The metal recoveries used in the study were taken from the literature and are given in ore sorting – which could be used to reduce the amount of ore (and hence energy) required for direct smelting; waste heat recovery – e.g. from smelting slags ( However, it is emphasised that the results presented in this paper only serve as first-pass comparisons of the various processing routes for low grade ores. More detailed operating data for the various processes are required before more extensive comparisons can be made. Falling ore grades and more complex ore bodies anticipated in the future can be expected to lead to increased energy consumption and associated greenhouse gas emissions for primary metal production. Sustainability concerns have seen the mineral processing and metal production sector come under increasing pressure to address these issues, but choosing the most appropriate processing route for low grade ores is not always clear. A study was therefore undertaken using life cycle assessment methodology to examine various alternative processing routes for extracting metal from low grade ores (down to 0.1% metal), particularly those of copper and nickel, in terms of their life cycle-based energy consumption (embodied energy) and greenhouse gas emissions. The processing routes examined included conventional concentrating and smelting, direct ore smelting, heap leaching, pressure leaching and in situ leaching. The results of the study indicated that the most appropriate route for processing low grade ores in terms of embodied energy and greenhouse gas emissions largely depends on the mineralogy of the ore deposit concerned. Provided no additional grinding of the ore is required as the ore grade falls then conventional concentrating and smelting is the preferred route for both copper and nickel where pyrometallurgical processing can be applied. However, if fine grinding is required (down to 5