Background
                  Restoring preoperative horizontal femoral offset (FO) promised good functional outcome in patients receiving total hip arthroplasty. However, relatively little was known regarding the clinical relevance of restoring the offset in patients with bipolar hemiarthroplasty to treat displaced femoral neck fracture. Therefore, the objective of this study was to evaluate postoperative FO accurately and verify its relation with functional outcome.
               
                  Methods
                  One hundred elderly patients who received bipolar hemiarthroplasty to treat displaced femoral neck fracture were identified. Preoperative CT scanning of contralateral hip joint and reconstruction of images led to rotation-free FO. By referencing postoperative implant specification and comparing to measured values in Picture Archive and Communication System, rotation-free postoperative FO and the amount of change were acquired. Postoperative Harris Hip Score (HHS) and Modified Barthel Index (MBI) were evaluated to measure functional outcome at 12-month after the surgery. Patients with significant FO change were identified. Multiple regression analysis was conducted to determine if the FO change might independently affect the outcome regardless of confounding factors.
               
                  Results
                  The mean preoperative offset was 37.4±2.5 increased by 12.7±9.6% after the surgery. Only 25.0% of postoperative offset after hemiarthroplasty was changed within ±5% of preoperative offset. A total of 45.0% of postoperative offset changed within ±10% while 77.0% of postoperative offset changed within ±20%. 23% of patients whose FO changed more than 20% showed significantly worse outcome score than the patients whose FO change remained within ±20% of initial value. Mean MBI and HHS were negatively correlated with FO change. After adjusting for confounding factors, significant correlation remained between modification of FO and MBI, but not between FO change and HHS (B
                     
                     =
                     4.576; β
                     
                     =
                     0.235; 95% confidence interval of B: 0.534 to 8.135).
               
                  Conclusions
                  FO was not properly restored in 23% of subjects receiving bipolar hemiarthroplasty due to femoral neck fracture. FO restoration independently predicted fair MBI after the surgery. Therefore, surgeons should pay attention to restoring FO with meticulous templating.The aging society has posed a grave problem related to hip fractures worldwide Unlike modular stem, conventional femoral stems do not provide options for variable offset One plausible explanation of the paucity regarding this subject might be the difficulties in evaluating horizontal offset. Vertical offset or leg length discrepancy is easy to evaluate postoperatively in plain radiographs because it is hardly affected by the rotation of affected limb. However, measurement of horizontal offset can be greatly influenced by the rotation of the lower extremity and the anteversion of the femoral stem We hypothesized that FO after bipolar hemiarthroplasty in elderly subjects with displaced femoral neck fracture might differ from the preoperative value and that the amount of change could affect the functional outcome if measured free of radiographical error. Therefore, the objectives of this study were: (1) to investigate the accurate change of femoral offset after hemiarthroplasty in elderly patients with displaced femoral neck fracture, and (2) to clarify whether there was an association between FO change and postoperative functional outcome. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of our institution. This retrospective observational study was conducted in a single university hospital located in a city with one million inhabitants of East Asians. The hospital has a level 1 trauma center specialized for acute traumas. One hundred hips in 100 consecutive patients (75 women and 25 men) with displaced femoral neck fracture who underwent bipolar hemiarthroplasty in a single institution were enrolled in the current study. Review of medical records identified 125 hips in 124 patients who were hospitalized from May 2014 to May 2016 for treating this condition. Patients with any previous fracture or surgery on the contralateral or the affected side were excluded (5 hips). Fractures with congenital or acquired deformities confusing accurate radiologic evaluation were excluded (3 hips in 2 patients) as well. Fractures following high-energy trauma were also excluded (2 hips). Five patients passed out during follow-up of 1-year (5 hips). Ten patients were lost to the one-year follow-up. The remaining 100 hips in 100 patients were enrolled in the end and the follow-up rate was 100%. Their average age was 79.5 years (range, 59–94 years). Preoperative CTs were scanned for all patients using a 64-channel multidetector scanner (Siemens Ltd., Erlangen, Germany) covering both lower extremity during their stay in the emergency room. DICOM images were exported to image processing software (Xelis software, version 1.0.2.2; Infinitt, Seoul, Korea). In the unaffected contralateral side, hip and knee joint centers were identified, and sagittal sections were adjusted to ensure both centers could appear in the same coronal section. Best fitting circles were drawn to fit the perimeter of the femoral head and the maximal width of the femoral neck. The line connecting the centers of these two circles was defined as the axis of the neck. To neutralize the effect of limb rotation, axial sections were re-oriented parallel to the axis of the contralateral femoral neck. In the resultant coronal plane, the anatomical axis of the femur was drawn using embedded function. The distance between the center of the femoral head and the anatomical axis was designated as a preoperative horizontal offset. All patients were operated with the same cementless femoral stem with a Centrum-Collum-Diaphysis angle of 131° (SL plus, Smith and nephew, Memphis, TN, USA). Preoperatively, an acetate template was superposed on the digital monitor. As routine preoperative X-rays were taken with a 10 Implant information including the size of stem, head, and neck was acquired in the operating room. The manufacturer provided actual dimensions of each component size. The true stem horizontal offset was determined by the horizontal offset of the femoral component and the individual neck width. If a 28-mm femoral head with a short neck was used, the offset would be shortened by about 2 A A′ Magnification factor F B True offset B′ In the end, the true postoperative offset B́ was independent of magnification and rotation. The change of the offset was expressed in percent relative to the preoperative FO in the contralateral limb. The percentages of patients with postoperative offset change within ±5%, ±10%, and ±20% of preoperative offset were calculated. Modified Barthel index (MBI) was used to assess the ability to perform activities of daily living All values were reported as absolute mean values and standard deviations (SD). Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to test the normality of data distribution. Independent Patient demographics are reported in Mean HHS and MBI at 12-month postoperatively were 76.9 In this observational study, we determined whether FO before and after bipolar hemiarthroplasty differed in elderly subjects with displaced femoral neck fracture and whether the amount of change would possibly worsen the functional outcome in such patients. FO increase of more than 20% of preoperative offset resulted in worse functional outcome scores such as MBI and HHS. Although tremendous literature has focused on FO change in the total hip arthroplasty patients The problem of studies analyzing the exact amount of FO and its effect was their methodology. The FO is rotation sensitive An earlier study has reported conflicting effect of FO on functional outcome Some limitations need to be declared to interpret the results of the present study better. First, as the posture of patients and anteversion of the stem were not evaluated, functional FO can vary among patients, even within one patient. The measured horizontal offset cannot precisely predict the abductor moment arm or joint reaction force in a clinical setting. Gait analysis is needed to measure the actual ‘functional offset’. However, previous studies have shown a positive relation between restored FO and better gait pattern in total hip arthroplasty patients In summary, the current study showed that FO was not correctly restored in 23% of patients receiving bipolar hemiarthroplasty for displaced hip fracture after correction of the rotational error in plain radiographs. Restored FO positively affected MBI, but not HHS. This suggests that restoring FO has clinical relevance in the functional outcome. Therefore, surgeons are recommended to pay attention to restoring the original FO, even in bipolar hemiarthroplasty setting. Further study is needed to evaluate “functional offset” such as gait analysis to determine the quantitative effect of FO on the functional outcome in these patients. None.