Fossil fuel depletion, environmental concerns, and steep hikes in the price of fossil fuels make it imperative to develop alternative and renewable products to decrease oil products consumption in coal flotation process. Pyrolysis product of the waste cooking oil was proposed as a potential coal flotation collector in this paper. The gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer test and thermogravimetric method were used to study the properties of the waste cooking oil. The pyrolysis product of the waste cooking oil was used as coal flotation collector in two different ways. Thermogravimetric analysis showed that the pyrolysis of the waste cooking oil sample was mainly divided into three processes. The waste cooking oil pyrolysis product possessed strong collecting ability and better selectivity, and can replace diesel as a coal flotation collector. 79% combustible matter recovery was obtained in the presence of 1 kg/Mg DW-450 °C dosage compared with that of 68% in the presence of diesel. Better flotation results can be obtained in the presence of gaseous pyrolysis products of the waste cooking oil. With the increase of pyrolysis temperature of the waste cooking oil, the combustible matter recovery of the concentrate is increasing, while the ash content of the concentrate is showing a decreasing trend.In the coal preparation process, the amount of pulverized coal accounts for 10–30% of the raw coal. From the current technological development point of view, flotation is one of the most efficient and economical ways to handle this part of the material Waste cooking oil (WCO) as a waste source and a cheap feedstock is produced with millions of tons per day. The potential to produce hydrocarbon rich liquid fuels is receiving increased attention today. Numerous research projects on the utilization of WCO have been done In this paper, we used the pyrolysis method to produce a coal flotation collector from WCO. Effects of the pyrolytic parameters on coal flotation behaviors were studied. The performances of the pyrolysis products in coal flotation were evaluated for comparison with diesel collector. WCO was obtained from a local Biotechnology company and used as received in the experiments. Properties of the WCO were presented in Coal sample obtained from local Coal Preparation Plant in Huainan city, was used in the investigation. The sample was screened to a particle size fraction of −0.5 mm. Proximate analysis of the coal sample was presented in The composition of fatty acids in WCO was determined using a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer (HP6890GC/5973MS) from Agilent Technologies Inc. Prior to the tests WCO was subjected to methyl esterification using a two-step catalytic process as described below: The WCO, concentrated sulfuric acid and anhydrous methanol were placed in a round bottom flask at a mass ratio of 1:0.02:0.16. And then, the flask was heated using water bath method at 75 °C for 4 h. The mixture was washed repeatedly with deionized water 4–5 times, and separated by a separatory funnel. The supernatant liquid was then evaporated to remove water. The liquid after dewatering was placed in a flask with 20% methanol and 1% KOH. Then, the mixture was heated and stirred at 65 °C for 2 h. At last, the mixture was washed and evaporated as described above. The obtained clear liquid was the sample for GC-MS analysis. The gas chromatographic analysis conditions were as follows: HP-5MS quartz capillary column (30 mm × 0.25 mm × 0.25um), column initial temperature 40 °C, inlet temperature 250 °C. Mass spectrometry conditions: ionization mode EI, electron energy 70 eV, pipeline temperature 250 °C. DTA-TG thermal analyzer (SDT2960) from American TA Technologies Inc. was used to study the pyrolysis characteristics of the WCO. In the test, A10mg WCO sample was placed in a corundum crucible. The crucible was then placed on a thermobalance and continuously heated from room temperature to 800 °C at a heating rate of 20 °C/min. All throughout the experiments, N The experimental system was presented in All flotation tests were conducted in a 1.5L XFD flotation machine manufactured by Wuhan Rock Grinding Equipment Manufacturing Co., Ltd. 150 g of coal was used in each flotation test. The impeller speed of flotation machine was 1800 r/min and air flow rate was 1.6 L/min. The electric furnace was heated to a predetermined temperature in advance. Coal sample was first prewetted in flotation cell for 2 min. Then, the WCO was pumped into the electric furnace to produce pyrolysis oil and gas. The oil and gas was blown into the flotation cell by the N The fatty acid composition in the triglyceride of the WCO in the study was presented in TG and DTG curves of the WCO pyrolysis were showed in Conventional flotation tests with diesel as collector were carried to compare with the flotation performance in the presence of the pyrolysis products of WCO. The flotation process is a physical and chemical process that occurs at the gas, solid, and liquid three-phase interface. The addition mode and dispersion state of the agent directly affect its adsorption at the gas, solid, and liquid three-phase interfaces. It is well known that during the flotation process, the free energy of the system decreases due to the adhesion of bubbles to the surface of the ore particles, which can be expressed by the Dupre formula. When the gas, solid, and liquid three-phase systems are balanced, the contact angle of the bubbles on the solid surface satisfies the Young formula. The adsorption density of the collector at the interface can be calculated according to the Gibbs equation. Eqs. It is indicated that the adsorption density of the collector at the solid-gas interface is greater than its adsorption density at the solid-liquid interface. Adsorption at the solid-gas interface provides better conditions for the hydrophobicity of the solid surface than the adsorption at the solid-liquid interface. Therefore, the addition of the collector to the flotation process in a gaseous state promotes a rapid increase in the adsorption amount at the solid-gas interface and a small adsorption amount at the solid-liquid interface, thereby making the particles more hydrophobic. The attachment process of the bubble and the particles were different between the two methods. For DW method, the gaseous pyrolysis products were firstly adhere to the surface of the bubble and then entered the slurry like oily bubble. While for CW method, the liquid pyrolysis products were firstly adhere to the surface of the particles. And then the particles were attached to the bubbles. During this process, the pyrolysis products may be adsorbed on the surface of the gangue mineral and making it hydrophobic which leads to poor selectivity of the flotation process. The schematic representation of the two processes was presented in It was reported that the collectors containing oxygenated functional groups could be used to improve the coal flotation process by conquering the negative effect of oxygen-containing functional groups on the coal surface, such as alcohol hydroxyl, carbonyl and the others. This behavior could be attributed to the interaction (i.e., hydrogen bonds) between the polar heads in the collectors and oxidized sites on the coal surface The flotation results as a function of the WCO pyrolysis temperature was showed in As the pyrolysis temperature of the WCO increased, the main components of the pyrolysis product changed. During the pyrolysis of the WCO, a series of chemical changes occurs. At about 300 °C, the WCO was first pyrolyzed into fatty acids, acrolein and fatty aldehydes. As the temperature increased, to about 400–450 °C, the pyrolysis products of the first step was further pyrolyzed through dehydroxylation, decarboxylation, decarbonylation, cleavage and condensation process to produce smaller molecule compound Combined with the thermogravimetric analysis test results of the WCO, it can be found that the weight loss rate of the WCO was less than 2% at around 350 °C ( In order to make the WCO pyrolysis products smoothly entered the flotation cell, a vertically arranged tubular furnace was used in the WCO pyrolysis system. Since the WCO and pyrolysis intermediates have fluidity, at low temperature some of the WCO and intermediate products may enter the flotation cell without being fully pyrolyzed. When the pyrolysis temperature was increased, the pyrolysis reaction rate was accelerated and the WCO can be fully pyrolyzed. It was found in the tests that when the WCO sample without any treatment was directly used as the coal collector, the collection performance was not exhibited. Therefore, increasing the pyrolysis temperature can improve the collecting ability of the pyrolysis products for the coal. The WCO sample without any treatment showed little collecting ability for coal, while the WCO pyrolysis products possessed strong collecting ability and better selectivity, and can replace diesel as a coal flotation collector. 79% CMR was obtained in the presence of 1 kg/Mg WCO-450 °C dosage compared with that of 68% in the presence of diesel. The pyrolysis of the WCO sample was mainly divided into three processes, of which the range of 370–480 °C was the main weight loss temperature range of the WCO, and the weight loss rate of the WCO at this stage is about 95%. Better flotation results can be obtained in the presence of gaseous pyrolysis products of the WCO. With the increase of pyrolysis temperature of the WCO, the CMR of the concentrate is increasing, while the ash content of the concentrate is showing a decreasing trend. This work was supported by the