Background
                  Our objective was to analyze the effect of different anteromedial coronoid fracture patterns with different combinations of ligamentous repairs. We hypothesized that smaller fractures would be sufficiently treated with ligamentous repair alone but that larger fragments would require a combination of ligament and bony repair versus reconstruction.
               
                  Methods
                  Two multibody models were created from cadaveric specimens in the ADAMS program. Four different conditions were simulated: (1) no fracture, (2) O'Driscoll anteromedial subtype I (2.5-mm) fracture, (3) subtype II 2.5-mm fracture, and (4) subtype II 5-mm fracture. In each of these conditions, 3 ligament repairs were studied: lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL), posterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament (pMCL), and both LUCL and pMCL. For each condition, kinematics and articular contact areas were calculated.
               
                  Results
                  LUCL repair alone increases whereas pMCL repair decreases internal rotation of the ulna relative to all tested posteromedial rotatory instability conditions; their rotational effects are summative when both ligaments are repaired. With a subtype I fracture and both pMCL and LUCL injuries, repairing the LUCL alone corrects angulation whereas rotational stability is satisfactory through the arc from 0° to 90°. In a subtype II 2.5-mm fracture, isolated repair of the LUCL or pMCL is not capable of restoring rotation or angulation. For a subtype II 5-mm fracture, no combination of ligamentous repairs could restore rotation or angulation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study suggests that LUCL repair alone is sufficient to restore kinematics for small subtype I fractures for an arc avoiding deep flexion; whereas nearly normal kinematics throughout the arc of motion can be achieved if the pMCL is also repaired. Larger anteromedial coronoid fractures should ideally have fragments fixed in addition to ligament repairs.Isolated coronoid fractures are rare injuries; thus, most coronoid fractures are usually associated with ligament injuries. The O'Driscoll classification outlines the injury mechanism and associated injuries. Thus, it is a helpful guideline when determining the treatment strategy. It has been stated that only patients with small anteromedial-rim coronoid fractures and minimal opening of the radiocapitellar joint on varus stress radiographs can be treated nonoperatively and the rest of the injuries need to be addressed surgically. There are 3 components of varus posteromedial rotatory instability (PMRI): anteromedial coronoid fracture, lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) injury, and posterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament (pMCL) injury. The mechanism of trauma that produces PMRI are axial loading, internal rotation of the forearm relative to the humerus, and varus force. Our objective was to analyze the effect of various anteromedial coronoid fracture patterns with different combinations of ligamentous repairs on elbow kinematics and articular contact area in anatomic computational multibody elbow joint models. We hypothesized that smaller fracture patterns would be sufficiently treated with ligamentous repair alone but that larger fragments would require a combination of ligament and bony repair versus reconstruction of nonrepairable coronoid fractures. This is a computational kinematics study investigating the effects of different fracture patterns of the anteromedial facet of the coronoid with different combinations of ligament repair by measuring kinematic data and the contact area of the elbow affected by PMRI. Two multibody models created from intact cadaveric specimens were used for this study: right arm of a 61-year-old male cadaver (specimen 1) and right arm of a 42-year-old male cadaver (specimen 2). The multibody models were built in the ADAMS program (MSC Software, Santa Ana, CA, USA), which is a commercially available multibody dynamic analysis program. The multibody model creation has been previously described. The specimens were positioned so that the long axis of the humerus was parallel to the floor with the lateral epicondyle facing up and medial epicondyle facing down ( Templating of fractures onto the anteromedial facet of the multibody models was performed, using the curvature of the trochlea, simulating the concave shape of impaction described by O'Driscoll et al. For each condition, internal-external rotations and varus-valgus angulations of the ulna relative to the humerus were calculated and compared with the intact model simulation. The range of varus to valgus angulation and rotational variability throughout the simulated range of motion were individually calculated in the specimens with intact ligaments and anteromedial facets. These calculated values were used as the acceptable laxity for tested conditions, meaning that the elbows were considered stable if the kinematic curve fell within this range. These ranges of laxity in an intact elbow plus or minus the individual kinematic curve for the elbow tested are represented by the shaded areas in To determine the effects of individual components of the PMRI pattern, comparisons of kinematics and contact areas were made between the values recorded at the corresponding flexion angles for the tested condition and baseline comparison. These differences were measured and averaged, with reporting of their sum ± standard deviation. The variation in rotational motion throughout the tested range of motion was 3° for intact specimen 1 and 1° for specimen 2. For varus and valgus angulation, laxity was 2° for both intact specimen 1 and specimen 2 (represented by shaded areas in With both the LUCL and pMCL torn, when compared with an intact coronoid, subtype I fractures did not increase internal rotation in specimen 1 or 2. Subtype II 2.5-mm fractures increased internal rotation by 4° ± 3° and 3° ± 1° in specimens 1 and 2, respectively. Subtype II 5-mm fractures increased internal rotation by 4° ± 3° and 5° ± 1° in specimens 1 and 2, respectively. From the tested conditions with both the LUCL and pMCL torn, the isolated LUCL repair increased internal rotation, regardless of testing the intact coronoid or fracture subtype. In contrast, isolated pMCL repair decreased internal rotation when compared with the corresponding injury tested with both ligaments torn ( This experiment showed that in PMRI with subtype I (2.5-mm) fractures, repair of the LUCL restored kinematics that closely paralleled those of the intact and uninjured elbows' coronal-plane and rotational alignment simultaneously through the arc from 30°-85° of flexion in both specimens. However, when we tested an isolated repair of the pMCL in PMRI with a subtype I (2.5-mm) fracture, both angulation and rotation were acceptable from only 30°-50° in specimen 2 and were never both satisfactory simultaneously in specimen 1. In PMRI with a subtype I (2.5-mm) fracture, when both ligaments were repaired, the angulation and rotation were within the defined threshold throughout the arc of motion tested for both specimens. In PMRI with subtype II 2.5-mm fractures, isolated repair of the LUCL or pMCL alone did not restore rotation or angulation when tested in gravity varus. When repairs of both the LUCL and pMCL were simulated, an acceptable kinematic pattern was obtained from 50°-110° in specimen 1 and 30°-50° in specimen 2. For larger fractures (subtype II 5-mm fractures), no combination of ligamentous repairs could restore varus and valgus angulation.  From the limited amount of published literature, both coronoid fracture fixation and repair of the LUCL seem to be favored during the treatment of significant PMRI. The importance of the coronoid fragment size has been highlighted in determining treatment strategies in cadaveric and clinical studies. In most clinical studies in which successful outcomes were obtained with conservative treatment for anteromedial coronoid fractures, the status of the pMCL and LUCL was unclear. The current understanding of the function and importance of the pMCL is rudimentary, and this is a neglected but emerging area of interest among PMRI researchers and clinicians. This is because, clinically, the LUCL is often repaired yet few surgeons repair the pMCL. One reason is the familiarity with LUCL repair and its well-established repair techniques. Another reason is the thought that the medial collateral ligament (MCL) can be intact in patients with anteromedial coronoid fractures In our study, kinematic angulation and rotational analysis of the repair techniques has delineated that some larger fracture patterns will necessitate combined bony and ligamentous repair; however, some smaller fractures may be treated with ligamentous repair alone if range of motion is protected. This study confirms the prior published literature showing that no ligamentous repair tested would be sufficient to restore acceptable kinematics in subtype II 5-mm fractures; thus, these fractures would require reduction and fixation in combination with ligament repair or reconstruction. Our results are similar to those reported by Pollock et al There are possible reasons for these differences in the findings. PMRI-specific concave fracture patterns were used in our study, whereas a convex pattern was simulated by Pollock et al. In our study, for subtype I (2.5-mm) fractures, only LUCL repair was sufficient to regain acceptable angulation, rotation, and contact areas for an arc avoiding deep flexion, mostly corroborating the findings in the literature. Pollock et al In subtype II 2.5-mm fractures, perfect repair of both medial and lateral ligaments allowed for acceptable angulation and rotation but not for contact areas through the midportion of the arc tested. In addition, similar to the findings of Pollock et al, In subtype II 5-mm fractures with repaired ligaments, we not only could not restore favorable kinematics but also were not able to restore the articular contact areas close to the preinjury level, similar to the findings of Bellato et al. In our study, the total contact area decreased in elbows affected by PMRI, similar to cadaveric studies. Computation modeling allows for repeated testing in the gravity varus position without the effects of ligamentous fatigue, as well as the ability to measure through the continuous arc with or without simulated muscle loading, while allowing for more extensive combinations of injuries and repairs. The simulations show anatomically perfect repairs. In cadaveric studies, it is difficult to obtain standard and equal ligament tension on each specimen with a ligament repair. For example, Fraser et al This study has limitations associated with the use of computational modeling for data acquisition. We used values calculated from the specimens' intact ligamentous structures to model how an anatomically perfect repair would be represented. The isolated LUCL and MCL injuries and their repairs were tested previously in cadavers and their respective models This is the first study in which combinations of pMCL and LUCL ligamentous repairs were analyzed by evaluating kinematics and contact areas. However, it must be noted that the findings obtained in our study should be supported by further multibody models, as well as clinical trials. This study's findings suggest that LUCL repair alone is sufficient to restore kinematics and the elbow contact area for small subtype I fractures for an arc avoiding deep flexion, whereas nearly normal kinematics and a nearly normal ulnar contact area throughout the arc of motion can be achieved if the pMCL is also repaired. For small subtype II fractures, ligamentous repair alone may not reliably restore kinematics or the elbow articular contact area. Larger fractures of the anteromedial coronoid should ideally have the fragments fixed or reconstructed if comminution prevents fixation. For all subtypes of anteromedial coronoid fractures, repair of the LUCL might result in more internal rotation if the fractures cannot be fixed anatomically and the pMCL is not addressed. This study was partially funded by UMKC Franklin D. Dickson Professorship Endowment. Akin Cil and the research foundation with which he is affiliated receive royalties from Stryker. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.