This paper deals with the degradation of aqueous phenol by a newly proposed rotating-drum reactor coated with a TiO2 photocatalyst, in which TiO2 powders loaded with Pt are immobilized on the outer surface of a glass-drum. The reactor can receive solar light and oxygen from the atmosphere effectively. It was shown experimentally that phenol can be decomposed rapidly by this reactor under solar light: with our experimental conditions the phenol with an initial concentration of 22.0 mg/dm3 was decomposed within 60 min and was completely mineralized through intermediate products within 100 min. The photonic efficiency under solar light was shown to take the value 0.00742 mol-C/Einstein. The photocatalytic decomposition processes of phenol by this reactor were also discussed on the basis of the Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetic model.Photocatalytic oxidation reactions have the potential to completely mineralize organic compounds to carbon dioxide by solar light and to lead us to a ‘clean and green purification technology’ for treatment of polluted air and water ( For air purification, some practical purification technologies using the TiO The main purpose of the present study is to develop a new photocatalyst reactor for water purification which can be operated under solar light. We here propose a rotating-drum reactor coated with a TiO The reactor was tested by decomposing aqueous phenol under solar light and its performance was evaluated. It was shown that phenol can be decomposed effectively by this reactor under solar light. The experiment using artificial ultraviolet light was also carried out and the results were compared with those obtained using solar light. The degradation and mineralization processes were also shown to be explained by the Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetic model. We used an anatase type of titanium dioxide powder (TP-2, Fuji Titanium Ltd.) of 0.15 μm mean diameter for the photocatalyst. To improve the photocatalytic activity, we loaded platinum on the surface of the TiO A glass pipe of diameter 5 cm and length 18 cm was used for the rotating-drum. The treated powder was fixed in a film on the outer surface of the glass pipe. An aqueous solution of 35 wt.% water glass was spread by a brush on the outer surface of the glass pipe and the resultant water glass film was dried at 80°C. The treated titanium dioxide powder was dispersed in water at 25 wt.% and was then spread by a spray gun on the water glass film on the surface of the glass pipe. During this process, the glass pipe was continuously rotated so as to spread the powder uniformly. The coating film was finally dried at 450°C for 1 h. In determining the amount of Pt-loaded TiO The SEM image of the surface of the TiO According to JIS (Japanese Industrial Standard) K5400, 8.5.2 Lattice Tape Method, the stability of the structure of the TiO  The phenol concentration was measured with a gas chromatograph (GC-14B, Shimadzu Ltd.) and TOC by a TOC meter (TOC-5000, Shimadzu Ltd.).   The experimental data obtained using a photocatalyst-free drum are also shown in the figure. The figure shows that phenol can hardly be degraded by ultraviolet light alone. The photocatalyst film fabricated here has a high photocatalytic activity and the TiO Time-dependent phenol and TOC concentrations in the process of decomposition by Pt-free TiO It is known that there are several intermediate products and the reaction proceeds in the corresponding several elementary steps ( The TOC concentration The physicochemical constants included in The constants In the separate experiment in which water was aerated, we found no substantial difference between the degradation process when aerated and that when not aerated. This indicates that there is enough oxygen in the water film for photocatalytic reaction regardless of whether the water is aerated or not. Thus there is no need to aerate the water when the rotating drum reactor is used, which provides a benefit in saving energy in practical operation. We now discuss the rate control of the degradation process of phenol by the rotating-drum reactor. The dissolved oxygen necessary for the photocatalytic reaction has to be provided continuously from the atmosphere. The flux Considering the simplest situation where oxygen is saturated at the surface of the water film and does not exist at the surface of the photocatalyst, we can easily estimate the diffusion flux of oxygen from  The degradation rate The photonic efficiency of the reactor can be determined from the mineralization rate of phenol and the intensity of light. The photonic efficiency of the rotating-drum reactor for solar light was evaluated to be 0.00742 mol-C/Einstein. In evaluating the solar photon flux, we counted all the solar energy of wavelength According to the existing articles, diverse values have been reported for the solar photonic efficiency depending on their evaluation methods.  The photonic efficiency of our reactor for the artificial ultraviolet light, on the other hand, was determined to be 0.0234 mol-C/Einstein. This value is much higher than that for solar light. The photons can excite electrons in the valence band to the conduction band when the photocatalyst is illuminated by light with a wavelength shorter than 387 nm. The electrons excited by the photons with energy higher than the bandgap can have excess energy. The wavelength, 253.7 nm, of the artificial light is at the tailing edge of the spectrum of the solar light. Therefore, the electrons excited by the artificial light have higher excess energy than those excited by the solar light. That is the reason why the photonic efficiency for artificial light is much higher than that for the solar light. In this paper, a rotating-drum reactor coated with a TiO The double-layer film of Pt-loaded TiO The initial degradation rate of phenol for this reactor is 1.635 mg/m The photonic efficiency of the reactor for solar light is 0.00742 mol-C/Einstein. This value is higher than those reported in previous articles. The photonic efficiency for artificial light ( The degradation and mineralization processes of phenol in this reactor can be explained by the Langmuir–Hinshelwood kinetic model. The authors are indebted to Dr. Y. Kawashima at Himeji Institute of Technology for providing data on the radiation power density of solar light in Harima district.