The Gamma Nail is the latest advance in the treatment of trochanteric fractures based on intramedullary nailing principles during closed procedures. Its design is based on Küntscher's Y-nail and locking intramedullary (IM) nails. This paper reports the results from the first-ever series of 121 patients operated between 1988 and 1990. They were followed until bone union was achieved. The mean patient age was 75years. Most patients were in poor general health and had unstable fractures. Anatomical preoperative reduction was achieved in 72% of cases. Fixation was good in 66% of cases and acceptable in 27% of cases. Intra-operative complications consisted of nine fractures without consequences. Of the treated patients, 83.4% resumed weight-bearing during the first week. There was one case of deep infection that resolved with treatment. The mortality rate was 12.3% at three months. We noted 7 alunions in varus, 3 in valgus, 2 in external rotation and 1 in internal rotation. There were no cases of non-union. In six cases, the screw had cut out of the femoral head. The drawbacks associated with surgical treatment methods for trochanteric fractures also apply to the Gamma nail. Nevertheless, one of its primary advantages is the possibility of using a closed procedure. When compared to Ender nailing, knee pain is absent and weight-bearing can be achieved in all patients, no matter the fracture type.Trochanteric fractures are problematic in the Western world because of the wide-ranging human social and economic repercussions. Because the frequency of these fractures increases with age, these effects will only get worse as our population ages. The number of trochanteric fractures is expected to double between 1980 and 2000 Fracture treatment aims to allow patients to quickly resume weight-bearing so as to improve survival. Progress has been made in achieving this goal with both open (slide plate and screw plate) and closed (modified Ender nailing) treatment methods. Preventative measures have been implemented in parallel that should have a positive impact over time: balanced calcium-phosphate intake, calcium and vitamin D administration, and oestrogen administration in women. But further research needs to be performed to improve current internal fixation methods. The Gamma nail is the newest implant designed to treat these trochanteric fractures using a closed intramedullary (IM) fixation method. The method is similar to the procedures designed by Küntscher The sliding screw fixation mechanism proposed by Kempf and Bitar chronic knee pain and discomfort; construct not reliable enough to allow early weight-bearing in patients with more complex fractures. Type 6 intertrochanteric and type 7 subtrochanteric were borderline indications; type 8 trochanter-diaphysis junction was either contraindicated or required 4–6 the method was difficult to perform in young people because of the density of cancellous bone in cervicotrochanteric fractures and fractures in a coxa vara hip.  These reasons led us to develop a new fixation method that still used closed procedure and locking IM nail principles We were inspired by Küntscher Y nail ( The idea came to us to invert the mechanical configuration of the Y-nail while maintaining its basic principles. The Gamma nail ( Although femoral neck screws are available in various diameters, lengths and angles, the standard nail is 20 Our surgical technique has previously been described in great detail reduction on the traction table must be as perfect as possible before starting the procedure; planning is performed using X-rays of the reduced fracture to determine the appropriate nail length, diameter, angle and anteversion. The insertion point for the alignment jig and nail must be at the top of the greater trochanter; the femoral canal is reamed up to 2 the neck screw must be inserted from the bottom and advanced until it contacts the medial cortex of the femoral neck on an A/P view and is in the middle of the neck on the lateral view. The screw will extend up to 1 No additional support is needed. The patient can easily be placed in a wheelchair without experiencing knee pain. No matter the fracture type, the patient is allowed to stand early on without restrictions on weight-bearing, using two canes, a frame or a third person.  From March 30, 1988 to November 29, 1990, 236 nails were implanted. The results from 121 patients were available for analysis. The inclusion criteria consisted of at least three months follow-up with full clinical and radiological outcomes. At first sight, this follow-up period does not seem long enough. However, we were limited because these elderly fracture patients could not be followed for a long time. Most do not return to see us once the fracture has healed, which occurs around the end of the third month. It also became increasingly difficult to monitor a patient's condition during a longer follow-up because the healthcare system no longer covered the expenses of driving patients to our facility. This confluence of reasons resulted in many patient files not being usable. Despite these challenges, the studied population was representative all the operated patients in terms of age and fracture type. There were 88 women and 33 men. The women had an average age of 78 The patients were often in poor general health. Based on the Singh Index for Osteoporosis  The right femur was fractured in 51 cases and the left one in 70 cases. All were due to trauma, mainly following an insignificant fall. These consisted of 15 cases of severe trauma, 3 pathological fractures, 3 revisions of other fixation techniques and one revision for non-union secondary to Ender nailing. Based on the Ender (  An average of 27   The average total operating time (from initial incision to final closure) was 41  Reduction quality was determined on the X-rays used for surgical planning. The neck-shaft angle, neck anteversion on lateral views and maximum diastasis at the main fracture line on A/P and lateral views were taken into consideration. Irradiation during fluoroscopy was only 84 The reduction was deemed anatomical if the neck-shaft angle and anteversion were the same as the uninjured side and the maximum fracture diastasis was no more than 5  A 12  Various parameters were evaluated. The nail entry point was considered ideal 86 times, too medial 7 times, too lateral 19 times, too posterior 7 times; the nail was never placed too anterior. Fracture diastasis was measured on the main fracture line on postoperative X-rays. It was 4.7 In 6 cases (4.9%), the initial fracture reduction was altered when the nail was inserted: once leading to valgus alignment, once leading to varus alignment and four times causing distraction, but in the latter cases contact was re-established upon loading. The position of the femoral neck screw within the femoral head (  The proximal metaphysis split in nine cases (7.4%) during nail insertion. This occurred either in a new location or as an extension of a pre-existing crack ( There were six problems during the locking step. Two constructs could not be locked (broken drill bit and wrong alignment of both screws). In one case, locking resulted in misplacement of the screw, which led to an intra-operative femoral shaft fracture that was fixed with a plate and subsequently healed. In the three other cases, the locking step could not be carried out because of poor aiming. These splits, cracks and metaphysis-diaphysis junction fractures are a true danger for the patient. They can be avoided by over-reaming and manually inserting the nail, without using a hammer. The amount of muscle in that location also makes it difficult to lock the nail.   The postoperative blood loss was determined by the volume collected in the suction drains. The average was 166  Early full weight-bearing was defined as standing and loading during walking with the help of two canes and/or another person or a frame, and without restrictions being placed on loading the affected leg. Under these conditions, 83.4%of patients resumed weight-bearing during the first week, independent of fracture type.  a - Local There were six cases of haematoma, but only one had to be surgically drained. There were three superficial infections (one leading to partial wound dehiscence) but none required surgical revision; every case resolved with bandages and second-intention healing. One deep infection required Gentallin bead implantation, but no hardware removal. b - General Eight patients died within 15  The patient's destination upon discharge from our hospital partially revealed their functional capacities: 49% were able to return home, 24% were transferred to an old-age home, 24% to a rehabilitation facility and 3% to a secondary hospital.   Bone union occurred in 2.7  Including the early deaths mentioned early, there were 15 deaths within three months (12.3%). At the time of follow-up, three patients were bed-ridden.  a - Hardware-related There were no hardware failures, nail breakage or buckling or breakage of the locking screws. The locking screws moved back up to the skin in one patient. These screws were too short to provide good fixation in a very osteoporotic medial cortex; they were replaced by expanding screws. b - Secondary displacement Seven fractures had healed with secondary displacement of more than 10° varus (5.7%) and three in more than 10° varus, but these were all reduced into valgus. Two special cases were observed: union with femoral head rotation (fracture at neck base) and union with femur medialisation due to the femoral neck screw backing out excessively. There were also two cases of union in external rotation greater than 10° and one case in internal rotation greater than 10°. There were six cases of implant cut out in the femoral neck (4.9%). These mostly occurred two months after the surgery. In two cases, the femoral neck screw was obviously too short and in four cases it was badly positioned in the head. The worst possible screw position would be in the upper quadrant on A/P view and posterior quadrant on lateral view ( c - Avascular necrosis. There were no cases of femoral head avascular necrosis, but the follow-up was not truly long enough to detect this complication.  Functional results were evaluated based on the types of walking aids used. At the time of follow-up, 49% of patients were living at home. Of these patients, 33 patients (27.2%) walked without canes, 27 patients (22.3%) used one cane, 31 patients (25.6%) used two canes, six patients (4.9%) used a frame and four patients (3.3%) no longer walked, thus were confined to a bed or wheelchair. Three of the patients who were initially bed-ridden died before the end of the third month. Because most published retrospective studies were performed at different facilities, used different implants and had different outcome measures, comparing them is difficult. There are no prospective, randomized studies available that can be used to objectively evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of these various treatment methods. Nevertheless, we compared our new method with the two methods that are or have been used the most: sliding hip screw with lateral plating (DHS and THS) and Ender nailing with sliding screw fixation, which we also use. The total operating time was 77 Blood loss was harder to evaluate because few series report it. One prospective, randomized study found less blood loss with the Ender procedure than the DHS one The quality of preoperative or intra-operative reduction was deemed perfect or nearly perfect in 78% of cases with the DHS Our data confirm that reduction quality is similar with closed and open techniques. But a few fracture types are problematic: complex pertrochanteric fractures (Ender type 2) with detached lesser trochanter; however, we believe this fragment does not need to be replaced accurately as it will heal even if greatly positioned to the inside; some type 7 fractures or more often type 8 trochanter-diaphysis junction fractures; we have encountered two different scenarios. 1) Oblique fractures below and behind on lateral views ( 2) Oblique fractures below and in front, often shorter than the previous ones, with flexion-abduction displacement of the proximal fragment and posterior drop of the distal fragment. This fracture type poses a true problem: reduction through external manoeuvres is incomplete or does not hold, despite using external bracing (  In published studies with the DHS Fracture fixation with the DHS was supplemented by additional screws, plates, cerclage wire, cancellous bone grafts or cement in 9% to 20% of cases The time to full weight-bearing is difficult to compare because the number of unstable fractures must be taken into account in studies with sliding screw plates and Ender nails: with the DHS, Müller in the Penot study most the patients (85%) operated with the THS Here lies one of the indisputable strong points of this treatment method: the degree of fracture instability does not factor into the return to weight-bearing. This makes it better than other open and closed methods including Ender nailing, which already had one positive aspect in this area. We found a clear difference in favour of closed procedures, as they had fewer superficial and deep infections. The infection rate was 2.4% for Gamma nailing and Ender nailing There also seemed to be fewer deaths when the Gamma nail was used: 12.3% in comparison to 15% with DHS The comparative, retrospective series by Penot These data lack precision because shortening is not included in these two methods, but it automatically produces varus displacement. Nevertheless, the data provide evidence of the secondary displacement and settling of certain types of trochanteric fractures that occurs no matter which fixation method is used. This is taken into account in all three fixation methods, as there is a possibility of sliding along with settling. The time to union and union rate were similar for all three methods, which confirms a widely known fact that trochanteric fractures have an excellent union potential.  Fracture fixation using the Gamma nail technique is not without its problems, but it can be applied in nearly all cases without supplemental devices and without opening the fracture site. Its mechanical soundness allows for early weight-bearing in most cases. Although malunions are more common than with DHS fixation, their severity is acceptable as they have no major functional impact. In theory, all types of trochanteric fractures can be treated with this method. In practice, some nuances must be highlighted: only unstable fractures can unquestionably be treated with this method; for stable simple pertrochanteric fractures (type 1 and some types 2 & 4), modified Ender nailing is the best indication as it is less costly. The Gamma nail is indicated for: cervical-trochanteric fractures; fractures in coxa vara hips; pathological fractures; fractures in young patients, although the femoral neck screw is hard to insert; treatment of non-unions. A longer implant could allow treatment of some combination fractures (neck and shaft or pertrochanteric and shaft) or trochanter-diaphysis junction fractures. Authors’ disclosure of conflict of interest was not requested when the article was originally published.