The aim of the study was to determine the effect of soaking in an ascorbic acid and citric acid solution and modified atmosphere packaging on bioactive compound contents and antioxidant activity in a coleslaw mix stored for 12 d at 4 °C. Samples were packaged under modified atmosphere consisting of 5/10/85, 20/25/55, 50/30/20, 70/30/0% O2/CO2/N2, and in air. Soaking of tested samples in the solution of ascorbic and citric acids caused a significant increase in ascorbic acid contents and a more efficient retention of phenolic compounds and carotenoids. The application of packaging in the atmosphere with reduced oxygen contents resulted in a higher content of ascorbic acid. The greatest content of carotenoids was recorded in air-packaged samples and those packaged in the atmosphere of 5/10/85 or 20/25/55% O2/CO2/N2. Contents of phenolic compounds and antioxidant activity were significantly greater in vegetable mixes packaged at 20% or 50% oxygen contents.Numerous literature sources indicate a reduced incidence of several chronic diseases correlated with an increased consumption of vegetables and fruit ( Coleslaw mix is an example of a minimally processed product consumed in many countries. Its primary ingredient is white cabbage, a vegetable from the family Brassicaceae. Vegetables from that family are rich in glucosinolates, phenols, vitamins and carotenoids ( Minimal processing causes tissue damage, disturbing its integrity. This may lead to oxidation of antioxidant compounds such as ascorbic acid and phenolic compounds, while it may also contribute to the synthesis of secondary metabolites, mainly polyphenols. As a result of comminution the tissue is frequently exposed to an increased action of oxygen or light, which may lead to degradation of e.g. carotenoids and ascorbic acid. Modified atmosphere packaging is a method to extend life of minimally processed products. A new trend is to use a modified atmosphere with a high concentration of oxygen and an elevated level of CO The aim of this study was to determine the effect of pretreatment and the composition of the atmosphere on changes in contents of phenolic compounds, ascorbic acid and carotenoids, as well as antioxidant activity in a coleslaw type vegetable mix stored for 12 d at 4 °C. The dry coleslaw mix was prepared using white cabbage ( The raw materials were washed in tap water, then the outer leaves and head cores were removed and carrots were hand-peeled. The vegetables were again washed in tap water and dried on paper. Next, cabbage and carrots were shredded appropriately into 3–5 mm and 2–3 mm thick strips. The dry coleslaw mix was obtained by mixing cabbage and carrots (80%:20% ratio w/w). Then, the coleslaw mix was soaked in a solution of 5 g/L ascorbic acid and 5 g/L citric acid for 5 min, with agitation, at a temperature of 4 °C. The ratio of raw material to water was 1:5. After pretreatment, adherent solution was removed using a vegetable spinner (Zepter, Viersen, Germany). Portions of 200 g coleslaw mix were put into polypropylene trays (205 × 160 × 60 mm) with an oxygen transmission rate of 7–8 cm An OXYBABY gas analyser (Witt-Gasetechnik, Witten, Germany) was used to determine oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere inside the trays with the coleslaw mix. The determinations were conducted after 0, 1, 3, 6, 9 and 12 d of sample storage. The extraction of the ascorbic acid was conducted according to the procedure described by Aceton extraction of carotenoids was carried out according to Polyphenol extraction was conducted according to the procedure described by Phenolic extract (50 μL) was added to 5 mL ABTS˙ 1,1-Diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical scavenging activity was determined using a method of Statistical analysis was conducted by the Statistica version 9.1 computer software (StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, USA). The variance analysis (ANOVA) and Fisher's least significant difference (LSD) test were performed. Correlations were estimated with the Pearson test. Statistically significant differences were reported at During storage, in samples packaged in the atmosphere with a 20% oxygen content or greater a decrease was recorded in the contents of this gas. In samples packaged in the atmosphere with a high oxygen content (50% or 70%), a significantly greater content was maintained up to the 3rd d of storage. At the application of the atmosphere with a reduced oxygen content (5%), its level increased up to the 3rd d of storage. From 6 d to the end of the assumed storage period the content of oxygen in the tested samples was comparable and ranged from 11.4% to 14.6% ( In samples packaged in the atmosphere with a 25% or 30% share of carbon dioxide, during storage a significant decrease was observed for the contents of this gas. Up to 6 d of storage, a significantly greater content of carbon dioxide was detected in samples packaged in modified atmosphere. After 9 d, contents of carbon dioxide were uniform in the tested samples and ranged from 10.3% to 12.5% ( Packaging the samples in the microperforated film contributed to the rapid decrease in the levels of O Soaking in the solution containing 5 g/L ascorbic acid and 5 g/L citric acid caused a 7-fold increase in the contents of ascorbic acid in the tested samples. After 1 d of storage, in vegetable mixes packaged in atmosphere of 5/10/85 or 20/25/55% O There is a limited body of data concerning the effect of atmosphere with a high oxygen content on the content of ascorbic acid in the fresh-cut product. Soaking of tested samples in the solution of ascorbic and citric acids resulted in a more efficient retention of analysed compounds in the product (approx. 25% more than in the vegetable mix before pretreatment) ( During storage, a significant reduction was observed in the contents of carotenoids. After 12 d, the depletion of In the tested samples hydroxybenzoic and hydroxycinnamic acids accounted for 67% and 33% of total contents of phenolic compounds. A similar profile for white cabbage, constituting the dominant components of coleslaw mix, was reported by Contents of phenolics in the tested product may be affected both by the oxidation process connected with enzymatic browning and by de novo synthesis. The accumulation of phenolic compounds in this case has been linked with the wound-induced activation of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL) synthesis ( Antioxidant activity of the tested samples was recorded in phenolic extracts. Applied pretreatment resulted in a more advantageous preservation of antioxidant activity in comparison to the vegetable mix not subjected to pretreatment. In all the tested samples, a significant decrease was recorded in antioxidant activity after 1 d of storage. During further storage, the antioxidant capacity remained constant in most samples. Towards the end of the assumed period, it was observed to increase significantly in samples packaged at a 20% oxygen content and in the atmosphere of 50/30/20% O Two principal components, which explain about 91% of total variability were identified based on the correlation matrix, see The PC1 was negatively correlated with the contents of ascorbic acid, carotenoids, phenolics and antioxidant activity ( Application of soaking in the solution of ascorbic and citric acids contributed to an increase in ascorbic acid contents and a more effective retention of phenolics and carotenoids in the coleslaw mix. Contents of ascorbic acid, phenolic and carotenoid contents significantly influenced the effect of the composition of the atmosphere surrounding the product. For ascorbic acid the atmosphere with a reduced O This work was supported by the