Residence time in a single flotation machine is one of the most important parameters necessary to properly design a flotation circuit. The mean residence time for any particular cell design is usually determined from residence time distribution (RTD) experimental results. The comparison of the measured mean residence time with the expected residence time, as well as analysis of the shape of the RTD curve, give the most useful and valid information about the mixing properties in the cell.
                  Experimental RTD results for three large flotation cells (Dorr-Oliver, Outokumpu and WEMCO®) discussed in this publication were released by the Chuquicamata Division of CODELCO as a part of the competitive rougher flotation test report (CODELCO (National Copper Corporation of Chile), Chuquicamata Division, 2000, Project IM2, No. 19/99; Final Report of the Evaluation of Large Volume Flotation Cells). Evaluation of the results by CODELCO as well as by authors is provided. “Approximation of the theoretical curve of a perfect mixer,” used by CODELCO as a base for cell categorization is analyzed and critiqued after comparing to the criteria used by many authorities in the field.
                  Conclusions are drawn based on the multi-parameter flow model, showing existence of stagnant volume of 45% in Outokumpu, 35% in Dorr-Oliver, and 7% in WEMCO® flotation cell volumes.Flotation is a dynamic process and the efficiency is directly related to the time material spends in the machine. To fully analyze this process, the distribution of the time it takes for the material to proceed from the inlet(s) to the outlet(s) has to be known. This distribution is the best indication of the flow patterns in the vessel. The most common way of RTD determination is to inject an impulse tracer (solid or water-soluble – depending which RTD is to be obtained) and detect the amount of this tracer emerging in the outlet(s) as a function of time. The resulting patterns can be considered in terms of two ideal types: plug flow and perfect mixing ( In perfect mixing, tracer input is immediately dispersed throughout the whole volume of the device. It can be seen that some of the tracer leaves instantaneously, while some never leaves, so that there is a distribution of residence time from zero to infinity. The most important outcome from RTD experiments is the measured mean residence time. This is the main reason why the experimental evaluation of the residence time distribution is performed. The relationship between experimentally measured and expected mean residence times is the easiest-to-obtain indication of the hydrodynamics of a flotation cell. If they are equal, the cell is most probably well mixed. If the experimental mean is smaller than expected, it indicates that there are dead volumes, short-circuiting, or other anomaly. The cause of the difference usually can be determined by comparing the shapes of the RTD curves for ideal case and the case in question. The description of the method and many examples can be found in the Levenspiel's textbook “The Chemical Reactor Omnibook” ( On April 3, 2000, the Chuquicamata Division of CODELCO released its report entitled “Final Report of the Evaluation of Large Volume Flotation Cells” ( Tests at the Chuquicamata Concentrator Plants were performed in three phases: start up, optimization of the cell operation, and the period of official evaluation, including the residence time distribution test. Suppliers invited to participate were Dorr-Oliver, EIMCO/Baker Process (manufacturer of the WEMCO All experimental results and procedures used in this article are taken from CODELCO final tabulation of the data, which was made available to all three vendors ( Throughout the competitive test campaign, operating and metallurgical performance data were collected and analyzed by CODELCO. In the course of the testing, CODELCO also commissioned the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy (CCHEN), Section of Tracers to perform measurements of residence time distribution in each of the three flotation machines. CCHEN's findings appear as Appendix 4, “Analysis of Residence Time Distribution,” following Chapter IV of the CODELCO report ( The general objective of the RTD experiment was to characterize the fluid dynamic behavior of the large flotation cells manufactured by the Dorr-Oliver, EIMCO/Baker Process, and Outokumpu. It was accomplished by determining the residence time distribution in each of the cells, in separate experiments, using the pulse tracer method. Selection of radioactive tracers was based on the following properties: The physico-chemical behavior should be suitable for the material being traced. In this case it was necessary to trace solid material that is not floatable. Final concentrator tailings of distinct particle sizes were used to study the effects of this parameter. The lifetime of the radioactive isotope should be compatible with the duration of the experiment, in this case several minutes. The type and energy of radiation from the isotope must permit its detection in an adequate form relative to the characteristics of the background where the work is being conducted. Selection of an appropriate tracer isotope was subject to several constraints. To facilitate automated data acquisition in real time, CCHEN preferred to employ tracers emitting gamma radiation. The tracer should be non-floating ore material from the Chuquicamata concentrator, and this material must contain an element that could be neutron-activated in CCHEN's reactor. After analysis of the neutron activation spectrum and radioactive decay curves of the Chuquicamata material, sodium was identified as the only suitable element for activation. Based on these conditions, it was determined that quantities of 2 mCi of Na-24 were sufficient to obtain an adequate appraisal in each of the experiments using solid material. For experiments with liquid, 5 mCi of Br-82 was the indicated amount, based on the other experiments in similar equipment.  CCHE used scintillation detectors, 1×1.5 in., Tl-doped NaI with associated electronics. The probe was connected to the data acquisition system, which, besides providing power to the probe, also acquires the data, records them on the hard disc, and permits an adequate visualization of the data during the experiment. Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy (CCHEN) corrected the collected raw data for radioactive decay, which was not negligible in this case because of the relationship between the duration of the experiment (some hours), and the half-life of the irradiated tailing (between 15 and 30 h). Data were also corrected for natural background (cosmic) radiation. The mathematical expression that summarized the calculation of radiation intensity was The experimental mean residence time was calculated from the RTD curve Data calculated from tracer experiments are shown in CODELCO's analysis was based on the data provided by CCHEN and consisted of fitting models of mixing to the experimental data and calculating the mean residence time. The model curves obtained were compared with the ideal cases to approximate how closely each one approached conditions of ideal mixing. The expected residence time was calculated for each cell and served as a reference standard. The experimental data were corrected for natural or “background” radiation, and all the measurement times were standardized, with measurements taken between the time of injection and the time at which the measured radiation reached the background level. The tails of the curves were “trimmed” to avoid errors generated were the measuring standards were low, at extended times ( The calculation of expected residence time is very simple, as given by the equation below Obtaining the value of One of the parameters, When the volume of air in each of the three machines was calculated using the equation of Glembotskii ( It is also necessary to subtract the volume of froth from the volume of the cell. Froth volume was not calculated, but was estimated at 2% of cell volume. The expected time calculations are shown in Final CODELCO conclusions were based on the “approximation of the theoretical curve of a perfect mixer”. The validity of this assumption is discussed in the next chapter. In general, the distributions of residence times in all three cells were concluded to be close to that for ideal mixing. The only one that presented a small deviation was the WEMCO In all cells the RTD curves for distinct size fractions of solids are practically coincidental, and the differences between the respective mean residence times are minimal. This indicates that the three cells have more than adequate capacity for suspension of solids. Other parameters can be used to characterize fluid-dynamic performance, including power number, air flow number, bubble flow, and mixing time, but these depend on specific operations data and details of cell geometry that were unknown at that time. The RTD experiment was professionally designed and flawlessly executed by the Section of Tracers of the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy. There are three main points that have to be made in regard to the CODELCO analysis of the results. First, the most important single piece of information to be gained from tracer experiments of this type is the mean residence time. True (measured rather than calculated) mean residence time provides the greatest opportunity for inference about flow through the cell, especially when the measured residence times for a few cells of the same volume and flow rate can be compared. Second is the lack of comparison between experimental and expected mean residence times. Of course, both were calculated from experimental data (see Comparison between the measured and theoretical residence times is another opportunity for inference about the flow characteristics of the flotation vessels. CODELCO chose to ignore the theoretical residence times and focused on the measured values. These explanations are intuitive. If a medium transits a vessel faster than the The higher measured value of liquid residence time in the WEMCO A final, third, point regarding CODELCO's analysis relates to their use of the perfect mixing model as a standard for comparison of the measured RTD's of the three machines. Previous studies on the mixing characteristics of flotation cells ( In this model, a flotation cell consists of different regions representing perfect mixing, dead volume, by-pass, recycling and plug flow. The main reason cited for the existence of stagnant portions of the flotation machines is insufficient turbulence. This portion of the machine is usually located in the corners and upper part of the vessel. The part of the cell where mixing is complete and there is no variation in composition is considered the effective volume. Bypass or short-circuiting represents that part of the feed, which goes directly to the exit stream without being dispersed in the cell. Similarly, that part of the feed which may be recirculated through the impeller zone due to intense stirring action in that zone represents recycling ( Approximation to perfect mixing is not necessarily the “perfect” operating mode for a flotation machine. Harris ( In the case of perfect mixing, any input would be immediately dispersed uniformly throughout the whole cell. This prohibits part of the feed to be pumped through the rotor space. In all types of flotation machines, volume inside the rotor is the place where the majority of particle–bubble contact takes place. Without a particle–bubble contact flotation can not take place; this is the first, necessary step. The work of CCHEN with subsequent analysis by CODELCO has provided a valuable measurement of the RTD of both liquid and particles in large flotation machines. Coupled with knowledge of the expected residence time, this provides new insight into the flow characteristics of the individual machines that were evaluated. Each of the flotation machines contained a certain amount of stagnant volume, and this varied from 7% of the WEMCO machine's effective volume to 45% of the Outokumpu volume. Although the concept of “perfect” mixing is seducing, the best method to interpret the residence time distribution data is to use a multiple-parameter model. Application of the perfect mixing model to the flotation machine is a simplistic approach that ignores the many unit functions of a large modern flotation machine. Taking into consideration the necessity of the flow through rotor, the slurry pumping rate together with the highest achievable mean residence time in a flotation cell is the best possible indication of cell performance.