Silicon deficiency in animals leads to bone defects. This element may therefore play an important role in bone metabolism. Silicon is absorbed from the diet as orthosilicic acid and concentrations in plasma are 5–20 μM. The in vitro effects of orthosilicic acid (0–50 μM) on collagen type 1 synthesis was investigated using the human osteosarcoma cell line (MG-63), primary osteoblast-like cells derived from human bone marrow stromal cells, and an immortalized human early osteoblastic cell line (HCC1). Collagen type 1 mRNA expression and prolyl hydroxylase activity were also determined in the MG-63 cells. Alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin (osteoblastic differentiation) were assessed both at the protein and the mRNA level in MG-63 cells treated with orthosilicic acid. Collagen type 1 synthesis increased in all treated cells at orthosilicic acid concentrations of 10 and 20 μM, although the effects were more marked in the clonal cell lines (MG-63, HCCl 1.75- and 1.8-fold, respectively, P < 0.001, compared to 1.45-fold in the primary cell lines). Treatment at 50 μM resulted in a smaller increase in collagen type 1 synthesis (MG-63 1.45-fold, P = 0.004). The effect of orthosilicic acid was abolished in the presence of prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors. No change in collagen type 1 mRNA level was seen in treated MG-63 cells. Alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin were significantly increased (1.5, 1.2-fold at concentrations of 10 and 20 μM, respectively, P < 0.05). Gene expression of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin also increased significantly following treatment. In conclusion, orthosilicic acid at physiological concentrations stimulates collagen type 1 synthesis in human osteoblast-like cells and enhances osteoblastic differentiation.Silicon (Si) is a ubiquitous environmental element found mainly as insoluble silicates, although small amounts of soluble Si are also present in natural waters, chiefly as orthosilicic acid [Si(OH) In 1972, Carlisle Many of these earlier studies and more recent ones on extracellular matrix formation have been mainly carried out in animals such as chicks The study was divided into two parts. In the first series of experiments we investigated the effects of varying concentrations of soluble Si in the form of orthosilicic acid (Si (OH) (a) The MG-63 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, GIBCO BRL, Life Technologies, Paisley, Scotland, UK) supplemented with 5% fetal calf serum (FCS, GIBCO BRL), penicillin (100 IU/ml), streptomycin (100 μg/ml), and amphotericin B (2.5 μg/ml) in 24-well plates (GIBCO BRL) at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO (b) Human bone marrow stromal cells were grown as detailed below. An aliquot of bone marrow aspirates was obtained from five subjects (3 M, 2 F, age range 2–18 years) undergoing a percutaneous aspiration of bone marrow from the iliac crest for investigation of various hematological conditions. Only samples from patients who had normal hematopoietic cellular morphology were used in the present study. Ethical approval had been obtained from the University Hospital of Wales and St. Thomas’ Hospital ethics committees and all patients or their parents gave informed consent. The bone marrow aspirates were suspended in 10 ml alpha-minimum essential medium (α-MEM, GIBCO BRL) containing 20 units/ml heparin and centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in 20 ml α-MEM and 15 ml lymphocyte separating medium (GIBCO BRL) was added to the bottom of the marrow suspension and centrifuged as previously described (c) The conditionally immortalized HCCl (d) Human skin fibroblasts were cultured from normal skin samples obtained at surgery. The fatty layer was removed and the skin specimen cut into small pieces of 1 mm A 1.0 mM stock solution of orthosilicic acid was prepared from sodium silicate or a standard solution containing 9.8 mg/ml Si (both Aldrich Chemical Co Ltd, Gillingham, UK) using ultrahighly purified water. The stock solution was sterilized by γ-irradiation (Gammacell 1000 Elite, Nordion Netechnology, Reading, UK). Aliquots of the sterile stock solution were added to the culture medium at concentrations of 10, 20, and 50 μM. The final concentrations of Si in the media were measured in duplicate wells by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICPOES) (Jobin-Yvon JY 24, Instruments SA, Longjumeau, France) in a clean air room (class J) as previously described Quantification of collagen type 1 synthesis was performed by measuring the amount of carboxy-terminal propeptide of type 1 procollagen (CICP) liberated into the culture medium during the synthesis and deposition of type 1 collagen by the preosteoblastic cells using the Prolagen-C kit (Metra Biosystems Ltd, Great Haseley, UK). Results were expressed per microgram of protein. For assessment of alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin, the MG-63 cells were grown in medium containing, in addition, 1,25(OH) Total cellular RNA was isolated from the MG-63 cells following incubation with orthosilicic acid for 12 and 36 h as described above. RNA was extracted using the Trizol reagent (GIBCO BRL) and purified according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The samples were analyzed by RT-PCR. Two micrograms of total RNA was reverse-transcribed in the presence of random hexanucleotides as random primers and Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (GIBCO BRL). The reaction mixture was incubated at 37°C for 1 h and then at 95°C for 5 min to terminate the reaction. In PCR amplification, 2.0 μl of the resultant first-strand cDNA mixture was used per PCR in a 25-μl reaction mixture containing 1.0 mM MgCl To assess whether silicon influences prolyl hydroxylase activity, we investigated the effects of orthosilicic acid on collagen type 1 synthesis in the presence of 2 prolyl hydroxylase inhibitors  The data were analyzed using Student’s The baseline Si concentration in serum-free DMEM kept in plastic containers was (mean ± SD) 1.60 ± 0.5 μM. Following addition of 10, 20, and 50 μM orthosilicic acid, the final concentrations measured in triplicate were 11.7 ± 1.8, 21.9 ± 2.2, and 50.9 ± 3.1 μM Si, respectively. Collagen type 1 synthesis increased in all cell lines tested following treatment with orthosilicic acid at 10 and 20 μM. Treatment of the MG-63 cells with orthosilicic acid at 10 and 20 μM increased the amount of collagen type 1 in the culture medium by a factor of 1.75 ( Alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin synthesis were significantly increased at the added orthosilicic acid concentration of 10 μM (1.5-fold vs untreated cells, Comparable levels of collagen type 1 mRNA were detected in untreated MG-63 cells and cells treated with orthosilicic acid at the different concentrations (10, 20, 50 μM) at 12 and 36 h ( Inhibition of prolyl hydroxylase activity by Our results demonstrate that physiological concentrations of Si in the form of orthosilicic acid stimulate collagen type 1 synthesis in human osteoblast-like cells and skin fibroblasts. Treatment with Si also enhanced osteoblastic differentiation. Orthosilicic acid did not alter collagen type 1 gene expression but our results suggest that it may modulate prolyl hydroxylase activity. Further studies are required to confirm this. The human osteoblastic cell lines were treated with orthosilicic acid since dietary silicon compounds are hydrolyzed into orthosilicic acid prior to gastrointestinal absorption. Silicon is thus almost entirely present as orthosilicic acid in human serum and the bioavailability of silicon in orthosilicic acid is high Maximal stimulation of collagen type 1 synthesis was observed within the physiological range while at the supraphysiological concentration (50 μM), the observed effect of soluble Si was diminished. A similar pattern was seen in all the early osteoblastic cell lines although the results just failed to reach statistical significance in the primary bone marrow stromal cell cultures. This dose-dependent effect on bone cell function has previously been reported with other trace metals, such as copper. Trace amounts of copper are essential for collagen cross-linking but any beneficial effects on bone matrix formation is abolished at pharmacological concentrations The increase in collagen type 1 synthesis was more marked in the MG-63 and the clonal HCC1 cells compared to the primary bone marrow cell cultures. One explanation for this may be the heterogeneity and multiclonality of our primary cultures as previously documented Other markers of bone formation such as alkaline phosphatase activity have also been shown to be reduced in Si-deficient animals Collagen type 1 synthesis involves a series of closely coordinated physiological processes. After being transcribed and translated, the resulting proteins undergo extensive posttranslational modifications before being assembled in a triple helix and released in the extracellular space In conclusion, the present study indicates that physiological concentrations of soluble Si stimulate collagen type 1 synthesis in human osteoblast-like cells and promote osteoblastic differentiation. The precise cellular mechanism by which silicon affects collagen type 1 synthesis requires further investigation, although our results suggest that it may be related to a possible role in the regulation of prolyl hydroxylase activity. Our in vitro results of a stimulatory effect of orthosilicic acid on collagen synthesis and osteoblast differentiation suggest that this compound may have a stimulatory effect on bone formation in vivo. To date, there have been no studies looking at the potential effect of orthosilicic acid on bone formation in osteopenic animal models This work was supported by research grants from the Special Trustees of St. Thomas’ Hospital and the Royal Society, London, UK. We thank Dr. B.A. Ashton from the Robert Jones and Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital, Department of Rheumatology, Oswestry, UK, and Dr Caroline Silve from INSERM U426, Hospital Bichat, Paris, France, for the gift of the HCC1 and MG-63 cells, respectively.