Special cross-section shape matrices may present better performance than the circular matrices in high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS). The particle capture of elliptic matrices in the transversal HGMS was investigated previously but no experiments were conducted. In the present paper, experiments with circular and elliptic matrices are conducted in the transversal HGMS, providing that the short axis of the elliptic matrices is equal to the diameter of the circular matrices. Results show that the elliptic matrices have higher hematite recovery than the circular matrices. However, the experimental results are inconsistent with previous theoretical analyses. It is therefore necessary to reconsider and improve the particle capture models of circular and elliptic matrices in the transversal HGMS. The magnetization state of the matrices has great influence on the particle capture in HGMS. Previous investigations are all based on the assumption that the matrices are saturated by the magnetic induction. In this article, the magnetic field around the unsaturated matrices is derived and the generic particle motion equations of particles around the circular and elliptic matrices in transversal HGMS are deduced. Analyses with the improved particle capture models show that the ratio of the particle capture radius of the elliptic matrix to that of the circular matrix decreases with the increase of magnetic induction. The elliptic matrices have higher particle capture efficiency at q/b
                     =1 (ratio of matrix spacing to matrix short axis) than the circular matrices in relatively low magnetic induction, which agrees well with the experimental results. Based on the theories constructed in this paper, systematic investigations of elliptic matrix in transversal HGMS will be conducted in follow-up studies, including its separation performance for actual weakly magnetic minerals.the applied magnetic field strength, A/m the Magnetic field induction, T the saturation magnetic of the matrix, 1.55 half the long axis of the elliptic matrix, mm half the short axis of the elliptic matrix, mm half the focal length of the elliptic matrix, mm ratio of matrix long axis to short axis, – radius of the circular matrix, mm radius of the magnetic particle, μm volume of the magnetic particle, mm magnetic susceptibility of the magnetic particle, 0.0025 elliptic angle coordinate, – elliptic coordinate, – imaginary symbol, – napierian base, – polar angle coordinate, – polar coordinate, m permeability of vacuum, 4π the velocity of the fluid, 0.01 viscosity of the fluid, 1 High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) has been widely applied in many scientific and industrial fields. Magnetic matrices are the core component of the HGMS system and determine the separation performance of the HGMS system. Circular cylinders are the most commonly used matrices in HGMS and much attention had been paid to the basic principles of the HGMS employing circular cross-section matrices ( In the present paper, a set of circular and elliptic cross-section matrices (circular and elliptic matrices for short hereafter) used for the transversal HGMS were manufactured and experiments were conducted to test and compare their performance. It was found that the experimental results are not consistent with the theoretical analyses in previous modeling work ( Based on the above facts, the authors derived the magnetic field around the circular and elliptic matrices when the matrices are unsaturated by the magnetic field. With the magnetic field and flow field around the matrices, improved particle capture models for the circular and elliptic matrices were deduced. With the improved particle capture models, the particle capture efficiency of the matrices were calculated and compared with the experimental results. The transversal configuration of HGMS as referred to in this paper, is shown in The matrix units were installed layer by layer in a tailored box and then the tailored box was placed between the magnetic poles of a cyclic strong magnetic separator, as shown in Experiments were conducted to test the particle capture performance of the circular and elliptic matrices. Pure hematite was used as the experimental sample. To investigate the effect of particle size, the hematite was screened to three size fractions: −25 As shown in The experimental results were shown in In a previously published paper, the author modeled the particle capture of elliptic matrices in the three configurations of HGMS and compared the particle capture efficiency (ratio of the specific magnetic particles captured by the matrices) of circular and elliptic matrices under the magnetic induction of 1 The magnetization state has great influence on the matrices’ performance in HGMS. The particle capture behaviors of the matrices vary remarkably before and after reaching magnetization saturation. However, almost all the previous investigations into the basic principles of HGMS were based on the premise that the matrix was saturated by the applied magnetic induction ( For the modeling of particle capture of unsaturated circular and elliptic matrices in the transversal HGMS, the magnetic field around the unsaturated matrices should be firstly derived. As the matrix material is ferromagnetic, the permeability of the matrix Then the radial and tangential components of the magnetic field can be calculated with Eq. With the components of the magnetic field, the magnetic force acting on the paramagnetic particle of susceptibility For unsaturated and saturated matrix, the flow field around matrix is the same. In the transversal configuration, the velocity components of the flow around the circular matrix are as follows: Eqs. The cross-section of the elliptic matrix is shown in When the matrix is unsaturated by the magnetic induction, Then the components of the magnetic field around the elliptic matrix can be calculated with Eq. Having obtained the magnetic field around the matrix, the magnetic force acting on particles can be calculated, as shown with Eqs. The components of the flow field around the elliptic matrix have been derived in previous paper ( The fluid drag force acing on the particle can be calculate with Eq. In this study, the magnetic induction of 0.1 In the modeling of particle motion, only individual particles are considered and the particle-particle attraction and its influence on the magnetic field are not included. The capture radius of paramagnetic particles by the circular and elliptic matrices under different conditions can be determined from the particle motion trajectories. As shown in  For more intuitive observation of the relative difference of particle capture radius between the circular and elliptic matrices, the particle capture radius ratio of the elliptic matrices to circular matrices as a function of magnetic induction is investigated, as shown in As the horizontal dimension of the circular and elliptic matrices is not the same, although the particle capture radius of the elliptic matrix is larger than that of the circular matrix, the particle capture efficiency of elliptic matrix is not definitely higher than that of the circular matrix. For particle capture efficiency, we consider a definition similar to the one given in a previous paper ( For the circular matrices, the particle capture efficiency is only the function of the particle capture radius  The So for the case that the short axis of the elliptic matrices is equal to the diameter of the circular matrices, the elliptic matrices have higher capture efficiency for magnetic particles than circular matrices in the transversal HGMS at relatively lower magnetic induction, which is supported by the improved particle capture models. The elliptic matrices present better magnetic characteristics at relatively low magnetic induction. In the transversal HGMS, another case which is worthy of being investigated is that the long axis of the elliptic matrices is equal to the diameter of the circular matrices. Additionally, this paper focuses on the improvement of modeling the particle capture by the matrices in the transversal HGMS and pure hematite is adopted. The performance of elliptic matrices in transversal HGMS for the separation of actual weakly magnetic minerals should also be investigated. Based on the theories constructed in this paper, all these investigations will be conducted in follow-up studies. In this paper, experiments were conducted with circular and elliptic matrices in the transversal HGMS, providing that the short axis of the elliptic matrix is equal to the diameter of the circular matrix. The results show that the elliptic matrices have higher hematite recovery than the circular matrices within the magnetic induction range of 0.1–0.4 This research work was financially supported by the