Signal processing is an important task for machine fault diagnosis. Over the recent years, many deep learning based signal processing methods have been developed for bearing fault diagnosis. However, these methods are facing some major problems when they are applied to machine fault diagnosis. In this paper, a new hybrid deep signal processing method for bearing fault diagnosis is presented. The presented method incorporates vibration analysis techniques into deep learning to form a deep learning structure embedded with time synchronous resampling mechanism. Data collected from real bearing test rig are used to validate and demonstrate the effectiveness of the presented method.Signal processing is an important task for machine fault diagnosis. Over the years, many vibration signal processing methods have been developed for bearing fault diagnosis. In general, they can be classified into two major categories: vibration analysis based and deep learning based. Vibration analysis based signal processing techniques include: time-domain analysis, frequency-domain analysis, and time-frequency domain analysis Since vibration signals are collected as time series data, time-domain analysis can be applied directly to the time series data. Typical time-domain analysis calculates the statistical condition indicators from the time series signals. Commonly used condition indicators include descriptive statistics such as mean, peak, peak-to-peak interval, and standard deviation. With limited success, simple condition indicators such as root-mean-square (RMS) and crest factor have been applied for detection of localized bearing defects Frequency-domain analysis is the most widely used method for bearing fault diagnosis Time-frequency analysis is used to extend the capability of frequency domain analysis on non-stationary waveform signals. Time-frequency analysis methods such as short-term Fourier transform (STFT) In recent years, limited deep learning based signal processing methods for bearing fault diagnosis have been developed. Unlike vibration analysis such as TSA which requires much human expertise on signal processing, the deep learning based approaches have their adaptive learning capability for automatic signal processing and feature extraction. Originally, deep learning was developed as machine learning with deep structures and has been successfully applied to image recognition Even with the limited success for bearing fault diagnosis, the deep learning based approaches suffer the following two major limitations. First, most of the deep learning based methods determine the deep structure by trail-and-error approach. The structure of the developed deep structures cannot be explained with the physical characteristics of the vibration signals. The commonly used constraints in a deep structure such as weight decay and sparsity coefficients cannot force the deep structure to learn the unique properties of the signals. The connection between the extracted features and time domain filters stated by Lei et al. In this paper, a new hybrid deep signal processing approach for bearing fault diagnosis will be presented. The hybrid deep signal processing method will be validated with vibration signals collected from seeded bearing fault tests conducted in a bearing test rig. The performance of the hybrid deep signal processing method will also be compared with other deep learning based approaches. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In The framework of the hybrid deep signal processing approach for bearing fault diagnosis is shown in As shown in To integrate vibration analysis techniques such TSA into deep learning to process vibration signals for bearing fault diagnosis, it is important to select the correct number of data points in each revolution of the shaft rotation, i.e., signal segmentation. The number of data point in each revolution can be extracted by calculating zero crossing times in tachometer signal. However, in many machine health monitoring and fault diagnosis applications, obtaining tachometer signal is almost impossible. For example, in some aircraft engine, the high-speed turbine shaft is not accessible for a tachometer. Therefore, an alternative way to estimate appropriate segment length is needed. According to the study by Luo et al. The shaft speed profile can be generated using the instantaneous frequency of the vibration signals, which is obtained from the derivative of the unwrapped phase signal. Given the original vibration signal as Step 1. Given the shaft speed profile as shown in Step 2. Once the Step 3. Calculate the average shaft speed Step 4. The time difference between t The time elapsed by one rotation can be written based on Step 5. The target As one can see from the tachometer synthesizing procedure, the location of a possible impulse can only be determined when the closest previous impulse is certain. By considering the tachometer in each revolution, the synthesized tachometer is proved to be accurate with small error. However, for automatic vibration signal processing and fault diagnosis, an automated tachometer synthesizer that can generate synthesized tachometer signals from the vibration signals is needed. Assuming the equal length of the signal segments, then the length of a signal segment will be the number of data points between two continuous impulses in shaft speed profile and Δ To establish the relationship between activation and the adjustable filter size, an upper-bounded filter Therefore, the activation Thus, the optimal filter size With Note that after padding zeros into Substitute Thus, the partial derivative of the activation with respect to the filter size can be calculated as: With relationship stated in Based on Therefore, the filter size Similarly, the partial derivative of the activation with respect to the upper-bounded filter can be expressed as: The derivative of loss After each iteration, the filter size Expanding: When the updated filter size is greater than the previous upper-bounded filter size, i.e., Shrinking: When the updated filter size is smaller than the previous lower-bounded filter size, i.e., Inspired by the fact that the extraordinary impulses are easier to identify in the frequency domain, a neural network that can automatically learn the characteristics of vibration signals in the frequency domain is developed. Let the general mapping function Let As described by Velik By viewing the DFT and IDFT of the segmented vibration signals as an encoding and decoding process, respectively, then the vibration signals can be processed by an autoencoder structure embedded with vibration analysis techniques. The DFT-IDFT autoencoder is shown in As shown in According to Note that the imaginary part of the DFT coefficients is updated by adjusting the weight matrix with constant imaginary unit. Therefore, the weight matrix between the imaginary input layer and the hidden layer can be simply expressed as: Furthermore, It can be observed in The connections between the real output layer and the final output layer, and between the imaginary output layer and the final output layer are kept constant as 1 Thus, DFT and IDFT coefficients of the input vibration signals can be learnt through unsupervised training. The constraints between 4 different weight sets expressed as To validate the DFT-IDFT autoencoder, a sample vibration signal with random noises was used to train the autoencoder and the denoised result was obtained at the final output layer. The sample signal was expressed as With the TSA embedded neural network, signal processing techniques based on TSA methods can be carried out in a neural network structure. Inspired by the successful applications of TSA based gear pitting diagnosis, Van Hecke et al. As shown in Here in Through the averaging layer, the spectral average can be obtained from the frequency magnitude of all segments. With the spectral average, the expression in time domain can be reconstructed through the pre-trained IDFT layer. Note that the weight sets in both DFT kernel and the IDFT kernel are obtained through unsupervised learning using the TSA embedded neural network. Finally, the TSR result in time domain from neural network can be expressed as: Furthermore, the supervised learning can be added in the TSA embedded neural network to reduce the influence of segment length selection. In the supervised learning procedure, the theoretic calculation results using the method by Van Hecke et al. The supervised learning procedure would force the neural network to learn a more generous solution to remove the noise with less influences of rotating speed. Therefore, signal segment length can be estimated without tachometer signals. To validate the effectiveness of the DFT-IDFT for computing the TSR and the denoised signals, the vibration signals acquired from the bearing test rig were used. Initially, the length of segment was determined according to the following equation: The comparison results in To diagnose the bearing faults using the reconstructed vibration signals, a classifier layer using softmax function is constructed right after the DFT-IDFT autoencoder. The output of the DFT-IDFT autoencoder as the reconstructed vibration signals is fed into the softmax classifier as the input, and the representative labels of bearing faults as the output. Therefore, the number of neurons in the softmax classifier is the same as the number of bearing faults. This section covers the experimental setup used to validate the hybrid deep signal processing approach for bearing fault diagnosis using vibration signals. Type 6205-2RS steel FAG ball bearings were used for the testing. Four bearing faults were simulated on the steel bearings: inner and outer race faults, rolling element fault, and cage fault. The inner and outer race faults were generated by scratching the steel race surfaces with a diamond tip grinding wheel bit to cover the ball contact surface. The scratches on both races were about 1/16 inch wide and 1/250 inch deep. The ball fault damage was created by cutting the steel cage in one of the ball locations and then using the diamond tip grinding wheel bit to create a small dent in one of the steel balls. The dent was about 20% of the ball volume. For the cage fault, the steel cage was cut in between two ball locations. The cut was about 50% of the ball diameter. For all seeded fault tests, the bearing seal and grease was removed and replaced following the creation of the fault. For vibration signals acquisition, VibraQuest Pro by SpectraQuest, Inc. was used to digitize the continuous vibration signals at a sampling rate of 102.4 kHz. Vibration signals for the healthy bearing and the seeded fault bearings were recorded during the tests at 4 shaft speeds: 15 Hz, 30 Hz, 45 Hz, and 60 Hz. No load was applied for the duration of the seeded fault tests. To validate the hybrid deep signal processing method for bearing fault diagnosis, vibration signals were acquired from the bearing test rig and used in different experiments. The tested bearings were operated at 4 different shaft rotating speeds and for each shaft speed, 400 samples were collected with a length of 10,000 for each sample. Therefore, the bearing dataset contains 8000 samples under 4 different shaft rotating speeds for 5 bearing conditions. Two different experiments were conducted. The deep structure used in the experiments was designed as: one input layer (10,000 neurons), one convolutional layer with the optimal segment length, one average pooling layer with optimal segment length, one DFT-IDFT layer, and one output layer (5 neurons). Note that layers including the convolutional layer, the average pooling layer, and the DFT-IDFT layer were built dynamically according to the vibration signals with adjustable size. Initially, the samples collected under the same shaft speed were used to carry the experiment. Then, experiments were carried on the samples under the mixed operation conditions. For both types of experiments, 20% of the samples were randomly selected to obtain the segment length by the convolutional kernel and train the DFT-IDFT autoencoder, the rest of samples were used for testing. Note that the fault classification accuracy of each experiment was averaged over 5 runs to reduce the effect of randomness. The computation was carried out with MATLAB 2015B on a PC: Intel Core i7-3770 CPU, 1T hard drive, 8 G memory. The fault classification results are presented in It can be observed from It can be observed that the computational time drops significantly when the segment length decreases. The testing accuracy for samples with speed of 30 Hz decreases mostly with the minimum segment length. Segment length has relatively less impact on the samples with the mixed shaft rotating speeds. The testing accuracies with theoretic segment length are slightly lower than those using the optimized segment length. However, the computational time increased significantly when using the theoretic segment length. Moreover, the tachometer signal is required for computing the theoretical segment length. In the proposed framework, segment length can be decided automatically without the tachometer signals. To further evaluate the adaptive learning capability of the hybrid deep signal processing method, the experiments with signals under different operation conditions for training and testing were also conducted. Since the network is constructed and applied on signals with different shaft speed, the optimal segment length of 3125 with mixed shaft speeds in The classification results displayed in As discussed previously, the features extracted by existing deep learning based approaches lack the meaningful connection to the characteristics of the vibration signals. Recall In addition, the inputs into the softmax layer for classification were investigated. By calculating the root mean square (RMS) of the reconstructed vibration signals from each sample, the boxplots of the RMS are grouped by shaft speed in As can be seen in Other popularly used deep learning methods on machinery fault diagnosis have been reported with good performance. These include deep neural network (DNN) Comparison results presented in To further investigate on the effectiveness of the vibration analysis as the hard constraint in the proposed framework, an experiment was conducted where the DFT-IDFT autoencoder was replaced with a basic autoencoder. The experiment results are provided in As shown in In this paper, a new hybrid deep signal processing method for bearing fault diagnosis using vibration signals was presented. The presented method embedded vibration analysis technique into a deep learning structure for effective and efficient automatic vibration signal processing, feature extraction, and bearing fault diagnosis. First, the vibration signal segmentation was determined through the convolutional kernel with adjustable filter size. Then, the DFT-IDFT autoencoder was trained with the segmented vibration signals. Next, the trained DFT-IDFT autoencoders were used to compute the spectral average of the vibration signals and reconstruct the vibration signals using the computed spectral average. Finally, the reconstructed vibration signals were fed into the softmax layer for bearing fault diagnosis. The hybrid deep signal processing method was validated with vibration signals collected from bearing seeded fault tests conducted in a bearing test rig. The validation results have shown that the hybrid method can diagnose the bearing faults using raw vibration signals through unsupervised learning with high accuracy. Also, the hybrid method can eliminate the impact of signal segmentation and operation conditions. Furthermore, the RMS and peak values extracted from the reconstructed vibration signals obtained by the hybrid method show the monotonic trend along with the increasing shaft speed. The behavior of such statistical features agrees with the results reported by Van Hecke et al. The integration of vibration analysis enables the deep learning structure to adaptively learn the time-frequency features from raw vibration signals regardless of the operation conditions. The weights obtained by the deep learning structure represent the time-frequency characteristics of the vibration signals and can be correlated with the bearing fault features. These weights can be used to reconstruct the vibration signals with the noises removed for effective bearing fault diagnosis. The structure of the deep learning can be determined according to the characteristics of the vibration signals rather than trial and error tests as typically adopted in the deep learning based fault diagnosis methods. With the capability of revealing time-frequency characteristics in raw vibration signals, the presented method can be expanded into more complicated deep structures by stacking the DFT-IDFT autoencoders. The stacked DFT-IDFT autoencoders for machine fault diagnosis and prognostics will be explored in the future research. None.