Multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal wells is a key technology for successful development of ultra-low permeability reservoir. The propagation of hydraulic fracture during multi-cluster fracturing is complicated, especially in shale reservoir with multiple natural fractures. The design and operation of multi-cluster fracturing requires adequate understanding of influence of different factors on hydraulic fracture propagation. Up to now, many scholars have studied the hydraulic fracture morphology in multi-cluster fracturing, but few have analyzed the effect of natural fractures on hydraulic fracture propagation during multi-cluster fracturing. In this paper, a new computationally version of the particle-based model is established by Xsite to study the fracture propagation in multi-cluster fracturing with natural fractures. The tensile strength and rock toughness are calculated, and tri-axial experiments are performed to verify the accuracy of model. Simulation results show that cluster spacing and in-situ stress difference have a significant influence on the length of the hydraulic fracture and the morphology of fracture. The length of middle fracture increases with the increase of the cluster spacing, but decreases with the increase of the in-situ stress difference during multi-cluster fracturing with three natural fractures. The enhancing of cluster spacing can reduce the deflection of left and right fractures, and the increase of the in-situ stress difference can improve the ability of middle fracturing penetrating the natural fracture. Three fracturing sequence of synchronous fracturing, two-step fracturing and sequential fracturing is simulated. The left and right fractures can always penetrate the natural fracture with different fracturing sequence. But the middle fracture shows different morphology of arresting by natural fracture (during synchronous fracturing), partially penetrating the natural fracture (during two-step fracturing) and directly penetrating the natural fracture (during sequential fracturing). Different cement strengths of natural fracture are analyzed. The increase of strength of natural fracture can enhance the ability of hydraulic fracture penetrating the natural fracture. Hydraulic fracture is arrested by weak natural fracture (shear strength of 0.5 MPa), resulting in natural fracture opening. As hydraulic fracture intersecting with strong natural fracture (shear strength of 20 MPa), the hydraulic fracture can penetrate the natural fracture directly without natural fracture opening.Unconventional reservoir such as shale oil and gas has been an important fossil energy sources with the depletion of conventional oil and gas resources. Because of the ultra-low permeability of unconventional reservoir, hydraulic fracturing is usually performed to increase the stimulated reservoir volume. The practice has proved that multi-cluster fracturing method in horizontal well is a key technology for successful development of ultra-low permeability reservoir Relevant studies has proved that the distribution of in-situ stress field in the original stratum is changed by multi-cluster hydraulic fractures, and the induced stress leads the hydraulic fractures to deviate from the direction of maximum principal stress, resulting in complex fracture morphology The stress interference will occur between different hydraulic fractures during multi-cluster fracturing. The mechanism of stress interference between fractures has been studied by many scholars Olson et al. Natural fractures are widely distributed in shale reservoir, and the existence of natural fractures will obviously affect hydraulic fracture propagation. So it is necessary and important to study the influence of the natural fractures on hydraulic fracture propagation during multi-cluster fracturing. Many scholars have studied the propagation pattern of hydraulic fracture intersecting with natural fracture by physical modeling and numerical modeling. It is generally believed that there are three conditions of the intersection between hydraulic fracture and single natural fracture: The hydraulic fracture intersects with the natural fracture, the natural fracture intercepts, and the hydraulic fracture deflects into the natural fracture. Zhao et al. In this paper, a new computationally particle based model is proposed based on the Lattice method by Xsite software to study the multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal wells with natural fractures. In this method, the rock matrix is regarded as a large amount of particles connected by springs. The macroscopic properties of rock matrix are defined by adjusting the micro-properties of stiffness and strength The position and contact force of the particle element determine the motion of the element. The motion of a single particle can be determined by the resultant force and moment acting on the particle. The linear equation of motion can be expressed as According to the speed at time of A lattice formulation is used for simulation of rock deformation and hydraulic fracturing. The lattice used in XSite is a quasi-random assembly of particle nodes contacted by nonlinear springs. The law of motion for translational degrees of freedom consists of the following central difference formulae for each code: The equation of rotation motion of particle element is written as The angular velocity The constitutive properties of materials are represented by different contact types between particles. The position of particle contact point can be calculated as following formula The contact force of two contact elements is expressed as Fluid flow model consists of fluid flow in the rock matrix and in the hydraulic fracture, and fluid can be exchanged between the rock matrix and the hydraulic fracture. The rock matrix flow uses the pore pressures stored in the springs of the matrix model, which considers the leak-off of fluid in hydraulic fracture into the surrounding rock matrix. The fluid flow in hydraulic fracture is established by the flow model geometry, which consists of a network of fluid nodes and pipes. The flow rate in rock matrix from particle A to particle B along the pipe can be written by formula The pressure increment with timestep of A criteria of stress intensity factor for fracture propagation based on J-integral is proposed. Considering the domain expression for local energy release rate at the fracture front point, in direction of unit vector For a spherical domain with radius of The stress intensity factor based on J-integral can be derived as: The criteria of stress intensity factor for fracture propagation based on J-integral can be expressed as: The process of fluid flow and mechanical change during hydraulic fracturing simulation are fully coupled in XSite. The deformation and damage evolution of the mechanical particles are calculated based on the change of fluid pressure and fluid flow rate. Conversely, the fluid pressure and fluid flow rate change in response to the deformation of the particles. In order to investigate the propagation morphology of hydraulic fracture during multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal well with natural fractures, we established a basic model with two natural fractures (shown in To verify the accuracy of the numerical simulation, the tensile strength and rock toughness were calculated by XSite, and the tested values were compared with the basic data ( A strain-controlled pull test is performed to test the fracture toughness of the numerical rock sample. The dimension of the cuboid numerical rock sample is 60 m × 60 m × 1 m (half-length of The maximum value of the force is 7MN, corresponding to a stress of The fracture toughness is calculated as 0.799 MPa·m A tensile testing simulation of rock sample is performed to test the tensile strength of numerical rock sample. The size of cuboid numerical rock sample is 0.025 mm × 0.025 m × 0.05 m, and the basic parameters of the rock sample are based on The recoded peak force is 2830 N at the point of rock failure, and the corresponded tensile strength of the rock sample is 4.528 MPa. The value of tensile strength calculated by the tensile testing simulation is close to tensile strength of 4.5 MPa in In order to affirm the accuracy of the Lattice method for numerical simulation of fracture intersection, tri-axial experiments are carried out with different approaching angle and in-situ horizontal stress difference. Many other scholars also studied the propagation morphology of hydraulic fracture intersecting with single natural fracture  Wang et al. Previous research has proved the existence of stress interference between different hydraulic fractures if the distance between each fracture is close, which can affect the propagation morphology of hydraulic fracture As shown in  From the above simulation, we can find that natural fracture has obvious influence on the middle fracture propagation during multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal well. Under small cluster spacing, the middle fracture is restricted to propagate due to the stress interference of left and right fractures. When the cluster spacing is large enough for middle fracture propagation, the middle fracture is arrested by the natural fracture once it propagates at the interface of natural fracture, which still restricts the middle fracture propagation. In order to analyze the influence of in-situ stress difference on multi-cluster fracturing with natural fractures, Different in-situ stress difference of 1 MPa, 3 MPa, 5 MPa and 7 MPa is investigated. The cluster spacing is 5 m, and hydraulic fracturing fluid is still injected from the three clusters synchronously. Simulation results are shown in  As shown in The simulation results prove that the in-situ stress difference has significant influence on the length and the propagating ability (penetrating the natural fracture) of middle fracture during multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal well. The length of middle fracture decreases with the increase of the in-situ stress difference. While the propagating ability of middle fracture increases with the increase of the in-situ stress difference. The above simulation is based on the fracturing fluid injected synchronously in three clusters, which is defined as synchronous fracturing. There are another two fracturing methods based on the injecting sequence of fracturing fluid from clusters: two-step fracturing and sequential fracturing. The two-step fracturing is defined as the fracturing fluid injected from the left cluster and right cluster at first, and then injected from the middle cluster. The sequential fracturing is defined as the fracturing fluid injected from the right cluster to the left cluster in turn. In order to investigate the influence of fracturing sequence on multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal well with natural fractures, three different fracturing sequence of synchronous fracturing, two-step fracturing and sequential fracturing are simulated. The cluster spacing is 5 m and the in-situ stress difference is 1 MPa in this part. The simulation results are shown in As shown in  The right fracture propagates parallel to the direction of the horizontal maximum principal stress during sequential fracturing, as shown in Natural fracture is usually filled with a certain amount of clay, forming different strength of natural fracture. In order to invest the influence of strength of natural fracture on hydraulic fracture propagation during multi-cluster fracturing, three cement strengths of natural fracture with different shear strength are defined as weak strength (0.5 MPa), medium strength (2 MPa) and strong strength (20 MPa). In this part, hydraulic fracturing is injected from tree clusters synchronously. The cluster spacing is 5 m and the in-situ stress difference is 1 MPa. The natural fracture with shear strength of 0.5 MPa (weak strength) is at Y = 2.5 m, and another fracture with shear strength of 2 MPa (medium strength) is at Y = −2.5 m (shown in  The natural fracture with shear strength of 2 MPa (medium strength) is at Y = 2.5 m, and another fracture with shear strength of 20 MPa (strong strength) is at Y = −2.5 m (shown in Two natural fractures with same shear strength of 20 MPa (strong strength) are at Y = 2.5 m and Y = −2.5 m separately. The simulation results shows that all the three hydraulic fractures penetrate the two natural fractures without natural fracture opening ( Compared with the result of weak natural fracture and medium natural fracture, it can be seen that the increase of strength of natural fracture can enhance the ability of hydraulic fracture penetrating the natural fracture. Hydraulic fractures can be arrested by weak natural fracture, resulting in natural fracture opening. As hydraulic fractures intersect with strong natural fracture, hydraulic fractures can penetrate the natural fracture directly, and increase the stimulated reservoir volume during multi-cluster fracturing in oilfield. In this paper, a new computationally particle based model is proposed based on the Lattice method by Xsite software to study the multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal wells with natural fractures. The tensile strength and rock toughness are calculated by XSite, and tri-axial experiments are performed to verify the accuracy of model. Some conclusions are proposed as follows: Cluster spacing and in-situ stress difference mainly affect the length of middle fracture during multi-cluster fracturing in horizontal wells with three natural fractures. The length of middle fracture increases with the raise of the cluster spacing, but declines with the raise of the in-situ stress difference. Besides, the enhancing of cluster spacing can reduce the deflection of left and right fractures, which is beneficial to reduce the stress interference. The increase of the in-situ stress difference can improve the ability of middle fracturing penetrating the natural fracture. Different fracturing sequence of synchronous fracturing, two-step fracturing and sequential fracturing is simulated. The left and right fractures can always penetrate the natural fracture with different fracturing sequence. But the middle fracture shows different morphology of arresting by natural fracture (during synchronous fracturing), partially penetrating the natural fracture with natural fracture partial opening (during two-step fracturing) and directly penetrating the natural fracture without natural fracture opening (during sequential fracturing). Different cement strengths of natural fracture with shear strength of 0.5 MPa (weak strength), 2 MPa (medium strength) and 20 MPa (strong strength) is investigated. The increase of strength of natural fracture can enhance the ability of hydraulic fracture penetrating the natural fracture. Hydraulic fractures are arrested by weak natural fracture, resulting in natural fracture opening. As hydraulic fractures intersecting with strong natural fracture, hydraulic fractures can penetrate the natural fracture directly without natural fracture opening. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the We have no conflict of interest. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: