Valuable non-ferrous (NFe) metals are contained in municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) bottom ash (BA). The applicability of an air table for separating NFe metal-abundant particles in MSWI BA (<8 mm) was studied. A stepwise separation procedure was developed based on the performance tests of the air table conducted by changing three variables (air injection, vibration, and end slope). As a result of the stepwise separation, six bulk density ranges (<0.7 to >1.1 g/cm3 at intervals of 0.1 g/cm3) were prepared from non-magnetic fractions with four size ranges (4–8, 2–4, 1–2, and 0.5–1 mm). The effectiveness of air table sorting was evaluated based on dry particle density and proportion of metals. NFe metals were obtained by sieving (>0.5 mm) after a ball mill process, confirming that NFe metals accounted for 3.2% of the < 8 mm MSWI BA. The highest particle density of each size fraction and the proportion of NFe metals in the fractions were 3.19 g/cm3 and 59.9% (4–8 mm), 2.97 g/cm3 and 28.8% (2–4 mm), 2.78 g/cm3 and 10.4% (1–2 mm), and 2.87 g/cm3 and 4.4% (0.5–1 mm). In the 0.5–2 mm particles, the highest density fraction contained 68.7% of the NFe metals, which were expected to be recovered by applying an air table separator to MSWI BA 0.5–2 mm.Municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) has become increasingly important in terms of waste treatment as well as energy recovery from MSW and resource recovery from bottom ash (BA) ( Small particles (<2 mm) are expected to contain considerable amounts of NFe metals, including precious metals such as Au and Ag, originating from electronic devices ( Several dry separation technologies have been applied to achieve a consistent quality of the materials, such as air separation for recycling of cathode ray tubes ( An air table can be applied to collect metal-abundant particles of a size that are difficult to handle by existing MSWI BA separation processes. Few studies have reported the applicability of an air table to sort MSWI BA. The determination of metallic components is another important subject to determine metal-abundant particles. Previous studies have reported the presence of metals during the sample preparation steps of MSWI BA ( The current study highlighted the interactive effects of the variables of the air table separator on MSWI BA particle behavior. The four size ranges of the BA particles (4–8, 2–4, 1–2, and 0.5–1 mm) were sorted into six density ranges by applying an air table after magnetic separation. The dry particle density of each fraction was examined to verify the accuracy of air table sorting and identify the original physical characteristics. Wet methods for density measurement by liquids are not appropriate due to the dissolution of soluble substances; thus, dry particle density was measured by gas pycnometry. The proportion of metals in each fraction was measured via milling to determine the metal-abundant fractions. Understanding of the effects of the variables of air table separator and its applicability to metal-abundant high-density particle separation can complement existing metal recycling processes. The BA used for this study was collected from a stoker-type MSWI plant in Japan. The sample was collected from various parts of a storage pit of the dry MSWI BA discharge system to identify the characteristics of BA excluding the influence of water. Approximately 150 kg of MSWI BA was collected from the storage pit. The sample was mixed and large pieces, mainly metal scraps > 8 mm, were removed manually. After that, approximately 40 kg of the sample, as the reference sample, was divided and kept in an airtight container to bring the laboratory. The reference sample was further divided by a splitter (Riffelteiler, Retsch). The splitting process was repeated until approximately 500 g of sample was collected; several samples were subjected to a sieving process. Five size fractions (4–8 mm, 2–4 mm, 1–2 mm, 0.5–1 mm, and <0.5 mm) were prepared after a sieving step. Subsequently, the four size groups, excluding <0.5 mm, were subjected to magnetic separation. A magnet with 1500 gauss field strength was applied to the separate the magnetic fraction (BA_M). The non-magnetic fraction of the four size ranges of MSWI BA, hereinafter referred to as BA_NM, were used for air table separation. An air table is an effective method for sorting mixtures by density ( An air table separator with a width of 46 cm, length of 36 cm, and height of 47 cm (J.TEC Ltd.) was used in the present study. The area of the porous deck was 446 cm The representative sample with a wide density range was prepared to evaluate the effects of the air table variables. The entire quantity of BA_NM of each size range was introduced to the air table with the following conditions: 2.9 m/s air injection, 7 Hz vibration, 11° end slope for BA_NM 4–8 and 2–4 mm; 2.3 m/s air injection, 7 Hz vibration, 11° end slope for BA_NM 1–2 mm; and 1.8 m/s air injection, 7 Hz vibration, 6° end slope for BA_NM 0.5–1 mm. In each size range, approximately 50 g of particles from the four outlets of the air table was collected, and 200 g of the representative sample were prepared as the input sample for the performance test. The performance tests were conducted according to the conditions listed in The outlet of the air table was separated into two parts for the stepwise separation: light and intermediate 1 were combined into the lighter part, while intermediate 2 and heavy were combined into the heavier part. The BA_NM particles of each size range were sorted into six density ranges from < 0.7 to > 1.1 g/cm The operating conditions of the stepwise separation were developed based on the performance test results. The initial operation of the stepwise separation was set to a relatively moderate condition, which could prevent scattering of particles due to extreme operating conditions. For the first step, BA_NM with particles heavier and lighter than 0.9 g/cm The bulk density of BA_NM was measured using a measuring cylinder and an electronic balance scale. After pouring the BA_NM into the measuring cylinder, the cylinder was flipped upside down and returned to its original position with the inlet closed by a polyvinyl bag. Subsequently, the cylinder was gently shaken five times. Afterwards, the volume of BA_NM was measured. The value of bulk density could be changed by measuring methods or operators; hence, the dry particle density was measured to present an original index. The dry particle density was measured by gas pycnometry (AccuPyc ⅠⅠ 1340, micromeritics) to exclude the effects of liquid; soluble substances could be dissolved by liquid used to measure the sample volume. The weight of a certain amount of sample from each fraction was measured using an electronic balance scale. Then, the volume of the sample was measured using a nondestructive technique as the gas displacement method. The inert gas, helium, was used as the displacement medium for the measurement of the volume of the sample. The density of each fraction was calculated from the measured weight and volume using Eq. After the density measurement, the prepared twenty-four BA_NM fractions were mechanically pulverized using a ball mill (8000 M mixer/mill, Spex Certiprep). For BA_M, the sample was mixed according to the proportion in each size range, and then the milling step was applied. The vessel containing approximately 20 g of sample and two balls was shaken for 30 min; the ball was 11.2 mm in diameter and the vessel (4.1 cm internal diameter and 3.8 cm height) was made of tungsten. Rotational movement of a ball mill generates centrifugal and acting acceleration forces, leading to impaction and friction. This results in a comminution effect between the balls and the sample ( After milling, the coarse components were separated by a sieve opening of 0.5 mm. The coarse components were in an apparent metallic form, and gloss was observed after washing with ethanol. Hence, the coarse components > 0.5 mm after the milling process were classified as metal: Fe metals from BA_M and NFe metals from BA_NM. The weight of the metals and the pulverized part were measured, and the proportion of the metals was calculated by weight percent. The proportion of BA_NM was decreased as the particle size decreased. Before magnetic separation, the distribution of each size range was 21% (4–8 mm), 28% (2–4 mm), 22% (1–2 mm), 14% (0.5–1 mm), and 15% (<0.5 mm) ( In all particle size ranges, stronger vibration intensity, high air injection rate and end slope were effective in collecting higher density particles. However, the extent of the effect was different depending on the particle size. The effect of air injection on particles in the ranges 4–8 and 2–4 mm was relatively less than that of the end slope and vibration within the operating range of the present study. There was a limit to transporting the 2–8 mm particles solely by the air injection. However, the effect of the end slope could complement the transportation of large particles to the light part. The changes in the end slope significantly affected the changes in the proportion of the 4–8 and 2–4 mm particles sorted into each outlet ( Air injection was found to have a greater effect on particles < 2 mm. Proper adjustment of the air injection rate is recommended under moderate end slope and vibration conditions, as steep slope and high vibration intensity resulted in particles transferring to one side. The change in the movement of the 1–2 mm particles was clearer than that of the larger particles under the same operating conditions ( The particles 0.5–1 mm reacted more sharply to changes in the air injection rate because the particle diameter affects the superficial velocity of air at the minimum fluidization velocity and the terminal velocity ( The stepwise separation procedure enabled accurate sorting of particles according to the target density. For the separation of the highest density particles (>1.1 g/cm The reason for combining the heavy and intermediate 2 parts, and the intermediate 1 and light parts in the stepwise separation procedure was based on reproducibility identified in the performance tests. The same parameters, which were applied to prepare the representative sample, should result in particles distributed in one quarter at each outlet. According to the results of the performance tests, the same parameters divided the particles into approximately half; the proportion of the heavier (heavy and intermediate 2) and lighter (intermediate 1 and light) parts was 44% and 56% for BA_NM 4–8 mm, 50% and 50% for BA_NM 2–4 mm, 57% and 43% for BA_NM 1–2 mm, and 46% and 54% for 0.5–1 mm. Particle distribution by density showed a different tendency between the 2–8 and 0.5–2 mm particles. The proportion of particles with a bulk density > 1.0 g/cm BA_NM with bulk density > 1.1 g/cm A correlation between particle density and bulk density is suggestive of porous materials ( The application of an air table separator could be an effective approach to concentrate the NFe metal-abundant fractions of MSWI BA. The 0.5–2 mm particles were found to have less fluctuation in the metal proportion by density, thus a high separation efficiency of the metal-abundant fraction was expected compared to 2–8 mm particles (c.f. This study provides evidence for the applicability of an air table separator to enhance the performance of the NFe metal recovery process. The effect of air table variables on various size ranges of BA_NM was identified. Stepwise separation was effective in collecting NFe metal-abundant particles. The air table could be utilized for a pre-concentration process of NFe metal-abundant particles in the size range of 0.5–2 mm. As the particle size decreased, the effect of changes in variables on the behavior of particles increased. The application of extreme conditions immediately resulted in scattered particles; thus, stepwise separation by an air table separator was developed to increase the accuracy of sorting. The NFe metal-abundant high-density particles were obtained by three steps of separation. Air table sorting was more effective for accurate sorting of particles in the size range of 0.5–2 mm. In BA_NM 0.5–2 mm, 68.7% of NFe metals were present in the highest density fraction, which could be recovered by applying an air table separator. Based on this result, particles of a size that are difficult to handle in a conventional process were expected to be treated by an air table separator. Therefore, connecting an air table separator to existing technologies could improve the metal recycling process. To fully characterize MSWI BA depending on density, further studies are required to evaluate the elemental composition of high-density particle to identify the amount of recoverable precious elements and removable toxic elements. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study is supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: