The feasibility of recovering phosphate from Algerian industrial wastewater was evaluated by a combination of membrane processes: nanofiltration, diananofiltration and Donnan dialysis. First, the separation of phosphate from a synthetic target effluent with an ionic composition resembling that of the industrial one was tested by nanofiltration using three commercial flat sheet membranes NF270, NF90 (Dow Filmtec) and Desal 5-DK (GE Osmonics) investigating the effect of the effluent pH. The results obtained show that the NF270 membrane assures the highest transport and recovery of phosphate. Afterwards, a diananofiltration process was developed with the optimal process parameters identified. A complete recovery of phosphate was achieved with one additional step of diananofiltration. Finally, Donnan dialysis was also investigated for further purification and preconcentration of phosphate from the permeates previously obtained. The performance of four anion exchange membranes with distinct properties: Neosepta AXE01, Neosepta ACS, Ralex AMH-PES and PC200D was investigated and compared, using chloride as a “driving” counterion in a KCl containing receiver solution. It was found that the AXE01 membrane gives the highest transport and phosphate recovery, achieving a 6-fold increase of the phosphate concentration in the receiver solution, in just one Donnan dialysis step.Natural resources, especially mines containing reserves of phosphorus are becoming extremely rare, due to the increasing consumption of phosphorous species Since phosphorus is an essential chemical element indispensable for the living world, its recovery from wastewaters is essential for preserving and managing the reserves of phosphorus mines, which are more and more exhausted, thus leading to increasing phosphorus costs on the market Various methods have been investigated and applied so far, for phosphate recovery and pre-concentration from water streams, such as chemical precipitation Nanofiltration is a reliable and a comparatively (with respect to reverse osmosis) low energy consumption process, providing reasonably high water fluxes at relatively low operating pressures while assuring high salt and organic matter rejections Donnan dialysis is a membrane separation process based on the Donnan equilibrium principle In this work, three complementary membrane-based processes, namely Nanofiltration (NF), Diafiltration (DF) and Donnan dialysis (DD) were investigated with the aim of recover and preconcentrate phosphate from Algerian industrial wastewater. To achieve this purpose, three NF membranes: NF270, NF90 and Desal 5-DK were compared for the separation of phosphate under various experimental conditions (pH, nature of the membrane). A diananofiltration process was used afterwards under optimal conditions in order to achieve a complete phosphate separation. Finally, for preconcentration of the phosphate contained in the permeates, the performance of four anion-exchange membranes, with intentionally selected distinct properties, namely Ralex AEM(H)-PES, PC200D, Neosepta AXE01 and Neosepta ACS, were evaluated under Donnan dialysis operating conditions. The composition of the effluent resembled in this experimental study was provided by an Algerian industrial company. The composition of the effluent (with a natural pH of 10.9) is presented in A synthetic solution with the same composition as the industrial effluent as shown in The nanofiltration experiments were carried out in a stainless steel Metcell (Membrane Extraction Technology, LTD, UK), with a cylindrical form, with an effective membrane area of 51.4 cm Three commercial membranes were tested, namely NF90 and NF270 supplied by Filmtec Dow and DESAL 5-DK obtained from GE Osmonics. The characteristics of each membrane based on manufacturers’ information and data reported in Before use, all membranes were compacted with distilled water at a pressure of up to 40 bar until providing a constant water permeability. Then, the cell was filled with 200 ml of a synthetic effluent solution and pressurized at 20 bar. At regular intervals permeate samples were taken. At the end of each experiment, the concentrate was recovered for diananofiltration experiments and the samples were stored for further analysis. Dianafiltration was performed in a “Metcell” with a stirring of 200 rpm at an operating pressure of 20 bar. 200 ml of feed solution was loaded into the cell and a vessel connected to the cell through a dosing pump was loaded with 600 ml of distilled water. During the experiment, the pump rate was adjusted in a way allowing to transfer a controlled volume from the diafiltration buffer vessel to the cell in order to keep the volume inside the cell constant. The experiment was terminated when 780g of permeate were collected, which corresponded to three diafiltration volumes. At predefined time intervals in each diafiltration stage, samples were taken from the permeate side and, at the end of the experiment, the concentrate was collected for analysis. The schematic procedure of diananofiltration is presented in The concentration values in the permeate The Volumetric fluxes through the membrane: Jp (L/(m The volume concentration factor (VCF) was calculated as: The osmotic pressure π was estimated using the Van’t Hoff equation. The osmotic pressure difference across the membrane (assuming no significant concentration polarization effects) is given by: The osmotic pressure difference and the operating pressure were used to calculate the trans-membrane pressure TMP as: The experiments were performed in a dialysis cell made of Plexiglas and composed of two compartments with a circular central window, where a flat sheet piece of the membrane under study, with an exposed area A = 11.3 cm The two compartments were equipped with stirring devices. The membrane was fixed between the two half-cells (compartments) of the apparatus and a volume of 136 ml of each feed solution (permeate from an NF experiment) and a receiver solution of KCl were introduced in the respective compartments of the cell with the stirring rates set to 350 rpm. At predefined time intervals, samples of 3 ml were taken from the feed and receiver compartments to measured pH and conductivity and for analyses of the chemical composition. The performance of four commercial anion exchange membranes was investigated and compared: Neosepta AXE01 and ACS, manufactured by Tokuyama Soda (Japan). The ACS membrane, is a monovalent anion perm-selective and the AXE01 a membrane is suitable for transport of anions with a molecular mass of up to 300 Da; Ralex AMH-PES, which is a heterogeneous membrane produced by Mega a.s (Czech Republic); and PC200D a homogenous membrane produced by PCA-polymerchemie Altmeier GmbH (Germany), appropriate for transport of anions with a molecular mass of up to about 200 Da The degree of phosphate recovery in the receiver solution was determined through the following equation The concentrations of elements in all samples were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry. The ICP-AES apparatus (Ultima model, Horiba Jobin-Yvon, France) was equipped with a radio-frequency (RF) generator of 40.68 MHz, a Czerny-Turner type monochromator with 1.00 m (sequential), and hydride generator with a concomitant metals analyzer (CMA), AS500 auto-sampler and data acquisition software. The concentrations of phosphate and ammonium ions were analyzed with a Segmented Flow Analyzer (Skalar). The Type of instrument used was The San The volumetric effluent fluxes and the trans-membrane pressure in all experiments were measures and are represented versus the respective factor of concentration at different feed pH (the initial pH without adjustment was equal to 10.9 and pH = 8.12 was also chosen as a second experimental value) at an operating pressure, of 20 bar, for all investigated NF membranes in As it can be observed, the NF270 membrane shows the highest permeate volumetric flux with 27.5 and 29.9 L/m Operation at a lower pH affects the volumetric fluxes, leading to an increment of the permeate flux for all membranes tested. This behaviour could be attributed to a reinforced negative zeta potential of the membrane surfaces, which induces a stronger electrostatic interaction between dissociated functional groups of the membrane material, resulting in pores constriction, leading to decreased permeate fluxes, as demonstrated by López-Muñoz and al For all tested membranes, at the two different pHs, the transmembrane pressure (TMP) values remained almost constant with the increase in the concentration factor, which is an indication of the negligible contribution of osmotic pressure to the TMP during the experiments. The dominant species of phosphate in the feed solution at pH 10.9 and 8.12 is HPO The results obtained for the apparent recovery coefficients are represented in As it can be seen in As it can be observed, at pH 10.9, the recovery coefficients for all tested membranes are lower than those at pH 8.12. The increase in pH leads to conversion of all di-hydrogen phosphate into mono-hydrogen phosphate and a small part of the mono-hydrogen phosphate into the triply negatively charged PO The Diananofiltration experiments were carried out comparing the performance of the three NF membranes at pH = 8.12. The volumetric flux data obtained are presented in The results for the recovery coefficients obtained during the diananofiltration experiments are presented in The results obtained demonstrate that it is possible to obtain a complete recovery of phosphate and its total separation from the metals present using the NF270 membrane at a feed solution pH equal to around 8. As a final step, the feasibility of applying Donnan dialysis for further phosphate purification and enrichment was studied comparing four anion exchange membranes, namely Neosepta AXE 01, PC 200D, Neosepta ACS and Ralex AMH-PES, using as a feed solution the total volume of permeate obtained in the diananofiltration stage. The experiments were carried out using chloride as a “driving” counter-ion, added to a receiver phase composed of 0.1M KCl. The phosphate concentration–time profiles obtained for the feed and receiver phases are presented in The ACS membrane exhibited the slowest phosphate transport with an efficiency of 52% after 120 h of operation, due to its dense polymeric structure, which blocks the transport of larger divalent anions as mentioned and demonstrated in the literature Preconcentration of phosphate is highly desirable in order to facilitate its further isolation and recovery. For this purpose, Donnan dialysis was tested using the AXE01 and Ralex AMH-PES membranes using chloride as a “driving” counterion provided by 0.1M KCl solution in the receiver compartment (the feed to receiver compartment volume ratio was set to 8.35). The data obtained are presented in As it can be observed the transport of phosphate from the feed to the receiver compartments was complete with increasing concentration of phosphate in the receiver side until reaching a plateau level, where the concentration becomes constant. The phosphate concentration increased six times compared to the initial concentration after 6 days and five times after 7 days for the AXE01 and Ralex membranes, respectively. Higher concentrations can be achieved by applying subsequent Donnan dialysis steps and/or further increasing the volume ratio between the feed and receiving solution. Despite its relatively slow kinetics (due to the absence of external pressure and/or electrical potential driving force) The results obtained in the present study demonstrate that a complementary membrane-based process treatment: based on Nanofiltration, Diananofiltration and Donnan dialysis concepts can be successfully applied for the separation and preconcentration of phosphate from Algerian industrial wastewater. The major outcomes of the study of each process step can be summarized as follows: The NF270 membrane gives the highest permeate flux of 27.5 L/m At pH = 8.12 the NF270 membrane shows the highest (90%) recovery of phosphate in the permeate phase. Diananofiltration can be successfully used to achieve a total recovery of phosphate. Neosepta ACS membrane is not recommendable because of the slow transport of phosphate. Neosepta AXE01 provides the fastest transport of phosphate and its complete recovery in the receiver. Preconcentration of phosphate through Donnan dialysis is a feasible option facilitating its further recovery. It is thus concluded that this complementary membrane-assisted process treatment could be an alternative option for treating phosphate-containing wastewaters, after optimization of the operational parameters values and performing a dedicated techno-economical analysis for a defined case. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the