The extraction of copper from a chalcopyrite concentrate by hydrogen peroxide in sulphuric acid solutions was studied. The influence of various parameters was investigated in order to elucidate the kinetics of chalcopyrite dissolution. It was determined that stirring speed had no effect on the rate of chalcopyrite dissolution, which suggested that reaction was not controlled by liquid-phase diffusion. Dissolution curves were found to conform to the surface reaction controlled shrinking core model, i.e., 1−(1−X)1/3=k
                     s
                     t. Both the magnitude of the activation energy of 60 kJ/mol and the linear relationship between the rate constant and the inverse particle radius support the fact that dissolution is controlled by the surface reaction. Hydrogen peroxide had great influence on the rate of chalcopyrite dissolution; a reaction order of unity was calculated with respect to the concentration of this oxidant. Sulphuric acid also had influence on chalcopyrite dissolution, with a reaction order of 0.3 with respect to the acid concentration being established.Chalcopyrite, CuFeS In this paper, the dissolution, i.e., oxidation of chalcopyrite was done with hydrogen peroxide in acid sulphate solutions. The purpose was to study the kinetics of chalcopyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen peroxide was chosen because it is a strong oxidant and the reaction kinetics should be accelerated as chalcopyrite is the most refractory of the copper sulphides. In addition, hydrogen peroxide is an environmentally safe reagent as, apart from water no other reaction products are generated during oxidation of sulphide minerals. This fact along with high redox potential have caused hydrogen peroxide to be studied as an oxidizing agent for the dissolution of various mineral raw materials such as oxide uraniferous ores By means of electrochemical studies, hydrogen peroxide was found to be produced as an intermediate during oxygen reduction. This fact points to the possibility of the existence of some analogies between chalcopyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide and its oxidation by molecular oxygen. Since chalcopyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide in aqueous solutions is rather slow and yet very important in the leaching of sulphide ores as well as in their grinding and flotation, it would be of interest to ascertain this analogy, provided that chalcopyrite dissolution by hydrogen peroxide is fast enough. This paper addresses this problem. A chalcopyrite sample obtained by refloating chalcopyrite concentrate from the Veliki Krivelj copper mine (Bor, Yugoslavia) was used during this study. The sample obtained assayed 34.33% Cu, 30.83% Fe and 34.19% S. X-ray diffraction analysis revealed only peaks for chalcopyrite. The sample was sieved into three size fractions (0.040–0.050, 0.050–0.063 and 0.063–0.080 mm). The experiments were carried out with the 0.050–0.063 mm fraction unless otherwise stated. The solution was investigated in a 500 mL glass reactor equipped with a glass stirrer. The reactor was filled with 250 mL of peroxide solution, which was heated to the desired temperature. When the desired temperature was attained, a charge of 0.500 g of chalcopyrite was added to the peroxide solution, stirring was started, and the temperature of the reaction mixture was then maintained constant. The fraction of chalcopyrite was followed over time; at definite time intervals, six samples of 1 mL each were taken for the determination of copper by AAS. The reaction residues after oxidation were washed with distilled water, dried and examined by X-ray diffraction analysis. In order to examine the effect of stirring speed on the rate of chalcopyrite oxidation, experiments were carried out at various stirring speeds (without stirring, 300, 600 and 900 min The data in Different results were obtained during pyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide in sulphuric acid. That is, it was observed that stirring had a negative influence on the oxidation of pyrite and a conclusion was drawn that this influence is not caused by peroxide decomposition at higher stirring speeds but probably by better contact between pyrite particles and peroxide in the absence of stirring The experiments were carried out in the 298–323 K temperature range in solutions containing 2.0 M H The dissolution curves in The magnitude of the activation energy of 60 kJ/mol supports the proposed surface reaction shrinking core model. Similar values of activation energy were found for the chalcopyrite oxidation by ferric ions. Thus the magnitude of the activation energy for chalcopyrite oxidation by ferric chloride is between 40 and 60 kJ/mol, whereas its value is somewhat higher where ferric sulphate was used as an oxidant and is around 60–80 kJ/mol When chalcopyrite oxidation is compared with pyrite oxidation studied in hydrogen peroxide and sulphuric acid solutions The experiments were carried out with three particle sizes (0.040–0.050, 0.050–0.063 and 0.063–0.080 mm) at 313 K in solutions containing 2.0 M H Linear dependence of the rate constant on the inverse particle radius is another fact in favour of the proposed surface reaction shrinking core model. The experiments were carried out by varying the initial H The oxidation curves were linearized by means of Incidentally, a first-order reaction with respect to hydrogen peroxide concentration was found also for pyrite oxidation by this oxidant in sulphuric acid solutions XRD analysis of the solid residue, after chalcopyrite oxidation in a solution containing 0.5 M H This implies that, in addition to the dominant leaching reaction: Similar results were found for pyrite dissolution by hydrogen peroxide in perchloric acid, where 3% of the sulphide sulphur was oxidized to the elemental form and the remainder to the sulphate ion The experiments were carried out in solutions containing different initial H However, at very high acid concentrations (3–5 M), this effect is not observed any longer, i.e., approximately similar fractions of chalcopyrite reacted are obtained. Furthermore, at the lowest concentration investigated (0.1 M), the curve obtained shows some deviation from the other curves. The fractions reacted in the first 60 min are somewhat higher, and a plateau is reached after 90 min that corresponds to the end of reaction. Perhaps the reaction is at the beginning more intense because of a lower concentration of sulphuric acid that is the stabilizer of hydrogen peroxide decomposition After linearizing the oxidation curves and calculating rate constants, a reaction order of 0.3 with respect to sulphuric acid concentration (between 0.5 and 3 M H During the study of the effect of sulphuric acid concentration on pyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide a negative reaction order was found to be −0.36 with respect to the acid concentration. This is the only essential difference between chalcopyrite oxidation and pyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide in sulphuric acid solutions as regards to the effects examined in this paper. On the basis of the results of this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The rate of chalcopyrite oxidation by hydrogen peroxide in sulphuric acid is independent of stirring speed, which indicates that the reaction is not controlled by diffusion in the liquid phase. The oxidation kinetics follows a shrinking core model with the surface chemical reaction as the rate-controlling step. Both the value of the activation energy of 60 kJ/mol and the linear relationship between the rate constant and the reciprocal of the particle radius confirm the postulated reaction model. Increasing the hydrogen peroxide concentration accelerates considerably chalcopyrite oxidation. The oxidation rate is first order with respect to hydrogen peroxide concentration. Increasing the sulphuric acid concentration accelerates chalcopyrite oxidation. The reaction order with respect to sulphuric acid concentration is 0.3. The authors wish to thank the Scientific Fund of the Republic of Serbia for financial support (Project No. 1622).