Purpose
                  To determine trends in arthroscopic-assisted tibial plateau fracture fixation (AATPFF), to evaluate trends in the overall rate of tibial plateau fracture fixation, and to compare postoperative complications between AATPFF and traditional tibial plateau fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review of patients undergoing AATPFF and traditional tibial plateau fixation was conducted using the Humana Inc. administrative database from 2007 to 2016. A 1:1 propensity match was utilized to match patients in the 2 study groups based on age, sex, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, depression or anxiety, and smoking history. Postoperative complications were grouped as minor medical complications, major medical complications, surgical complications, emergency department visits, and reoperation. Linear regression analysis was used to assess trends and Pearson’s χ2 test was used to compare postoperative complications with statistical significance defined as P < .05.
               
                  Results
                  In total, 522 patients underwent AATPFF and 3920 patients underwent traditional tibial plateau fracture fixation. There was a 4-fold increase in the use of AATPFF over the study period (P = .0173). Similarly, there was an increase in the utilization of traditional tibial plateau fracture fixation, although to a lesser extent (1.33-fold). After propensity matching, the traditional fixation group demonstrated significantly higher rates of minor medical complications (8.2% vs 2.7%, P = .0002), major medical complications (9.9% vs 4.6%, P = .0018), surgical complications (13.2% vs 2.7%, P < .0001), and emergency department visits (21.4% vs 13.5%, P < .0001) within 90 days of surgery compared with the AATPFF group. There was no difference in reoperation rates within 90 days between the 2 groups (2.9% vs 3.6%, P = .85).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The incidence of tibial plateau fracture fixation is increasing, however, use of AATPFF is increasing at a faster rate compared to traditional techniques. Furthermore, the addition of knee arthroscopy to fracture fixation does not increase the risk of complication, reoperation, or emergency department visit within 90 days.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  III, retrospective matched cohort.Tibial plateau fractures are estimated to represent approximately 1% of all fractures and typically occur in older patients with osteoporotic bone or young patients involved in high-energy trauma. Knee arthroscopy is a minimally invasive technique that allows direct visualization of the articular surface during fracture reduction. Currently, the complication rate of AATPFF is poorly understood. In addition, arthroscopy is not frequently performed by orthopaedic traumatologists, and the rate of use of concomitant knee arthroscopy in the treatment of tibial plateau fractures is unknown. The purposes of the current study were to determine trends in AATPFF, to evaluate trends in the overall rate of tibial plateau fracture fixation, and to compare postoperative complications between AATPFF and traditional tibial plateau fixation techniques. The current study was deemed to be exempt from institutional review board approval. The PearlDiver research tool (PearlDiver Technologies, Colorado Springs, CO) is a research source that queries available patients in the Humana administrative claims database (Humana, Louisville, JY). This customizable tool can access deidentified information from more than 20 million patients who are insured privately or through Medicare. Patient information, including demographic characteristics, operative procedures performed, comorbidities, and complications, can be obtained using Patients undergoing AATPFF and open tibial plateau fracture fixation from the years 2007 to 2016 were identified in the Humana database (HOrtho) using CPT codes. The following CPT codes were used to identify the traditional open tibial plateau group: 27535 and 27536 (open treatment of tibial fracture, proximal [plateau]). CPT codes 29855 and 29856 (arthroscopically aided treatment of tibial fracture, proximal [plateau]) were used to identify the AATPFF group. The annual incidence of open and arthroscopic-assisted tibial plateau fracture procedures was recorded. Patient demographics, comorbidities, and 90-day postoperative complications were queried using relevant A 1:1 propensity match was used in an effort to minimize confounding by matching patients in the 2 study groups based on age, sex, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, major depressive disorder or generalized anxiety disorder, and smoking history. Postoperative complications were grouped as minor medical complications (pneumonia, urinary tract infection, and blood transfusion), major medical complications (sepsis, septic shock, venous thromboembolism, and myocardial infarction), surgical complications (superficial surgical site infection, deep surgical-site infection, wound dehiscence, and postoperative peripheral nerve palsy), emergency department visits, and reoperation. Linear regression analysis was used to assess trends and Pearson’s χ During the study period, a total of 522 patients and 3920 patients underwent AATPFF and traditional tibial plateau fixation, respectively. There was a significant increase AATPFF use over time ( After propensity matching, 952 patients were included in the study for further analysis. There were 476 patients in the AATPFF cohort and 476 patients in the traditional fixation cohort. As a result of the propensity matching, all examined patient demographics and comorbidities did not differ between the AATPFF and traditional tibial plateau fixation cohorts ( There was a significantly greater incidence of minor medical complications (8.2% vs 2.7%, A multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed to determine independent risk factors associated with reoperation rate within 90 days after index tibial plateau fixation. In this multivariable model, diabetes mellitus (odds ratio 6.4; 95% confidence interval 1.21-45.1; Between 2006 and 2017, the use of AATPFF methods increased at a significantly faster rate than the traditional method of open reduction and internal fixation. Regardless of treatment strategy, the incidence of tibial plateau fracture fixation increased over the study period. Furthermore, the addition of knee arthroscopy to tibial plateau open reduction and internal fixation did not increase the risk of medical complications, surgical complications, postoperative emergency department visits, or reoperation. The etiology of the increased fixation of tibial plateau fractures is likely multifactorial; however, we speculate that 2 explanations remain likely. First, there has been an increase in the incidence of tibial plateau fractures over time. Tibial plateau fractures account for approximately 1% of all fractures and 8% of fractures in the elderly population. While the incidence of tibial plateau fracture fixation is increasing, the use of knee arthroscopy as a reduction tool is increasing at a faster rate compared with traditional techniques. Unlike sports medicine–trained orthopaedic surgeons, knee arthroscopy is not a technique frequently used by orthopaedic traumatologists. Our study failed to demonstrate an increased risk of postoperative medical complications with AATPFF compared with traditional open reduction and internal fixation. In fact, the traditional fixation group demonstrated greater rates of postoperative complications compared with the AATPFF cohort, which is almost certainly secondary to our inability to control for fracture pattern, severity, or associated soft-tissue injury. In a study of 519 tibial plateau fractures, Basques et al. Similar to postoperative medical complications, the addition of knee arthroscopy to tibial plateau fracture fixation did not increase the risk of surgical complications. High-energy injury mechanisms often lead to a traumatized and compromised soft-tissue envelope, which places these patients at a high risk of infection following surgery. Bachoura et al. In addition, we found no difference in rates of reoperation within 90 days between AATPFF and traditional methods. On multivariate analysis, diabetes was the only identified risk factor for reoperation. Age, sex, and other preoperative comorbidities were not associated with increased reoperation rates after tibial plateau fracture fixation. Diabetes was previously identified in another large database study of tibial plateau fractures to be a risk factor for readmission, however reoperation was not examined in the mentioned study. Limitations of the current study include those inherent to its retrospective study design and use of a large administrative claims database. Such studies rely on accurate billing and coding as well as correctly reported patient demographic information. Furthermore, detailed radiographic, clinical, and fracture specific factors such as open injury, soft-tissue injury, fracture pattern, degree of articular impaction or comminution, fracture displacement, and polytrauma status could not be assessed. Additional operative variables such as operative time, surgical approach, quality of fixation, and quality of reduction could not be evaluated. Lastly, patient follow-up including treatment of postoperative complications that occurred outside of the institution participating in database data collection would be missed based on study design. The incidence of tibial plateau fracture fixation is increasing; however, the use of AATPFF is increasing at a faster rate compared with traditional techniques. Furthermore, the addition of knee arthroscopy to fracture fixation does not increase the risk of complication, reoperation, or emergency department visit within 90 days. 