We model the elastic properties of bone at the level of mineralized collagen fibrils via step-by-step homogenization from the staggered arrangement of collagen molecules up to an array of parallel mineralized fibrils. A new model for extrafibrillar mineralization is proposed, assuming that the extrafibrillar minerals are mechanically equivalent to reinforcing rings coating each individual fibril. Our modeling suggests that no more than 30% of the total mineral content is extrafibrillar and the fraction of extrafibrillar minerals grows linearly with the overall degree of mineralization. It is shown that the extrafibrillar mineralization considerably reinforces the fibrils’ mechanical properties in the transverse directions and the fibrils’ shear moduli. The model predictions for the elastic moduli and constants are found to be in a good agreement with the experimental data reported in the literature.The remarkable mechanical properties of bone related to its low density are essentially due to the bone's complex, hierarchical microstructure from the macro- down to the nanoscale At the nanoscale ( Collagen type I molecules (triple helices ∼300 Biological hydroxyapatite (HA) minerals with hexagonal unit cells Water A relatively limited amount of noncollagenous proteins (NCPs) like the extrafibrillar proteins that glue together adjacent collagen fibrils It is now well established that the HA crystals inside the collagen fibrils grow primarily in the gaps between subsequent collagen molecules In the past decade, mechanical models for mineralized collagen fibrils have been developed by Akiva et al. In this work, we model the three-dimensional elastic constants of a single mineralized collagen fibril and of a bundle of fibrils with particular attention to the extrafibrillar mineralization and its influence on the mechanical properties of bone. Different homogenization methods are employed to first find the effective properties at a lower level of hierarchy, starting with the effective properties of the collagen-water composite inside the mineralized collagen fibrils, and then incorporate the obtained results in the modeling of the next higher hierarchy level. Here we propose a new model for extrafibrillar mineralization considering that each individual collagen fibril is reinforced with HA coating rings strongly adhering to the fibrils’ surface. Different mineralization scenarios are tested to establish how the fraction of extrafibrillar minerals evolves with the overall mineralization. Another improvement in our modeling with respect to earlier models is the incorporation of the experimentally observed shape of the HA platelets in a genuine three-dimensional formulation. In some earlier works In this section, we consider in detail a hierarchical modeling approach consisting of consecutive homogenization steps. In terms of Within the mineralized collagen fibrils, the collagen molecules are arranged in a staggered fashion ( Because the transverse properties of isolated collagen molecules are not known, we model the collagen triple helices as a hexagonal array of perfectly aligned long isotropic cylindrical fibers in an isotropic water-protein matrix, the elasticity of which is due to the hydrogen bonds linking the collagen molecules as well as to the crosslinks provided by the noncollagenous proteins. Accurate estimates for the effective properties of long-fiber composites with arbitrary volume fraction of the fibers and arbitrary contrast between the mechanical properties of the phases have been developed by Torquato Let the indices To construct the transversely isotropic stiffness tensor of the collagen-water composite, we need to find three additional constants for the properties along the collagen molecules, namely the longitudinal Young modulus, Because the Young modulus of HA significantly exceeds that of the collagen-water composite discussed above, the homogenized elastic properties of a single collagen fibril reinforced with aligned HA mineral platelets should strongly depend on the shape and the volume fraction of the platelets. Jäger and Fratzl The Mori-Tanaka model for the overall properties of the fibril can be written as As already mentioned in the Introduction, the most recent experimental studies on the extrafibrillar mineralization in bone The observation that part of the extrafibrillar HA shells have the same periodicity as the 67-nm period of the collagen fibril can be explained by considering that the 40-nm gaps between consequent collagen molecules must also be present at the fibrils’ surface and therefore follow the staggered patterns shown in With the above considerations in mind, we can find the mechanical properties of a collagen fibril partially coated with extrafibrillar minerals in two steps. Firstly, let us consider the overall properties of a fibril that is fully coated with a HA layer having a uniform thickness. As the HA coating is much stiffer and harder than the core collagen fibril, the effective mechanical properties of the coated fibril will be dominated by the HA properties as long as the coating is sufficiently thick. For simplicity, we can apply the Mori-Tanaka method The actual effective properties of fibrils with extrafibrillar minerals must be within the upper bound for a fully coated fibril, Let  To be able to use the above-described model, we need an additional formula for the extrafibrillar mineral content. By definition, the total mineral volume fraction is Taking the volume of the fibril as The volume fraction of the minerals within the fibrils, We now consider the overall properties of a bundle of parallel, closely packed mineralized collagen fibrils ( In this case, we cannot apply directly the modeling used in Effective Properties of the Collagen-Water Composite, and Collagen Fibril Reinforced with Intrafibrillar HA Platelets. The method of Torquato is valid only for isotropic phases while the individual collagen fibers possess markedly orthotropic properties With the above considerations in mind, we can express the effective stiffness tensor of a bundle of aligned fibrils, Once the stiffness tensor Consider a fibril array where the fibrils are oriented along The Mori-Tanaka method can be further applied for modeling of porosity at micron scale by considering the pores as ellipsoidal inclusions with zero stiffness, but we do not consider this topic here. As for fibril arrays with broad orientation distribution in wovenlike patterns, the Mori-Tanaka method can be used once again for finding the overall properties, as done for textile tissues in Gommers et al. Because of the extreme smallness of the collagen molecules, only their longitudinal Young modulus has been evaluated by various experimental and theoretical approaches. The Young modulus of collagen molecules obtained via electron microscopy With Eq. Because the properties of the water-protein matrix are subject to uncertainty, we also test a higher Young modulus for the matrix, As in the case of collagen, there are no reliable experimental measurements for the properties of HA nanocrystals in bone. The measured properties of synthetic HA obtained through various processes vary wildly with Young modulus ranging from 6 The mechanical properties of the extrafibrillar proteins are not known at present. Given that they consist of flexible, coiling macromolecules, their Young modulus must be lower than that of the collagen with its relatively stiff triple-helix molecules. We assume that the extrafibrillar NCPs have isotropic properties with Young modulus The volume fraction of the overall mineral content is assumed to vary from 32 to 52 vol %, which comprises a large amount of literature data for wet bone Using Eq. Initially, we consider the elastic moduli for a hypothetical bundle of naked aligned fibrils without extrafibrillar minerals. We first assume that the shape of the HA platelets remains unchanged for the studied volume fractions and the minerals are ellipsoids, with shape determined by the typical dimensions of the HA platelets of 50 It is seen that the preferential growth of the HA platelets along the fibril axis changes only the longitudinal Young modulus of the fibrils and the obtained values in this case are more realistic than the values obtained assuming constant platelet shape. The preferential growth of the HA crystals along the fibril axis seems to explain the experimental fact that the longitudinal Young modulus in parallel-fibered and fibrolamellar bone increases considerably for relatively small increase in the total mineral content The bundles of aligned naked fibrils possess excessive orthotropy and only two deformation modes are stiff enough to match the experimentally observed stiffness in bone—these are tension/compression along the fibril axis and shear in the 1-2 plane. The other deformation modes are too soft to insure sufficient load-bearing capacity of the bone tissue, which indirectly proves the importance of the extrafibrillar mineralization for the mechanical properties. Next, we consider the elastic moduli of a bundle of aligned fibrils with extrafibrillar mineralization. We test two different mineralization scenarios. Firstly, it is assumed that the extrafibrillar and the intrafibrillar mineralization develop simultaneously in a way that keeps the extrafibrillar mineral fraction fixed at The mineralization parameters for linear evolution of The mineralization scenario shown in In these simulations, the collagen-water properties are given by Eq. It is seen that the assumption of constant proportion We therefore perform simulations where the collagen-water properties are given by Eq. From The values obtained for the longitudinal Young modulus are in a good agreement with those obtained for hydrated fibrolamellar bone via microtensile testing In Voigt notation, the elastic constants of a bundle of aligned parallel fibrils (in a coordinate frame oriented as in The local properties From We have shown that extrafibrillar mineralization considerably enhances the overall mechanical properties of the mineralized collagen fibrils in bone when the extrafibrillar crystals strongly adhere to the fibrils surfaces and individually coat each collagen fibril, as suggested by the most recent experimental data. Part of the extrafibrillar minerals most probably form effective coating rings with the same period and staggered geometry as the underlying naked fibrils and start growing in the 40-nm gaps between the successive collagen molecules situated at the fibrils surface. Mineralization enhances the stiffness of the fibrils by two mechanisms: firstly, the intrafibrillar HA platelets strengthen the collagen fibrils in tension/compression along the fibril axis and in shear in the platelets’ plane. The extrafibrillar mineralization further strengthens the fibrils in all remaining deformation modes except those already stiffened by the intrafibrillar minerals. We have established that typically, if the mineral content within the fibrils does not exceed 43 vol % in fully mineralized cortical bone The model predictions for the longitudinal Young modulus of arrays of parallel mineralized collagen fibers are in a good agreement with the experimental data from microtensile testing of fibrolamellar bone with the assumption that for mineral content of >30 vol %, the HA platelets within the fibrils grow preferentially in the fibrils direction and the growth of the longest dimension of the HA platelets is proportional to the increase in the overall mineral content. We thank Prof. Peter Fratzl for communicating recent results from microtensile experiments for fibrolamellar bone. The authors are grateful for financial support of the Max-Planck Multiscale Modeling Initiative and for helpful discussions with Helge Fabritius and Christoph Sachs.