Apart from zircon and baddeleyite, some other minerals also contain amounts of Zr and Hf, and H2SO4 can be the best candidate leachate for their recovery. The subsequent step in the process would be the recovery and separation of Hf and Zr from the resulting leach solution together with impurities. This reported study focused on the recovery process following the leaching of Zr and Hf from a eudialyte residue after REEs extraction. The chemistry of the solution was studied to determine the feasibility of different methods, and based on the results, an anion exchange resin was chosen to selectively recover Zr and Hf from the acidic sulfate solution. Batch and continuous ion exchange experiments using a strong anionic resin (MP600) were performed to develop the ion exchange process. The experimental results showed that Zr and Hf can be selectively recovered over other impurities. In the process of the adsorption of Zr and Hf, the bed volume reached 6 using the feed solution at a pH 0.94 at 25 °C with a contact time of 2 h. Pure Zr sulfate solution was used to scrub the load resin, after which the loaded resin was easily eluted using 10% NH4HCO3 + 1 mol/L NH4OH solution. This produced 21.23 g/L Zr, 0.03 g/L Hf, 0.01 g/L Fe, 0.01 g/L Al, 0.02 g/L Nb and < 0.001 g/L Ca in the eluate. The impurity removal from the leachate and the enrichment of Zr were achieved by the process.Zirconiumis widely used in the fields of atomic energy, metallurgy, military, petrochemical, aerospace and new materials science ( Eudialyte can be a potential commercial source of zirconium. The typical empirical chemical formula of eudialyte is Na There are no natural minerals that contain Hf exclusively, it is usually present in trace quantities in minerals that contain Zr because its chemistry is very similar to Zr ( The objective of this reported study was to employ sulfuric acid to leach Hf and Zr from a eudialyte residue following the extraction of REE from the eudialyte concentrate. There are many other impurities such as sodium, iron and aluminium in the leach solution ( In order to recover Zr and Hf from the acidic sulfate solution, this study investigated the chemistry of the solution to better understand the feasibility of the different methods, and based on the results, an anion exchange resin was chosen to selectively recover Zr and Hf from the sulfuric acid leach solution. Chemical separation of Zr and Hf was also attempted. In EURARE project, as a resource for REE, eudialyte ore has been mined in South Greenland. After beneficiation, HCl was then used to leach REE from the eudialyte concentrate. It was found that about 30% Zr and Hf were also leached from the mineral using the HCl. The leached Zr and Hf were then treated like impurities similar to Fe and Al by neutralization using CaCO In aqueous solution, Zr  Taking into account of the predominant forms of the complex in the acidic sulfate solution, anion exchange could be used to recover Zr and Hf. The binding force of the complex ions and the charges of the ions illustrated above would affect the selectivity of their adsorption. Batch adsorption experiments were conducted using the leach solution with various adsorption conditions, including contact time and solution pH values. A 50 mL feed solution and 10 mL of wet resin were added to a beaker on a magnetic stirrer agitated at 150 rpm at room temperature (25 ± 1 °C). After a period of adsorption, the solution was subjected to elemental analysis, which provided elemental adsorption data for these conditions. From these results, the distribution coefficient (D) was calculated to be the ratio of the equilibrium concentrations of the metals in the resin to that in the aqueous solution: Separation factor of Zr from other metals ( Adsorption percentage (E) and equilibrium adsorption capacity ( Column adsorption experiments were conducted using the sulfuric acid leach solution at room temperature (25 ± 1 °C) using a resin-filled Ø 3.0 × 50 cm glass column. The resin was pretreated with HCl to convert it to a chlorine type. 100 mL of the resin were wet-packed into the glass column. The operation was performed with the flow rate of 50 mL/h. The column effluent was analyzed periodically to determine the elemental composition of the effluent. After adjusting the pH of the leach solution, the first step was to recover Zr and Hf from the feed solution in the presence of other impurities, Zr and Hf had been adsorbed first by anion exchange resin prior to other elements. The feed solution ( The Zr loaded on the resin column was then eluted using 10% NH Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms are commonly used to assess the adsorption characteristics of a resin. The Langmuir adsorption model assumes monolayer adsorption onto a surface with a finite number of identical and energetically equivalent adsorption sites, and the adsorbent surface is homogeneous in character. The Freundlich adsorption isotherm is an empirical relation between the concentration of the solute on the adsorbent surface and the concentration of the solute in the liquid with which it is in contact. The linear forms of these two isotherms can be expressed as follows ( Batch adsorption experiments were conducted to study the adsorption isotherms of Zr and Hf by comparing experimental data to the linear mathematical expressions. In the experiments, 50 mL of a Zr, Hf- bearing leach solution at the optimum pH was mixed with different volumes of MP600 resin. The volumes of the wet resin were 2 mL, 4 mL, 6 mL, 8 mL, 10 mL, 12 mL. The samples were equilibrated at room temperature for 12 h. The resin was then separated, and the concentrations of Zr and Hf in solution were determined by ICP-OES. Q The sulfuric acid leach solution contained several metals (  As can be seen from The relationship of contact time and the adsorptions of Zr and Hf is shown in  After adsorption, the Zr loaded on the resin was eluted with 10% NH As shown, the peak value of the Zr concentration in the effluent appeared at 3 BV, and the concentration of Zr decreased to lower than 0.1 g/L when the effluent/resin volume ratio was above 5. The elution of Zr reached 99.0% after 5 BV. The composition of the Zr peak solution is listed in The FT-IR spectra of the MP600 resin before and after metal adsorption are shown in Experiments were conducted using the feed solution at optimum pH to study the adsorption isotherms of Zr and Hf. Evaluation of Zr and Hf adsorption behavior was affected by fitting the experimental data to the isotherm equations. As can be seen from  Up to now, no extraction processes for eudialyte are known on an industrial scale, and research on the recovery of Zr is not enough or less reported. EURARE project studied some pilot-scale tests ( The strongly basic anion exchange resin MP600 was used in this reported study to selectively adsorb Zr and Hf from a sulfuric acid leach solution. The optimum pH for adsorption was around 1.0, and the Nb in the solution was removed via precipitation before the ion exchange process. Zr and Hf were adsorbed by the resin over Fe, Al and Ca in the acidic sulfate solution. The adsorption of Zr and Hf on the resin followed the Langmuir isotherm equation. Most of the impurities were removed during the column test using MP600 resin. A pure Zr-bearing eluate was obtained after using pure Zr sulfate solution to scrub the loaded resin bed and elution. The concentration of Zr in the eluate (21.23 g/L) was approximately double that in the feed solution (10.83 g/L), achieving the enrichment of Zr. High quality product of ZrO Authors are thankful to EURARE project for providing the initial material. One of the authors (Yiqian Ma) is grateful to the Chinese Government for providing a scholarship.