Purpose
                  The Cyberwand (Cybersonics, Erie, Pennsylvania) is a novel intracorporeal lithotrite that uses coaxial ultrasonic elements operating at 2 frequencies. We compared this device to the LithoClast® Ultra, which we previously noted is the most efficient commercially available intracorporeal lithotripsy device.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  An in vitro test system was used to assess the efficiency of stone penetration for the Cyberwand and the LithoClast Ultra. The devices were mounted upright with the probe tip up in a modified irrigation sheath. A gypsum artificial stone was centered on the probe tip and a mass was placed atop the stone to provide a constant force. The manufacturer recommended setting was selected for the Cyberwand, while for the LithoClast Ultra a pneumatic frequency of 12 Hz with an ultrasonic power setting of 100% was selected, representing optimal settings in previous in vitro tests. The time required for complete stone penetration was measured. Differences in mean stone penetration times were compared using ANOVA.
               
                  Results
                  Mean ± SD penetration time for the Cyberwand was significantly shorter than for the LithoClast Ultra (4.8 ± 0.6 vs 8.1 ± 0.6 seconds, p <0.0001). Neither device showed any difficulties with overheating, occlusion or another malfunction.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Initial assessment using our hands-free in vitro test system, in which stone penetration time is not affected by operator bias, suggests that the Cyberwand is an efficient lithotrite. These promising results justify in vivo testing.Percutaneous nephrolithotomy in conjunction with intracorporeal lithotripsy allows the rapid removal of any renal stone regardless of size. Currently the choice of intracorporeal lithotriptors includes ultrasonic, pneumatic and combined ultrasonic/pneumatic energy sources. Previous in vitro studies demonstrated that the combined ultrasonic/pneumatic lithotrite (LithoClast Ultra) is most efficient for stone penetration compared to purely ultrasonic lithotrites. The Cyberwand is a novel intracorporeal lithotriptor using a dual ultrasonic probe design that incorporates coaxial high frequency and low frequency ultrasonic probes. The synergistic action of the dual probes is designed to comminute stones more efficiently than single probe lithotrites, while suctioning fragments like any other ultrasonic device. To test the efficiency of this design we used a previously published, hands-free in vitro testing system The Cyberwand consists of an ultrasonic hand piece and 2 concentric probes, a 2.77 mm outer diameter inner probe and a 3.75 mm outer diameter outer probe ( An in vitro hands-free testing system in which artificial gypsum stones are fragmented was used to assess the efficiency of the intracorporeal lithotriptors. Details of the testing apparatus were previously described. The ultrasonic setting used for the Cyberwand was a power level preset by the manufacturer. The LithoClast Ultra was used at the maximum levels for the pneumatic (12 Hz) and ultrasonic (100%) settings, which were previously reported to be most efficient for stone penetration. Mean stone penetration time for the Cyberwand was significantly shorter than for the LithoClast Ultra (4.8 ± 0.6 vs 8.1 ± 0.6 seconds, p <0.0001, Intracorporeal lithotripsy is an integral part of percutaneous stone treatment. Most currently available intracorporeal lithotriptors are ultrasonic devices. Although ultrasonic lithotriptors are excellent for simultaneous fragmentation and removal of most urinary calculi, they are not universally successful, especially in the setting of harder cystine or calcium oxalate monohydrate stones. However, pneumatic lithotriptors are able to fragment stones regardless of stone type. The LithoClast Ultra combines ultrasonic and pneumatic mechanisms, taking advantage of the superior fragmentation of the pneumatic component, while the ultrasonic modality simultaneously suctions away stone pieces. Previous in vitro tests demonstrated that the LithoClast Ultra is the most efficient lithotriptor that is commercially available. The Cyberwand is a novel lithotriptor that uses a dual probe design in which 2 ultrasonic probes are attached to a single hand piece. The 2 probes vibrating at different frequencies were constructed to enhance stone comminution. Further fragmentation is thought to be augmented by the ballistic action of the outer probe as it becomes flush with the inner probe from its 1 mm offset position. The dual ultrasonic probe device contains a free mass in the hand piece, which determines the rate of excursion of this outer probe. To our knowledge this is a new technology that has not been previously available in any intracorporeal lithotriptor. In our experiments mean stone penetration time for the Cyberwand was almost twice as rapid as for the LithoClast Ultra. Since the LithoClast Ultra previously resulted in the most rapid mean stone penetration times in this in vitro testing model, To our knowledge the safety and efficacy of the Cyberwand has yet to be examined in vivo. Although it was not clinically tested, the safety profile of the Cyberwand would likely be similar to that of all other ultrasonic devices. The significantly higher stone penetration efficiency of the Cyberwand compared to other intracorporeal lithotriptors suggests that this instrument warrants further investigation. In vitro testing demonstrated that the Cyberwand is the most efficient intracorporeal lithotriptor because it achieves more rapid mean stone penetration times than those of the LithoClast Ultra. Future testing with this novel lithotriptor is necessary to determine its clinical safety and efficacy.