The influence of ore mineralogy and ore texture on flotation response was studied for 29 samples from the main mineralised zone at Pit 3 of the Nkomati Ni mine, through laboratory scale flotation testing, laboratory assay, and mineral liberation analyser examination of the ore and the concentrates. The individual sample flotation responses vary widely in terms of Ni grade, and cumulative Ni recovery. It is demonstrated that this is a complex function of ore mineralogy and ore texture. Chalcopyrite is the first sulphide to float, followed by pentlandite and finally pyrrhotite, in ore samples with dominant chalcopyrite, or where pentlandite, pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite occur in equal abundance. However in samples with a high ratio of pyrrhotite to pentlandite and chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite floats earlier than expected, reports to concentrate over the entire flotation period, and depress and extend the flotation of pentlandite over the flotation interval with no clear peak of Ni recovery during flotation. Primary silicates (e.g. olivine and pyroxene) and alteration-related minerals (talc, tremolite and chlorite) are naturally floating, and hence affect the flotation of pentlandite in a similar manner to that of pyrrhotite. The most problematic ore at Nkomati in terms of Ni recovery is characterised by fine disseminated and fine bleb- or net-texture sulphides, contain abundant olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, talc and tremolite, and include abundant metamorphism-related country rock xenoliths (with calc-silicate minerals such as diopside and tremolite).Froth flotation is a mature technology that has been practiced successfully for more than a century ( Several tools are available for the study of industrial flotation, with laboratory scale flotation testing playing a central role ( Variations in recovery are to a large extent caused by mineralogical and textural changes in the ore ( The Nkomati mine is the only primary Ni producer in South Africa. Although Ni is the main resource, accessory Cu, platinum group elements, and Co is also recovered ( The variability of recovery at the Nkomati Ni mine (and at other Ni producing mines) may be better understood through an examination of the sequence in which minerals report to concentrate, with time. For instance, if a fast floating mineral is present, it may crowd out other minerals during flotation, and therefore serve to delay and depress the flotation of minerals which would normally report to concentrate fairly early during flotation. In this regard, The ore deposit under investigation is located in the Uitkomst Complex, a layered mafic–ultramafic intrusion situated approximately 300 The intrusion is subdivided into six units, being (from lower to upper) the Basal Gabbro, a Lower Pyroxenite, a Chromititic Peridotite, a Peridotite, an Upper Pyroxenite, and various Gabbronorite Units ( The present study utilises samples collected from four boreholes drilled into the MMZ located in Pit 3. Sulphides in the MMZ are hosted by variably altered pyroxenite which locally contain abundant xenoliths of quartzite, dolomite and calc-silicate. The textures of the sulphides are variable, ranging from massive to semi-massive, bleb-textured, net-textured, and disseminated ( Samples collected for study were all on the order of 5 Flotation testing was performed using a modified bulk sulphide float, i.e. copper sulphate was not added, the pulp pH was set at pH 9.5, and the collector addition was at a moderate level (which should allow for a reasonable separation of pentlandite and pyrrhotite; Samples were coarsely crushed (−2 Small, representative aliquots of each coarsely crushed ore sample were mixed with resin in 30 Flotation concentrates were sieved into a −75 Ore samples and concentrates were also examined for modal mineralogy using X-ray diffraction, as a cross check of MLA results. The dominant sulphide assemblage in all ore samples investigated comprise of pyrrhotite, pentlandite and chalcopyrite, with intermittent pyrite also encountered ( The dominant primary rock forming minerals present in the ore samples are olivine, pyroxene, amphibole, and feldspar, while secondary alteration-related minerals include talc, actinolite, tremolite, serpentine and chlorite. Chromite and magnetite are the dominant oxide minerals ( Ni contents in the ore samples analysed vary from 0.2 to 0.9 The flotation procedure employed is effective in concentrating sulphides ( The time interval at which maximum Ni reports to concentrate during flotation, and the amount of Ni recovered as a percentage of total Ni (the recovery efficiency) is highly variable ( In the case of a ‘fast’ flotation response, high Ni concentrate grades are attained in the initial stages (1–3 In the case of samples with an ‘intermediate’ flotation response ( Samples with a ‘slow’ flotation response ( The time interval at which maximum Ni reports to concentrate during flotation, as well as the amount of Ni recovered as a percentage of total Ni in the primary ore, also appear to be influenced by the behaviour of certain minerals during flotation (i.e. in addition to the influence of primary ore mineralogy, and ore texture). Of the sulphide minerals pentlandite, pyrrhotite, and chalcopyrite, chalcopyrite typically concentrates earlier in the flotation process than pentlandite, with pyrrhotite being the slowest to float (as expected, e.g. Certain silicates may also have a role to play in delaying the flotation of pentlandite. In the case of sample UK462_2 ( The following conclusions are considered noteworthy: Chalcopyrite is the first to float, followed by pentlandite, and finally pyrrhotite, in sulphide ores in which chalcopyrite is the dominant sulphide, or in which there is an approximately equal proportion of pentlandite, pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite. However in the case of ores which are rich in pyrrhotite relative to pentlandite and chalcopyrite, abundant pyrrhotite will report to all concentrates (i.e. pyrrhotite will report to concentrate over the entire period of flotation), and serve to delay and depress the flotation of pentlandite. Naturally floating silicates have a similar effect to that in (2) on the flotation of pentlandite in that they report to concentrate over an extended period of time, and can act in combination with pyrrhotite to extend the flotation of pentlandite with time. Nkomati ore with abundant coarse sulphides, and with a low abundance of silicates and alteration-related minerals represent the ideal ore type for the efficient flotation-based recovery of Ni. Nkomati ore with fine disseminated and fine bleb- or net-texture sulphides, and which contain abundant olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and talc, as well as abundant metamorphism related xenoliths (e.g. with calc-silicate minerals such as diopside and tremolite), represent the most problematic ore. We would like to thank Nkomati Joint Venture for providing access to the Nkomati Mine, and for funding this project. This study was also supported with funds granted to Fanus Viljoen by the South African Department of Science and Technology under their Research Chairs initiative, as administered by the National Research Foundation. We thank Jonathan Woolfe, Karel Coetzer, Mark Davidson, Bongani Gabela, Lucky Msibi and all the support staff at Nkomati mine for help with sample collection, and sample processing. Jonathan Woolfe is also thanked for providing figures for this paper. We really appreciate the support provided by staff at the University of Johannesburg central analytical facility (Spectru) during sample preparation and analysis.