The treatment of olecranon fractures frequently involves the use of tension-band fixation. Although associated with high union rates, this method has a high incidence of morbidity associated with soft tissue compromise and limitation of range of movement requiring frequent re-operation for removal of metal.
                  We describe the use of a simple jig to ensure intramedullary placement of longitudinal K-wires and compare the accuracy of placement of Kirschner (K)-wires using this device with the traditional free-hand method.
                  We found the distance from the centre of the medullary canal, the range and standard deviations of K-wire positions to be significantly more precise when the jig was used. This has applications for the use of the device, both with standard metallic radio-opaque wires and potentially with bio-absorbable pins.Olecranon fractures are a common adult upper extremity injury comprising ∼10% Many methods of internal fixation have been described, including plate fixation, intramedullary (IM) screw fixation and tension-band wiring. The latter is commonly employed in fixation of transverse fractures extending to the mid-articular level of the olecranon fossa. Variations on the theme of tension-band wiring have been described and tested The most common complication of the use of tension-band wiring is prominence of the K-wires at the insertion site, leading to pain and skin compromise. Complication of any procedure has an associated risk of the requirement for re-operation. This is also true of complications of tension-band wiring of the olecranon. Re-operation following tension-band wiring of the olecranon has been reported as being as high as 80%. Secure placement of wires in an IM fashion as described by the Arbeitsgemeinshaft fur Osteosynthesefragen (AO) group in the setting of careful operative technique and adequate burying of the K-wires deep to the triceps could help decrease the risk of soft tissue compromise and the requirement for re-operation. Another method of reducing the risk of re-operation due to wires backing out would be to use bio-absorbable implants. The use of bio-absorbable pins has already been described for tension-band wiring and shown to have similar performance experimentally. A potential problem with the use of bio-absorbable pins is that they are not visible on X-ray, so the surgeon cannot confirm the correct placement by the standard use of intra-operative fluoroscopy. Even when fluoroscopy is used with radio-opaque implants, rotation or projection errors may give the false impression of correct positioning of K-wires where, in fact, the wires are outside the desired field, risking neurovascular injury or impingement. Using radiolucent materials may make this risk even higher. Free-hand placement of radiolucent pins may, therefore, not be appropriate. This problem may be overcome by using a guide to ensure accurate, IM placement of longitudinal K-wires without the need for radiological confirmation. In this study, we compare the position of K-wires inserted into the olecranon with the use of a guide with the position achieved with the traditional free-hand technique. The O-Jig™ (SOTA Orthopaedics Ltd., Dublin, Ireland; The O-Jig™ consists of two components. The first part allows the seating of a base-plate with a guide-hole for passage of a drill pin transversely to the ulnar shaft (green segment in the diagram in We used 10 pairs of synthetic left and right ulnas (Sawbones Each surgeon was invited to insert two stainless steel K-wires through the olecranon into the ulna as would be performed following reduction of the fracture in the operative setting, accepting only the first attempts and prohibiting any re-positioning. The surgeon first placed the wires using the free-hand technique. A second synthetic bone was then positioned in the clamp and two further wires were passed using the jig. Alternate-sided sawbone ulnae were used in sequence, that is, if the surgeon used a right ulna for the passage of wires free-hand then a left ulna would be used with the jig and vice versa. This was done to prevent learning bias. The K-wires were of standard dimension: 2.0 After placement of the K-wires, the sawbones were sectioned transversely at 70 The data were recorded and the mean distance, range and standard deviations (SDs) of the distance between the wire tips and the IM centre of the ulna were calculated. Significance was determined using Fisher's exact test comparing intra- versus extra-medullary position of the wires. The Student's Each surgeon placed two free-hand and two guided wires. This gave a total of 20 wires placed free-hand and 20 wires placed using the jig. The data are shown in Of the free-hand wires, only 11 of 20 were found to be IM. Of the wires inserted using the jig, all were found to be IM after sectioning the ulna. Passing the wire using the jig made IM positioning of the wire significantly more likely ( We have shown that the use of a specialised jig can greatly reduce the inaccuracy of pin placement associated with the passage of wires with the free-hand technique. We are not aware of any other study in the English-speaking literature comparing free-hand and jig-guided insertion of wires in olecranon fractures. Our study shows that the wires passed by the jig are more likely to be IM, and that they were also more likely to be closer to the centre of the medullary canal. Of particular note was the small SD and range of values for the jig-guided group (1–2 Furthermore, although not a direct goal of our study, we noted that free-hand positioning and radiographic confirmation may not always give a true picture of the position of wires. The appearance of metal is dependent on projection. If we consider the specimens in Re-operation following olecranon fixation is a common occurrence. Romero et al. showed the risk of re-operation following tension-band fixation of olecranon fractures to be >70%. Extra-medullary wire positioning raises concerns with neurovascular compromise. Prayson, Morbidity related to wire prominence and soft tissue compromise has been reported being as high as 80%. The use of bio-absorbable pins for stabilisation of osteotomies has been well described by Waris, Winemaker and others, albeit outside the setting of olecranon fractures. Our study is limited in its methodology by our use of sawbones. In the operative setting, soft tissues may well limit the ability to accurately place the base-plate and rail components of the device. We also did not fracture the models before wire placement. Wire passage may be more difficult in the setting of a disturbed medulla which may be found in the fracture setting. It may also be argued that the surgeons used in the study had limited experience and that the level of experience of the surgeon should dictate the accuracy of wire placement using the free-hand technique. While not a direct aim of our study, we did not identify that inexperience correlated with poor free-hand technique. The distribution of the wires was, in any event, improved by using the jig. We have shown that the use of an external jig to pass IM longitudinal wires in olecranon fixation significantly improves accuracy. This may well obviate the need for radiological confirmation of wire position. Further cadaveric and clinical investigation to determine the effect of soft tissues on jig alignment may be required, however. The likely future for this device lies in the use of radiolucent, bio-absorbable pins that will not require removal and which can be reliably placed using this guide tool. We believe that this simple device will help reduce the requirement for re-operation following tension-band fixation of olecranon fractures.