The purpose of this study is to identify the effect of particle shape on stress dip underneath granular piles based on the results of laboratory-scale experiments using a high sensitivity stress sensor mat system. Two different granular materials with contrasting particle shapes but in similar size ranges were evaluated. Wedge-shaped and conical piles of granular materials were formed by pouring using a local source method. Stress dip at the center was measured in all piles but with different developing situations. We suggest the use of the ratio of the maximum stress over the dipped stress value at the center as a quantitative index to assess the stress dipping effect. We observed that a higher elongation of the particle shape would yield a more profound stress dip under the pile. When piles of the same material but in various pile shapes are compared, stress dip is found to be more profound, and the influence of the particle shape is more obvious in a 3-d axisymmetic conical pile than in a 2-d plane-strain wedge-shaped pile. The reason is that a larger elongation of the particle shape be helpful for more steady arches with strong force chains formed to support more weight of the middle part of the pile, especially in a 3-d axisymmetic configuration.Granular materials exist commonly in nature, and transmission of force in a granular system impacts many situations in practice, ranging from silos and foundations to road and tunnel construction. A granular pile is probably the simplest example. However, the phenomenon of a distinct vertical stress dip underneath its apex, where intuition would expect a peak value, has attracted much attention of researchers and has been reviewed by Michalowski and Park In recent years, there has been a rising awareness of the influence of particle properties, especially particle shape, on the evolution of stress dip The stress state in a granular material system is known to be highly sensitive to boundary conditions. The different stiffness of conventional stress measurement devices, i.e., strain gauges and pressure cells, would affect the rigidity of the system and reduce the reliability of the data obtained. Moreover, data obtained in pervious experiments The purpose of the present study is to investigate the effect of particle shapes as well as pile size and pile type on the evolution of the stress dip underneath granular piles. We made use of a tactile sensor with a resolution of 0.01 A grid-based tactile sensor system (Tekscan Type 5315 made by: Tekscan Inc. of Boston, Massachusetts) was adopted in our experiments to measure the stress distribution underneath different granular piles. As shown in The features of the sensor mat, including dimensions of the mat as well as the number, spacing, density and stress range of sensels are listed in Standard sand (Leighton Buzzard Sand Fraction B) and glass beads were used in this study to construct the piles. These two materials have similar particle size distributions as shown in The particle size of standard sand ranges from 0.6 Particle density, minimum and maximum dry densities of standard sand are determined to be 2.65 A 20-mm thick base plate made of Plexiglas was used to support the wedge-shaped and conical piles of granular materials. The wedge-shaped and conical piles used in the experiments were constructed using a line-filling funnel and a point-filling funnel. During construction, the outlet of the funnel was adjusted to keep touching the peak of piles to minimize the kinetic energy of the falling particles as shown in For both the standard sand and the glass bead, the vertical stresses on the base of wedge-shaped piles of various widths and lengths were measured and representative results at different heights are shown in The behavior of a wedge-shaped pile can be approximated as a two-dimensional plane-strain engineering problem. To avoid possible boundary effects near the ends in the longitudinal direction of the wedge-shaped pile, our observation and analysis are focused on the middle one-third of the length of the wedge-shaped pile. To evaluate the size effect of the pile on the stress distribution, we normalized the horizontal position from the centerline by a half of the base width of the transverse cross-section of the pile. Moreover, in order to track the development of stress dip with pile size and make a quantitative comparison for different materials with consideration of the difference between their densities, we normalized the vertical stress distribution by the value of For one given material, the results show that the normalized stress distribution pattern is relatively independent of pile size. With the increasing of the pile height, the extent of stress dip after normalization, including the normalized value of the dipped stress at the center, the normalized value and location of the maximum stress, trends to be frozen. It is noted that those of smaller size piles built in the beginning stage are sometimes scattered about. The reason may be that the influence of kinetic energies of falling particles is hardly fully avoided especially when the pile is initially constructed. One controversial question about pile issue is the relationship of the stress distribution pattern and pile size. Some earlier experimental study on conical pile When different materials are compared in Similar to the information obtained for wedge-shaped piles mentioned above, distributions of vertical stress measured underneath representative conical piles of standard sand and glass beads with various pile sizes are displayed in three-dimensional view in Because a conical pile is an axisymmetic problem, we took the average value along each circle with the same radius. Similar to wedge-shaped piles, we normalized the horizontal position by the base radius of the pile and the vertical stress by γ Similar to wedge-shaped piles, for one given material, the normalized stress distribution pattern is relatively independent of pile height. And it is noted that, similar to wedge-shaped piles, the data in smaller size conical piles built in the beginning stage are sometimes scattered about, which may be due to the possible influence of kinetic energies of falling particles when a pile is initially constructed. However, with the increasing of pile height, the extent of stress dip trends to keep constant. Compared to wedge-shaped piles of the same material, the stress dip at the center in conical piles is more obvious. When different materials are compared in The effect of particle shape on the development of the stress dip can be investigated based on the relationship between the stress dip information and the particle shape elongation tabulated in With the particle shape elongation increasing from 0.08 to 0.4,the S For one given granular material, the S Some references Generally speaking, the stress dip measured in this study is consistent to some previous experimental studies So far, most of potential mechanisms suggested Stress distributions underneath granular material piles of different sizes, including the wedge-shaped and conical piles, were measured and analyzed in this study for granular materials with different particle shapes. The measured distribution of normalized vertical stress along the radial direction for one granular material remains almost constant when the pile size increases. A dip in vertical stress at the center was observed in each pile tested in this study. The S Financial support provided by