From outcrops located in Provence (South-East France), we describe the distribution, the microstructures, and the petrophysical properties of deformation band networks related to both contractional and extensional tectonic events. In contraction, pervasively distributed networks of reverse-sense compactional shear bands are observed in all folded sand units of the foreland, whereas localized networks of clustered reverse-sense shear bands are only observed close to a large-scale thrust. In extensional setting, networks of clustered normal-sense shear bands are generally observed adjacent to map-scale faults (100 m–10 km scale), although some randomly distributed bands are also observed between these faults. Normal-sense cataclastic faults, i.e. zone of deformation bands containing a localized slip-surface, are also observed to be restricted to sand units, suggesting that faults initiated in the sands during extension, but not during contraction. Shear bands and faults show cataclastic microstructures with high-permeability reduction whereas compactional shear bands show crush microbreccia or protocataclastic microstructures with moderate permeability reduction. This basin-scale analysis underlines the major role of tectonic settings (thrust-fault versus normal-fault andersonian-stress regime) and the influence of inherited large-scale faults on the formation/localization of low-permeability shear bands. We also provide a geometrical analysis of the band network properties (spacing, thickness, shear/compaction ratio, degree of cataclasis, petrophysical properties) with respect to the median grain size, porosity and grain sorting of host sand. This analysis suggests that grain size, although less important than stress-state conditions and the presence of large-scale faults, has a non-negligible effect on band network geometry. No correlations are observed between the grain sorting, porosity and band network geometry.In porous sandstone, strain localization occurs by the formation of tabular structures commonly referred to as deformation bands ( Different types of deformation bands are observed in a large range of settings (see In this paper, we analyze the distribution and the geometric attributes of deformation band networks and faults formed in different sand-dominated units of the South-East basin (France), deformed under contractional and extensional regimes. Their microstructures and related petrophysical properties are analyzed to discuss the potential control of these bands on fluid flow. The influence of the tectonic setting and the presence of large-scale faults on the distribution of low-permeability deformation bands at the basin-scale is analyzed. The impact of the median-grain size, grain sorting and porosity of host rock on the band networks organization is also investigated. The study area is located in the western part of the South-East Basin (South of France), between the Cévennes and the Nîmes faults ( The first tectonic event is the Pyrenean shortening related to the convergence between the Iberian and the Eurasian plates from the Paleocene to early Oligocene ( The second tectonic event is the Oligocene–Miocene extension related to the West European rifting and the collapse of the Pyrenean orogen in the Gulf of Lion ( A last tectonic event, the Alpine shortening, affected the eastern part of the South-East basin during the Miocene–Pliocene. This phase formed south-verging thrusts such as the Luberon thrust ( No significant erosion or diagenetic process occurred in the different sand-dominated units between the two first tectonic events ( Deformation bands and faults were analyzed at 42 quarries and outcrops throughout the study area. Their The apparent The ratio of The grain size distribution of the host sands was measured by Coulter LS 13 320 laser granulometer and completed by sieving for the coarse grains (>1.6 mm in diameter). The Polished thin-sections of host sands and deformation bands samples impregnated by epoxy resin were analyzed by backscattered electron imagery using a FEI Quanta 200 environmental scanning-electron microscope (SEM). 1 × 1 mm large SEM photomicrographs showing a gray-scale intensity ranging from 0 to 255 were used to calculate the The proportion of    Reverse-sense deformation bands are observed pervasively distributed in the sand units of the entire study area, from the south of the Roquemaure Thrust to the north of the Mondragon Anticline ( Shear-Enhanced Compaction Bands (SECB) are characterized by an average Compactional Shear Bands (CSB) are characterized by an average Shear Bands (SB) are characterized by an average Some of the different geometrical attributes of these band networks appear to be linked. A normal correlation is observed between the mean band thickness and the mean band spacing of each band network ( Normal-sense deformation bands are heterogeneously distributed in the studied area ( Normal-sense SBs are characterized by a ratio of Small normal faults are defined by several cataclastic strands of deformation around a slip-surface consisting in a millimeter to centimeter thick zone of cataclastic deformation showing a few meters of shear-displacement ( All studied bands and faults have a cataclastic microstructure showing grain cracking and comminution. Different intensities of cataclasis are identified: (1) crush microbreccia; (2) protocataclasis; and (3) cataclasis. Crush microbreccias are characterized by only small or no grain comminution. The proportion of cataclastic matrix ranges from 0% to 13% by grain volume which correspond to an increase less than 6% of small clasts compared to the host sands (1/10 of Protocataclasites are characterized by their low level of grain comminution. The proportion of cataclastic matrix ranges from 13% to 23% by grain volume which corresponds to an increase from 7% to 18% of small clasts compared to the host sands ( Cataclasites are characterized by intense grain comminution. The proportion of cataclastic matrix is higher than 19% of grain volume, sometimes until 60%, which corresponds to an increase higher than 19% of small clasts as compared to the host sands ( The host sands of Provence show a large range of initial petrophysical properties ( Reverse-sense deformation bands show permeability reduction ranging from 0 to 4 orders of magnitude ( Normal-sense structures show permeability reduction ranging from 0.5 to more than 5 orders of magnitude ( Pervasively distributed networks of reverse-sense deformation bands are observed in the entire area ( Large-scale faults can influence the distribution and the characteristics of deformation band networks. This influence seems particularly prominent in the contractional regime where networks of clustered SBs are only observed close to the Roquemaure thrust ( The grain size of the host sands can control the initiation and the organization of the reverse-sense SECBs and CSBs in the folded foreland part of the basin. The SECB networks are preferentially located in the coarse-grained layers within the Turonian sand-dominated unit at the Mondragon anticline whereas no bands are observed in fine-grained layers ( Local heterogeneities could disturb the organization of deformation band networks. Parameters such as the thickness of sand layers and their mechanical properties ( The permeability reduction within the studied band networks, their continuity and distribution in a reservoir unit, and their location at the basin-scale may exert a significant control on fluid flow or affect the reservoir connectivity. The permeability reduction measured in the distributed SECBs and CSBs, never higher than 3 orders of magnitude, and the relative discontinuity of these bands (small length, relay zones, zones devoid of bands…) prevent them from impeding fluid flow or compartmentalizing sandstone reservoirs ( Cataclastic SBs and faults induce permeability reductions up to 5 orders of magnitude ( The analysis of the basin-scale distribution, geometrical attributes, microstructures and petrophysical properties of the deformation band networks from Provence emphasizes the influence of tectonic setting, the presence of large-scale faults or the host sand grain size on band localization and characteristics. Control of tectonic setting: A pervasive distribution of networks of shear-enhanced compaction bands (SECBs) and compactional shear bands (CSBs) is favored in contractional setting whereas a localization of networks of clustered shear bands (SBs) around normal-faults is promoted in extensional setting ( Influence of large-scale fault (fault showing length ranging from 100 m to 10 km): A localization of networks of clustered SBs is observed close to a large-scale thrust in contractional setting. The increase of differential stress Control of host sand grain size: A correlation is observed between the host sand grain size and the geometrical attributes of band networks related to the contractional setting in areas devoid of large-scale thrusts. Although less important than the tectonic setting, the host sand grain size has a non-negligible effect on the band networks geometry (dihedral angle, thickness, spacing). No correlations are observed between the band networks geometry and the grain sorting or the porosity of the host sands. Intense cataclasites and low-permeability are observed in SB networks whereas crush microbreccias or protocataclasites, and moderate-permeability (i.e. permeability reductions ranging from 0 to 3 orders of magnitude compared to host sands) are observed in SECB and CSB networks. Extensional setting and large-scale faults therefore favor the formation of low-permeability shear bands which that form permeability barriers and compartmentalize the sandstone reservoir. Distributed networks of compactional shear bands, formed in contraction and showing moderate permeability reduction cannot compartmentalize the sandstone reservoirs but can, however, strongly affect their connectivity, buffering the fluid flow. This work was supported by the The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at