Various attempts to use Raman spectrometry to analyse the mineral phases in hydrated and unhydrated cement have been made and results were published on pure synthesized mineral phases as early as 1976. Limited investigations were reported in the past three decades on pure mineral cement phases, white cement and ordinary Portland cement (OPC) analysed with visible (VIS) excitation at 514.5 and 632 nm (mainly with normal Raman spectrometry) and near-infrared (NIR) excitation at 1064 nm (mainly Fourier Transform Raman Spectrometry — FT–Raman). Results were distinctly different for VIS and NIR lasers. Newman and co-workers assigned these differences to a fluorescence phenomenon. Previous work on the characterization of secondary cement materials (SCMs) by means of Raman spectrometry is even more limited. This work focused on the characterization of OPC, fly ash and slag, using ultraviolet–visible (UV–VIS), VIS and NIR excitation in micro-Raman spectrometry and the results obtained for OPC and fly ash will be compared with previously published results.The mineral cement phases alite (C Fly ash is the residue from the burning of pulverized coal in thermal power stations. It consists of a variety of different particle size fractions of hollow silica alumina glass spheres with average sizes ranging from 5 to 45 μm, after classification. Fly ash has a number of useful applications that serves to utilize some of the large amounts being produced. The bulk of current consumption of fly ash going worldwide is as an extender in cement and concrete Slag, an almost fully non-crystalline glassy material, is a by-product from the steel-making industry and granulated blast furnace slag is often used as an extender in cement due to its latent hydraulic properties. These hydraulic activities are influenced by the properties of the slag, including the glass content, chemical and mineralogical composition. Technical literature regarding the determination of the mineralogical composition by means of Raman spectrometry is limited and it is usually determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Typical compositions, as supplied in the open technical literature, indicate that they consist of various iron oxides, such as magnesioferrite, magnetite and hematite; silicates, such as larnite, belite and bredigite (calcium silicates), merwinite (Ca This paper describes the investigation conducted and the results obtained on OPC, fly ash Class F and an iron blast furnace slag, using UV–VIS, VIS and NIR laser excitation sources in a micro-Raman configuration. The cement analysed was an OPC, with a typical elemental analysis as given in Micro-Raman Spectrometry provided information about the chemical composition and identity of the sample. The different materials were examined with a Renishaw InVia micro-Raman spectrometer coupled with a Peltier cooled CCD detector. Excitation was provided by both the 514.5 and 785 nm lines of a continuous wave 25 mW Ar The results of the measurements done on the OPC sample with the UV–VIS, VIS and NIR lasers are depicted in Static scans were also performed with the NIR excitation and the results are shown in The Raman spectra collected at selected points on the classified 5 μm fly ash, using the 514.5 nm laser as excitation source, are illustrated in The glassy phases can be characterized as calcium aluminate or high silicate glasses, according to Scheetz The NIR excitation was performed on a classified fly ash with an average particle size less than 15 μm. It is evident from The slag sample was considerably more difficult to analyse due to a large fluorescent background observed with all lasers. The best excitation wavelength was found to be 514.5 nm. With the UV–VIS excitation no spectra could be obtained. The VIS spectra had a smaller fluorescence background and especially the darker particles could be analysed with good spectral resolution. The dark red and black particles proved to be discreet in distribution and spectra obtained were either pure graphitic carbon or iron compounds, or both. The G and D bands have been assigned at 1593 and 1353 cm The presence of calcium silicates was also discerned, as described by Kirkpatrick et al. The compounds identified by means of NIR excitation were very similar to those obtained by VIS excitation. The darker particles proved to be either graphitic carbon or iron-related compounds as illustrated in The suggested calcium–silicates and calcium–magnesium–silicates were not identified specifically, and although the presence of a calcium–silicate has been confirmed, it could not be assigned to specific mineral phases. It was noted, however, that spectra obtained for melilite by Fredericci et al. The use of micro-Raman spectrometry provides spatial and spectral resolution that enables the identification of varying mineral phases in grey ordinary Portland cement, without any special preparation of the sample. Structural fluorescence as observed by Newman et al. SCMs, by names the various forms of gypsum as found in cement or cementitious materials, fly ash and slag could be successfully characterized and the superior excitation wavelength proved to be 514.5 nm. Raman chemical imaging and mapping could prove to be a valuable tool to describe the distribution of the various phases in various types of cements. SSPV acknowledges the financial support from the FWO (Fund for Scientific Investigation, Flanders) and UA (University of Antwerp) for fellowships.