Severe gas disasters in deep mining areas are increasing, and traditional protective coal seam mining is facing significant challenges. This paper proposes an innovative technology using soft rock as the protective seam in the absence of an appropriate coal seam. Based on the geological engineering conditions of the new horizontal first mining area of Luling Coal Mine in Huaibei, China, the impacts of different mining parameters of the soft-rock protective seam on the pressure-relief effect of the protected coal seam were analyzed through numerical simulation. The unit stress of the protected coal seam, which was less than half of the primary rock stress, was used as the mining stress pressure-relief index. The optimized interlayer space was found to be 59 m for the first soft-rock working face, with a 2 m mining thickness and 105 m face length. The physicochemical characteristics of the orebody were analyzed, and a device selection framework for the soft-rock protective seam was developed. Optimal equipment for the working face was selected, including the fully-mechanized hydraulic support and coal cutter. A production technology that combined fully-mechanized and blasting-assisted soft-rock mining was developed. Engineering practices demonstrated that normal circulation operation can be achieved on the working face of the soft-rock protective seam, with an average advancement rate of 1.64 m/d. The maximum residual gas pressure and content, which were measured at the cut hole position of the protected coal seams (Nos. 8 and 9), decreased to 0.35 MPa and 4.87 m3/t, respectively. The results suggested that soft-rock protective seam mining can produce a significant gas-control effect.In China, underground mining is the predominant form of coal mining. However, most coal mines are gassy mines, and coal-bed gas in mines has the characteristics of low pressure, low permeability, low saturation, and substantial heterogeneity Researchers have performed numerous investigations focusing on pressure-relief mechanisms, mining techniques, and pressure-relief gas extraction in protective seam mining. Using an analogy simulation method, Liu et al. analyzed the dynamic rules of overlying fracture evolution induced by protective seam mining Consequently, an innovative method for selecting soft rock as the protective seam was proposed as an engineering approach, taking the III1 mine area of Luling Coal Mine as a case study. The influencing rules of different soft-rock protective seam mining technological parameters on the pressure-relief effect of the protected coal seam were analyzed by numerical calculation, facilitating the optimized design of the working faces. The physicochemical characteristics of the orebody were also analyzed in detail. From this, the primary equipment and key production technologies were determined for the proposed soft-rock protective seam mining. Finally, in combination with the optimal arrangement of the working face, the pressure-relief gas extraction technology accomplished the pressure-relief mining of the protected coal seam. In the northeast of Huaibei City, China, the III1 mining area of the Luling Coal Mine was the first to be worked after Level II. There are three primary mineable seams in the mining area, including No. 8, No. 9, and No. 10 coal seams (referred to as seams 8, 9, and 10). Seam 8 has an average thickness of 8.5 m, its consistent coefficient is in the range of 0.1–0.3, and its permeability coefficient is 0.0277 m Seams 8 and 9 belong to a typical, thick, strong-outburst coal seam that is low in gas permeability. Therefore, corresponding technical measures must be taken to eliminate its outburst danger. Two kinds of techniques could be employed based on traditional gas control practices. One is the pre-extraction of the coal seam gas by piercing holes in the rock roadway of the floor, and the other is protective seam mining technology. However, there are some technical problems with the pre-extraction of coal seam gas ( Due to the high gas pressure and content in seams 8 and 9, the drill is prone to sticking or retention in the process of piercing the holes, resulting in increasing difficulty of construction. During the construction process, it is easy for gas-jet accidents to exceed the limit, causing significant safety threats. The construction efficiency of drilling is low. Therefore, it is impossible to implement the pre-extraction of coal seam gas by piercing holes in the rock roadway of the floor. Seam 10, reserved for the protective seam mining, is a traditional and ideal protective mining mode due to its relatively small threat of gas outbursts. However, there are two sub-seams developed in seam 10, as shown in In the III1 mining area, due to the absence of an appropriate coal seam for use in protective seam mining, a novel concept of soft-rock protective seam mining was proposed. In this method, the soft-rock seam is adopted as the protective seam for mining the ultra-thick protected coal seam that has low permeability and strong gas outburst. The mining-induced pressure-relief effect can increase the permeability of the protected coal seams, form gas migration channels, and facilitate gas extraction. After the pre-extraction of the pressure-relief gas meets the standard, the coal resources in the protected seam can be used safely. Soft-rock protective seam mining faces two key technological challenges: (1) The effect of mining thickness, layer spacing, and working face length on the pressure-relief effect of the protected layer must be fully understood, and the optimum technical parameters for soft-rock protective seam mining need to be determined; (2) The key fully mechanized equipment for soft-rock protective seam mining needs to be designed and the mining technologies for soft-rock working faces must be developed to realize highly efficient soft-rock layer mining and the pressure-relief antireflection of the protected coal seam. The selection of mining technological parameters is critical for achieving a sufficient pressure-relief effect for soft-rock protective seam mining. Numerous factors must be considered e.g. the mining characteristics, pressure-relief protection effect, economic benefits, and safety The exploration drilling was arranged with a spacing of 150–200 m in the floor drainage lanes of the upper and lower III1013 mining area. Coring exploration of the mining layer and the corresponding roof and floor, as well as physical and mechanical testing of the rocks, were performed. The mechanical parameters of the coal-rock seam were determined, as shown in A 380 m × 308 m × 211.3 m model ( After the soft-rock protective seam is mined, the stress of the overlying coal-rock body redistributes, causing movement deformation of the overlying strata. The large displacement gradients of the different interlayer spacings contribute to a high expansion deformation rate between the rock formations and an improved pressure-relief effect. For the selection of the suitable protective seam, a core-drilling exploration was conducted within the range from 20 m above the roof of seam 10 to a point 30 m below the floor of seam 9. Two reasonably stable rock seams were found in the area. One lied 43–48 m below the floor of seam 9 and consisted of medium sandstone with an average thickness of 1–5 m and an average hardness of 7. The other contained Kaolin clay, consisted of gray mudstone, and was 54–64 m below the floor of seam 9. The average thickness of the gray mudstone was 5.1 m, and its average hardness was 3.73. The results demonstrated that the pressure-relief effect of the medium sandstone that was selected as the protective seam was better than that of the gray mudstone seam. However, the medium sandstone was harder, making it more challenging to develop fully mechanized technology. These unfavorable mining conditions were not suitable for the rapid advance of the protective seam. Therefore, the gray mudstone section was instead selected to be the soft-rock protective seam for mining. It has been demonstrated that within a certain range in a protected seam, when the unit stress for the coal seam is less than half of the theoretical stress level for the primary rock, the coal seam unit will undergo the effect of unrecoverable destructive pressure-relief. Therefore, in this study, the unit stress in the protected coal seam that was less than half of the primary rock stress was used as the mining stress pressure-relief index Five schemes were set up to study the optimal mining thickness. The interlayer spacing between the soft-rock protective seam and protected coal seam was fixed at 60 m, and the mining thicknesses were set (1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 m).  Eight schemes were used to optimize the working face length. The mining thickness of the soft-rock working face was fixed at 2 m, and the face length was set to 50, 75, 100, 120, 150, 180, 240, and 300 m. The size of the 3D numerical model was 508 m × 650 m × 284.6 m, and the excavation length was 1.5 times the working face length. At the end of the working face excavation, the vertical stress distribution curve of the overlying strata in the center goaf was drawn along the strike direction with the interlayer spacing of 60 m, as shown in  Based on the abovementioned considerations, in the absence of technological conditions conducive to conventional protective seam mining in the III1 mining area, a soft-rock seam containing Kaolin (i.e. mudstone) was selected as the protective seam for mining. On average, the mudstone layer was 59 m away from the floor of seam 9 and 23 m away from the roof of seam 10. The corresponding mining pattern of the soft-rock protective seam was developed (see In China, fully mechanized mining technology has been realized for working face mining in coal mines. The technology is different from that of the protective seam mining of traditional coal seams because the mining orebody belongs to the mudstone for the working face of the soft-rock protective seam. Hence, an independent and fully mechanized production technology may lead to the poor adaptation of fully mechanized equipment and low recovery coefficient of the working face. These cases require further studies on the technology for the fully mechanized mining of the soft-rock layer. The physiochemical characteristics of the mining orebody are essential to analyzing and selecting the mining technology. Large mudstone pieces were collected from the III11 soft-rock working face. A representative sample of the mudstone was selected in consideration of the complicated compositions of the rock samples. An X-ray diffractometer (XRD-6000) and scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) were then used to analyze the microstructure and morphology of the rock samples, as shown in A mudstone disintegration experiment was also conducted, as shown in Large underground mudstone pieces were drilled, cut, ground, dried, and prepared into three mudstone samples of different dimensions (Φ50 mm × 100 mm, Φ50 mm × 50 mm, and Φ50 mm × 25 mm). Physical and mechanical tests were performed using the RMT-150 rock mechanics test system, which was provided by the Mining Engineering Laboratory of Anhui University of Science and Technology. During the advancing period of the two roadways (air roadway and mechanical roadway) of the III11 soft-rock working face, rock samples for mechanical testing were collected above the tunnel cross-section every 50 m. The tested hardness of the rock samples was 1.47–9.30 (average = 3.52). Among all test parameters, the siltstone and fine sandstone had the highest hardness values, followed by the sandy mudstone, which could hinder the advancement of the working face, thereby resulting in the severe wear of the fully mechanized equipment. Based on the physicochemical characteristics of the mining orebody, the wear resistance of the equipment and mining technological system were critical considerations in the design of the fully mechanized equipment. The appropriate selection of equipment and support structures is essential for the safe, high-yield, and high-efficiency production of the soft-rock working faces. The supporting structures and model selection of the fully mechanized equipment were determined by characteristics, productivity, and geological conditions of the mining orebody on the working face. In accordance with the conventional protective seam mining practice, a three-machine assortment was explored for the soft-rock protective seam mining based on the physicochemical properties of the mining orebody. Mudstone was the main component of the soft-rock working face. Mudstone has a higher capacity (i.e. density, 2500 kg/m The primary devices of fully mechanized mining faces include the coal cutter, hydraulic support, and transport plane. These devices need to be harmonized in structure and function, demonstrating strong high reliability. They can adapt to the overall requirements of the mining orebody. Coal cutter selection: The appropriateness of the coal cutter selection directly influences the recovery coefficient of the working face. The average cutting speed and installed power are the main technological parameters influencing the coal cutter performance and are therefore chosen as the basic parameters for the coal cutter selection. Based on calculations, the specified average cutting speed of the coal cutter was 1.67 m/min, the maximum cutting speed was 2.7 m/min, and the installed power was 363.5 kW. A traction coal cutter (MG500/1130-WD AC) was selected. Hydraulic support selection: The selection of the model of hydraulic support exerts a significant influence on the safety and productivity of the working face. Hydraulic support is required to be stable and reliable, and its working resistance must meet the production needs. The maximum average support strength of the first soft-rock working face of III11 to be mined was calculated to be approximately 650 kN/m Mudstone was mainly mined from the working face of the soft-rock protective seam. In comparison with mining coal, the hardness or density of the mudstone can be high, which can easily cause high loads on cutting devices, leading to device failure, and this condition may further influence the normal circulation operation of the working face. A production process integrating fully mechanized and blasting-assisted soft-rock mining was developed to ensure the high-efficiency recovery of the soft-rock working face. Specifically, holes were drilled in the rock strata, and vibration shot was placed for the pre-splitting blasting of the rock strata. The coal cutter was then used to mine the soft-rock working face. Based on the specific production demands, a single row of portholes and three portholes were used. In these two arrangements, the porthole depth (waist and bottom portholes) and distance between holes were 1.6 and 1.0 m, respectively. The horizontal and pitching angles were 0° and 10°–15°, respectively. The diameter of the drilling hole was 43 mm, and the explosive payload was 1–2 volumes. The lute length was less than 0.5 m. A millisecond delay electric detonator and a three-level water-gel explosive, which are permissible in coal mines, were used in the series explosion. The explosion order was one charge and one detonation. The III11 soft-rock working face was the first mining working face in the III1 mining area. The corresponding ground elevation was +23 to +24 m. The strike pressure-relief range of the protected coal seam was studied using FLAC In addition, the working face of the III11 soft-rock protective seam applied trend long-wall and retreating mining as well as the full-caving method of roof management. The coal cutter was used unidirectionally upward. The cutting occurred in a weak area of the coal wall, and the depth was determined to be 0.5 m to fully realize the cutting efficiency of the coal cutter. The working face pushed the transportation plane forward, bottom-up, or top-down. The hydraulic support was shifted to cave the roof along the direction of advancement. Since the pilot production of the III11 soft-rock working face, the three-machine supporting facility can completely ensure the normal production of the working face. The working face was mined for 293 d and advanced 492.8 m in total; during the study period, the average daily advance was 1.64 m/d. After mining the soft-rock protective seam, the pressure-relief gas came mostly from overlying seams 8 and 9 (and underlying seam 10). By calculation, the relative gas emission rate was 95.3 m Boundary observation boreholes were drilled along the strike at the cut hole by using the special gas extraction roadway (III13). The cut hole position was located in a mining stability zone.  The main engineering problems of the first deep mining area of the Luling Coal Mine were analyzed. The traditional mining pattern of protective coal seams faced significant challenges. In the absence of an appropriate and conventional coal seam as the protective seam for mining, an innovative technological concept of soft-rock protective seam mining was proposed for regional gas control. Design optimization principles for the technological parameters were proposed for soft-rock protective seam mining. The influence rules of the interlayer spacing, mining thickness, and working face length on the pressure-relief effect were analyzed for the protected coal seams. The unit stress of the protected coal seam was less than half of the primary rock stress, which was used as the critical mining stress pressure-relief index. The optimal mining technological parameters, including the 59 m interlayer spacing, 2 m mining thickness, and 105 m face length, were determined accordingly. The physicochemical properties of the mining orebody were analyzed. The device selection framework for the soft-rock protective seam mining was developed, and the key devices of the working face were optimally selected. Further, the production technology, which combined fully mechanized and blasting-assisted soft-rock mining, was determined. Finally, the explosion technique of a single row of portholes and three portholes was selected. Engineering practices demonstrated that the normal circulation operation could be achieved on the working faces of the soft-rock protective seam, with an average advance of 1.64 m/d. The maximum residual gas pressure and content, which were measured at the cut hole position of the protected coal seams (seams 8 and 9), decreased to 0.35 MPa and 4.87 m This work is financially supported by