The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in a real petroleum refinery wastewater (PRWW) by a heterogeneous photocatalytic process using synthesized nano-TiO2 supported on Fe-ZSM-5 zeolite as photocatalyst irradiated with UV light has been studied. The influence of various operational parameters such as photocatalyst concentration, pH and temperature was investigated. The degradation rates of the organic pollutants followed mainly a pseudo-first order kinetic model. Results showed that the maximum photodegradation efficiency was achieved at a photocatalyst concentration of 3g/l, pH of 4 and temperature of 45°C under UV irradiation time of 120min. TiO2 loaded with the existence of oxo-iron ions in the framework of zeolite increased photocatalytic degradation of COD. The kinetics of photodegradation reaction was accelerated by an increase in temperature in the range of 15–45°C. The activation energy for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in PRWW was 18.76kJ/mol. Thermodynamic parameters of activation were assessed in the photodegradation process. Kinetics computation using transition state theory (TST) showed that the temperature had a significant effect on the rate constants during the photocatalytic degradation process. Significant photodegradation efficiency of organic pollutants using the synthesized photocatalyst indicates a good potential for this technique as a treatment system for real PRWW.Petroleum refineries use a large volume of water and consequently generate a significant amount of wastewater. PRWW based on the type of oil being processed as well as the plant configuration and operation procedure contains a high concentration of pollutants namely aliphatic and aromatic petroleum hydrocarbons. The traditional treatment techniques of refinery wastewater consist of two main treatment stages. The first stage is based on the mechanical and physicochemical processes and the second stage is the biological treatment of the pretreated primary effluent in the integrated activated sludge Photocatalytic degradation process using TiO In recent years, development of new complex molecular assemblies as photocatalysts with improved efficiency is an active area of research. The balance between charge separation, ease of interfacial electron transfer and energy-wasting charge recombination determine the efficiency of the photocatalyst In this study, the kinetic and equilibrium data were modeled using Langmuir–Hinshelwood (L–H) model and the temperature dependence of rate constant was described by the Arrhenius and transition state models. The effect of temperature was determined by the kinetic studies and the thermodynamic parameters (standard enthalpy, entropy and Gibbs free energy change of activation) were also calculated. Results are presented for the kinetics of degradation of organic pollutants under different photocatalyst concentrations, reaction pH and reaction temperatures. The PRWW was collected from the point that the wastewater is just leaving the oil and grease removal unit and just at the inlet to the dissolved air flotation for coagulation and flocculation treatment unit in Bandar Abbas refinery plant, southern Iran. The wastewater was stored at 4 The experiments were conducted in a photoreactor. Irradiation was carried out using a mercury UV lamp (Philips, 8 Wastewater pH was adjusted with 1.0 The experiments were repeated three times and the results were averaged. The standard deviations were found to be less than 5%. The effects of the TiO The effect of the different initial wastewater pH on the photocatalytic degradation was investigated by mixing 0.5 The effects of temperature (15, 35 and 45 For surface photocatalytic degradation reaction, we use the L–H model to describe the initial rates of photocatalytic removal of COD. In preliminary experiments, in order to examine the effects of UV irradiation on photodegradation of COD and adsorption of pollutants by photocatalyst, some experiments were conducted under three different conditions, Experimental data revealed about 66% of COD removal in the presence of photocatalyst and UV light, while very low COD removal efficiency of less than 4% was obtained in the presence of photocatalyst and under the absence of light after 120 The hydroxyl radicals (•OH) with a high oxidation potential of +2.8 The influence of TiO The maximum removal efficiency was obtained at a photocatalyst concentration of 3 The observed enhancement in the photodegradation in the range of 1–3 A multi-contaminated wastewater such as PRWW contains different organic pollutants which can attain a positive or negative charge, as well as the neutral form at a specific pH value. In addition, pH value of the wastewater is an important effective parameter on the surface charge properties of the photocatalyst, the adsorption behavior of pollutants and consequently on the rate of photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants taking place on the photocatalyst particulate surface The effect of pH on the photocatalytic reaction can be explained on the basis of the zero point charge (pzc) of TiO The anionic or cationic form of the organic compound affects the photodegradation efficiency. This efficiency is enhanced or inhibited by the electrostatic attraction or repulsion, respectively, between the photocatalyst's surface and the organic molecule Under acidic conditions (pH Our results demonstrated that the rate of organic compound photodegradation would be accelerated under acidic and alkaline conditions rather than pH These results are in line with findings of other researchers reporting photocatalytic degradation of organic materials under different pH values. The rate of photodecolorization of quinolone yellow dye increased when the pH rose, exhibiting maximum efficiency (97%) at pH 11.5 The effect of temperature on the COD removal rate was significant ( The Arrhenius equation ( The The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants (OPs) can also be described by the TST, assuming the existence of a stable activated complex The rate for the photocatalytic degradation may be expressed as follows: Thus, the apparent rate constant of photocatalytic degradation can be expressed as follows: According to TST, Therefore, the temperature dependent on the photocatalytic apparent rate constant is now expressed by the following equation: In the thermodynamic properties of TST, the change in the standard enthalpy (Δ Substituting Δ  The Δ If Arrhenius ( By differentiating The positive values of Δ A cost-effective solution of the photocatalytic process of organic pollutant of PRWW degradation efficiency was implemented for a number of working cycles in order to maintain its photoactivity. The possibility to reuse the photocatalyst TiO Under optimum conditions, the comparative study of the photocatalytic activity of TiO This study showed the kinetics and thermodynamics of the photocatalytic degradation of a real PRWW by a TiO This work is financially supported by the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 