Aside common methods as seismology, ground deformation, and geochemistry, electromagnetic and especially electric ones can efficiently be applied for imaging and monitoring active volcanoes and hydrothermal systems that most often control the initial eruptive phase. Surveys and mappings image ground fluids flow, faults systems, and structural interfaces with anomalies up to several hundred of mV. Reiteration of surveys highlights time and spatial evolution. Continuous networks must extend surveys when the activity becomes stronger. Resolution in the data can reach a few microvolts as compared to the tens of millivolts for surveys. Observations made on several volcanoes definitively show that electric signals, up to some tens of millivolts, may appear some hours to a few weeks before ground deformation and seismicity, and are related to some extent to the location of the future activity. These transient signals may have a relationship with those recorded aboard satellites. Both of them appear during the transition period between the “fatigue” and the “dynamical” stages, which announces accelerating and irreversible processes.Up to now, seismology, ground deformations and geochemistry are much more prevalent in studying and monitoring volcanoes compared to electric and magnetic methods, although these latter methods may bring much information on the possible scenarios of future activity, among which a smooth a-seismic renewal of activity a long time prior to an eruptive event. In the following, attention will be primarily focused on electrical methods with the objective: to describe the potentiality of electrical methods for imaging volcanic structures of depths of up to several hundred meters in which hydrothermal systems take place; to illustrate changes in the electrical pattern of the static electric field [self-potential (SP) anomalies] linked to volcanic activity; to analyze signals of durations of less than a few hours that appear prior to volcanic activity, from land and satellite observations. The recognition of a deep magma body, generally located at depths between 6 and 12 One technique is based on the straightforward measurement of the electrical potential difference between two non-polarized electrodes well positioned in the ground. Using a reference electrode considered as a relative zero potential, the measurement of the potential every 10 to 50 For our purpose, we may gather active volcanoes in three groups: volcanoes that do not currently own an active hydrothermal system in their upper part; those that exhibit large hydrothermal activity expressed by clay-rich rocks, soil degassing, warm outcrops, fumaroles, and a large related geothermal field at the ground surface; volcanoes that have well-developed hydrothermal systems located at some hundred meters below their central part, and are surrounded by non-strongly mineralized bedrocks. Group I can be illustrated by Mount Pelée in Martinique ( The above statements mean that SP mappings on volcanoes allow one to detect both the state of a hydrothermal system, if any, and the current activity. Mount Pelée and Miyake-jima can be used as case studies for illustrating two opposite states of hydrothermal activity. Mount Pelée (Martinique Island) is an andesitic composite volcano culminating at 1397 In 1991, SP measurements were performed with Pb–PbCl no active hydrothermal system was present; no deep thermal fluxes were coming from depth; as the whole, in 1991 the volcano was in a very quiet hydrothermally steady state. Miyake-jima is a basaltic stratovolcano, 760 Before 2000, although there was no large expression of surface activity on the summit (fumaroles, geysers, geothermal field), an active hydrothermal system was found at a depth of a few hundred meters below the summit by audiomagnetotelluric surveys ( Besides the fact that SP mappings on volcanoes give information on the existence of hydrothermal systems describing their activity and size ( After 1995, Miyake-jima volcano was monitored by several electromagnetic methods (SP, total magnetic and telluric fields, DC resistivity measurements) ( The comparison between the SP surveys performed before 2000 and the one achieved on the summit on 4 July did not show any large-scale increase in hydrothermal activity with time, but rather small negative anomalies and a small size positive one beside the southern rim of O-Ana crater ( These observations favour the following interpretation. Confirmed by AMT and total magnetic field measurements ( the electrical resistivity decreased at shallow depths; increased at deeper depths ( This opposite information could not be due to broad thermal fluxes coming from a magma source, but be the consequence of the opening of cracks at depth. Seismicity and gravimetric data clarified this observation in assuming the formation of a cavity during the drainage of magma outside the Island from 26 June to 4 July ( If geophysical ground surveys can be performed on volcanoes presenting a moderate activity, these methods cannot be secured when the activity enters a dynamical stage. Permanent, autonomous and as far as possible real-time monitoring networks must be used for detecting more finely the evolution of the activity. Precision of repeated SP surveys is on the order of several to tens of millivolts at a specific benchmark, while the resolution of a potential difference between two permanent electrodes can reach a few microvolts when recorded with a 24-bit data logger. Moreover, huge progress in electronics, mass memories, and more recently in speed of data transmission may allow one to install denser multi-parametric stations collecting data up to some hundreds of Hertz. The counterpart is that the huge amount of data cannot be processed manually and the development of algorithms of signal recognition is therefore required. For solving this issue, a cooperation with the Institute of Physics of the Earth of Moscow ( Some examples will now be given. These techniques were used on La Fournaise volcano for detecting electric signals prior to the 9 March 1998 eruption ( The algorithms begin with the building of rectification functionals (based on energy, length or zero crossing), and are independently applied on individual channels over an adapted running time window (there, 600 In addition to EM surveys performed on Miyake-jima during the five years preceding the eruption of 2000 in the frame of a Japanese-French cooperation project, we have installed EM autonomous self-recording stations ( Several features of the electric field at the stations can be outlined. Oscillations similar to those recorded on La Fournaise, up to 20 On Miyake-jima volcano, the interpretation of electric observations could be related to the perturbation of groundwater channels along the southwest major eruptive axis on which MYS station was installed and beneath which the first dyke was born on June 26. It is credible that the appearance of spikes between 02:30 and 06:00 LT on 27 June gives the timing of the fracturing of the sea floor from which the small submarine eruption emerged on 27 June. On 7 July, the vacant space below the summit produced by magma drainage outside the island was already in place, as attested by gravity measurements ( Results on La Fournaise and Miyake-jima volcanoes seem to obey some general pattern when we compare these observations with those obtained on Taal volcano in the Philippines ( Over the 550 active and dangerous volcanoes in the World, less that 1/5 are equipped with land networks able to detect an onset of volcanic activity. Thereby, it is noteworthy to prospect if satellites can be efficiently used in volcano monitoring, and in particular if the ionosphere and its electromagnetic content can be disturbed by volcanic activity. Such studies have not been intensely carried out, compared to those on tectonic earthquakes ( Because most transient EM fields signals take place during the few weeks preceding an eruptive event, we considered: the records with a time window starting 60 days [–60 d] before and ending 15 days [+15 d] after the onset of surface activity ( the orbits for which distances between the satellite footprint on the ground and the future erupting volcano were less than 500 High latitudes above 50° were not considered due to high magnetic activity. About 12,000 orbits were analyzed. It should be emphasized that the interesting part of an orbit lasted only 136 and 244 Between August 2004 and December 2010, 136 eruptions have occurred on 73 volcanoes. In spite of the above inordinate limitations, 57 volcanoes gave rise to 269 anomalies in the ionosphere related to the occurrence of 89 eruptions ( The most important observation is the distribution of anomalies with time. Let us consider the electrostatic disturbances and the distribution of anomalies per 15-day periods during the time window [–60 d, +15 d]( The preliminary statement is that, up to now, satellite observations are performed with a single satellite that flies over a target defined a posteriori during a very short-time span (less than a few minutes) and re-visits it the day after in the best case. Such a flying plan makes the satellite inefficient for tracking weak and progressive unrest of volcanoes. Only big-enough transient signals emerging from a background noise along an orbit can be successfully detected by one satellite. One may now consider a schematic process of volcanic activity. An active volcano may present a long period of rest, followed by a slow awaking. During this period of time, which can last several centuries, the volcano is continuously submitted to many physical processes ( The Although the number of examples of electric signals recorded at the ground before a volcanic burst in a multi-disciplinary context is relatively small, one can assert that electric signals may appear before ground deformation and seismicity. It is most likely similar for ionospheric anomalies related to volcanic activities. Therefore, it seems that only two main mechanisms could be at the origin of transient electric signals appearing a few weeks before an eruption; one is the appearance of electric signals due to a modification of groundwater circulation through fissures, and the other is the release of transient thermal fluxes and gases. But, till now, the transfer of on-land perturbations to the ionosphere or the genesis of induced anomalies in the ionosphere through some coupling mechanism are still in debate ( Self-potential method and more generally electric field measurements on volcanoes encompass a large panel of powerful techniques that give valuable information more specifically on hydrothermal systems and their activity. The measurement of SP anomalies can generally be performed everywhere easily, allowing one to rapidly detect and locate superficial faults, groundwaters, geothermal areas, and interfaces between different geologic structures. Steady state anomalies can reach hundreds of millivolts, compared to the several millivolts resolution of the method. This can be repeated on benchmarks set along particular profiles, and temporary anomalies of some tens of millivolts can be identified and be associated with the evolution of the activity. Mapping the distribution of SP anomalies at the scale of a volcano requires consistent and redundant surveys with closed loops in order to check the zero total change potential along these circuits. The error should be reduced to some tens of millivolts. The distance between measurements can become as small as 10 the possible presence of an hydrothermal system; the state of activity; the geological interfaces driving groundwater flows ( The reiteration of SP maps from which seasonal effects have been removed illustrates the large-scale time evolution of activity, as on Soufrière of Guadeloupe after 1992 ( These mapping techniques cannot be used when the level of activity increases. Real-time monitoring networks become unavoidable. When they are properly located with respect to nearby local discontinuities, electric stations are very sensitive to any change in the activity of a volcano, but also to large rainfalls infiltrating the interfaces. Anomalies of amplitudes of a few microvolts and of durations of several seconds should be detectable in order to identify the small series of signals that irregularly appear during the weeks preceding an eruption. These signals become more and more consistent between the different stations as the forthcoming activity is approaching. These signals may last some hours during the days preceding a large activity. Moreover, their distribution seems to depend on the location of the burst of activity (La Fournaise, Miyake-jima, Taal). During the last few weeks preceding a crisis, larger signals, from some hundreds of mV/km to almost 2000 Electric field anomalies in the ionosphere may also appear prior to volcanic activity. The most important observation is that the maximum number of anomalies appears in the time window between 30 and 15 days before an eruption. This would correspond to the transition period between the long false quasi-static period of “fatigue stage” and the “dynamical stage” that announces accelerating and irreversible processes ( Combining on-land and satellite observations, it appears that electric signals are prominent during the same interval of time. At that point, seismic and ground deformation may not yet have appeared. Therefore, only gas release, thermal flux, and electric field changes driven by perturbations in the groundwater flow may occur and be the primary source of anomalies in the ionosphere. Future studies should clarify if the on-land signals propagate to the ionosphere or if they induce a secondary mechanism in the atmosphere that is able to relay anomaly on the on-land anomaly to the ionosphere. This is an invited contribution to the thematic issue “Invited contributions of 2014 Geoscience laureates of the French Academy of Sciences”. It has been reviewed by Jean-Louis Le Mouël and Editor Vincent Courtillot. This paper is the outgrowth of many studies performed on different volcanoes in the frame of many cooperation projects. Without unswerving contributions of many researchers, engineers and students, such prospective work could not have seen the light. Among all of them, I would like to deeply thank J.-L. Le Mouël Y. Sasai, M.J. Johnston, A. Gvishiani, P. Yvetot, F. Fauquet, G. Vargemezis, S. Bogoutdinov, F. Bruère, J.-F. Delarue, A. Mille, T. Hashimoto, H. Hase, and S. Agayan. This work has been supported by the