Rare earth (RE) mineral deposits are typically processed using several different unit operations including flotation, gravity, magnetic and electrostatic separation techniques. Two of the most important beneficiation techniques for RE minerals are gravity and magnetic separation. Many RE minerals are found alongside low specific gravity gangue minerals thereby permitting the use of gravity separations to concentrate the heavy value RE minerals. Magnetic separation is used primarily to remove ferromagnetic gangue minerals as well as to separate individual paramagnetic rare earth minerals.
                  This work investigated the use of a wet high intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS) in conjunction with gravity pre-concentration steps (Knelson and Falcon centrifugal concentrators) to beneficiate a rare earth ore. The results of these separation steps are related to the magnetic properties of RE minerals, based on literature and measurements conducted using a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM).Rare earth (RE) element bearing minerals are composed of at least one of the fifteen lanthanide elements or yttrium. Rare earth elements are used in a diverse range of applications including high strength magnets, phosphors, alloying elements, catalysts and polishing compounds ( Recently, the Chinese government has begun imposing strict export quotas on the RE industry thereby driving RE exploration and mine development in many other regions of the world ( For further information on rare earth physical beneficiation recent reviews by Gravity separation is used in mineral processing to separate minerals based on differences in specific gravity. The most common and successful type of gravity separator used for fine particle sizes is a centrifugal gravity concentrator ( One of the most common centrifugal separators is the Knelson Concentrator, which employs an inclined bowl lined with collecting ridges where the heavy (specific gravity >4) value mineral is collected ( The Falcon Ultra-Fine (UF) Concentrator is designed specifically to process very fine particle sizes. It lacks the fluidizing water used in other centrifugal concentrators; instead relying on the geometry of the bowl walls to retain the high specific gravity material ( Magnetic separation of minerals is based on different behaviours of mineral particles when in an applied magnetic field. Unpaired electrons present in certain types of atoms cause magnetic dipoles which lead to the creation of magnetic moments in a material that can in turn result in a magnetic force on the material when these moments are aligned by an externally applied magnetic field. In mineral processing terminology there are three distinct behaviours that a mineral particle may exhibit: Ferromagnetic and paramagnetic mineral particles will both be attracted along the lines of an applied magnetic field whereas a diamagnetic mineral particle will be repelled along the magnetic field lines. The main difference in ferromagnetic and paramagnetic minerals is that a ferromagnetic material is able to much more rapidly align its magnetic moments so that the magnetisation (and consequently the magnetic force felt by the particles) is much higher at lower applied magnetic field strengths. An excellent introduction to magnetism in materials and other associated concepts can be found in the work of The magnetic recovery in a magnetic separator is dependent on the applied magnetic field strength, the magnetic field gradient and the magnetic susceptibility of the mineral particles and accompanying fluid medium as can be seen in the following equation ( The size range at which magnetic separation is effective depends on which of the three main forces on a particle (gravitational, magnetic and fluid drag) is dominant at a particular size ( As stated in Section An example of typical diamagnetic, paramagnetic and ferromagnetic behaviour may be seen in In the case of a binary mixture of a paramagnetic and a ferromagnetic material the trend of magnetisation as a function of applied magnetic field strength will be a combination of both materials (as shown in This paper investigates the magnetic properties of several different RE minerals and their associated gangue minerals through the use of a VSM. These magnetic properties are then exploited using a series of wet high intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS) steps in conjunction with gravity pre-concentration steps to concentrate the valuable RE minerals from a Canadian RE deposit. The raw material used in this work originated from the Nechalacho deposit (Avalon Rare Metals, Inc.) located in the Northwest Territories, Canada. The ore was initially crushed to a top size of 850 After crushing, a portion of the ore was stage pulverized in a ring mill to 80% passing 53 Pure mineral samples examined in this work were obtained from Gregory, Bottley and Lloyd (UK) and identified using X-ray diffraction. The vibrating sample magnetometer measurements (VSM) were conducted using a LakeShore 7300 series VSM. All mineral samples, with the exception of two zircon crystals which were analysed intact, were pulverized in a T100 ring and disc pulveriser (Siebtechnik) prior to VSM measurements. To conduct the measurements 50–100 Samples of fergusonite, bastnäsite, allanite and two different types of zircon were analysed in the VSM to experimentally determine the magnetic behaviour of these minerals prior to any attempts to concentrate the RE minerals present in the Nechalacho deposit. In addition, samples of several of the gangue minerals (including quartz, hematite and magnetite) found in the Nechalacho deposit were also examined. The Knelson separator used in this work was a KC MD3 model (FLSmidth Knelson, Canada) operated at a material flow rate of 300–400 The Falcon Concentrator used in this work was a SB-6A model (Sepro Mineral Systems, Canada). The bowl used in the Falcon Concentrator was the ultra-fine bowl, designed especially for concentrating high specific gravity fines, which is smooth-walled and has no fluidizing water. The slurrying water flow rate was 4.7 Wet magnetic separation was carried out in this work using a wet high intensity magnetic separator (BoxMag, UK). Slurried material was passed through a ferromagnetic matrix to provide as many points of high magnetic field gradient as possible. The separator also allows for the variation of applied magnetic field strength by varying the current supplied to the separator. In order to control the magnetic separator by varying the applied current, a gauss meter was used to generate a calibration curve. For each test approximately 50 Five different feed materials were used as feeds for wet magnetic separation: the untreated ore, the Knelson concentrate and tailings and the Falcon concentrate and tailings. A basic flowsheet of the different processing routes for the ore prior to WHIMS can be seen in X-ray Diffraction analysis was conducted using a Bruker D8 Discovery X-ray Diffractometer equipped with a copper X-ray generating source. The resultant diffraction patterns were processed using Xpert High Score software (PANalytical) to identify peaks and relate them to selected mineral phases present in the Nechalacho ore. The magnetisation as a function of magnetic field strength for the gangue minerals (magnetite, hematite and quartz) can be seen in The VSM results for bastnäsite and fergusonite can be seen in The VSM results for two different zircon samples, from two different localities, can also be seen in As the zircons analysed were single crystals there was no possibility of a ferromagnetic impurity being introduced during pulverising or any other sample preparation. Therefore the ferromagnetic and paramagnetic tendencies measured must be due to the presence of magnetic elements within the crystal lattices of the two zircon minerals. Given the significant concentration of rare earth elements within the crystal structure of zircon from the Nechalacho deposit it seems likely that the magnetic behaviour of the RE-bearing zircon would also be non-diamagnetic as many of the RE elements have significant paramagnetic properties due to their unpaired electrons ( The VSM results for allanite appear to indicate both ferromagnetic behaviour and paramagnetic behaviour (as can be seen in The Nechalacho ore was processed using a combination of WHIMS and gravity pre-concentration using either a Knelson (80% – 53 The mass recovery to the Knelson concentrate was 4.5% whereas the Falcon recovered 7.3% of the mass. The Knelson concentrate and tailings were each processed through a series of WHIMS steps with the resultant cumulative mass recoveries to the magnetic fraction shown in The Falcon feed, concentrate and tailings were all fed through the same series of WHIMS steps with the resultant cumulative magnetic recovery shown in A selection of the XRD patterns from the gravity and magnetic separations can be seen in Similarly When viewed relative to one another This work investigated the magnetic behaviour of several different RE minerals and then compared these results with the behaviour of a RE ore through various gravity and magnetic separation operations. The conclusions are as follows: XRD results of the products of Falcon gravity concentration followed by WHIMS indicate that diamagnetic, low specific gangue minerals in the RE ore such as K-feldspar and plagioclase are rejected into the tails of the Falcon concentration step and when these tails are fed to a series of WHIMS steps the same minerals report to the non-magnetic fraction. Comparison of the VSM results for bastnäsite, fergusonite and allanite appears to indicate that the magnetic susceptibility of fergusonite and allanite are of similar magnitude with both larger than the susceptibility of bastnäsite. This would imply that fergusonite and allanite would require a lower applied magnetic field strength for magnetic recovery than bastnäsite. The VSM results for zircon originating from two different locations shows that these two minerals are very slightly para- or ferromagnetic, and the XRD analysis of the WHIMS of gravity concentrates produced from the RE ore suggest that the zircon in the ore behaves in a para- or ferromagnetic manner as well. One possible explanation for this is that the zircon grains contain many rare earth elements whose unpaired electrons cause the material to be paramagnetic. An alternate explanation is that insufficient liberation has resulted in many zircon grains associated with ferromagnetic iron oxides in locked particles. The ferromagnetic component of these locked particles would then be expected to cause the locked particle to report to the magnetic concentrate after WHIMS. XRD analysis of the WHIMS first concentrate (lowest applied magnetic field strength) produced from the Falcon concentrate show clear signs of magnetite and hematite, indicating that the ferromagnetic iron oxide gangue minerals in the RE ore may potentially be removed from a future gravity concentrate using low intensity magnetic separation. This may be a very important finding as removal of unwanted iron-bearing minerals from a potential flotation feed could be a critical process step depending on the selection of flotation collector. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Avalon Rare Metals and for providing funding for this work through the Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) Program (444537-12). The authors would also like to acknowledge funding for A. Jordens from NSERC, Avalon Rare Metals and the McGill Engineering Doctoral Award. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Ray Langlois with the Knelson and Falcon concentration steps.