Energy, materials, and resource recovery from mixed household waste may contribute to reductions in fossil fuel and resource consumption. For this purpose, legislation has been enforced to promote energy recovery and recycling. Potential solutions for separating biogenic and recyclable materials are offered by waste refineries where a bioliquid is produced from enzymatic treatment of mixed waste. In this study, potential flows of materials, energy, and substances within a waste refinery were investigated by combining sampling, analyses, and modeling. Existing material, substance, and energy flow analysis was further advanced by development of a mathematical optimization model for determination of the theoretical recovery potential. The results highlighted that the waste refinery may recover ca. 56% of the dry matter input as bioliquid, yielding 6.2GJ biogas-energy. The potential for nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium, and biogenic carbon recovery was estimated to be between 81% and 89% of the input. Biogenic and fossil carbon in the mixed household waste input was determined to 63% and 37% of total carbon based on 14C analyses. Additional recovery of metals and plastic was possible based on further process optimization. A challenge for the process may be digestate quality, as digestate may represent an emission pathway when applied on land. Considering the potential variability of local revenues for energy outputs, the costs for the waste refinery solution appeared comparable with alternatives such as direct incineration.Within the recent decade, focus on recovery of materials, resources, and energy from solid waste has increased significantly in the endeavor of reducing fossil fuel consumptions and resources depletion Organic waste source-segregation at the household may contribute to this goal; yet, recent studies have highlighted that such a strategy may end up being inefficient (mass- and energy-wise) as a consequence of the losses occurring at the household and during the pre-treatments Emerging waste refining technologies provide potential solutions for organic separation and promise improved energy and materials recovery With regard to documenting the development potential, simple sampling at such preliminary facilities cannot provide data appropriate for full-scale implementation of the technologies. From this perspective, material-, substance-, and energy-flow analysis (MFA, SFA, and EFA) are useful techniques to assess mass, energy, and substance flows in a range of different urban systems (e.g. waste management, bioenergy, urban metabolism, etc.), including evaluation of the quality of the recovered resources This study used an advanced MFA, SFA, and EFA approach based on a mathematical optimization model to evaluate the potential flows of materials, substances (e.g. carbon, nutrients, and selected metals), and energy within a waste refinery including downstream energy conversion processes. The objectives of the study were: (i) a detailed sampling and characterization of the outputs of a pilot-scale waste refinery process (materials flow and chemical composition) with particular focus on the bioliquid; (ii) the development of a mathematical optimization model to evaluate the potential for recovery of bioliquid, materials, and nutrients with a ‘virtual’ post-treatment phase; (iii) the development of MFA, SFA, and EFA models based on the mathematical model outputs to illustrate the potential flows of materials, energy, carbon (including fossil carbon, i.e. C The study involved five major phases: (1) On-field sampling of the pilot-scale waste refinery outputs (bioliquid, fluff, and solid fraction ex-enzymatic treatment); hand-sorting of the solid fraction was also performed at this point: six individual waste material fractions were sorted and separated (see Section The study was based on the operation of a pilot-scale plant (0.5–1 The waste refinery aims at producing two products from the incoming MSW: (i) a bioliquid (i.e. slurry composed of enzymatically liquefied organics, paper, and cardboard) and a solid fraction (i.e. non-degradable waste materials). The refinery process consisted of two reactors: in the first reactor the waste was heated to about 75 The bioliquid can be exploited for biogas production (an option considered in this study), co-combusted in a coal-fired power plant, or utilized for producing fuel The three outputs from the pilot-scale waste refinery ( The following individual waste material fractions were then hand-sorted from the daily samples of SF It has to be noticed that enzymes were added during the process (ca. 7 The hand-sorted waste material fractions were sub-sampled using the method described by Dried bioliquid (BL) was shredded with the Retsch SM 2000 cutter mill down to a size of 1 Dried hard and soft plastic and textiles (HP Dried ferrous and non-ferrous (FE Dried residue (RES Dried fluff (FF During all operations, large amounts of pulverized dry ice (CO Volatile solid (VS) content, chemical composition, and calorific value (higher heating value, HHV) were determined by standard analyses following the approach described in The composition of the digestate was determined through (i) SFA modeling and (ii) chemical analyses of actual samples from full-scale anaerobic digestion of the bioliquid. The first approach was based on the chemical composition of the sampled bioliquid (BL The results of the chemical analyses provided the composition of the waste material fractions (BL The mathematical formulation consisted of two parts: (i) mass balance and (ii) uncertainty handling. In the second part (ii) the uncertainty in the model input variables was first characterized by means of Probability Distribution Functions, and then it was propagated onto the results. A detailed description of the approach used to elaborate the uncertainties is reported in the The model considered The flows As concentrations (or ‘fractions’), they fulfilled the conditions similar to Eq. Follows a detailed description of the methodology to determine Subject to the constraints of Eqs. Such problem is of simple solution, as it can be broken down into And by combining Eqs. For each material The determination of the material fraction flows The results of the mathematical optimization model ( A cost analysis was performed to compare the waste refinery-based system with direct incineration. The geographical and temporal scope of the analysis was Denmark, year 2013. The analysis included costs for collection, treatment, and disposal of residues, including eventual revenues associated with sales of electricity, heat, and recyclables as well as national taxes and subsidies. Externalities were not included. The following two scenarios were assessed: (A) collection of all municipal household waste without source segregation and waste refinery treatment (CHP production from the bioliquid–biogas and incineration of the residual solids fraction for CHP production; separation and recycling of hard plastic and metals). (B) Collection of all municipal household waste without source segregation and direct incineration for CHP production (with metals recovery from BA). The price for electricity and heat was based on current Danish sale market prices (0.035 and 0.042 Three sensitivity analyses were performed to test: (S1) the influence of heat and electricity prices (and related revenues) on the total cost; (S2) the influence of hard plastic management on the total cost; (S3) the influence of the electricity recovery efficiency at the incinerator. A detailed description of the background data used for the analysis, of the calculation of treatment and collection costs, and of the sensitivity analyses is reported in the The chemical composition of the input waste to the facility was determined based on substance balance calculation from the chemical composition of the individual waste material fractions sampled ( The results of the batch assays indicated an average methane potential of the bioliquid of 443 NL CH The material and energy flows are reported in All in all, more than half of the dry matter (56%) can potentially be recovered into the bioliquid (BL) flow as liquefied organic and paper material (see The hard plastic and soft plastic items (HP and SP) constituted about 8% and 9%, respectively, of the total dry weight. The energy content equaled 2.8 and 2.6 As previously discussed (Section The substance flows for C, C Most of the carbon ( Significant fossil carbon flows ( As mentioned in Section About 85% of the nitrogen (i.e. 11 As expected, almost all of the iron (Fe) and aluminum (Al) were found, respectively, in the ferrous (about 33 The quality of the digestate left after anaerobic digestion is of particular concern because of the opportunity to apply this product on agricultural land, thereby recycling the nutrients (N, P, and K). This management strategy, however, is strongly dependent on the content of heavy metals and other hazardous chemicals (e.g. PAH, phthalates, etc.), which might constitute an impediment to use on land. The analytical concentrations of most of the assessed chemicals (C, N, P, K, Fe, Al, Sr, Mn, Mg, Cr, Ni, Hg, Pb) were similar to the corresponding modeled SFA results. Some differences were found for Fe, Cu, and Cd, whose modeled concentrations were slightly lower than the analyzed values. For heavy metals, the results of the analyses showed that the concentrations of Cd and Ni exceeded the selected limit values (mg per kg of total P). For Ni, this was also confirmed by the SFA results. The concentration of the other heavy metals (e.g. Cr, Cu, Pb, etc.) was within the limits. However, as highlighted in As thoroughly detailed in the While the uncertainties associated with the analytical procedures were generally very low compared with the observed variations in material flows, the sampling procedure was designed to minimize the uncertainties associated with the material composition by involving a large number of small sub-samples which were then combined before analysis. This procedure follows standard practices within sampling of solid materials such as ash waste (e.g. The results of the cost analysis for the Danish case study ( As documented in the Lower electricity recovery efficiency at the incinerator may also change the final cost making the waste refinery scenario overall preferable to the alternative ( It has to be noted that when including the national subsidy for biogas-electricity, the net cost for organic waste digestion was negative (i.e. net gaining) under the assumptions taken for electricity and heat recovery (see Overall, the modeling results showed that about 81–89% of the nutrients could potentially be recovered in the bioliquid flow with the current technology set-up. However, still 11–19% of the total biomass input (i.e. organic waste, paper, cardboard, biogenic textiles, etc.) was found in the solids flow (mainly in the residue namely “RES”). This lost portion of biomass, although partly not liquefiable (e.g. fruit shells) and thus not recoverable as bioliquid, could be further decreased by improved enzymatic treatment (longer retention time, or optimized enzymes mix) in order to optimize the overall degradation of the biomass and to facilitate its further separation from the remaining solids. To this respect, the role of the post-treatment (here only modeled) will also be fundamental in order to maximize the separation bioliquid–solids and thus the total recovery of bioenergy. Further, in the broader perspective of maximizing the overall environmental performance of the technology, separation and recovery of ferrous, non-ferrous, and eventually plastic materials for recycling and substitution of virgin products will also be important as documented in other studies All in all, the integration of materials, bioenergy (from bioliquid), and energy (from residual solids) recovery could make the performance of this technology comparable (or better) to the best available state-of-the-art waste technologies A waste refinery may recover ca. 56% of the initial DM as bioliquid, yielding 6.2 Financial support for this study was provided by a Research Grant, EUDP 304701, from the Danish Energy Agency (DEA) as well as the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The authors would also like to thank Matthew Woods, ARC (Amager Ressource Center), and DONG energy for the contribution in the sampling campaign and Veronica Martinez-Sanchez for the valuable inputs to the cost analysis. Supplementary data (SI) associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 