The paper presents a new concept in the field of Eddy-Current separation. A new device was used for the magnetic separation of Al from a mixture of millimetric Al–Cu wires. The new device is presented where the feeding is achieved at the lower part of the magnetic drum. In this way the rotation of the conductive particle contributes positively, increasing the total translational acceleration, and enhancing the effect of separation. We also established the device parameters in order to obtain an optimum grade and recovery of Al.Eddy-Current separation methods are used for the recovery of non-ferrous metals (Cu, Al, Pb, Zn) from solid wastes and also for separating various non-ferrous metals from each other. These methods of wasteprocessing rely on the fact that Eddy Currents are induced in the conductive non-ferrous particles due to the changing of the magnetic field in such a separator. The interaction between Eddy-Currents and the magnetic field yields in electrodynamic forces exerted upon the conductive particles. Therefore the trajectories for these particles are different from the trajectories of the non-conductive ones. Eddy-Current dynamic separators with permanent magnets represent a class of separators substantially improved in the last 10 years. In these separators, the magnetic field is generated by machinery with moving permanent magnets. The modern Eddy-Current separators used at present for the recovery of non-ferrous metals are the horizontal drum Eddy-Current separator (HDECS) types, where the permanent magnets are placed alternately, N–S and S–N oriented around a drum, parallel to its axis ( A conveyor belt takes the particles over the drum and the conductive particles are accelerated thus following the motion of the drum ( A possible solution to these problems might be the introduction of the particles in the separator through the lower part of the drum. This paper describes a new type of Eddy-Current dynamic separator, which consists of a horizontal spinning drum covered with NdFeB permanent magnets, alternately N–S and S–N oriented ( As in the case of all dynamic Eddy-Current separators, the fluctuating field of the spinning drum induces Eddy Currents in conductive non-ferrous particles moving close to the drum. Eddy Currents in conductive non-ferrous particles moving through the non-homogeneous magnetic field are caused by Faraday's induction law and are induced in a particle as a response to a magnetic field which changes rapidly in time. In fact, Eddy Currents develop as a reaction to the fluctuations of the field observed by the particle ( While a particle moves through the magnetic field, it undergoes changes of size and orientation of the field due to its translational and rotational motion. The changes of the magnetic field acting on a particle moving close to the rotary drum are caused by two different motions: the rotation of the drum and the translational and rotational motion of the particle in the active zone of the magnetic field ( If the particle is sufficiently small, it can be treated as a magnetic dipole and the variations of the applied field within the particle are small. In this case, both the force It is also known that the translational acceleration is proportional to the particle surface, while the angular acceleration is independent of the particle size. This leads to the well-known effect that the small particles do not move in the belt direction but begin to jump on it or even move in the reverse direction. In order to increase the translational movement due to the rotation of the particles we have built a new device. Unlike the traditional solution (  Even when the particles are small, translational acceleration exists, and rotation determines particle movement and eventually causes particle to jump from the vibratory surface. The new separator is shown in We have used the following symbols: A – feeding system; VT – vibratory surface; T T C C1 – separation flap;      Our goal was to establish the optimum values for the device parameters ( An amount of 1 kg mixture was sieved and separated into four classes: K K K K For this, we obtained the following Al grade input: For every group of parameters (     We have found that increasing the magnitude of the friction coefficient between the particles and vibrational surface improved the degree of separation. Thus, when the vibratory surface was made of Pertinax we obtained the following values: We have also found that by increasing the friction coefficient between the particles and the vibratory surface, the total translational acceleration of the particles increased due to their rotation. Indeed, due to the friction between the particles and the vibratory surface (which hinder sliding) the particles will obtain an extra acceleration due to their rotation, which throw them in the direction of movement. At the same time, due to the higher Cu inertia momentum in comparison with Al (for the size particle) the Cu particles will have a lower angular acceleration when they get away from the vibratory surface, improving thus the separation process. Our results confirm the working hypothesis according to which the rotation of the conductive particle when the feeding is directed towards the lower part of the drum contributes positively to the separation process. From  