In this study, the separation of feldspar minerals (albite) from slimes containing feldspar and iron containing minerals (Fe-Min) was studied using dissolved air flotation (DAF) technique whereby bubbles less than 100μm in size are produced. Before the flotation experiments with slimes, single flotation experiments with albite and Fe-Min were carried out using DAF in order to obtain optimum flotation conditions for the selective separation of feldspar from the slimes. Flotation experiments were performed with anionic collectors; BD-15 (commercial collector) and Na-oleat. The two methods of reagent conditioning were tested on the flotation performance; traditional conditioning and charged bubble technique. In addition, the effect of pH, flotation time, rising time, and drainage time which influence the selective separation in the DAF system were studied in detail. Overall, the flotation results indicated that the separation of albite from Fe-Min can be achieved with DAF at 5min of rising time and 5min of drainage time. Interestingly, these results also showed that the conditioning of the particles with the charged bubbles increased the flotation recovery of Fe-Min compared to the traditional conditioning. Furthermore, the flotation tests with the feldspathic slime sample were carried out under the optimum conditions obtained from the systematic studies using the single minerals. The charged bubble technique produced an albite concentrate assaying 0.33% Fe2O3
                     +TiO2 and 11.07% Na2O+K2O from a slime feed consisting of 1.06% Fe2O3
                     +TiO2 and 10.36% Na2O+K2O.Feldspar minerals, Na-feldspar (albite) and K-feldspar (microline and orthoclase), have been widely used in many industries such as glass, ceramic and porcelain industry for a long time. Feldspar ores are generally separated from their colouring impurities and quartz by flotation technique. Slimes in feldspar flotation (usually −38 Flotation process depends on the attachment of particles on air bubbles at the three-phase contact line. The particle–bubble interaction involves three processes: collision, attachment, and detachment ( Some of the techniques used for recovering valuable minerals from slime are to selectively enlarge the particle size with polymeric flocculation, coagulation, oil agglomeration and shear flocculation ( Some of these techniques have been used with the traditional techniques to increase flotation efficiency ( Production of fine bubbles by DAF method has been largely used as an alternative method for waste water treatment, yet today its use for the beneficiation of fine particles has been investigated ( Iron containing minerals colours baked materials, especially in ceramics and porcelain industry must be removed from feldspars ( In this study, selective flotation of feldspathic slimes was performed with DAF system which provides fine bubbles. In this regard, the aim of this study is to achieve selective separation of fine albite particles from feldspar flotation plant slimes using the DAF cell and more importantly compare the performance of charged bubble system with the traditional conditioning system. The concentrated albite, Fe-Min, and slimes were used for the flotation experiments. All samples were obtained from Kaltun Inc., Aydin, Turkey. The chemical analyses of both samples and slime are presented in In addition, the samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique. The XRD analyses for the concentrated albite and Fe-Min indicated that the Fe-Min is mostly composed of biotite, amphibole, garnet, ilmenite, hornblende, quartz and feldspar ( The flotation studies were performed in two stages. In the first stage, the concentrated albite and Fe-Min obtained from altered granite sample were used. In the second stage, flotation plant slimes were used for the experiments. Fe-Min for the flotation experiments were obtained from rare earth magnetic separator (REMS) type high-intensity magnetic separator following crushing and classification process at 1.0 Anionic type commercial reagent BD-15 which consists of 48% oleic acid, 36% linoleic acid, max 3% palmitic and stearic acids and max 3% linoleic supplied by Da-Cemex company was used for the experiments. The main reason for using the anionic reagent for the flotation of Fe-Min is that the sample showed positive charge at pH Dissolved air flotation system (DAF) is composed of a bubble generator and flotation cell, as seen in The zeta potential measurements for biotite, concentrated albite, and Fe-Min were carried out using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern Inst, UK). The suspension used for the measurements was prepared by placing 0.1 The zeta potential of air bubbles with anionic collector and frother at various pH values were also measured using the same zetasizer. Micro bubbles for the measurements were generated using a pressure cabin at 5 In the ceramic industry, the colour test is usually performed for assessing the quality of the samples. In this method, the sample is burned in the oven at high temperature, and then the whiteness of the burned sample is observed as an indicator for the quality of the ceramic. The whiter the colour is the more suitable the quality. For this purpose, the colour tests were performed for the feldspar concentrates obtained from the flotation experiments. First, about 5 The zeta potential experiments were carried out with biotite, concentrated albite, and Fe-Min at different pH values.  Flotation experiments were carried out with the concentrated albite, Fe-Min, and slimes using DAF in order to find the optimum conditions for the separation. In the first group of studies, the effect of pH, amount of reagents, rising time, drainage time on the flotation recovery of the concentrated albite and Fe-Min were separately investigated using traditional conditioning (Method I) and charged bubbles (Method II). In the second group, the flotation experiments were carried out using slime samples. In this study, the flotation experiments were carried out using BD-15 as the collector to investigate the effect of reagent dosage on flotation recovery using Methods I and II. The rising time, flotation time, drainage time, hold-up, pH, frother dosage and bubble generator pressure were kept constant at 2 As shown in The flotation experiments (Method I) were carried out at different pH values with 100 As seen from Rising time of pulp in flotation cell is related to the aperture of needle valve, and affects the hold-up in the system. The flotation experiments at different rising times were carried out with 100 As seen from the The effect of drainage time on the flotation of the concentrate albite and Fe-Min was investigated using Method I and Method II. The results are presented in The flotation experiments were also performed with slimes as a function of reagent dosage. The experiments were carried out at pH 4, 5 In this study, it was aimed to achieve a separation with DAF technique under the conditions where true flotation was active in a medium with only fine particles and bubbles and selective collector reagent was used instead of developing traditional systems. Such studies also shed a light on separation studies of nanosized particles which gain importance nowadays. The flotation experiments with the concentrated albite, Fe-Min and slimes indicated that the charged bubble method (Method II) was more effective than the traditional method (Method I) in term of selective separation of the minerals. The reason for this is that while the hydrophobic and/or electrostatic interaction is the main mechanism between the particles and bubbles in the traditional system, there is only electrostatic interaction between the particles and bubbles in the charged bubble system ( Reagent charging of bubbles was performed via CGA system by Seba for the first time; although uncertain, the existence of a multi-layer formed by a surfactant around the gas core was stated (  Efficiency and selectivity were observed to increase after feeder pump was stopped in CGA system, while considering such condition as the second phase of flotation ( The concentrate achieved in these studies is of 2nd quality product which is able to be used in ceramics sector. The flotation results suggest that a 2nd quality product for use in ceramics sector can be obtained using DAF under the optimum conditions. The zeta potential studies with biotite indicated that biotite was contaminated by Fe ions during their occurrence. The removal of Fe-Min with anionic reagent (BD-15) was found to be suitable at the end of the experiments. In the selective separation study carried out with concentrated minerals, separation of Fe-Min from the concentrated albite using charged bubble method showed 76% recovery at 5 Pilot and industrial applications of this study will contribute to the slime treatment both in terms of environmental and economical benefits. In industrial applications, DAF system could be individually used to recover the valuable minerals from slimes.