Production water reinjection plays an important role in geothermal reservoir management. Heterogeneous porous geothermal reservoir models considering the spatial distributions of permeability and rock heat capacity are generated. In total, 200 realizations with different permeability fields were considered. A fully coupled modeling of reservoir deformation, fluid flow, and heat transport was performed on each realization using the finite element method. The results showed that heterogeneity induced channeling appears in the geothermal reservoirs with increasing heterogeneity of permeability, through which the injected production can quickly reach the production well. This causes the shorter thermal breakthrough time at production wells, and the lower reservoir surface settlement. In geothermal reservoir models considering the correlation between heat capacity and permeability, the thermal breakthrough curves and the reservoir surface settlement were the same as the reservoir models of the constant heat capacity. With increasing correlation length, the possibility of flow channels appearing in well pair system increases, causing a short average thermal breakthrough time and a lower surface settlement around the injection well. The existence of preferential flow channels between injection and production wells indicates that an equivalent flow channel model can be approximately simulate geothermal doublets in heterogeneous reservoirs.Geothermal water production from deep reservoirs has been mainly used for space heating worldwide. Reinjection of production water into geothermal reservoirs after utilization plays an important role in preventing from geothermal pressure drop, surface subsidence, and surface water pollution, but an improper scheme of reinjection may undesirably cause thermal breakthrough into production wells, ground heaving, as well as seismic activities [ In a porous geothermal reservoir with spatial heterogeneity in permeability, the development of preferential flow paths or channels is one of the most significant characteristics, which in some cases makes the performance of the well pair completely different from homogeneous case under the same injection conditions. Geological representations such as homogeneous models or layer cake models may not accurately predict the performance of the well pair in geothermal reservoirs. Crooijmans et al. [ Recent field and numerical studies [ The main objective of this paper is to systematically investigate the response of a heterogeneous geothermal reservoir that includes a well pair to the reinjection of cold production water, through a fully coupled thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) modeling. The thermal breakthrough time at production wells and the surface settlement are the main focuses of this study. For a heterogeneous porous geothermal reservoir, Watanabe et al. [ One of the main problems of modeling fluid flow and heat transport in heterogeneous geothermal reservoirs is the reliability of the spatial distribution of physical parameters, including permeability and rock heat capacity. Geostatistics is widely used to deal with heterogeneity in geologic formations [ Generation of a spatially random field of permeability The porous reservoir is divided into cubic domains with sizes above REV (representative element volume), and a value of permeability is assigned to each domain from a specified permeability distribution. In this generic study, it was assumed that the permeability was normally distributed and correlated in the space. The values of permeability were generated using a three-dimensional turning bands random field generator, TBSIM [ Note that Eq. The permeability distribution was defined by its mean (≠0) and the variance, and thus the mean can be added to each value of Correlation between permeability and rock heat capacity Plots of sandstone core data show that the logarithm of permeability ( The relationship between the heat capacity and porosity of sandstone is [ Rock porosity is the percentage of voids in a rock, and dry density and porosity of sandstone have the following relationship [ Combining Eqs. COMSOL Multiphysics was used in this study to model spatio-temporal evolutions of temperature and deformation in heterogeneous geothermal reservoirs, when the cold production water was injected at a constant rate. COMSOL Multiphysics has been widely adopted in industries and institutions for its capability to accommodate extensive reservoir modeling and the coupling of several fields in finite element analyses [ Darcy's law in porous media complies with mass conservation, Combining of Eqs. Heat transport in a porous media is described by the convection-diffusion equation, The effective thermal conductivity, Thermo-poro-elasticity typically describe the linked interactions among fluid, temperature and deformation in porous media. The relationship between stress tensor The elasticity matrix According to Biot's theory [ Navier's equations for a solid in equilibrium under purely gravitational load is, To summarize, the changes in fluid content and temperature are fully coupled with strain and stress through Eq.  Model geometry and parameters The data base for this generic study mainly comes from a well pair system in the Dezhou geothermal reservoir, Shandong province, China. The distance between the injection and production wells was about 230 m. Boundary and initial conditions We assumed linear depth-dependent hydrostatic pressure, lithostatic stress, and temperature distribution ( Realizations The focus of this numerical study is the response of a well pair system in a heterogeneous geothermal reservoir to the reinjection of cold production water, and thus 4 scenarios with different variances of permeability distributions, say 1, 2, 4, and 6, were considered ( Adequate calculation steps were performed before injection to reach an initial equilibrium state under the initial mechanical, hydraulic and thermal conditions, and then the injection and production wells stated to operate at the same flow rate of 50 m Injecting cold production water could induce complex changes in the temperature, stress, pore-pressure and thermal contraction in reservoir rocks [ To avoid the difficulty of showing the three-dimensional flow patterns in geothermal reservoirs, we plotted the two-dimensional flow patterns on the middle vertical and horizontal sections of geothermal reservoirs with increasing heterogeneity of permeability ( The cold fronts at If we defined the reduction of production temperature by 1 °C as the thermal breakthrough time, the average thermal breakthrough times changed from 29.5 a for the homogeneous reservoir to 13.8 a for the heterogeneous reservoir of σ It is emphasized that preferential flow channels did appear in the heterogeneous reservoirs, but this does not necessarily mean that flow channels connecting injection and production wells exist. Actually, in some numerical models of the heterogeneous reservoirs, the preferential flow channels connect the injection well and model boundaries. We accounted the percentage of the existence of flow channels connecting well pairs in heterogeneous reservoirs, and found that this percentage did increase with increasing heterogeneity of permeability ( In this section, we focused on comparing the vertical displacements at reservoir surfaces ( Watanabe et al. [ As the statistical properties of geothermal reservoirs are not well known, we assumed a correlation length of 50 m in Section The turning bands method used in this study is one of most well-known method for generating a multidimensional stationary process. The main advantage of this method relies on the fact that it simplifies he multidimensional simulations to the one-dimensional case. Another method for generating a multidimensional stationary random field with an imposed model of covariance function is the so-called Fourier integral method [ The four scenarios with different variances of permeability distributions, i.e., 1, 2, 4, and 6, were considered, and fifty realizations of each scenario were generated using the Fourier integral method. The present study examined the response of a well pair system in a heterogeneous geothermal reservoir during its continuous operation of 50 a. The effects of three important parameters including permeability, heat capacity, and correlation length on the response of a well pair system were studied. Actually, there are many other factors that may also affect the operation of deep well pair system [ Based on some empirical relationships from literature (Eqs We considered continuous injection and production for 50 a in this study, but well pair systems for district heating generally operate only during the annual cold season. There is an opportunity for reservoir temperatures to recover during the warm season. The current modeling procedure therefore leads to temperature predictions that are likely lower (worse) than the reality. Stepped injection and production consistent with discontinuous production can also be easily incorporated in the present models. In addition, the pre-existing flow field may also affect the response of geothermal reservoirs to the injection of cold production water, but the pre-existing flow field is rarely known. We performed numerical modeling on the coupled THM processes in heterogeneous porous geothermal reservoirs including a well pair, and the results showed that the heterogeneous geothermal reservoirs behaved differently from the homogeneous geothermal reservoir. The main characteristics are summarized below: With increasing heterogeneity of permeability, flow channeling appears in the geothermal reservoirs, through which the injected production can quickly reach the production well. In geothermal reservoir models considering the correlation between heat capacity and permeability, the thermal breakthrough curves and the reservoir surface settlement were the same as the reservoir models of the constant heat capacity. With increasing correlation length, the possibility of flow channels appearing in well pair system increases, causing a short average thermal breakthrough time and a lower surface settlement around the injection well. In heterogeneous porous geothermal reservoirs, flow channeling commonly occurs, but this does not necessarily mean that flow channels connecting injection and production wells exist. Flow channels are determined by the distribution of permeability and well positions in reservoirs. This work was jointly supported by the