The exploration of the dielectric properties of waste hydrodesulfurization catalysts has important guiding significance for the development of microwave heat treatment of waste hydrodesulfurization catalysts for the recovery of valuable metals. The resonant cavity perturbation technique was used to measure the dielectric properties of waste catalyst and the mixture of waste catalyst and Na2CO3 during roasting from room temperature to 700 °C at 2450 MHz. The heating properties of the waste catalyst and mixture of waste catalyst and Na2CO3 were determined in the microwave field. The results show that the waste catalyst and the mixture of waste catalyst and Na2CO3 exhibit strong microwave response capability, and the dielectric constant, dielectric loss factor, and dielectric loss tangent increase with increasing temperature; from 20 to 300 °C, the waste catalyst and the mixture of waste catalyst and Na2CO3 heated at a slower rate, while the material heated rapidly from 300 to 700 °C. In addition, the mechanism of microwave action has been proposed based on the study of dielectric properties and heating properties in the microwave field.Hydrodesulfurization catalysts are mainly composed of active components (usually sulfides of Co, Mo, Ni, etc.), carriers (usually Al Recently, microwave technology has been widely used in various mineral processing and metallurgical extraction processes, such as microwave calcination, microwave carbothermal reduction of ilmenite, microwave roasting of sulfide ore, microwave-assisted waste activated carbon regeneration and microwave-assisted treatment of waste, due to its rapid heating, selectivity of heating, uniform heat distribution, high heating efficiency, and other benefits [ Typically, commercial frequencies for microwaves are 915 and 2450 MHz. The dielectric properties of materials are closely related with microwave frequency, temperature, type, etc., and temperature is particularly important. He et al. [ Typically, materials with a higher loss tangent can be heated efficiently in the microwave field. The purpose of this work is to study the dielectric properties and heating properties of the waste hydrodesulfurization catalyst in the microwave field. Ultimately, the dielectric properties and heating properties of pure component materials such as Al The waste HDS catalyst used in the current work was provided by a petrochemical enterprise in China. The waste catalyst was deoiled according to a literature report before the dielectric properties and heating behavior were determined [ In general, the resonant cavity perturbation method is a relatively accurate and high-precision method for measuring the dielectric properties of powder samples [ Whether the materials can be effectively heated by the microwave depends on the ability of the materials to respond to microwaves. In general, the stronger the material's ability to respond to a microwave field, the more effectively the materials are heated by the microwave [ From the above analysis, it is known that the waste catalyst exhibits a better responsiveness to microwaves. However, the negative effect of the waste catalyst on the microwave response was observed when Na In summary, from 20 °C to 300 °C, the effective heating of the waste catalyst by microwave mainly depends on the high-efficiency response of NiS and MoS From the above analysis, it is known that the waste catalyst exhibits good responsiveness to microwaves and exhibits an interesting temperature rise phenomenon in the microwave field while being heated efficiently. The mixture of waste catalyst and Na In this work, the dielectric properties of waste catalysts and other related materials were tested, and the correlation between dielectric properties and temperature rise characteristics was verified by studies of temperature rise characteristics. The following conclusions are drawn from the experimental results: The responsiveness of spent catalyst to microwaves increases with increasing temperature. From 20 °C to 300 °C, the responsiveness of wast catalyst to microwaves is attributed to NiS and MoS The heating process of waste catalyst mixed with Na The microwave heating mechanism is proposed for the waste catalyst. Once the waste catalyst was exposed to microwave radiation, the microwave in-situ energy conversion increases the atomic activity, which promotes the rapid heating of the waste catalyst, especially the strong absorption of microwave materials such as NiS and MoS The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the