Clay-based mullite was prepared for insulating substrate applications. The clay and reactive alumina are the starting materials for the stoichiometric mullite prepared by reaction sintering at 1600 °C/3 h. MgO and boehmite were added as sintering aid to improve the density and decrease the sintering temperature. The properties of the sintered bodies, such as thermal, electrical and mechanical properties of the sintered samples were studied. The boehmite (5.0 wt.%) substituted for reactive alumina mixture showed higher density (96% theoretical density). Clay and reactive alumina completely reacted at 1600 °C and formed mullite phase. Samples with 3.0 wt.% MgO addition showed the presence of secondary phases such as α-alumina and spinel. The mullite crystals formed are needle-shaped with rectangular faces. The MgO (3.0 wt.%) addition slightly decreased the thermal expansion. Dielectric constant values are almost same for the samples with boehmite or MgO addition.Mullite is not only having good high temperature properties but also excellent electrical insulating ability making it potentially useful in applications ranging from refractories to electronic substrates Traditionally, alumina ceramics dominate this area of application for their outstanding thermal and corrosion stability. However, the high dielectric constant and high thermal expansion coefficient of alumina cause delay in signal propagation and thermal expansion mismatch between substrate and silicon chip, respectively When alumino-silicate minerals are heated above 1400 °C, they react to form primary mullite and SiO Mullite powder compacts have poor solid state sinterability because of the low interdiffusion rates of Si Experiments were carried out with raw kaolinite clay from Neyveli, India and reactive alumina (SG 9000 mean grain size 0.7 μm). As per the stoichiometric composition (72 wt.% of Al Particle size distribution analysis was carried out for the starting raw materials using Shimadzu laser particle size analyzer model SALD 1100. Powders were characterized by differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TG) using NETZSCH STA409PC with α-alumina as the reference material at a heating rate of 5 °C min  The XRD results of the sintered samples are shown in The microstructure of the samples sintered at 1600 °C for 3 h is shown  The physical properties of the sintered samples are presented in The linear thermal expansion coefficient (30–400 °C) of the sintered bodies is shown in The dielectric constant of the sintered bodies measured at a frequency range of 1–13 MHz for both MgO- and boehmite-containing samples are shown in From the results of this study, the following conclusions are arrived. Boehmite increases the density to 3.01 g cm Addition of MgO increases the grain growth, while boehmite substitution is not favoring the grain growth. However, the presence of boehmite broadens the grain size distribution. This yields maximum density and moderate strength. The MgO-containing samples are lower in density than the boehmite-containing samples; however, the strength is high. The linear thermal expansion coefficient is comparatively lower for sample containing MgO. The dielectric constant values of both the samples are almost same. The linear thermal expansion coefficient and dielectric constant of the clay derived mullite are higher than the pure mullite; however, the value for clay based mullite is far below the values reported for alumina elsewhere.