Background
                  Currently existing classifications of tibial plateau fractures do not help to guide surgical strategy. Recently, a segment-based mapping of the tibial plateau has been introduced in order to address fractures with a fracture-specific surgical approach. The goal of the present study was to analyze incidence and fracture specifics according to a new 10-segment classification of the tibial plateau.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 242 patients with 246 affected knees were included (124 females, 118 males, mean age 51.9±16.1years). Fractures were classified according to the OTA/AO classification. Fracture pattern was analyzed with respect to a 10-segment classification based on CT imaging of the proximal tibial plateau 3cm below the articular surface.
               
                  Results
                  161 Patients suffered an OTA/AO type 41-B and 85 patients an OTA/AO type 41-C tibial plateau fracture. Females had an almost seven times higher risk to suffer a fracture due to low-energy trauma (OR 6.91, 95% CI (3.52, 13.54), p<0.001) than males. In 34% of the patients with affection of the medial tibial plateau, a fracture comminution, primarily due to low-energy trauma (p<0.001), was observed. In type B fractures, the postero-latero-lateral (65.2%), the antero-latero-lateral (64.6%) and the antero-latero-central (60.9%) segment were most frequently affected. Every second type C fracture showed an unique fracture line and zone of comminution. The tibial spine was typically involved (89.4%). A typical fracture pattern of high-energy trauma demonstrated a zone of comminution of the lateral plateau and a split fracture in the medial plateau. The most frequently affected segments were the postero-latero-central (85.9%), postero-central (84.7%), and antero-latero-central (78.8%) segment.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Posterior segments were the most frequently affected in OTA/AO type B and C fractures. Acknowledging the restricted visibility of posterior segments, whose reduction and fixation is crucial for long-term success, our findings implicate the use of posterior approaches more often in the treatment of tibial plateau fractures. Also, low-energy trauma was identified as an important cause for tibial plateau fractures.Although tibial plateau fractures represent a rare fracture entity with an approximate incidence of 10.3%, their manifestation may constitute a severe injury to the knee joint and demands proper treatment to restore the knee joint function and to prevent early onset of osteoarthritis Between June 2010 and December 2015, a total of 305 patients with a tibial plateau fracture were treated at a level-one trauma center and retrospectively analyzed. Of these cases, 36 had to be excluded, as there was no pre-operative CT scan available. Another 25 were excluded due to an extra-articular fracture manifestation (OTA/AO type A). Additional exclusion criteria included re-operation due to a second fracture of the same tibial plateau or periprosthetic fractures. Four patients suffered from tibial plateau fractures on both knees. Therefore, a total of 242 patients with 246 affected knees and completed patient demographics (124 females [mean Intra-articular fractures were classified on preoperative CT scans, according to the OTA/AO classification Statistical analysis was carried out using IBM The study cohort included 161 tibial plateau fractures classified as OTA/AO type 41-B (B1: n Males showed an age-peak to experience a type C fractures or type B fractures in their 5th and 6th decade, respectively. Females showed their highest frequency of fracture approximately 10 years later and suffered from a type B or type C fractures in their 6th and 7th decade ( 29.3% (n In type B fractures, a wide range of fracture patterns with an overall of 29 different segment combinations could be identified. The lateral tibial plateau was most commonly affected (88.8%, either lateral only or in combination with the medial tibial plateau, In type C fractures, we did not find any differences in the fracture pattern between the sexes and different age groups. Due to its nature and with 44 different types of fracture variations, type C fractures showed a greater diversity of fracture patterns than type B fractures. Every second type C fracture showed a unique fracture line and zone of comminution. Despite its wide range of fracture patterns and in contrast to type B fractures, the tibial spine was typically involved (89.4%, Understanding fracture characteristics is a prerequisite to treat tibial plateau fractures properly There has been an increasing appreciation of the complexity in the treatment of tibial plateau fractures. Among other factors, this is reflected in the difficulty to concordantly categorize tibial plateau fractures into current classifications. Although still most frequently used to describe fracture morphology, the OTA/AO, Schatzker as well as Moore classification only showed fair to moderate results regarding inter-observer reliability In accordance with previous studies, in type B fractures impression or combined split-impression fractures primarily affected lateral segments only (88.8%), whereas in type C fractures combined fracture pattern involving the lateral and the medial plateau were observed Besides the macroscopic anatomical differences of both plateaus, the subchondral microarchitecture also plays an important role. Numerous studies have shown that due to the higher loading of the medial plateau its subchondral bone structure is stronger than of the lateral plateau, making it more resistant to axial trauma Recently, a segment-based mapping of the tibial plateau as a potential guiding tool for choosing a fracture-specific surgical approach has been introduced While in type B fractures a posterior approach can be contemplated, specifically in case of posterior segment affection, in type C fractures it becomes a ‘must’ to utilize a posterior approach. Here it remains contemplative in which cases not to choose a direct posterior approach. In 94.1% of the cases the posterior segments (lateral and medial) were affected in complex tibial plateau fractures. Although, some studies demonstrated good clinical outcome with unilateral locked plate fixation This study has some limitations. First, only intra-articular fractures were included, as the scope of the study focused on a segment-based mapping of the tibial plateau addressing the challenge of articular surface reconstruction. Second, we three-dimensionally analyzed 3 In conclusion, we were able to demonstrate that posterior segments were the most frequently fractured segments in OTA/AO type B and C fractures. Acknowledging the restricted visibility of posterior segments, whose reduction and fixation is crucial for the long-term success, our findings implicate the use of posterior approaches more often in the treatment of tibial plateau fractures. In addition, low-energy trauma could be identified as an important cause for fracture, especially in elderly females. As low-energy trauma may represent an indicator for impaired bone quality, the finding of a comminuted medial articular surface in low-energy trauma indicates potential challenges to properly reconstruct the medial tibial plateau in the future. All authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. All authors declare that they have no conflict of interest and no study sponsor was involved in the study design; collection, analysis and interpretation of data; the writing of the manuscript; or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. Institutional funding by