A novel, highly sensitive and stable conductometric biosensor for creatinine determination is developed. The biosensor is based on solid-state contact ammonium-sensitive sensor. Creatininase is chemically immobilized on the surface of the solid-state contact ammonium-sensitive membrane via glutaraldehyde covalent attachment method. The developed conductometric creatinine biosensors demonstrate high sensitivity and short response time toward creatinine. The detection limit of the biosensor was about 2×10−6
                     M and the response time was shorter than 10s in phophate buffer solution at pH 7.20. The linear dynamic range of the biosensor was between 1×10−1 and 9×10−6
                     M creatinine concentration in phosphate buffer solution at pH 7.20. The biosensor exhibited good operational and storage stability for at least 4 weeks kept in dry at 4–6°C. It had a reproducible and stable response during continuous work at least for 10h with the relative standard deviation of 0.5% (n
                     =48) for creatinine of 1×10−3
                     M in phosphate buffer solution.Creatinine is the end product of creatinine metabolism in mammalian cells. Therefore, it is an important diagnostic substance in biological fluid. Creatinine can be used for the diagnosis of renal, thyroid and muscle function For routine creatinine determinations in clinical laboratory, the most frequently used methods are the HPLC Conductometric sensors for biosensing devices have first been introduced by Watson et al. However, to our best knowledge, as alternatives to the present methods for creatinine determination, no previous work has been done on the conductometric creatinine biosensors to date. The present study reports the development of an alternative conductometric creatinine biosensor based on solid-state contact ammonium-sensitive sensor chip membrane. The main analytical characteristics of the biosensor, such as pH behaviour, time of immobilization and the enzyme loading were investigated with respect to the influence on sensitivity, limit of detection, dynamic range, response time, operation and storage stability. Creatinine and creatininase ( A stock creatinine solution (1.0 A 2.5% (w/w) glutaraldehyde solution was prepared with 5 A 10 Sodium borohyride solution was prepared by dissolving 20 Conductometric measurements were performed by CMD 750 model conductometer (WPA Linton Cambridge, UK) at room temperature (20 pH measurements were performed by using Jenway 3040 Ion Analyser. The conductometric sensor was designed as a chip using glass–fiber substrate with interdigitated copper pads. Copper pads of the glass–fiber substrate were used for the construction of sensor chip. The epoxy resin mixture used to bind the graphite in preparing the all solid-state contacts of sensor chip was made from epoxy and hardener in THF solvent in the proportions 1.0:0.5 (w/w). The powdered graphite was mixed with the epoxy–resin mixture in the proportions 1.0:10 (w/w). After mixing, the solution was allowed to stand for 20–30 PVC–NH The enzymatic membrane was immobilized on the surface of the ammonium-sensitive sensor membrane by using a simple two step glutaraldehyde covalent attachment method as described in our previous work Measurements were conducted at room temperature (25 Before the construction of conductometric creatinine biosensor, as preliminary studies, solid-state conductometric ammonium-sensitive sensor was designed. Conductometric performance of the ammonium-sensitive sensor was evaluated to optimize membrane composition. The conductometric results obtained by one of the evaluated ammonium-sensitive membrane compositions are summarized in The performance of the conductometric biosensor, in terms of sensitivity and long term stability is strictly dependant on the enzyme loading and the amount of glutaraldehyde. The optimum glutaraldehyde amounts were arranged according to our group's previous work For the optimization of amount of enzyme in membrane, different concentrations of creatininase solution were prepared by dissolving 0.5–10 Concerning time of incubation in creatininase enzyme solution, the best result was obtained for 15 Since enzyme activity is strongly affected by pH, the effect of pH on the conductometric creatinine biosensor response was examined with 0.1 Using the optimum conditions obtained in the above studies, calibration curve of the conductometric creatinine biosensor was obtained over a creatinine concentration range of 1 The response of the biosensor was highly reproducible as shown in Using the optimum conditions, the performance characteristics of the conductometric creatinine biosensor were summarized in A novel conductometric creatinine biosensor based on all solid-state contact ammonium-sensitive sensor chip has been developed. Creatininase was immobilized on the surface of the polymeric ammonium-sensitive membrane using glutaraldehyde attachment method. The all solid-state conductometric creatinine biosensor is cheap and easy to fabricate. More, the biosensor presented here has a short response time, wider linear range, operational stability as well as a good long age stability. This biosensor has better selectivity than amperometric analogues because it has no response to the presence of electrooxidizing components. The developed biosensor could be a useful alternative for creatinine determination in real samples. Therefore, our studies will continue the use of developed conductometric biosensor for detection of creatinine in urine, blood and blood dialysate.