In thickened tailings disposal operations, the yield stress, which is a unique physical property of thickened tailings, is a key design parameter as it has a controlling influence on the final slope of deposited tailings. A quick but rough estimate of the yield stress is typically obtained using a mini-slump test in industry. This paper explores the feasibility of using a laboratory flume test to measure the yield stress of thickened tailings.
                  The model of slow sheet flow (SSF) which has previously been used to model flume tests and the Fourie and Gawu (FG) model, which was developed for interpretation of flume tests on thickened tailings, are compared. The SSF model, derived within the framework of long-wave approximation, is shown to only hold for flumes with frictionless sidewalls (or very wide flumes), whereas the FG model is valid for flumes of finite width and nonslip sidewalls. These findings were confirmed using CFD simulations of laboratory flume tests with nonslip and free-slip sidewalls on materials with yield stresses ranging from 20 to 60Pa. Simulations to investigate the sensitivity of the final beach profile in the flume test to variations of yield stress and viscosity were performed. The results suggest that the final profile is very sensitive to yield stress variation but relatively insensitive to viscosity variation. This relative insensitivity to viscosity further justifies the use of the FG model for evaluation of yield stress from flume test data, as this model ignores the effect of viscosity.
                  Simulations of mini-slump tests were conducted to demonstrate that different mould lifting velocities may introduce different inertial effects, thereby impacting the final profile and hence the yield stress extrapolated from slump tests. Moreover, comparison between the profiles predicted by several theoretical models for slump tests and CFD simulation results revealed that the existing models are not capable of capturing the final shape of the slumped material, which is invariably distorted by the mould friction to some extent. Consequently, the accuracy of the yield stress extrapolated from mini-slump tests is not high. The small errors in yield stresses calculated from the CFD simulation results using the FG model suggest that yield stresses may be determined from flume tests with very high accuracy using the FG model.Yield stress, which is defined as the minimum stress that must be applied in order to induce flow, is a key design parameter in the industrial application of surface disposal of thickened tailings (sometimes termed paste). The yield stress of thickened tailings must be low enough that the energy required to transport the tailings by pipeline to the tailings storage facility is minimised, but must be high enough to ensure that the designed beach slope can be achieved in the field, i.e. two often essentially conflicting requirements. Additionally, as is now evident from numerous case studies, the yield stress of tailings increases exponentially with increasing solids concentration ( However, the accuracy of this method is comparatively low as a result of its inherent disadvantages. For example, the lifting velocity of the mould in a mini-slump test may influence the final spread and slump, especially for material of relatively low yield stress and viscosity as reported by several researchers ( This paper investigates the feasibility of using a laboratory flume to measure the yield stress of thickened tailings. In the laboratory flume test, which has been used to predict the beach slope of conventional tailings deposits, a quantity of tailings slurry is discharged from an elevated storage tank into a flume, producing a sloped profile once deposition ceases. This profile is usually concave-up, as a consequence of the segregating nature of conventional (low solids content) tailings. The profile achieved in the flume is used to predict the beach slope developed in the field ( To explain the disparity in beach slopes of thickened tailings achieved in flume tests and the field, Simms ( The L-box test, which is used to assess the ability of fresh self-compacting concrete  In view of the uncertain application of the SSF model to laboratory flume tests, and desirability to obtain the yield stress of thickened tailings accurately without resorting to use of expensive and delicate instruments, such as the vane rheometer, the present work uses computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to explore the feasibility of using a laboratory flume test to obtain the yield stress of thickened tailings. Firstly, the SSF and FG models are described to facilitate the analysis of the differences and relations between the two models. Thereafter the numerical model (CFD) and settings used in simulations are described. A detailed comparison between the SSF and FG models is subsequently made using 3D simulations to determine the superior model for yield stress measurement using a flume test. Moreover, the sensitivity of the final profile in a flume test to variations in yield stress and viscosity is investigated using CFD simulations. Additionally, the flume test is compared with the mini-slump test in terms of accuracy of yield stress measurement. Finally, several comments on the application of laboratory flume test data to yield stress measurement are made. It is noted that thickened tailings, which are treated as Bingham fluids in the present work, refer to fluids where suspended solids are fine enough to not settle or segregate during the flume deposition process, so that they can be modelled using the homogeneous fluid approach ( Two mathematical models (SSF and FG), which were used to predict the final profiles achieved in flume tests, are described in this section, examining their differences and applicable conditions. The analytical solution for the slow sheet flow of a yield stress fluid which has been derived by several authors ( The expression for pressure Integrating Eq. At the threshold of flow the shear stress at the bottom of the material equals the yield stress of the fluid: Then the final (equilibrium) profile of a sheet of yield stress fluid on a flat plane can be described by integrating Eq. The volume of the fluid (per unit width along As the point (0, Combining Eqs. Given the volume of the fluid per unit width along The analytical solution for the profile of yield stress fluid at a threshold static equilibrium in a rectangular flume has been derived by With a number of simplifying assumptions a differential equation can be established by equating the driving and resisting forces acting on the control volume in the The resultant force The shearing force The shearing force Considering that the resultant force in The final profile of the yield stress fluid along the longitudinal direction ( As (0, With the assumption that the fluid thickness is constant in the Eq. Given the volume ( If the flume width is infinite ( It seems that the difference in the analytical solutions between SSF (Eq. On the other hand, if it is assumed that the sidewalls of the flume are frictionless (i.e. Consequently an infinite flume width is equivalent to the sidewalls of the flume being frictionless in terms of the influence on the final profile in a flume test. This is a very important and useful conclusion because it indicates that it is not appropriate to use the SSF equation to model a laboratory flume test unless frictionless sidewalls (or a wide enough flume) and no-slip bottom condition can be achieved simultaneously. It is worth noting that neither the SSF equation nor FG holds for the scenario where inertial effects of flow are significant. ANSYS FLUENT, a commercially available CFD code was used to perform the simulations. To track the interface between Bingham fluid and air, the volume of fluid method (VOF), a free surface tracking technique for immiscible phases ( The coupled level-set and VOF model that overcomes the deficiency of the level-set method in preserving volume conservation and discontinuity of VOF equation was activated ( Thickened tailings were treated as Bingham fluids that only start to flow when the stress exceeds a certain value (known as the ‘yield stress’) ( The Bingham relation which is normalized in ANSYS FLEUNT to guarantee the continuity of the viscosity curve at the null shear rate was used to model the flow of thickened tailings ( It is noted that if the critical shear rate ( A detailed discussion on the validation of the numerical model in ANSYS FLUENT for the flow of thickened tailings can be found elsewhere ( In the computational domain the place where the volume fraction of fluid was 0.5 was deemed the interface between Bingham fluid and air. The final profile in the flume test was the interface at the centreline of the flume. All the simulations of laboratory flume tests performed are three-dimensional (3D). Two dimensional (2D) axisymmetric simulations were conducted for the mini-slump test. In the laboratory flume test the Bingham fluid will stop flowing completely given enough time. However, complete stoppage of flow cannot be reached in the numerical simulations as the flow curve of the Bingham model implemented in ANSYS FLUENT passes through the origin. In other words, the Bingham fluid in the simulation will not stop completely as long as the simulation is running. To determine an acceptable stoppage time in the simulations, the spreading speed of the front toe was monitored. It was found that the rate of decrease of spreading speed of the front in flume tests declined very slowly once it was less than 0.3 Regular hexahedra were used to discretise the 3D geometries of flumes and care was taken to reduce the difference in sides of the elements in order to increase the accuracy of the simulations. Square cells were used to discretise the 2D computational domain of mini-slump test simulations. Mesh independence was verified for all simulation results in the present work and is discussed later in Section This section investigates the potential for using the laboratory flume test for measuring yield stress. Firstly, simulations of flume tests using relatively low yield stress (18.6 To determine the preferred model for simulating laboratory flume tests, simulations of four cases of flume tests on material of 18.6 An evaluation of mesh-independence was performed for all the simulations in the present work but only that for Case 1 listed in   Does the SSF model (free-slip condition) hold if the sidewalls of the flume are greased? An interesting experiment was conducted by Coulomb, which was referred to by Stokes ( According to the discussions above it is believed that the FG model, which takes sidewall friction into account, is more applicable for simulating flume tests than the SSF model, which assumes that the sidewalls are free-slip, particularly considering that the walls of nonslip or negligible-slip conditions are easier to achieve than free-slip conditions. To illustrate the consequences of using the SSF model to calculate the yield stress from flume test data, the profile of Case 1 in To summarise, it would be unconservative to use the SSF model to assess the yield stress in a laboratory flume test as the preconditions of free-slip sidewalls (or small enough ratios of fluid depth to characteristic length scale of the contact surface with the plane bed) are rarely fulfilled for a laboratory flume on thickened tailings slurry as shown in Since the FG model does not account for fluid viscosity, which may influence the inertial effects and hence the final profile to some extent, it is of interest to investigate the influence of viscosity in the flume test. Simulations of flume tests in three cases were performed to assess the “sensitivity” of the final profiles to the variations of yield stress and viscosity. Information on the three cases is listed in Two simulations of flume tests with the same volume of Bingham fluid at 56.1 To investigate the influence of mould lifting velocities on the final profiles in mini-slump tests, six cases of simulations with three lifting velocities (10, 50 and 100 There are several theoretical models used to evaluate the yield stress in slump test. With the Von Mises yield criterion implemented, a similar analytical solution was proposed by    For the material with yield stress of 18.6 Laboratory flume tests may be superior to mini-slump tests for yield stress measurement of thickened tailings in terms of accuracy. Firstly, the final profile in a mini-slump test is more likely to be influenced by inertial effects than in a laboratory flume test. For example, for the mini-slump test with a mould lifting velocity of 50 The simulations of flume tests undertaken in the work, the extrapolated yield stresses from the simulations with FG model and the corresponding percentage errors are summarised in In the oil sands industry, high molecular weight polymers are widely used to flocculate mature fine tailings (MFT) before or during deposition to enhance dewatering and shear strength development. The flocs may range from several millimetres to half a decimetre in size which can be easily identified visually, and physically separated from the flowing mass ( Several comments on the laboratory flume test used for yield stress measurement may be made: The yield stress of the thickened tailings should be roughly between 20 Make sure the flume is horizontal which will simplify the calculations. It is not necessary to lubricate the sidewalls or base since the FG model assumes that the shear stresses at walls are equal to the yield stress of the material. Do not wet the flume before testing, as the water content of the thickened tailings near the walls will otherwise be increased, thereby reducing the shear stress on the walls and distorting the inferred yield stress value. A small discharge nozzle with low flow velocity should be used so that the inertial stress will be negligible compared to the yield stress of the tested material. According to our simulations, a tube with a diameter of 21 The height between the outlet and the flume base should be as small as possible (within reason) to reduce the inertial effects, especially for tailings of low yield stress. Make sure sufficient fluid is discharged into the flume to form a profile that is long enough. Firstly, the long flow distance should reduce measurement error, and secondly, with an increase of the volume of fluid discharged into the flume, the spreading speed of the fluid will reduce gradually as shown in The flow distance along the centreline of the flume and the volume of the fluid deposited should be measured and used to calculate the yield stress. The discharge time can be recorded if feasible, which can be used to calculate the average spreading speed of the fluid in the flume, thus assessing the inertial stress in the test. Given the volume ( All of the discussions and conclusions in the present work are based on fluids with yield stresses from approximately 18–60 The SSF model for slow spreading of a sheet of yield stress fluid is generally not valid for laboratory flume tests of thickened tailings due to the sidewall friction of the flume. Theoretically this model only holds if the flume width is infinite or the sidewalls of a flume are frictionless (the inertial effects certainly should be negligible). The excellent agreement between the predicted profiles by the FG model and the simulation results with nonslip bottom and sidewalls shows that the FG model, which was developed for laboratory flume tests and took the sidewall friction into account, is more appropriate to model laboratory flume tests as long as the wall slip at the sidewalls and base is negligible. Laboratory flume tests with low deposition rates can be used to measure the yield stress of non-segregating thickened tailings by using the FG model. Moreover, simulation results reveal that the final profile in a flume test is sensitive to yield stress variation but relatively insensitive to the variation of viscosity, which is beneficial for yield stress measurement as the FG model, which is used to obtain yield stress from the final profile, does not account for viscosity. The results of mini-slump test simulations demonstrate that different mould lifting velocities may introduce different inertial effects, thereby impacting the final profiles. Moreover, comparison between the predicted profiles by several theoretical models for the slump test and CFD simulation results reveals that the existing models are not capable of capturing the final shape of slumped material accurately, not only because of the inadequacy of the theoretical models but also the final profile is distorted by the wall friction of the mould. Consequently, the degree of accuracy of the yield stress calculated from a mini-slump test is not very high. Notwithstanding, the mini-slump test provides a quick and easy way to evaluate the rheological properties of thickened tailings to a first approximation in the field. The minor errors of the yield stress calculated from the simulation results suggest that the flume test interpreted with the FG model is extremely accurate with respect to determining the yield stress of thickened tailings. Therefore, it may provide a cheap and robust way of measuring the yield stress of thickened tailings without necessarily resorting to a costly rheometer. Moreover, the flume test may be more appropriate for the yield stress measurement of heavily flocculated clay tailings (such as MFT) compared with the vane technique, considering the similarity (i.e. materials are sheared before and during deposition) between the flume test and field deposition, as well as the possible invalidity of the continuum assumption caused by the presence of large floc particles, which constitute a disadvantage in the vane test, given the small size of vanes typically used. The opportunity exists for downscaling the laboratory flume to a desktop-flume, which may lead to a cheap, easy and accurate way for yield stress measurement of thickened tailings in both the laboratory and the field. This work was supported by resources provided by the Pawsey Supercomputing Centre with funding from the Australian Government and the Government of Western Australia; the first author gratefully acknowledges the China Scholarship Council (CSC) and The University of Western Australia for financial support.