Understanding methane sorption behavior in the gas-shale system is of great importance for evaluating reservoir production potential and reducing exploration risk. In this study, methane sorption capacities of total 12 organic-rich marine shale samples from the southwest of China were measured by volumetric method. The absolute sorption results were modeled using Langmuir, Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET), Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) and Dubinin–Astakhov (D–A) models. The accuracy of each model for quantifying shale gas sorption capacity was analyzed and compared by using a residual error analysis technique. The impacts of organic and inorganic constituents on the methane sorption capacity were also analyzed. The experimental results indicate that the maximum absolute methane sorption capacity of the collected marine shale samples is between 0.50cm3/g and 3.41cm3/g, which positively correlates with the total organic carbon (TOC) content. The TOC-normalized methane sorption capacity shows a positive correlation with the total clay mineral content and exhibits a significant increase with increasing illite–montmorillonite mixed layers content when it is greater than 9%. For the results of gas sorption modeling, the D–A model is superior to the Langmuir, D–R and BET models, because of the additional parameter describing the micro-heterogeneity of shale rocks. The most commonly used Langmuir model gives a reasonable fit for most of the shale samples, which is comparable to D–A modeling results when TOC content is greater than 5%. The BET model performs poorly and thus it is not recommended for methane–shale sorption modeling exercise. Therefore, both D–A and Langmuir models are recommended for describing methane adsorption on organic-rich shale samples.Shale gas is the fastest growing natural gas resource and has enormous resource potential in the United States and Canada The sorption isotherm plays an important role in the reservoir evaluation and is routinely determined by direct experimental measurements. However, limited investigations were reported for the methane sorption isotherms of shale in literatures. The gained knowledge from methane-coal sorption system lays the foundation for the characterization of sorption behavior in methane–shale system Similar to coal, gas sorption isotherms in shale are conventionally modeled using Langmuir model Three marine shale units of Early Cambrian, Early Lower Silurian and Late Permian age in upper Yangtze area (UYA) are the main shale gas resources in China Fresh shale blocks were collected from outcrops in the potential production regions located in UYA of southwest China ( Before the sorption experiments, the TOC content and mineral composition were characterized for all the collected samples listed in High pressure (up to ∼8.5 The sorbed gas volume, as directly measured in the laboratory, is known as excess (or Gibbs) adsorption capacity. In fact, a certain volume in the pore space occupied by the adsorbed phase is no longer available to the free gas. The excess adsorption capacity, however, ignores this adsorbed phase volume, which will underestimate the total sorption capacity. Therefore, the absolute adsorption capacity was estimated by considering the adsorbed phase density. Mathematically, the absolute adsorption capacity can be calculated as follows: The Langmuir model is based on the assumption of adsorption homogeneity, such as equally available adsorption sites, monolayer surface coverage, and no interaction between adsorbed species When the sorbed volume is the half of the Langmuir volume ( The BET model extends Langmuir-type adsorption to multilayer adsorption To obtain the values of these constants, 1/[ The D–A equation, was originally proposed by Polyanyi on the basis of adsorption potential theory. Dubinin applied this theory to describe adsorption on microporous solids and proposed a new theory, which is based on the theory of pore volume filling of micropore (TVFM) Another one is D–R equation, which is expressed as: Mathematically, Eq. TOC content is one of the most important factors for shale reservoir evaluation since it strongly correlates with the gas sorption capacity. TOC contents of 12 marine samples ranged from 1.46% to 10.02% are shown in The mineral compositions characterized by XRD are shown in A series of CH Due to its simplicity and providing reasonable fit results, the Langmuir model is widely used to model sorption isotherms. From statistical analyses of the Based on the statistical analysis of the 1/[ The D–R modeled results were shown in All experimental results were fitted by different analytical models as previously described. The model with the least ARE is considered to be the best model to describe methane adsorption behavior. It is obvious that the BET model has the highest ARE for each sample except for sample CX-8 ( The literatures have shown that the TOC content has been considered as one of the primary determining factors for methane sorption capacity, while organic matter type and maturity are less important The mineral constituents, in particular the clay minerals, have also been widely considered as a potentially influencing factor on shale sorption capacity Based on the aforementioned results, the BET model performs the worst among all the sorption models. The D–R and D–A isotherms were fitted well with the experimental data in most cases. Since the D–R equation (Eq. In addition, the correlation between ARE of two models and the clay mineral content shows a similar trend as shown in In this study, the excess adsorption capacities were directly measured in the lab and the absolute adsorption capacities were estimated for 12 marine shale samples. In order to analytically define the sorption behavior of shale, four well-established sorption models including Langmuir, BET, D–R and D–A models were tested against our experimental data. Based on the results, the following conclusions have been made: Both Lower Cambrian and Lower Silurian shales with high TOC content have an extremely complex mineral composition and that quartz and clay are the primary mineral constituents. The maximum absolute methane sorption capacity of the Lower Cambrian shale is between 0.50 Among all four adsorption isotherm models, the D–A model is the most accurate model to define the sorption behavior of gas-shale system. The BET model performed the worst compared to other three tested models, namely, Langmuir, D–A and D–R models. The Langmuir model is capable of accurately fitting the methane sorption data when the TOC content of shale samples is greater than 5%. Generally, the methane sorption capacity positively correlates with the TOC content, which is not the only controlling factor for shale sorption capacity. The TOC-normalized methane sorption capacity shows a positive correlation with the total clay mineral content and exhibits a significant increase with increasing illite–montmorillonite mixed layers content when it is greater than 9%. The authors would like to sincerely thank various organizations for the financial support. This work was jointly supported by the