Metallic Hollow Spheres (MHSs) as a base material in production of hollow sphere structures and developed composite metal foams are produced using an advanced process based on powder metallurgy. In this study, polystyrene spheres were coated with a gas and water atomized iron powder with particle size distributions of 1–5μm and 20–25μm, respectively. The green spheres were heat-treated to remove the binder at 600°C with a heating rate of 50, 100 and 600°C/min, and then the process was followed by sintering at various temperatures of 1100, 1140 and 1180°C. Results show that an optimum output is attainable applying coarser particles and a higher sintering temperature, where the shell porosity is low enough and the sphere shells remain intact.Metallic Hollow Spheres (MHSs) play an important role in production of hollow sphere structures as a base material In the last few years, several methods have been proposed to synthesize MHSs This paper focuses on a production process of low carbon steel hollow spheres (LCSHSs) and studies their microstructure. A relation between the heat treating parameters such as heating rate, sintering time and temperature on surface quality and shell porosity of produced LCSHSs is also proposed. Expanded polystyrene cores (EPS) with an average outer diameter of ~ To coat the EPS, water atomized iron powder (WAIP) and gas atomized iron powder (GAIP) were utilized. Chemical composition and physical properties of powders are listed in Prior to the coating process, the metal powders were suspended in a binder–solvent mixture where ethyl silicate was used as binder with a weight percent of 10% and dissolved in alcoholic solvent. The coating apparatus for the production of coated LCSHSs was designed and fabricated in the Metallurgy Engineering Department of K. I. A. University. Iron powder, binder and solvent were mixed in determined proportions in a suspension-container. In order to form a consistent suspension and avoid any sedimentation stirring process was applied continuously. Through a nozzle an exact amount of suspension was sprayed onto the rotating EPS. There was a constant air flow during the process which enables the coated spheres to dry and sufficiently harden. GAIP and WAIP were both used in the coating process, separately. A further important step in the production of LCSHSs is heat treatment, where the coated spheres are transformed into solid hollow spheres by sintering. Sintering was done by transferring an agglomerated sphere into a furnace tray. In an effort to prevent them from being sintered to each other, the hollow spheres were coated on the outside with corundum powder. This inert powder does not undergo any chemical or physical reactions with the material of hollow sphere at sintering temperature. Heat treatment was carried out in two steps. First, the polystyrene core and binding agent are removed by pyrolysis. Next, the aggregation of the metal powders to a solid metal occurs, so that the end product is sintered and hardened. Debinding and sintering process were carried out simultaneously under a dissociated ammonia atmosphere in a continuous walking beam furnace. The coated spheres were pyrolyzed with heating rates of 50, 100 and 600 Shell porosity of the LCSHSs after sectioning, grinding and polishing was surveyed using the optical microscope equipped with Material Plus 4.2 image analysis software. The whole and cross-sectioned LCSHSs after sintering are shown in It is known that the MHS shell porosity is dependent on powder properties, binder system, coating procedure and sintering parameters The results of bulk density are confirming a shell porosity difference between two types of produced LCSHSs. Average bulk densities were measured at 0.66 Another significant point which can be observed in Use of finer powders in production of LCSHSs prevents proper gas exiting during pyrolysis and thereby a sudden explosion in sphere shell is inevitable. Both spheres produced by GAIP and WAIP are shown in The surface quality of LCSHSs is chiefly influenced by the heating rate during pyrolysis. A lower heating rate ensures a better surface quality. In comparison, spheres produced by WAIP have a high shell porosity which eases gas exiting. Even in this case, a heating rate of 600 As illustrated, use of finer powders ensures the minimum shell porosity. However, use of small particles has some problems during pyrolysis as mentioned. In case of coarser particles, although the sintered shells remain largely intact the shell porosity is also high. Results of shell porosity at different sintering time and temperature are reported in We found that two notable variables, surface quality and remained shell porosity of low carbon steel hollow spheres (LCSHSs), are mainly influenced by powder characteristic and process parameters. Decomposition of the binder between GAIP particles caused severe damage in spheres within pyrolysis. Somehow this incident can be modified using WAIP where easier exit of waste gas from pores is provided. It is noteworthy that heating up during pyrolysis also determines the surface quality of spheres. Placement of the coated spheres directly to the pyrolysis temperature causes a high amount of waste gas to be produced, thus, the severe damage on sphere shells. It should also be emphasized that although by using WAIP, the sintered shell remains largely intact the shell porosity is also high which is unfavorable. Moreover, measurements indicated that by changing the powder type from WAIP to GAIP, the bulk density increases from 0.66 Finally, it can be concluded that WAIP due to coarser particle size appears to be a better option than GAIP and by sintering of spheres at 1180 The authors would like to acknowledge supports from