Electrokinetic geosynthetics (EKGs) were developed about a decade ago, producing a material that did not experience the same corrosion problems as metal electrodes when used in electro-osmotic (EO) dewatering applications. The conductive polymeric material from which EKGs are made has the additional advantage of being able to be formed into a variety of shapes, including drainage tubes such as those used in this study. One of the primary concerns regarding EO dewatering applications is the rate of energy consumption. This paper reports experiments at three different scales, on different mine tailings materials, that illustrates the potentially misleading results obtained from small scale laboratory tests. Using large, outdoor tests, power consumption rates for treating a kaolinitic mineral sands tailings and a smectitic diamond tailings were found to be up to 30 times lower than the power consumption rates obtained from laboratory tests using small samples in a purpose built EO cell. The primary reason for the improved performance is thought to be the lower voltage gradient used in the field tests, plus the geometric advantages offered by a field layout where a greater volume of material is exposed to the EO effect than only the material directly between the electrodes, which is the case in the EO cell tests. Finally, in the field tests the EO treatment caused the early development of vertical cracks in the tailings, resulting in increased exposure of the tailings to the effects of solar drying. This effect cannot obviously be reproduced in the EO cell laboratory tests, and can be a major advantage for the in situ treatment of mine tailings lagoons, where in some materials the onset of cracking is significantly delayed by the development of an impermeable surface crust.A majority of above-ground tailings storage facilities (TSFs) today are constructed using the tailings material itself to raise the height of the retaining perimeter of the TSF. The manner of construction may differ, e.g. downstream, upstream or centreline, but the use of tailings as a construction material is widespread. Common to all these techniques is the deposition of high water content slurries into the storage facility. The reason for pumping low density slurries to TSFs has inevitably been one of cost; firstly the lower cost of pumping low viscosity material and secondly by undertaking only limited dewatering of the tailings after the mineral extraction process has been completed, the cost of dewatering is limited. Upon deposition, the tailings tend to segregate, with the coarser fraction settling out first, near the point of deposition, with the finer fraction of the total tailings stream being carried towards the centre of the impoundment, often settling out sub-aqueously in the tailings pond. As the tailings elevation rises, the potential for an instability to occur, increases. Water is usually stored on top of these facilities, either intentionally, with a view to reclaiming the water as and when required for processing operations, or unintentionally, when inadequate provision has been made for water re-use. Catastrophic failures of TSFs are nothing new. For example, in 1928 the Barahona TSF in Chile failed during a large earthquake, killing more than 50 people in the ensuing flow failure. In 1976 the Bafokeng platinum TSF in South Africa collapsed after a period of above average rainfall, releasing more than 3 million tonnes of tailings during the resulting flow failure, causing the deaths of 12 people. As discussed by Another problem is that many tailings disposal facilities contain material that undergoes extremely slow self-weight consolidation. Aside from the obvious dangers posed by such poorly consolidated material (e.g. the potential for flowslides or mudrushes in the event a breach of the impoundment occurs), are problems of rehabilitation of the facility once it is closed. The extremely low undrained shear strength of many such deposits means that earthmoving machinery cannot operate on the surface and thus placement of cover material and a growing medium is extremely difficult. In many operations it has been found that it is not adequate to rely on self-weight consolidation to achieve the required degree of dewatering (and thus shear strength gain). As an example, in the phosphate industry in Florida, USA, the tailings have very low solid contents (of the order of 3–6% solids) and consolidation to the required solids content of 20–25% may take several decades ( Recourse has therefore often been made to a range of other dewatering techniques, including electrokinetic dewatering, as pioneered by The particular issue addressed in this paper is the type of electrodes used, and the promise offered in this regard by the development of new generation geosynthetics that are electrically conductive. Experiments were carried out at three different scales to obtain estimates of likely power consumption rates, and it is shown that small scale laboratory tests at elevated voltage gradients can result in overestimates of power consumption. The specific electrokinetic phenomenon of interest in the in situ dewatering of tailings is that of electro-osmosis. Although water molecules possess an overall neutral charge, they are polar. This means that they are attracted to positive ions in solution and orient themselves around the ions. If an electric field is set up within a matrix that is saturated with water (such as in a TSF) the positive ions tend to move toward the zone of lower potential (the negative electrode for instance). As the ions move, the surrounding water molecules are dragged along. Hence in soils, electro-osmosis involves the flow of pore water to the cathode (negative electrode). In addition to the water molecules surrounding the ion, frictional drag is created by the motion of the ions, and this helps to transport additional water ( There are a number of reported applications of electro-osmotic (EO) treatment of soils. These include the stabilization of slopes, excavations and embankments ( The most commonly used electrodes are metal, usually iron, steel or copper. The reaction that occurs at the anode, which causes a significant drop in pH, results in the very rapid corrosion of this electrode. Corrosion rates have been reported as 2½ Alternative electrode materials have therefore been tried, e.g. The EKG used in the experiments described here consists of a mesh made from a metal wire stringer coated in a conductive polymer. The EKG resembles a reinforcing geo-mesh and can be in the form of sheets, strips or tubes. When used as a cathode, the tubular electrode is enveloped in a geotextile sleeve such as a non-woven, heat bonded product. Its great advantage over conventional metallic electrodes used in soil improvement applications is that it overcomes the difficulties of corrosion, sufficient electrical contact and physical removal of water from the system ( In order to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the viability of using EKGs to dewater mine tailings, four different tailings were tested, although two of the tailings products were similar, as outlined later. The tailings tested were: Tailings from two different mineral sands operations (designated MS1 and MS2). The material tested is the fine residue that is managed separately from the coarse dune sand produced during the mining process. The material MS1 is currently stored in a dedicated impoundment, which includes a constructed earth perimeter wall. It is produced by thickening in a deep cone thickener, a process that includes the addition of a synthetic flocculant. Material was collected from the discharge spigot on the TSF and transported immediately to the laboratory for testing. Material MS2 was from the site of a proposed new mine and was obtained from a pilot thickener. It too, was prepared using the addition of a synthetic flocculant. Diamond tailings (D) from an operational diamond mine TSF, also taken directly from a spigot deposition point. Coal tailings (CT) was the residue left from the washing of the coal product. It is currently stored in a dedicated facility and managed as a conventional upstream TSF. The properties of the tailings materials are given in Two different sets of laboratory tests were carried out. The initial set of laboratory tests were designed to test the viability of dewatering the tailings electrokinetically and therefore used metal electrodes. They also provided an initial estimate of likely power consumption rates. The viability of using EKG electrodes was checked in the second phase of testing, which utilised rectangular tanks, with dimensions (length An EO testing cell based on that described by The cathode was always placed at the top of the specimen. A layer of filter paper and a 1.3 Initial screening tests on the coal tailings showed virtually no difference in settlement rates between consolidation under load (with zero voltage gradient) and consolidation under load aided by electro-osmosis. X-ray diffraction tests showed the coal tailings minerals to be primarily quartz and kaolinite. The latter should have contributed positively to EO dewatering potential. However, the loss on ignition (LOI) of these tailings was 69%, indicating that a very significant proportion of the solids were in fact of organic origin. It may be that the particle surface charge of this organic material was negligible, thus contributing to its relative immunity to EO dewatering. This material was thus not used in any further testing. In the EO cell tests two values of applied vertical total stress were used, 10 and 30 In order to confirm the validity of the parameters measured by the EO cell, the consolidation characteristics of the tailings were separately determined using a 15 Tailings slurry was poured into the tanks at the required water content, EKG electrodes inserted into the tailings at either end of the tank, leaving a gap of approximately 3  These figures should be considered in conjunction with results summarised in Another aspect of the results to note is the difference in performance of the two mineral sands tailings MS1 and MS2 (tests A1–A8) on the one hand, and the tests on diamond tailings (A9–A12). Whether we consider the tests conducted in the absence of an applied voltage (i.e. a conventional consolidation test) or those in which a voltage was applied, the diamond tailings typically took about twice as long to achieve a similar degree of consolidation as the mineral sands tailings. Despite the differences between the two mineral sands tailings (see Although all tests were terminated once settlement rates dropped below a threshold of 1  It is not only the amount and rate of settlement that occurs that is of interest in a potential application, but also the likely increase in cost if an alternative technology is introduced. One of the additional costs that will be incurred in utilising EO dewatering is that of energy. Four tests were carried out, and a typical result is shown in The energy consumption for this test was 37.3 The tank tests confirmed the technical viability of using EKG electrodes with both the mineral sands tailings and the diamond tailings, and two large, outdoor experiments were carried out to investigate this further. Many small scale bench top laboratory experiments such as those discussed in the preceding sections have appeared in the literature, showing the technical viability of dewatering soft clays and mine tailings using electrokinetic techniques. A question invariably arises as to whether the process could be technically viable at a larger scale. Unfortunately it was not possible to convince any TSF operators to conduct a large field trial at their operation, and the next best option was considered to be large, outdoor tank tests. In this section, the results from two such tests, one on MS1 tailings and the other on the diamond tailings, are described. A schematic cross-section of the test tank arrangement used for both tests is shown in Samples of the tailings were taken regularly for determination of water content using a modified thin-walled piston sampler and the thickness of tailings in the tank measured with a graduated rod. Water that accumulated in the cathode overnight was only decanted the following morning. This sometimes resulted in water from the cathode discharging onto the tailings surface overnight, potentially allowing this free water to flow into the cracks that formed around the electrodes. Tests were run for as long as possible, with tests being terminated when the site operators could no longer provide assistance. The results of the two tests are shown in Although desirable, similar sized control tests (in which the only water loss allowed is that due to evaporation) were not carried out because of budget and area constraints. It is thus not possible to quantify the extent of dewatering that was solely due to electrokinetic effects and how much was attributable to evaporation. What can be said with certainty is that the water collected in the cathode was attributable to electrokinetic dewatering. In both tests, after installing the electrodes into the tailings, about 24  Both tests were started at values of water content substantially higher than the respective liquid limit values, and even the final values of water content were higher, although in the case of the mineral sands tailings the final value was only about 20% higher than its liquid limit (75% compared with 66%). The initial values (e.g. 158% for the mineral sands tailings) are typical of the water content at which conventional tailings are pumped to storage facilities where, on deposition, natural processes of drainage and evaporation are expected to dry the tailings sufficiently to produce the required in situ strengths. The results presented in this section therefore represent tests on material that is at the wet end of likely field moisture content values, and serves to illustrate the potential benefits that can be derived from an array of EKG electrodes. For example, the experience of the operators at the mineral sands TSF is that the material tends to develop an impermeable and relatively dry upper profile (of a few centimetres or less in thickness), but below this the material remains at water contents of around 120% for long periods of time. It is only when desiccation cracks begin to form that the rate of drying has been found to increase again. The diamond tailings is reportedly even worse, with the TSF filling up much faster than initially allowed for because the rate of consolidation was much lower than originally envisaged. The electrokinetic technique allows much more rapid drying to take place, plus initiating the formation of cracking much sooner than would occur under natural drying conditions. This potential benefit of course comes at some cost, aside from the cost of electrodes and the cost of installing the system. The cost of power consumption is a key consideration, and in some cases has been a very significant component of the total project costs, as mentioned earlier for the project described by In both the outdoor tests, the current was regularly monitored, and together with the applied voltage was used to calculate power consumption per dry tonne dewatered. The units used were therefore kWh/dry tonne. This is different from the units often used in the literature (kWh/tonne) and is considered to provide a more meaningful basis for comparison, particularly as TSF operators are interested in how much tailings they can store on a particular land area, not how much tailings plus water can be stored. The values derived for the two tests were 0.9 In situ electrokinetic dewatering of soft clays has been tried a number of times in the past. It has, however, never become a major ground improvement technology in the same way as conventional vertical drains, for example. The primary reasons for this probably include the high rates of corrosion of metal electrodes (which were used in earlier studies), no facility for collecting water transported to the cathode, installation difficulties, and the logistics of energising and maintaining a large array of electrodes in the field. The advent of EKGs can alleviate the first of these two problems. The conductive polymer used in the manufacture of EKGs is not prone to corrosion, and is extremely durable, with the same electrodes being used in a number of the laboratory tank tests described in this paper, with no discernible change in performance. The issue of collecting drainage water at the cathode is also addressed, as the EKGs can be formed into wells, with a geotextile sleeve, as was done with the tank tests and outdoor tests reported in this paper. The other problems, relating to installation and energising, require the development of equipment and procedures by a specialist ground improvement contractor. Installation should be little different from conventional vertical drains, where access is often provided using a pioneer layer of material over a geotextile separator layer. The EKG wells could be punched or bored in place, preferably using some type of mandrel to protect the EKG during installation. A power regulator would be required, providing a source of DC power. Safety issues would be slightly different from conventional drain installation and operation, with particular attention having to be paid to ensuring the current developed is not excessive, and the electrode array cannot be accidentally accessed. These are relatively routine matters, and it is therefore suggested that there is no technological reason that EKG electrodes cannot be used successfully for in situ dewatering of soft clays, and particularly of the soft mine tailings material such as studied in this paper. The experimental work has shown that small scale laboratory tests can potentially provide misleading data, overestimating potential power consumption rates for field applications by more than an order of magnitude. It is suggested that this is because of the higher voltage gradients usually used in laboratory tests compared with the large outdoor tests reported in this paper, together with improved contact in the large tests with the material being dewatered, particularly the anodes which are embedded in the tailings, which effectively flows around the ribs of the EKG, thus enveloping it. It is likely that the outdoor test configuration provided some additional benefits in that cracking of the tailings surface was accelerated, exposing additional surface area for evaporative drying. This cracking developed after only 2 In the field tests the power consumption rate was as low as the lowest values reported in the literature (0.9 Tests were conducted at three scales, using two different types of electrode (metal in the case of the EO cell tests, and EKGs for the laboratory and outdoor tank tests). In all these tests, the mineral sands tailings, which have kaolinite as the dominant clay mineral, responded much more favourably to electrokinetic dewatering than the diamond tailings, which was rich in smectite. This result confirms previous studies, in which higher power consumption rates were reported for smectite clays than for kaolin-rich clays. While this might be seen as a potential drawback of the electrokinetic dewatering technique, it should be borne in mind that smectite-rich tailings have been more problematic than their kaolinitic counterparts, and are among the most notoriously difficult materials to dewater and consolidate (see the work of Power consumption rates were not uniform for the different size of tests carried out, with small scale laboratory tests providing the highest estimates of power consumption, although this was for larger percentage changes in water content. There are a number of differences between the various tests, including voltage gradient and the nature of the electrodes used. Nevertheless, the results suggest that an evaluation of the potential viability of electrokinetic dewatering should not be based solely on small scale laboratory tests, particularly if the voltage gradients used in these tests are higher than those likely to be used in field applications. The finding that lower power consumption rates are achieved at larger scales remains to be borne out by full-scale field installations using electrokinetic dewatering wells.