Bud-branched nanotubes, fabricated by growing metal particles on the surface of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), were used to prepare poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) based nanocomposites. The results of differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) showed that the introduction of the MWCNTs and bud-branched nanotubes both increased the crystallization temperature, while no significant variation of Tm
                      (melting temperature), ΔHc
                      (melting enthalpy) and ΔHm
                      (crystallization enthalpy) occurred. The results of wide angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) tests showed that α-phase was the dominated phase for both pure PVDF and its nanocomposites, indicating the addition of the MWCNTs and bud-branched nanotubes did not alter the crystal structures. Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) tests showed that bud-branched nanotubes were much more efficient in increasing storage modulus than the smooth MWCNTs. In addition, no significant variation of the Tg
                      (glass transition temperature) was observed with the addition of MWCNTs and bud-branched nanotubes. Tensile tests showed that the introduction of MWCNTs and bud-branched nanotubes increased the modulus. However, a dramatic decrease in the fracture toughness was observed for PVDF/MWCNTs nanocomposites. For PVDF/bud-branched nanotubes nanocomposites, a significant improvement in the fracture toughness was observed compared with PVDF/MWCNTs nanocomposites.The idea of using rigid fillers as a reinforcing agent is nothing new: straw has been used to reinforce mud bricks since about 4000 BC. In more recent times, fibers made from materials such as alumina, glass, boron, silicon carbide, and especially carbon have been used as fillers in composites. Normally, these conventional fillers are typically on the meso-scale with diameters of tens of micrometers and lengths of the order of millimeters There are four main requirements for effective reinforcement. These are large aspect ratio, good dispersion, alignment and interfacial stress transfer. In all, the key point for the efficient reinforcement is that the external stresses applied to the composite as a whole are efficiently transferred to the nanofillers, allowing them to take a disproportionate share of the load In this article, “bud-branched” nanotubes have been fabricated. The appearance of the buds on the surface of the nanotubes would help the stress transfer from the polymer matrix to the nanotubes, and ultimately affect the macro-properties. Especially here the particles were fixed on the surface of nanotubes, which may affect the development of the micro-cracks along the interface, and influence the fracture toughness. In this research, our attention predominantly focused on the effect of the morphology of the nanotubes. To avoid strong interaction between polymer chains and nanotubes, a non-polar polymer, PVDF was chosen as the matrix. PVDF (Kynar 741, powder) was kindly supplied free-of-charge by Arkema (Australia, New Zealand). The multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) with diameter of 10–30 Bud-branched nanotubes were prepared by a wet impregnation method using an acetone solution of ruthenium trichloride. The MWCNTs were purified by 5 The procedure for the fabrication of nanocomposites was as follows: (1) MWCNTs or MWCNTs-B were dispersed in solvent NMP with strong mechanical stirring and ultrasonic treatment (60 As summarized in Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the prepared nanocomposites were obtained on a JEOL 1010A high-resolution transmission electron microscope operated at 100 DSC tests were conducted by means of a TA Q20 differential scanning calorimeter. In the tests, samples of about 5 The wide angle X-ray diffraction (WAXD) of PVDF and its nanocomposites were obtained with a Bruker Advanced X-ray Diffractometer (40 The DMA (tension deformation) was carried out using a TA Instruments Q800 DMA. All the samples (30 The mechanical properties of all materials were measured on an Instron 5584 universal testing machine with a 100 Typical TEM images of the single MWCNTs-B and PVDF/MWCNTs-B nanocomposites with 2 Some research shows that MWCNTs can act as a nucleating agents during the crystallization process of semi-crystalline polymers such as polypropylene (PP)  To further characterize the crystal structure, the WAXD was employed, and the result is shown in Based on the DSC and WAXD results, it can be seen that the thermal history played an important role for the multi-melting behavior, which can be supported by significant difference of the melting curve between the first and the second round too. So it is possible that the addition of nanotubes induced different morphologies (lamellar thickness, distribution, perfection or stability), which are very sensitive to the thermal history. Even though the shape of the DSC curve changed, no significant variation in Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) measures the response of a material to a cyclic deformation (usually tension or three-point bending deformation) as a function of temperature. The storage modulus (  Tensile measurements were carried out in order to determine the mechanical properties of the PVDF nanocomposites. Typical stress–strain curves at a testing speed of 5 In general, the addition of rigid particles to polymers improves their stiffness and strength, but the variation of toughness is rather complicated. In the majority of studies, dramatic drops in fracture toughness compared to their corresponding pristine polymers are often noted  Normally, the cost for the reinforcement by rigid fillers is a decrease in the toughness. But the results of this work show a way to avoid this problem, that is, by the control of the filler morphology. As shown in this research, fixing metal particles on the surface of the nanotubes can help control the propagation of micro-cracks, and finally improve the fracture toughness significantly. The bud-branched nanotubes were fabricated successfully by growing the metal particles on the surface of MWCNTs and the nanocomposites were prepared by a solution method. The results of DSC showed that the addition of both the MWCNTs and MWCNTs-B increased the crystallization temperature, while no significant variation of Mr. Tang gratefully acknowledge the support from IPRS (Endeavor International Postgraduate Research Scholarship, Australia), and UQRS (University of Queensland Research Scholarship).