Ultrasonic transducers based on PZT-5A thick films deposited onto polycrystalline Al2O3 substrates using screen-printing were successfully fabricated. Considering the relatively high sintering temperature of PZT-5A thick films and better impedance matching characteristics with PZT-5A, polished polycrystalline Al2O3 were used as substrates. For electrodes, high quality platinum (Pt) was deposited by a thin film process, because the surface state of electrodes greatly affects the quality of piezoelectric films. Applying Pt/PZT-5A/Pt/Al2O3 structures, dual-element ultrasonic transducers were assembled. The assembled transducers included a wear plate (normally alumina with 40.21×106
                     kg/m2
                     s of impedance), backing (tungsten carbide-epoxy), electrical matching, an epoxy glue layer, and a housing. The optimum measurement ranges of 5 and 10MHz ultrasonic transducers were 2.51–300.2 and 2.50–250.1mm, respectively. From the time and frequency response measurements of the assembled 10MHz DEUTs, the value of −20dB level waveform duration and the −6dB bandwidth was 481.8ns and 34.4%, respectively. Also, the measurement accuracies of both 5 and 10MHz DEUTs assembled in this study were below 0.1 and 0.4%, respectively.While all nondestructive inspection methods offer practical capabilities suitable for special needs, nondestructive testing based on ultrasonic transducers (UT) has wide-ranging capabilities and is most adaptable to flaw characterization and thickness monitoring Various techniques such as sol–gel spinning For the fabrication of UTs based on piezoelectric thick films, there are several problems that should be resolved. These include errors in transmitting/receiving ultrasonic waves at the interfaces between the acoustic matching layer and piezoelectric element, and noise generated from those interfaces. Also, due to the multiple reflections and transmissions of ultrasonic waves within the thick electrode, ultrasonic losses in the electrode are critical in terms of device performance. Thus, it is advantageous to reduce the thickness of electrode without any microstructural defects for the reduction of such losses. In this respect, the formation of an electrode layer by a thin film process is highly preferred. Dual-element angle beam transducers generally exhibit operating characteristics suitable for a large range of practical field applications, particularly for the interrogation of highly attenuative materials such as stainless steel. As their name implies, dual-element ultrasonic transducers (DEUTs) use a pair of separate piezoelectric elements, one for transmitting and one for receiving, bonded to separate delay lines cut at an angle. The two elements, set at an angle, make the transmitting and receiving beam paths cross beneath the surface of the test piece. This crossed-beam design of DEUTs provides a pseudo focusing effect that optimizes measurement of minimum wall thickness in corrosion applications. The dual-element units are thus more sensitive than single element transducers to echoes from the base of pits that represent minimum remaining wall thickness. Furthermore, they are typically rugged and able to withstand high temperatures, and are highly sensitive to detection of pitting or other localized thinning conditions. With consideration of the aforementioned, in this study, we developed well-defined DEUTs applying PZT thick films formed by a screen-printing technique. As active piezoelectric elements, PZT-5A was chosen considering its high dielectric constant ( PZT paste was prepared from slurries containing PZT-5A powder, hydroxyl-ethyl-cellulose (HE-10), α-terpineol, dispersant (BYK-110), and toluene. A detailed flow of the DEUTs were assembled with the PZT-5A/Pt/Al For the measurement of piezoelectric constant ( To evaluate the properties of the DEUTs, the frequency and time responses were evaluated by a shock excitation technique. Following the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) code E1065, an evaluation test setup consisting of a shock pulse generator (pulser), a preamplifier (receiver), an electronic gate, an oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS 5104), a spectrum analyzer (Agilent 4402B), a test block, a PC, and an ultrasonic transducer was established. A schematic diagram of the impulse response setup is shown in To evaluate the possible measurement range, the assembled DEUTs were connected to an ultrasonic thickness monitor (Krautkramer Co., Germany) and the thickness of test blocks ranging from 10 to 500 TG and DTA analyses were performed to determine the vaporization temperature of various organic binders after screen-printing of PZT-5A pastes on Al The surface state of Al Because the PZT-5A thick films are annealed on top of the Pt/Al To assess the stability of the sputtered Pt layer, Pt/Al It is well known that the piezoelectric properties of active materials depend greatly on the microstructure of final films. Compared with other processes, however, it is not easy to obtain dense films by screen-printing technique. This is because pores in the paste arising from organic binder burnout and trapped gases generally give rise to the formation of cracks and/or prohibit the densification of films. Thus, pretreatment such as ultrasonic leveling and pressing are performed to improve the sintered density of final PZT-5A thick films. In this study, pretreatments were performed before the drying step to eliminate pores trapped within the PZT paste during the sheet formation. Cross-sections of screen-printed PZT-5A thick films dried with and without ultrasonic treatment are presented in In Initially, the longitudinal piezoelectric coefficient ( In order to achieve high-resolution ultrasonic measurement, transducers must have the capability of generating a short time waveform ultrasonic pulse, i.e., a broadband frequency spectrum. Basically, the UTs in the present study are composed of a uniform piezoelectric thick film and a backing that is bonded to the active layer back face. The ultrasonic pulse time waveform of conventional UTs is, however, not sufficiently short, because the transducer generates an ultrasonic pulse at both surfaces of the active layer upon impulse excitation and these pulses are repeatedly reflected between one face and the other When the DEUTs are assembled, the impedance of the backing materials should be carefully adjusted to realize high efficiency and broadband characteristics. In this study, an equivalent circuit was designed to analyze the electromechanical coupling effect of the piezoelectric devices effectively. The impedance of the backing materials was then determined by the condition of Using the test setup described in Piezoelectric transducers based on a Pt/PZT/Pt/Al