The present research work examines extraction mechanism of zinc by D2EHPA (Di-2-ethyl hexyl phosphoric acid) and comprehensively studies the main effective parameters on the process. Results of thermodynamic experiments showed that zinc extraction by D2EHPA was endothermic and spontaneous, and thermodynamic parameters including entropy and enthalpy were +27.37 J·mol−1·K−1 and 25.21 kJ·mol−1, respectively. Gibbs free energy was varied between −7.21 kJ·mol−1 and −8.41 kJ·mol−1 with the variation of temperature from 20 °C to 70 °C. Solution ionic strength was increased by addition of potassium and lithium sulfate solution while addition of calcium sulfate decreased ionic strength whereby zinc extraction efficiency was also decreased. TBP showed positive synergism at concentration of 5% (v/v) and negative synergism effect at concentrations of 2% and 10%. Simultaneous addition of both TBP and salt caused extraction efficiency to drop significantly and lower both TBP and ionic strength efficiency. Results showed that a continuous addition of TBP tends to effectively improve the zinc extraction efficiency. Experiments in the presence of catalyst Ni-Raney demonstrated that zinc extraction kinetic increases remarkably and due to easy recycling of the catalyst, we can propose a novel idea in solvent extraction field.Pioneering works on the application of solvent extraction method in separation industries were done during years 1950–1970. The method of solvent extraction is commonly used for selective extraction of impurities from solutions In 1983, Vazarlis and co-workers Ionic strength is a measure of the total ion concentration in solution; however, ions with more charge are counted more due to stronger electrostatic interactions with other ions. The equation below describes ionic strength as: Recently, Nickel Raney catalysts are widely used for a wide variety of applications and industries such as organic chemistry. It is commonly used to improve kinetic of reactions by activating its surface with reagents such as sodium hydroxide. The activation of A/Ni systems is the so-called Raney process, patented by the American engineer Murray Raney in 1925 In this investigation, zinc extraction from solution by D2EHPA was investigated. In order to optimize results and decreasing reaction time, nickel Raney catalysts were used. Chemical and thermodynamic parameters were also calculated to determine reaction mechanism and ionic strength and various ion effects on the process were also determined. Zinc extraction from synthetic sulfate solution was investigated using D2EHPA (Merck Co., Germany, 95% purity) as extractant and TBP (Merck Co., Germany, 99% purity). D2EHPA was diluted in Kerosene supplied by Sigma Aldrich, UK. Ionic strength experiments were carried out using salt solutions of K The effects of three important parameters including ionic strength of solution, thermodynamic conditions and catalyst addition were investigated. First, a standard zinc solution with concentration 20 g·L Synergistic effect of D2EHPA with TBP was investigated in different concentrations of both extractants. TBP was added into D2EHPA/Kerosene system and after each test about 10 ml of aqueous solution was taken and analyzed for remained amount of Zn Ionic strength effects were examined using lithium, potassium, and calcium sulfate solutions in different concentrations. In each test, salt solution was added into aqueous phase and then mixing of two phases (organic-aqueous phases) was continued for a specified period of time. Finally, about 10 ml of aqueous solution was taken and analyzed to determine Zn Aluminum–nickel alloy (Ni–Al 50:50 wt%, Density 3.46 g·ml In this research work, in order to quantify the zinc extraction, the following equations were used: For thermodynamics, a thermodynamic state of D2EHPA/Kerosene is fully identified by examining zinc extraction efficiency in different temperature values By considering plots 1 and 2, Zinc extraction mechanism also will be obtained as: By obtaining Enthalpy Δ Gibbs free energy is used to determine whether reaction is feasible or not  TBP shows a synergistic effect with D2EHPA extractant; however, it is not a selective and strong extractant for zinc when it is used alone In this study, the effect of TBP spraying effect was investigated for the first time. A specific amount of TBP was continuously added into the organic phase ( Lithium, potassium, and calcium sulfate were added into aqueous phase and TBP into organic phase in different concentrations in order to examine the combined effect of TBP and ionic strength. Results were given in Nickel Raney catalyst is widely used in many industries because of its stability in changing conditions and higher activity in room temperature  Zinc extraction from synthetic sulfate solution was carried out using D2EHPA diluted with kerosene. Thermodynamic parameters were obtained +