Distal radius fractures are the most frequent lesions encountered during clinical practice. The treatment is controversial and still debated in the literature. For a correct management of these lesions many authors recently emphasised the importance of anatomical reduction, a stable fixation and early joint mobilisation.
                  We report our experience in the daily management of these lesions. The fractures are evaluated considering fracture type, fracture reduction criteria, adequacy of reduction criteria and overall fracture stability. The best treatment option must be decided in accordance to the type of fracture, the extent of metaphyseal comminution, the quality of the bone and the medical condition of the patient.Distal radius fractures are the most frequent lesions encountered during clinical practice. Despite the improvements made in both the diagnosis and the management of these injuries, long term pain, stiffness and impairment of strength of the affected joint are not uncommon. Several studies have emphasised the importance of anatomical reduction, stable fixation and early range of motion. In intra-articular fractures, the development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis is related to a residual step off greater than 2 The best option to avoid secondary loss of reduction seems to be internal fixation. Several factors have been shown to be important for the management of distal radius fractures including amongst other the type of fracture, the quality of the bone, patient co-morbidities and the surgeons’ personal experience. The aim of this work is to report our experience in the daily management of these lesions. Different evaluation and treatment algorithms for distal radius fractures have been described in the literature. We define the fracture type in accordance to the AO classification. Simple and user friendly is the flow chart proposed by Gupta et al. If the fracture is not anatomically reduced, but the criteria proposed by Fernandez dorsal tilt less than 10°; radial shortening less than 2 radial inclination greater than 15°; distal radio-ulnar joint congruence; articular step off less than 2 We have observed that if these parameters are respected even if the anatomical reduction is not achieved it is possible to obtain a good outcome. After the evaluation of the quality of the reduction, our decision to proceed to a surgical or non-surgical procedure is based on the fracture instability parameters described in the literature by Lafontaine et al. radial dorsal angle more than 20°; dorsal fracture comminution; intra-articular fracture line; presence of ulna fracture; patient's age more than 60 years. Furthermore we consider a radial shortening more than 4 Finally associated joint lesions must be considered. We evaluate the injuries of the distal radio-ulnar joint in accordance with the classification of Fernandez and Jupiter. Such associated injuries can be identified by standard wrist and elbow X rays. An injury of the scapholunate ligament must be suspected if there is an important radial styloid or lunate facet dislocation. A lesion of the lunotriquetral ligament must be considered if there is a severe radius shortening and an impact of the ulna head on the carpus. These radiographic parameters are part of the static evaluation of the wrist. Furthermore, during surgery dynamic wrist evaluation must be performed under fluoroscopy. Dynamic and static wrist evaluation as described by Henry, During follow up we always evaluate the range of motion of the affected wrist and we compare it to the healthy wrist. The strength parameter is assessed with a Jamar dynamometer whereas pain is quantified using a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS). Radiographic evaluation includes the development of post-traumatic wrist osteoarthritis assessed according to the Knirk and Jupiter criteria. There is no agreement in the literature whether the immobilisation must be performed in a long or short arm cast, in supination, pronation or neutral position. The cast immobilisation must be kept for at least 6 weeks. Cast removal before 6 weeks, could be responsible for a loss of fracture reduction. Loss of reduction can be as high as 60% of the cases and for this reason it is important to perform X rays during the first 3 weeks after the injury. In 100 extra-articular fractures of distal radius treated in our department between 2004 and 2007, we observed a secondary loss of reduction during plaster cast immobilisation in 35% of cases. All of these patients underwent revision surgery. After an accurate analysis of these fractures, we observed that the secondary loss of reduction was in reality 5% as the remaining fractures that lost reduction were wrongly classified as stable fractures and, therefore were incorrectly treated in plaster cast. In 1929 Bòhler Anderson and O’Neil described external fixation in 1944. In a recent retrospective study of 90 patients treated for fractures type A, B, C in accordance with the AO classification we achieved an overall good outcome in 76% of cases. Different studies demonstrated that anatomical reduction of distal radius fractures with early joint mobilisation leads to good functional outcomes. Plates and osteosynthesis techniques have undergone an important evolution during the last years resulting in new implant designs with greater versatility. Locking volar plates introduced recently work biomechanically as if they were external fixators placed directly on the fracture. It is of note that locking volar plates have been used successfully for the treatment of fractures with dorsal displacement, elderly patients with osteoporosis and complex type C fractures according to the AO classification. In our experience this type of fractures are well managed with non-operative treatment. We perform closed reduction and plaster cast immobilisation (long arm) in neutral position with the wrist kept in 20° of flexion and 20° of ulnar deviation. Radiographic evaluation is performed at 7 and 15 days from injury to eventually identify secondary fracture displacement. The long arm cast is kept for 4 weeks, followed by a short arm cast for 2 weeks followed by removal of plaster and referral to physiotherapy. These fractures are normally treated with closed reduction, percutaneous fixation with Kirschner wires and immobilisation in short arm cast. We perform closed reduction and stabilisation of the fracture using two Kirschner wires positioned through the radial styloid and one wire through the dorsal aspect of the radius. Under fluoroscopy we evaluate the stability of the radio-ulnar distal joint, and if necessary we stabilise it using a Kirschner wire inserted through ulna to the radius. Then we immobilise the limb with a short arm plaster cast for a period of 6 weeks. Kirschner wires are usually removed after 4 weeks. Our preferred method of fixation is closed reduction, stabilisation with percutaneous pinning and neutralisation of the fixation with an external bridging fixator, type Penning. We perform when indicated a trabecular bone grafting with a mini-open access in order to gain fracture stability and to accelerate the consolidation period More recently we are considering open reduction and internal fixation of these fractures with locking volar plates. We perform closed reduction and use a Kirschner wire as a joystick. The fracture is stabilised by percutaneous pinning. The wrist is then immobilised with short arm plaster of Paris ( If closed reduction is not successful, we perform open reduction and osteosynthesis with a cannulated screw. We carefully search for any associated scapholunate ligament injury performing under fluoroscopy dynamic stress views. We stabilise these unstable lesions with two 1 In these cases we proceed with closed reduction and fixation with percutaneous pinning and further stabilisation with a bridging external fixator. To obtain the reduction of the dorsal fractures comminution we perform, if necessary, a dorsal mini open approach. Internal fixation is performed if loss of reduction is evident after 2 weeks from conservative treatment. If the dorsal fracture fragment appears uncontrollable with the percutaneous pinning, open reduction and internal fixation is performed using locking volar plates. Dorsal plates are used only in special situations because they have a high rate of complications on the extensor compartment. For this reason we prefer the removal of the dorsal plate after 6 months from surgery. Our favourite procedure is the open reduction and internal fixation currently with locking volar plates. For these fractures we do not consider any other options ( If we achieve a good reduction according to Fernandez criteria we proceed to an external fixation with an eventual mini open access to correct any intra-articular step offs. Bone grafting is used as indicated. We perform an external fixation in patients with associated lesions and local conditions affected by soft tissue trauma. If it is not possible to achieve a good reduction it will be necessary to perform open reduction and internal fixation using locking volar plates. To treat this type of injury we prefer the use of an external fixator. If a long period of immobilisation with the external fixator is required we prefer the use of open reduction and internal fixation. Locking volar plates are used without the need for bone grafting ( These lesions frequently require an integrated treatment with percutaneous pinning, internal fixation and bridging external fixator. The use of locking volar plates may avoid the need of a supplementary external fixation ( Great versatility of treatment options for distal radius fractures is required in order to be able to manage all the considered fracture types. It is not reasonable to assume that there is a gold standard of treatment for all distal radius fractures. The best treatment option must be decided in accordance to the type of fracture evaluated from the radiographs after temporarily reduction. Many factors must be taken into consideration including the quality of the bone, the extent of comminution, the risk of loss of reduction, and the overall medical condition of the patient. When treatment is being evaluated, it is also necessary to consider the cost-benefit ratio for both the patient and the society. We consider appropriate the treatment option that is simpler, less invasive and able to control the fracture variables. The more complex treatment options should be reserved only in those fractures that are particularly difficult to reduce and to stabilise. All authors disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organization that could inappropriately influence the work, within 3 years from submission of the work. There are no conflicts of interest.