Dentin remineralization is of clinical relevance in the therapy of caries and dentin hypersensitivity. This study is aimed at gaining more insights on a molecular scale, through IR spectroscopy, into dentin demineralization and remineralization. The dentin demineralization by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, EDTA (17%, 2 h) significantly altered the secondary structure distribution of collagen, upon loss of interaction with calcium ions. To investigate dentin remineralization, previously demineralized human dentin slices were soaked in Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS) or Hank's Balanced Salt Solution HBSS, in close contact with three commercial cements used as sustained releasing sources of Ca2+ and OH− ions (i.e. calcium hydroxide- and calcium silicate-based cements). IR spectroscopy showed the occurrence of remineralization under these conditions. Collagen did not lose its ability to chelate Ca2+, and these interactions allowed collagen to rearrange into a conformation similar to that of sound dentin. This process appeared slower in HBSS than DPBS, as also shown by the lower degree of maturation of the inorganic phase enucleated in the former medium (amorphous calcium phosphate versus B-type carbonated apatite). Collagen appeared to act as a spatial constraint to crystal deposition, affecting crystallinity and carbonate content of the enucleated phase. Remineralization was found to strongly depend on the calcium releasing ability of the cements. The fast formation of a rough apatite biocoating may represent a favorable clinical condition in the context of mineralized tissue regeneration.Biomineralization is an organic matrix-mediated process in which organic macromolecules act as templates for the nucleation and growth of mineral crystals to form hierarchically ordered hybrid materials such as bone or teeth. Molecular interactions play a key-role in the crystallographic control over the oriented nucleation at the matrix-mineral interface. Mineral ions interact with the organic matrix to produce crystallographically oriented hybrid nanostructures [ In dentin mineralization, type I collagen, the main matrix protein (accounting for about 90% of the organic phase), acts as a template for mineral deposition in the presence of non-collagenous proteins, Dentin remineralization is of clinical relevance in the therapy of dental caries and dentin hypersensitivity. In dental caries, the initial carious lesion reduces the crystallinity, carbonate and magnesium contents and crystal orientation of the inorganic phase of dentin [ Calcium hydroxide-, calcium oxide- and calcium silicate-based materials (mineral trioxide aggregate, This study is aimed at gaining more insights on a molecular scale into demineralization and remineralization of dentin. Demineralization was achieved through ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ( Dycal (i.e. a conventional calcium hydroxide-based cement), TheraCal (i.e. a light-curable resin-based Portland cement-containing material) and White ProRoot MTA (i.e. a self-setting calcium silicate MTA cement) were used as sustained releasing sources of Ca All materials were prepared according to the manufacturers' directions. They were compacted to excess into polyvinyl chloride ( Human dentin slices (5 ± 2 mm side and 0.8 ± 0.1 mm thick) from molar teeth extracted for orthodontic/surgical reasons, were prepared and demineralized in 15 mL of EDTA 17% for 2 h at room temperature, as previously reported [ Disks of the three cements were prepared as previously described, and were used immediately after preparation for the dentin remineralization tests. Each material disk was maintained in close contact with a demineralized dentin slice using a tailored PVC support. In the first experiment, the cements were soaked in 15 mL of DPBS at 37 °C for 7 days in a polystyrene sealed container. The second experiment was carried out in HBSS for 14 days, i.e. for a longer time due to slower calcium phosphate deposition in HBSS [ IR spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 5700 Fourier Transform FT-IR (Thermo Electron Scientific Instruments Corp., Madison, WI, USA), equipped with a smart orbit diamond ATR accessory and a deuterated triglycine sulphate ( According to Du et al. [ As previously reported [ Data were analyzed applying the one-way ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls test using the Sisvar statistical software (Daniel Furtado Ferreira, Universidade Federal de Lavras/UFLA – Brazil). Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.  Upon the EDTA treatment, the IR bands assigned to the mineral phase disappeared while those of collagen underwent significant changes in intensity and wavenumber position with respect to sound dentin ( With regards to the Raman spectra (  All the demineralized dentin samples remineralized, as indicated by the appearance of the bands at about 1415 cm In the case of the dentin slices that stayed in contact with Dycal, several bands (indicated with an asterisk) ascribable to the salicylate component were detected ( To evaluate the relative thickness of the apatite deposit, the I  As can be easily seen from the spectra and from the I Also upon remineralization in HBSS, the collagen Amide I, II and III bands underwent shifts in their wavenumber positions ( Figs. S4 and S5, Supplementary Information, show the average IR spectra of demineralized dentin slices before and after ageing for 14 days in HBSS and in the calcifying solution according to Chirila et al. [ Vibrational spectroscopy proved suitable to characterize the collagen demineralization and remineralization processes as well as the phases formed on the cement disks upon soaking in SBFs. EDTA has been chosen as demineralizing agent since it is usually used in endodontic therapy to remove smear layer and dentin debris and to demineralize the dentine surface and remove bacteria from the root canal space [ ATR-IR spectroscopy showed that the EDTA treatment used in the present study was able to demineralize dentin down to its first 2 μm of thickness, at least. Actually, as observable in The changes observed in the relative intensity of the IR Amide bands ( In spite of the above reported structural rearrangements, collagen did not lose its ability to chelate calcium ions under remineralizing conditions (i.e. upon treatment with the cements in SBF solutions). In this context, it may be observed that the β-sheet conformation (i.e. the prevailing one in demineralized dentin, The I It is well known that type I collagen, the main matrix protein in dentin, forms enclosed spaces where the mineral phase grows. When the degree of supersaturation of calcium and phosphate ions is high, apatite, i.e. the phase thermodynamically more stable, is formed via intermediate amorphous precursors (ACP). They infiltrate into the nanoscopic gaps of collagen fibrils through electrostatic attraction, capillary action and size exclusion [ From the results of our study, it is evident that the adopted demineralization conditions did not alter collagen structure to such an extent to prevent remineralization. On the other hand, it must be stressed that the demineralized dentin samples used in the present study were only partially demineralized ( In any case, remineralization was found to be strongly dependent on the presence of the cements and their calcium releasing ability, since in their absence no remineralization was observed (Fig. S4, Supplementary Information); evidently, with decreasing medium saturation, the time required for mineral induction increases and no deposit was detected. Increasing the concentration of the main inorganic ions of the apatite phase (Ca It is interesting to note that also the organic components of the TheraCal and Dycal cements appeared to play a role in dentin remineralization. The average IR spectrum recorded on the demineralized dentin slices that stayed in contact with TheraCal in HBSS ( As previously reported [ The phase enucleated by demineralized dentin upon soaking in the presence of the cements in DPBS or HBSS had a meanly lower crystallinity (i.e. a meanly higher FWHM Considering that ProRoot MTA, Dycal and TheraCal showed a prolonged calcium release [ Vibrational spectroscopy proved suitable to investigate at a molecular level the dentin demineralization and remineralization processes. The EDTA treatment used in this study to demineralize dentin significantly altered the secondary structure distribution of collagen: the prevailing secondary structure became β-sheet, instead of triple-helix. However, collagen did not lose its ability to chelate calcium ions under remineralizing conditions (i.e. upon treatment with the cements in DPBS or HBSS). The interactions with calcium ions under remineralizing conditions allowed collagen to rearrange into a conformation similar to that of sound dentin and this process appeared slower in HBSS than DPBS, as also shown by the lower degree of maturation of the inorganic phase enucleated in the former medium (amorphous calcium phosphate in HBSS versus B-type carbonated apatite in DPBS). Collagen appeared to act as a spatial constraint to crystal deposition, affecting crystallinity and carbonate content of the enucleated phase. Remineralization was found to strongly depend on the calcium releasing ability of the cements; actually, this phenomenon was not observed upon soaking in HBSS. The organic phases of TheraCal and Dycal (through C  ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid Dulbecco's Phosphate Buffered Saline Hank's Balanced Salt Solution non-collagenous proteins dentin matrix protein 1 dentin phosphoprotein mineral trioxide aggregate simulated body fluid polyvinyl chloride attenuated total reflectance Fourier Transform urethane dimethacrylate bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate triethylene glycol dimethacrylate hydroxyethyl methacrylate polyethylene glycol dimethacrylate deuterated triglycine sulphate neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet amorphous calcium phosphate full-width at half maximum None. This work was supported by RFO funds from None.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at