Vertical Shaft Impact (VSI) crushers have been used as interesting alternatives to cone crushers, particularly in the production of aggregates for the construction industry, not only due to their good energy efficiency but also to their ability to generate more isometric and tougher particles, which is highly desirable in cement mortars and concrete applications. Several mathematical models for the VSI crusher have been proposed in the last two decades or so. The Whiten crusher model, originally developed for cone crushers, has served as the basis of several approaches to model VSI crushers. In the present work, the Andersen/Awachie/Whiten model has been used as the basis for modeling a VSI crusher operating in an industrial plant in Brazil, processing quarry rock to product manufactured sand. Nineteen industrial experiments, covering a range of feed rates, rotor speeds, feed distributor types and feed size distributions, have been carried out. The approach demonstrated to be capable of providing satisfactory estimates of the VSI performance, being able to predict the product size distribution and the specific energy consumption with confidence over a wide range of operating conditions. Since it uses a model that is already available in commercial plant simulators, it may be used, with additional expressions, in simulating any desired circuit. Model parameters such as 
                        
                           K
                           3
                        
                      and 
                        
                           T
                           10
                        
                      were found to be particularly influenced by key operational variables such as feed rate and rotor frequency. The significant effect of feed rate on the performance of the VSI crusher studied has been discussed on the basis of simulations of the material flow pattern inside its feed distributing system, simulated using the discrete element method. According to these simulations, it has been inferred that change in the behavior of VSI from lower to higher feed rates may be related to the transition from material being fed predominantly to the rotor, to the increasing contribution of the cascading effect.Impact crushers have become particularly useful in manufactured aggregates production because of the nature of the breakage mechanisms, which allow direct fragmentation of the particles without leaving residual stress in them ( The issue of residual stress and damage associated to crushing process has been studied by Another noticeable feature of impact crushers is their ability to improve particle shape in the product ( A number of studies have been reported in the literature showing the operational benefits achieved in comminution plants when either cone crushers are replaced by VSI crushers, or when conventional grinding circuits are enhanced with the incorporation of a pre-crushing stage based on VSI technology. Examples of these improvements are: Barmac crushers replaced roller crushers in the final crushing stage of a nepheline syenite processing plant, allowing feeding with a coarser feed, at similar circuit capacity, greater ease of operation, smaller space requirement, lower energy consumption and less demand for maintenance with slightly higher generation of fines (i.e. material less than 74 A significantly higher energy efficiency of a VSI compared to a cone crusher in a crushing plant processing gneiss (feed size distribution below 50 A potential increase of 10–20% in the throughput of a conventional cement grinding circuit (two-compartment dry ball mill in closed circuit with an air-swept classifier), as well as potential energy savings in the whole clinker grinding circuit with the incorporation of a fine pre-crushing stage using a Barmac crusher, which may result in a lower capital investment compared to a pre-crushing stage based on HPGR ( Given its relatively wide applicability, VSI crushing has also attracted researchers interested in mathematically modeling its performance. Recent activity has been focused on attempting to model the process in a mechanistic way, with the aid of the discrete element method ( For instance, Originally developed for modeling of cone crushers, the Whiten crusher model ( Researchers from the JKMRC, on the other hand, proposed a methodology for a more direct application of the Whiten crusher model to the VSI ( Set the parameters of the classification function (Eq. Calculate the Calculate the product particle size distribution ( This approach ( As a further improvement, the Andersen/Awachie/Whiten (AAW) model ( The AAW model also differs from the original Whiten model ( In the present work, an alternative methodology is proposed with the aim of predicting the performance of the VSI in terms of both product size distribution and power consumption for a wide operational range, using the AAW model as a basis. A discussion on the significant effect of feed rate on the model predictions has been carried out on the basis of simulating the material flow in the feeding system using the discrete element method. The work focused on a VSI crusher in operation in the State of São Paulo (Brazil), dedicated to production of manufactured sand for mortars. The feed consists of granulite, a metamorphic rock, rich in quartz and feldspar. In the deposit in question, the material has a beige-grayish color, phaneritic granular texture, presenting exceptional homogeneity A representative sample of the feed to the plant was collected for breakage testing in a drop weight apparatus. Following an adaptation of the standard drop weight test (DWT) ( The VSI crusher installed in the circuit is a Barmac-type crusher, with partial cascading of the feed, manufactured by Shanghai Shibang Machinery Co. Ltd. (China). It is equipped with two 132 Industrial surveys were carried out under different operating conditions, including: material feed size distribution, mass flow in circuit feed, feed distributor and circuit configuration (open or closed circuit), and rotational speed of the VSI rotor. Indeed, campaigns were conducted covering feeds with top sizes from 37.5 to 26.5 The collection of samples in the industrial surveys was carried out in reverse order of the circuit flow, that is, samples of the discharge of the VSI crusher were taken immediately prior to sampling the feed and the recycle stream. In order to collect the discharge sample, a deviator was installed which diverted the material flow, through which timed samples were collected. On the other hand, 1.5-m belt cut samples were collected of the feed to the crusher, during which the plant operation was interrupted. After weighing, samples were split until an appropriate mass was reached for size analyzes. These analyzes were carried out through a combination of sieving in a Ro-Tap® sieve shaker for sizes ranging from 37.2 Size distributions and solids flowrates collected during surveys were reconciled through mass balancing, using the corresponding module available in the JKSimMet® software. Some biased tests were identified after reconciliation and analysis of all data sets, possibly due to the instability of the process during the conduction of the sampling campaigns, particularly in some of the few tests conducted with the open circuit configuration, which is not a common operating condition for that circuit and that was only tested for the purpose of modeling the crusher. Such inconsistencies were mainly detected in the particle size distributions of VSI feed and discharge. As such, 16 out of the 19 tests were used to develop the model. The breakage characteristics of the feed have been described from drop weight tests. Typical results from experiments are shown in The methodology suggested by researchers from the JKMRC ( Although originally developed for compressive crushing, where the unbroken material is mixed with the fresh feed and subjected to sequential breakage and classification stages as they move downwards in the crushing chamber, the Whiten model (Eq. All particles contained in the feed may be classified for breakage, that is, the The parameter Product size distributions of the VSI crusher under different operating conditions are simulated based on the proposed modeling approach (Section While the AAW model explicitly accounts for changes in feed size distribution and breakage characteristics, through Eqs. In order to gain insights into this phenomenon, simulations using the discrete element method were conducted using the software EDEM Version 2.7 from DEM Solutions (Edinburgh, UK). The contact model describing interactions between materials was described by the Hertz–Mindlin model (Weerasekara et al., 2013). The contact parameters for the model were taken from a previous publication by the group for rock with similar characteristics ( The simulated geometry was drawn according to Results of the DEM simulations are illustrated in However, the lack of experimental data for cone B at lower feed rates did not allow to confirm such observation in practice, so that the The Andersen/Awachie/Whiten model of the cone crusher has been applied in modeling the performance of a 264 Nevertheless, the significant effect of feed rate was further analyzed on the basis of simulations of the feed distributing system using the discrete element method. Such simulations demonstrated that, as feed rate increases, the proportion of material entering the rotor decreases while the cascading flow increases. The significantly lower collision energies to which particles that report to the cascading flow receive in comparison to those projected by the rotor ( The authors would like to thank ECOMIX Ltda., as well as