A novel three product hydro-cyclone screen (TPHS) has been developed at the Key Laboratory of Coal Processing and Efficient Utilization, China University of Mining and Technology, China for particle separation. The new hydro-cyclone consists of a cylindrical screen embedded in a conventional hydro-cyclone (CH), which combined both centrifugal classification and screening. The present study aimed to remove the fish-hook effect and demonstrate the performance of TPHS based on pilot-scale and industrial-scale experiments. In pilot scale, the screen aperture size varied in the range ∼0.50–0.70 mm, while the aperture size was 0.60 mm in case of industrial-scale. It found that the performance of hydro-cyclone significantly influenced by the aperture size. In contrast to the pilot-scale CH, the fines and the water recovery of TPHS in underflow were reduced and became less with the increase of aperture size, while the contrary trends of fines obtained in overflow. Furthermore, TPHS generated a new outgoing stream namely screen underflow due to the presence of a cylindrical screen, wherein the dominant size distribution was close to overflow. Note that the fish-hook effect was disappeared entirely in TPHS because the trapped and entrained fines in underflow reduced significantly. Also, the performance of both TPHS and CH was discussed based on the Hancock classification efficiency (HE), imperfection (I) and cut size (d50c
                     ) using the data obtained from the pilot-scale and industrial-scale experiments which indicate that TPHS represented a better performance than CH. A successful industrial-scale application of TPHS instead of CH in coal preparation plant demonstrated its advantage and application potential.hydro-cyclone diameter (cm) particle size corresponding to the partition numbers 25% (mm) particle size corresponding to the partition numbers 75% (mm) corrected cut the size of partition curve (mm) mean size of the particle at interval cumulative weight percentage in feed which size is coarser than target cut size (mm) cumulative weight percentage in the feed which size is finer than target cut size (mm) cumulative weight percentage in underflow which size is coarser and finer than the target cut size (mm) cumulative weight percentage in underflow which size is coarser and finer than the target cut size (mm) weight percentage of any particle size interval in the feed stream (%) weight percentage of any particle size interval in the overflow stream (%) weight percentage of any particle size interval in the screen underflow stream (%) weight percentage of any particle size interval in the underflow stream (%) imperfection particle size interval partition number of the raw partition curve for any particle size interval partition number of the corrected partition curve for any particle size interval partition number of the corrected partition curve for any particle size interval ratio of water from the feed to the underflow (%) solid recovery in the overflow (%) solid recovery in the screen underflow (%) solid recovery in the underflow stream (%) Hancock classification efficiency conventional hydro-cyclone three product hydro-cyclone screen particle image velocimetry computational fluid dynamics Hydro-cyclones are known as liquid cyclones which play a significant role in solid-solid or solid-fluid separation based on the densities, shapes, and sizes of particles ( The fish-hook in conventional hydro-cyclone (CH) is not reported frequently due to its random and sporadic occurrence. The fish-hook effect not only leads the unnecessary cost but also produces some fines which are difficult to handle in the downstream processes and attenuates the classification sharpness ( describe the detail design, classification process and principle of three product hydro-cyclone screen (TPHS) for both pilot-scale and industrial scale. explicitly explain the experimental approaches including the rig, procedure and data analysis. compare the size distribution and water recovery of TPHS with the conventional hydro-cyclones (CH) based on the pilot-scale experiments and demonstrate the size characteristics and bypass fraction in the underflow. critically analyse the raw and corrected partition curves of TPHS and CH for both pilot-scale and industrial scale experiments. describe the effect of fish-hook on TPHS and CH based on both pilot-scale and industrial scale experiments. The schematic diagram as shown in The classification principle of TPHS can be considered partially similar to the CH, namely the combination of centrifugal classification and screening for particle classification in TPHS compared to that in CH. In detail, the feed slurry was introduced under pressure through the tangential inlet and forced by the geometry of the unit to move in a circular path. The typical “spiral within a spiral” flow patterns namely inner spiral and outer spiral were evident inside TPHS due to the opposite outward centrifugal and inward drag forces (see    The coals (density ∼ 1.44 g/cm For the pilot-scale experiments, the slurry pulp was maintained at 110 ± 10 g/l and pumped to the TPHS and CH device at an inlet pressure of 0.07 ± 0.02 MPa. The duration of each experimental run was approximately 30 min. After that time, three sets of samples (feed, screen underflow, screen overflow) were taken at 5.0 min intervals, at 30, 35 and 40 min. Each sample set was obtained over a 5 ± 1 s time interval. Therefore, the total sample volume for each stream was that for 15 s of the collection. Finally, slurry samples captured by weighing, filtration, and drying. Then, the size distribution of each sample was obtained using the wet sieving to estimate the partition curve for both TPHS and CH. In industrial-scale TPHS, the concentration and pressure of feed inlet were ∼110 g/l and 0.08 MPa, respectively. The mass flow ratio of solids (solid recovery) for each product stream was calculated using the least-squares method (LSM) ( Here, The partition curve represents the percentage of the size interval ( Furthermore, the corrected partition curve was used to remove the effect of the bypass to underflow ( To evaluate the performance of hydro-cyclones, the imperfection ( The size distribution of the particles in the TPHS for three different product streams namely (a) underflow (b) overflow and (c) screen underflow are shown in The solids recovery of each product stream for TPHS and CH was estimated using the least-squares method (Eqs.  It is worth to mention that both the raw and corrected partition curve of CH represent a dip namely “fish-hook” effect in the regions of fines and asymptotes to a larger value (see, the dotted circle line in The performance evaluations of TPHS and CH for different aperture size are presented in The data obtained from industrial-scale was analysed to get the partition curves following the procedure of pilot-scale operations (see Sections  In general, the fish-hook effect has been observed in centrifugal classifiers and separators while treating fine and ultrafine particles ( In the present study, a new three product hydro-cyclone screen (TPHS) has been designed based on the conventional hydro-cyclone (CH) aiming to remove the fish-hook effect for better performance. The essential features of the new hydro-cyclone include cylinder stratification, cylinder classification, and cone classification to generate three product streams namely overflow, underflow, and under-screen flow. The experiments were carried out extensively using TPHS with different aperture sizes varied in the range of ∼0.5–0.7 mm for both pilot-scale and industrial-scale experiments. The obtained results of TPHS were compared with CH under the similar experimental conditions. Based on the presented results, the following conclusions can be achieved: For the pilot-scale TPHS, the size distribution in underflow was coarser and became bigger with increasing the aperture size compared to CH. In contrast, the size distribution in overflow was finer compared to CH and became smaller as the aperture size increased. Both pilot-scale and industrial scale experiments showed that the water recovery in underflow of TPHS substantially attenuated as increased the aperture size. The estimated water recovery for TPHS was lower in compared to CH, which indicates that less quantity of bypass existed in TPHS than CH. Contrary to the pilot-scale CH, the trends of raw and corrected partition curves in TPHS exhibited the reduction of fish-hook effect. Hence, the new device can remove the ratio of fines reporting to underflow. Both pilot-scale and industrial scale experiments indicate that the trends of corrected partition curves demonstrated the better performance of TPHS considering higher Hancock classification efficiency ( In future, the experiments are being conducted using the non-intrusive particle image velocimetry (PIV) technique to accurately characterise the flow pattern in TPHS and compared with the obtained computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation results. This work was supported by: (a) Fundamental research funds for the 