Primary crushers are characterized by the maximum size of boulders that they can accept and secondary crushers are defined by their reduction ratio. The reduction ratio R is defined by: This ratio ranges from 4 to 8 and is moderate, which explains the low energy consumption per unit mass of product. The presence of fines and, especially, moisture, could promote the formation of lumps, leading to a decrease in capacity and an increase in energy consumed. Bond d  The fragmentation function obtained by crushing is expressed in the following form: It is an expression with four empirical parameters: u, v, Ø and x The first term recognizes pure and simple crushing and the second recognizes intergranular abrasion. The parameter x This expression was used for cone crushers but we must not rule out the fact that it could equally be valuable for gyratory and jaw crushers and especially autogenous mills, where each one could replace one crusher followed by a mill. 1) Principle The machine has two jaws, opening toward the top for the feed. One jaw is fixed and the other jaw is mobile. The upper part of the mobile jaw has a circular movement created by an eccentric. The lower part of the mobile jaw has a recess at the bottom where an oscillating flap rests, whose function is to maintain a roughly constant distance between the two jaws. In fact, this distance defines the size of the crushed product and it is regulated by adjusting the flap. When the mobile jaw moves forward, fragmentation is produced by pressure. This latter could be exerted directly: jaw on product or even product on product (self-grinding). When the jaw retreats, the product descends by gravity and the process repeats itself a dozen times up until the outlet. The proportion of pore spaces decreases as it descends. The distance Two jaws in an open position form an angle that varies between 20 and 28° according to the situation. This angle is significantly smaller when the product is hard, moist and rounded and it has a weak friction coefficient. In fact, boulders should not escape the jaw’s grip. With all manufacturers, the L/G ratio of the width of the jaws at their opening on the feed side is equal to 1.25. The frequency of oscillations could range between 50 and 750 cycles per minute depending on the substance’s elasticity. Energy consumption is from 0.5 to 1.5 kWh.tonne 2) Interest and Performances Advantages are as follows: a hydraulic device allows for adjustments when in operation; the jaw’s wear plates could be turned around from top to bottom or even exchanged between themselves, which extends their lifespan; active surfaces could be adapted to the product. A smooth surface allows for a greater capacity than an embossed surface and it is preferred for soft products; an embossed surface eliminates flat grains; finally, a convex surface reduces the capacity but prevents jamming;  the reduction rate ranges from 4 to 7 depending on the adjustment. For a low rate, flow is obviously much higher. The optimum reduction rate is 5. The maximum “mouth” opening is 1.5 m, but it happens when the device is much bigger than the scale; the minimum size that we could hope for the product is approximately 4 the device’s capacity does not exceed 1,000 tonne.h To finish, we note that the jaw crusher is not very suitable for moist and sticky products because there will be jamming. The solution involves using a hammer crusher.  Principle The upper part of the jaw pivots around a fixed point. The lower part has a forward and backward horizontal motion created by a system involving two connected flaps and one eccentric flap. When the flaps are extended one against the other, the opening at the base of the device is minimum. A single turn of the eccentric leads to two back-and-forth motions of the mobile jaw, where we get the name “double effect”.  Jaw motion in a single-effect crusher involves a vertical component that leads to significant friction wear. Inversely, the mobile jaw of a doubleeffect device has an essentially horizontal displacement and the friction is minimum. The double-effect principal is therefore used for very hard products such as ferrochromes and ferroalloys. The double-effect crusher, which is clearly much more expensive than a single-toggle crusher, is reserved for limited use (very hard products). We will use the work of Rose and English The maximum size of boulders that the device can treat is given by: G is the maximum distance separating jaws in their upper part. It is the maximum dimension of the “mouth” of the machine. The “landing” (or the run) of the mobile extremity of the moving jaw is given by: An upper limit of the reduction ratio is: R is generally found to be between 4 and 7. The practical frequency of the mobile jaw’s strike is:  This flow rate is given, in tonnes per hour, by: For granite and quartz: For carbon and coke: L: equipment’s width (m) Ø depends on the granulometry of the feed through the intermediary of the parameter: For α Otherwise, we will consult the table below:   The net power is given by: x I   upper limit of the reduction ratio; flow rate that the equipment can manage; net power. According to the authors, the maximum boulder size that the crusher can treat is given by: G is the maximum distance separating jaws from their upper part. It is the opening of the machine’s “mouth”. This crusher’s action is similar to the action in roller mills. However, jaws give a product that is much richer in fines than rollers. With smooth jaws or simply worn ones, the product descends in small successive columns and seems to possess, at the outlet, angular features.  The inner mobile surface of the chamber is made up of a conical trunk with its tip at the top. It is called a nut and it is also covered in armored plates. It follows from the above that the open space between grinding surfaces continues to retreat as the product descends, just like in a jaw crusher. The nut is suspended by the upper extremity of its axle to a ball bearing that rests on a crosspiece. The lower extremity of the nut’s axle is moved by a circular movement of an eccentric system and this axle then sweeps the surface of a small angled cone. The nut turns freely around its axle without any mechanical moving device, but only from this axle’s rotation and friction on the product. As such, the nut rolls on the product without sliding. This movement regulates wear on active surfaces. Through a complete rotation of the axle, the nut has made a revolution around the chamber and each of its points has come nearer and has moved away from the concaves in a movement that is very similar to the movement of jaws. The product descends by gravity and, each time it passes the nut, gets reduced into grains that are increasingly fine. The angle between the chamber and nut surface is close to that of the jaws of a jaw crusher. Nevertheless, primary crushers have a smaller angle so that they do not let boulders escape, in the same way that the grip angle of roller crushers is also limited. The size of the product leaving the base of the equipment is fixed by adjusting the minimum distance separating the nut and the chamber. This adjustment is made by changing the height of the nut in relation to the chamber. The smaller the adjustment, the finer the product, but flow rate is reduced. A lower radial run of the nut creates a granulometry that is more uniform and has less fines. This crusher’s mode of action is therefore comparable to the action of jaw crushers, but, here, the movement of grinding surfaces is continuous and the risk of blockage is minimum. A loading at “full mouth” is possible.   The gyratory crusher can, just like a jaw crusher, accept boulder sizes close to 1.5 This crusher can handle products with a Mohs hardness that is not necessarily less than 5. As is the case for jaw crushers, there is not any mutual sliding on grinding surfaces, but simply rolling of the nut on concaves. Wear is then uniform and minimum. However, the gyratory crusher is sensitive to jamming if it is fed with a sticky or moist product loaded with fines. This inconvenience is less sensitive with a single-effect jaw crusher because mutual sliding of grinding surfaces promotes the release of a product that adheres to surfaces. Wear is maximum at the lower part, because at this location compression forces are exerted on the entirety of grinding surfaces. The profile of active surfaces could be curved and studied as a function of the product in a way to allow for work performed at a constant volume and, as a result, a higher reduction ratio that could reach 20. Inversely, at a given reduction ratio, effective streamlining could increase the capacity by 30%. The typical reduction ratio is bound to be between 6 and 8 and is similar that of jaw equipment. Applying the crushing force by rolling the nut breaks flats and gives a product that is more “cubic” than the jaw crusher. The largest-scale equipment can treat a flow with the magnitude of 4,000 tonne.h With a production rate and flow that are equal, the power consumed by a gyratory crusher is similar to a jaw crusher.  Compared to the gyratory crusher: its size and capacity are much smaller; its rotation speed is clearly much higher; the product fineness is much greater (up to 2 the reduction ratio varies between 6 and 8. Profiles of the chamber and the nut are adjusted to the desired fineness. This equipment is of two types: hammer crushers and mills; cage mills. The rotor in hammer equipment has a horizontal axle and, at its periphery, it has hammers spread on a crown that can hold 2, 4, 6 or 8 hammers. The number of crowns could, along the length of the axle, vary between 1 to over 30 (sugar cane grinder). Hammers could be organized in relation to the rotor or rigidly fixed upon it. Rigid hammers allow for a maximum capacity and are used in crushers. Organized hammers used in grinders are recommended for easy products (limestone, clay, standard bricks, cork) and for moderate flows. Organized hammers each act separately, which allows for all piece sizes to be attacked. Hammers are made of steel or chrome (30%) hardened by incorporating 1% manganese and 1% silicon.  a localized impact plate and a plane surface; an impact plate (the anvil) is set out around the rotor, which covers the major portion of its perimeter. The anvil, particularly used for crushers, is generally made up of a series of collision bars with a rectangular section, from which the product rebounds to be hit by hammers. The impact plate could also be a plate with a sawtooth profile that has the same effect. Finally, with sticky products or, products rich in fines and moisture, there is a risk of accumulation in the equipment and, finally, obstruction and jamming. The anvil is therefore made up of mobile plates mounted in a similar way to tracks on a tractor, so that the work surface is constantly being renewed. The impact plate’s bars are spaced one or several centimeters apart and let the crushed product pass without being selective to the grain size. If the anvil is a surface without holes or voids, the product is pushed back and collects at the base of the equipment. It is therefore crucial to plan for an external classifier, so that the equipment recycles the fraction of inadequate fineness. We can avoid this complication, especially in grinders, by replacing the anvil with a perforated sheet or series of bars that will let only the adequately fine fraction escape. The percussion effect could be achieved with a rotor spiked with “teeth” or with points of unequal size. The rotor turns in the mill chamber that gets increasingly narrow as the product advances. The peripheral speed of the “teeth” is 2 m.s The percussion effect can also be achieved by the hammer’s action. As such, the cage grinder has a cylindrical rotor formed by bars parallel at the rotation axle. This cage turns on the inside of another bar cage whose diameter is slightly greater.  The feed system for grinders and crushers is located at the upper part of the equipment that forms a hopper. Boulders to crush or grind descend into the hopper as crushing or grinding takes place. At the inlet, the product undergoes the first hard collision from a hammer and then mixes up with the product roll rotates with the hammers (but more slowly than them). Several collisions come one after the other, with a lower intensity that depends on the difference between the peripheral hammer speed and the rotation speed of the product roll. Tschorbadjiski and Schalinus [ The product’s exit can take place in different ways: by centrifugal force through the grid surrounding the rotor and its hammers; in the same way between collision bars and the impact plate; by gravity with the lower part of the equipment if the anvil is designed without interstitial voids; by pneumatic drive through an exit located, like for the feed system, at the upper part of the equipment and that can be placed on the other extremity of the rotor if the machine is long and has many crowns of hammers. Mill hammers are much smaller than hammers on crushers and there are many more of them. A large number of hammers increases not only the fineness of the product but also the energy consumed. The shape of teeth varies with the characteristics of the ore: pointed in the case of coal, they could also be up to 20 A rotor with teeth could give products with an 80% underflow that does not exceed 50 μm.  by increasing the rotation speed of the rotor. As such, the peripheral hammer speed is 50 m.s by decreasing the gap between the hammer’s hitting circle and the anvil if it is set. As such, as sugarcane grinding progresses, this gap is reduced from 15 to 5 by decreasing the opening of the outlet grid of a mill or even the opening of the screen connected to a crusher. But, as product flow decreases, the product spends a longer time in the equipment and energy consumption per tonne of the product increases; by increasing the number of hammers, meaning the number of circles that they are placed on. Classifiers connected to collision mills are of cyclone type. However, a simple air current sweeping the inside of the equipment is sometimes enough to drag particles that have a satisfactory size without needing to pass through a cyclone. Classifiers connected to crushers are screens. Large crushers can treat up to 1,500 tonne.h Hammer crushers require 30% more energy compared with gyratory equipment or jaws as the kinetic energy of fragments is released as a pure loss. Hammer mills are still mainly used to get ultrafine products, for example, grain flours. In this case, the high energy consumption is from the plastic behavior of the soft product and it has nothing to do with the type of machine used. When treating ores and inorganic products, the granulometry obtained is spread out and the portion of fines is quite significant. On the other hand, Wearing of hammers is still significant and it is not advised to use a hammer crusher or mill with abrasive products like coke or firebrick. In all situations, the content of silica in the treated product must not exceed 10%. This equipment is very suitable for soft products. As such, talc can be milled to a fineness of 10 μm. Soft rocks, and therefore quite easily deformed, have a tendency to plug gyratory crushers or jaw crushers. On the other hand, with collisions caused by hammers, they appear to be more fragile and are treated in a satisfactory way by using hammer crushers. Hammer mills do not accept slurries. Generally speaking, if an ore or plant’s moisture content is too high, the product tends to exhibit plastic behavior and grinding it becomes more difficult. In particular, if the feed is enough rich in fines and moisture so as to be sticky, it will have a tendency to accumulate on the equipment, a solution to which would be to add dry product to the feed. Drying by sweeping hot air is required if the plan is to use a pneumatic classifier. Hammer mills allow for a good release of the main constituents of an ore, because with collisions pieces literally explode and the ore is liberated from its matrix. In fact, matrix–ore interfaces are weak surfaces. The hammer crusher works quite well as the primary crusher on soft rocks or moderately hard ones (schistose and stratified structures) and the reduction ratio could be approximately 4. If working in a “closed circuit” (so with one classifier) and if treating limestone (which is neither hard nor abrasive), the hammer crusher could reduce 500  These machines work in a closed circuit with an external hydraulic classifier that sufficiently evacuates fine products and recycles any product that is too big back into the mill. Air circulation in the interior of the mill creates an internal pseudo-classification, whose effect is additional to the external classifier. We will only study the effect of internal classification, that is the operation in an open circuit where production is expelled pneumatically. See F will be the total feed flow (which is equal to production flow) and M is product holdup inside the machine. C F is measured in kg.s  Austin and Gotsis Austin Rogers Austin and Luckie [ The balance of the loop is written as: Milling in the equipment is expressed by: Eliminating f Let us set: Let us divide by F:  Now let:  Components of the granulometric vector of the product are: where r is measured in s On the other hand, we see on the circuit graph that: Where, by eliminating p  γ  We use We carry out the granulometric analysis of the contents of the mill after stopping it, which provides values for m For fines, we state that C Knowing r, we deduce C  We could also have used the relation: If we make use of analytical expressions for B The S In these devices, comminution is a result of the product’s impact on hammers that are fixed in relation to the rotor. The continuous grinding equation applies to this equipment: Remember that S τ: the average residence time: M: retention of solid in the equipment (kg) F: fed flow (kg.s  or even: In the above equation, r is measured in s It can be noted that g Eliminating p Let: The preceding equation becomes: γ  By stopping the mill, we can measure the mass M of the retained solid and the granulometry m Knowing the feed flow rate F, we deduce the average residence time: The granulometry p  This product is a decreasing function of the size of particles and, when the index i changes from 1 to n, the quantity r (1 If we make use of analytical expressions for B By increasing the feed flow F, we see that M changes in the same way until there is a jam.  The product S Finally, the useful power is proportional to the feed F above a certain minimum value of the holdup M. Jindal and Austin A shredder is made up of a rotation axle with what we can call teeth fixed up on it. This equipment is used to shred used tires and cotton or hay.  For very fine grinding (<  The product could have high moisture. The peripheral speed of the turning disc could reach 120 m.s Two cylinders along the parallel and horizontal axles turn in the opposite direction, very close to each other at equal or similar speeds. The product is generally fed by gravity above the gap separating the two cylinders. Let us consider at a given moment a spherical particle that is pinned between two cylinders. It is subjected in part to the surface of each cylinder by a normal force N and a tangential exertion T. The particle’s weight is negligible compared with these forces. The  For the particle not to be released, you must have the vertical component T (pointing toward the bottom and equal to Tcosθ/2) being greater than the vertical component of N (pointing toward the to and equal to N sin θ/2). In other words: For this to be possible, you must have: or even: Taking into account the variations in μ, θ must range between 17° and 33°. If x where D is the diameter of the cylinders.  According to the inequality This result enables us to define the maximum reduction ratio R This reduction ratio is optimal for a dry ore. With large cylinders and significant spacing, crushers could treat 80 The idea of an angle of nip comes into play especially for crushers and sometimes for mills. In fact, in the latter, the diameter of the rollers is never less than 0.2 Johanson   When sliding is nil, comminution is carried out by pure compression. The energy yield is then important but it decreases with the reduction ratio, as there is agglomeration of fragments and loss from mutual friction. Sliding of 5–10% produces a shearing effect that is useful for treating plastic products. This is the case for paint mills. The product is then pulled by the fastest cylinder. These machines, for mechanical reasons, are made up of three cylinders and therefore undergo two successive grindings. Such sliding is not advised for products with dry grains, as there will be a significant production of fines. However, if the ratio of peripheral speeds achieves a value of 10, the energy yield increases again as significant shearing prevents fragments from agglomerating. This yield could even be greater than the value that it would have with no sliding. Capacity is given by the equation: F: empirical factor that increases when the angle of nip decreases ε: product’s porosity between cylinders. If the product is soft, there will be a tendency to agglomerate and ε will be low and clearly less than 0.4 L: length of cylinders (m)  e: gap between two cylinders (m) ρ  We will not use the classical notion of fragmentation speed, here but instead a fragmentation rate which is a dimensionless number less than one. We will denote this rate by a lowercase “s” to distinguish it from the fragmentation speed S When grains in the granulometric layer j are found between two rollers, the fraction (1–s We characterize the granulometric layer using the index i If i If i If i We then very easily obtain values for s On the other hand, s Expressing s Components of the fragmentation rate s  We admit that fragmentation of each granulometric layer is done independently of other layers. We take up again a part of the calculations made by Austin Consider then that we feed the equipment with a unique layer with a size x Selecting feed particles that get milled could be materialized by a fictitious separator s On the other hand, the existence of the equally fictitious separator s We observe at the outlet: p Note that, for k  fragments coming directly from the grinding of f  the “recycled” p’  Recycled granulometric layers therefore corresponds to i values that do not exceed the value k − Finally: Austin with We can calculate b We will start with:  Finally, for a feed with n granulometric layers, the mass of the layer of product size x and, of course: The peripheral cylinder speed could be much higher for wet products (8–10 m.s Crusher cylinder separation is never less than 1 On this basis, oleaginous grains are also milled in smooth cylinder mills and we get fine scales with a thickness that is less than a millimeter, which improves oil extraction either by pressing, or by solvent extraction. This type of milling that produces flakes is called flattening or lamination. The reduction ratio of crushers and mills is between 3 and 7 and its magnitude is often 4. The granulometry obtained will be constricted if we distribute the feed evenly and with a low flow rate along the length of cylinders. The target reduction ratio will then be approximately 3. Conversely, if there is no fear The major inconvenience with cylinder equipment is wear and this limits their usage for products like coal or even food products. Hard minerals are excluded from the product’s Mohs hardness, which must be less than or equal to 5 (clay, shale, ash, barite). The industrial yield of cylinder equipment is the best (60–90%) of all crushers and mills. Kellerwessel The roller press must be fed quite slowly for a volume of product to accumulate above the “gap” of the two rollers. Particles are crushed by mutual contact, which allows hard products such as quartz to be treated. Energy consumption is less than 3.5 kWh.tonne In the small particle domain, we obtain the straight line AB represented by log The steep slope A’B shows a decrease in the reduction ratio and the presence of less fines. A feed with flat grains gives a much lower slope than a unidimensional feed. Cubic grains break in two ways. First, transverse cracks make tablets, especially if the reduction ratio is low. Then, radiating cracks appear near the compression force’s point of application. The biggest grains are fairly flat but those the peak M of the frequency curve are more unidimensional. The finest grains have a tendency to be lengthened, or at least angular. It is clear that galena (soft) produces more fines than hard quartz for the same adjustment of the separation gap between rollers at the size of the feed.  Roasted coffee grains are ground with equipment whose cylinders have grooves that are parallel to the axle. In flour production, grains of wheat are first treated (after hydrating to 16 or 17% moisture) with cylinders equipped with helical slots, with very broad gaps and triangular sections. From the first to the last couple of cylinders: the section of grooves decreases; the number of grooves increases from 300 to 800 for cylinders that are 0.2 gaps between cylinders decrease. Sliding is expected to emphasize the shearing effect. Milling is then followed with machines with smooth cylinders. Typically, mills with grooved cylinders are used to carry out the initial milling of grains.  A grid is located at the bottom of the chamber, with openings whose size varies from 1.5 to 10 This equipment is suitable for moderately hard products (clay, schist, barite). It consumes low power and requires very little maintenance because it is a simple machine. The reduction ratio is high; from pieces that are 10 The maximum flow is 50 tonne.h A wet path could be used, particularly for ceramic powders. The olive grinder used to produce olive oil functions by using the same principle.  The track is a ring with an immobile vertical axle. The axle bearings that are slightly inclined on the vertical are applied to the track by centrifugal force. This is therefore a swing-type mill. It is suitable for soft products and allows for fines that are 0.1 For coal, we could use either: equipment with turning chambers on the edges of which bearings are applied using springs; or a system of steel balls sealed between two circular tracks where one is fixed and the other is revolving. Springs exert a vertical face on the fixed upper track. The centrifugal force removes the product. This model was modeled by Austin Remember that net power P Now let F where R is the radius of the circular track. The net power is then: The coefficient μ varies with the nature and granulometry of the treated product. Its value has a magnitude of 0.1.  In the manufacturer’s range, equipment is geometrically similar. In machines where the milled product is evacuated by centrifugal force, rotation speed is such that, at the edge of the track, the centrifugal acceleration is independent of the track’s radius: On the other hand, the pressure of grinding bodies supposedly spread on the track is also constant. Yet, the width L of the track is proportional to R. So: Net power is such that: It is the same as the flow that is proportional to net power. Broadbent and Calcott  Expressions are suggested respectively for the capacity and power consumed by the same authors Ball-and-race mills are only used for dry milling. In the Hardinge mill, grinding bodies are big boulders that circulate along the circular horizontal track. The curve for the distribution frequency of diameters is a unique maximum flanked by two straight lines. Rod or bar mills suffer from a lot of wear if the product is very abrasive. This limitation gave rise to the autogenous mill where the grinding bodies are themselves pieces of ore. These pieces are a lot more efficient when they fall from a great height. This is why the diameter of these mills could achieve 11 Internal retention in the mill basically involves: large-sized boulders; particles (grains) that have a small size or an average size. Comminution is performed: by crushing grains by collision, either mutually or with boulders;  Generally, ore density is much less than the density of steel. To activate fragmentation, we expect to have on the inside of the equipment a low proportion (5% by volume, for example) of steel balls. Wear on this low mass of balls has very little effect on the actual operation cost. Mills that operate in this way are called semi-autogenous mills. The feed must have a suitable granulometry. In particular, there needs to be an adequate proportion of boulder sizes greater than 250 The rotation speed is equal to 85 or 90% of the critical speed. Like ball mills, the critical speed is given by: D: equipment diameter (m). Stanley If [g] is the matrix of the underflow’s coefficients through the outlet grid, we thus have: Where [g] is the diagonal matrix and, if the grid is ideal, elements g  and, taking into account This relationship directly relates the feed to production. Elements S As a function of grain size in the device, the fragmentation function can be represented in 1) j is small (boulders): erosion dominates almost exclusively. We use a non-standardized function: This expression involves empirical parameters x* and u. 2) j is big: it is the fine fraction where crushing is the main process: This function, termed Broadbent, is standardized. 3) j is medium: we then have  The mass M of solid retained in the mill at the granulometry shows two peaks if we consider the frequencies m As such, Stanley [ erosion is proportional to the particle surface; erosion is proportional to the particle volume. Menacho For an equal production and having a large equipment diameter, energy consumed is greater than that required in ball mills. On the other hand, the consumption of steel from wear on the few balls present is less but the wear on bearings is greater. The autogenous mill could be fed with boulders reaching up to 800 The possible flow increases with the diameter D of the equipment as D  The autogenous mill is equipped with a classification device. In wet mode, the pulp mixture is evacuated through a grid and then treated by a hydro-cyclone or a sieve. Granules are recycled back into the equipment. In dry mode, an air current goes through the equipment and drives the fines fraction, which economizes the entire classification circuit. The autogenous mill simplifies a circuit by replacing it with a single complete installation for crushing and milling: a classic diagram will include the primary gyratory, a secondary crusher in a closed circuit, two rod mills and two ball mills; a much simpler diagram involves only two primary crushers, two autogenous mills and one ball mill in a closed circuit. The equipment principle is to energetically agitate the medium in which the following are mixed: a liquid (generally water); grains of the solid to be milled, up to the size of a micron; small beads that act as grinding bodies and whose diameter has a magnitude of a millimeter. In all configurations, agitation is achieved by a turning device whose vertical rotation axle is shared with a cylindrical enclosure called a chamber. Different types are obtained by sharing the chamber volume between the agitation system on the one side and the agitated medium on the other side. The types of chambers are described by Engels If the agitated volume is the maximum and represents, for example, 80% of the chamber’s volume, the rotor’s shaft has a diameter that is simply The orthoradial speed being minimum when close to the axle, this area has a very low efficiency. There is therefore interest that the product is localized close to the wall of the chamber. Therefore, we then give the rotor the shape of a simple cylinder whose diameter is such that the agitated volume is not more than 40–60% of the chamber’s volume. This is the ring design Power consumed by the erosion mill could be expressed in the following way N: rotation speed of the rotor (rev.s D: internal diameter of the chamber (m) ρ ρ ρ For soft products like limestone, coal or cocoa, the energy required does not exceed 100 kW.tonne  To model the energy spent according to the product, we usually act on the rotation speed of the rotor. If agitation is caused by shaft holding discs, the peripheral speed of the latter has a magnitude of 10 m.s Beads are generally made of glass, ceramic or steel. To treat hard products like corundum, beads must be made from a very hard material. We can find potential materials in Table 2 of Joost and Schwedes [ The concentration of beads in the medium is a very important factor for the efficiency of the operation. According to Sadler D C The reduced path is then: Ø  where: Granulometry (size distribution) follows: Heim Continuous milling does not appear to have been treated. According to the size of the equipment and the nature of the product to mill, flow rate can vary between 50 and 1,000 kg.h This equipment is used to obtain ultrafine products (between 50 In reality, products treated economically are soft products whose Mohs hardness is less than 5. But otherwise pearls are quickly eroded. Particularly soft products are microorganisms (see Schütte  injection nozzles were worn very quickly; product granulometry depended on its feed flow rate. In the opposite case, for example, in equipment proposed by the Alpine Company, the product is separately fed by a screw starting from the hopper and is kept in a fluid state by the gas that is introduced by horizontal nozzles placed in circles and blowing toward the chamber’s axle. We can use: compressed air at room temperature and between 6 and 12 rel. bar; hot air; superheated vapor. Hot fluids partially dry the product. The size of feed nozzle must be between 1 and 6 Energy consumption varies, according to the situation, between 30 and 500 kWh.tonne The flow rate could range between a few kilograms per hour to 10 tonnes per hour according to the product, the desired fineness and the type of the equipment. The gaseous flow ranges between 200 and 15,000 Typically, in equipment using fluid energy, the fluid drives particles that break by mutual collision. Movement can be spiral and could also oppose two fast jets or even direct the jet onto a target. The fluid used is normally a gas.  We then obtain a product whose size has a magnitude of micrometers. In the pepper mill, grains are carried by an air current along the rotor’s axle (horizontal). They hit radial elements at the edge of the rotor and, as such, break. Tanaka Dispersion of one liquid in another could occur through constriction, where speed gradients (pronounced gradients) are very high and break the drops in suspension, to give droplets that are a micron in size (emulsion). Similarly, opposite disc equipment has a feed along the disks’ axle (vertical) that turns at different speeds (but in the same direction) or even where one does not turn. The centrifugal force takes the product to the periphery. The interval between the two discs sets the fineness of the product obtained. This equipment is suitable for organic products that are not hard but are resistant (maize groats, wood pulp). This equipment also serves to disperse a powder in a liquid. The same principle of opposite discs is used for milling and dispersal of solids in a liquid. We feed the interval found between two discs that are opposite and that are driven by a relative speed in relation to each other, but which turn in the same direction. The feed is located at the center of the discs.  In mining industry laboratories, we use metallic discs fed in the center and whose axle is horizontal, used solely for wet milling. Cylinder diameters can reach 900 This equipment is suitable for soft products. The paint mill is made up of three rollers turning faster and faster in the same direction of the moving product. Different speeds have a dual purpose: to bring about sharing between cylinders; to ensure that the product’s progress is from the slow roller to the faster roller.