Due to the scarcity of freshwater, the application of seawater has been considered as an alternative in mineral flotation. Previous studies reported that the challenges of using seawater was due to various ions contained, but not many achievements in relieving their negative effects have been obtained. This study systematically investigated the application of sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) in chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) flotation in seawater, as well as in the presence of Mg2+ or Ca2+ (two divalent ions displayed the most significantly negative roles on mineral flotation). It was found that the detrimental effects of seawater on CuFeS2 flotation were primarily due to the formed Mg(OH)2 colloids (major) and CaCO3 precipitates (minor) attaching onto CuFeS2, giving rise to a hydrophilic CuFeS2 surface. The presence of SHMP significantly increased CuFeS2 recovery in seawater and in the solution containing Mg2+ and Ca2+. Two beneficial mechanisms due to SHMP were proposed. Firstly, SHMP combined with Ca2+ and Mg2+ to form dissolvable complexes, reducing the formation of hydrophilic Ca and Mg precipitation. Secondly, SHMP reversed the interaction force between CuFeS2 particles and Mg(OH)2 colloids from attractive to repulsive, thereby reducing the attachment of these precipitates onto CuFeS2 surface. This study therefore provides a promising way in utilizing seawater for mineral flotation.Seawater, with a 3.5 wt% salinity, comprises nearly 97% of the earth’s water resources ( Some studies reported that the seawater conditioned at alkaline condition was detrimental to flotation process ( As chalcopyrite (CuFeS As a common dispersant, sodium hexametaphosphoate (SHMP) has been widely used in industrial implementation, Therefore, SHMP was applied in this study to reveal its roles in improving CuFeS A pure CuFeS A XFGIItype flotation machine ( After 1.2 cm/s air was introduced, the froth was collected at 1, 3, 5, 8 and 10 min with a scraping rate of 10 s. Both the floated concentrate and residue were air dried at 70 °C and then weighed to calculate flotation recovery. The seawater was prepared according to the main composition of seawater published in Species diagrams of seawater with a total ionic strength of 0.7 M in a system open to air was calculated using Medusa software. The ion concentration of seawater was referred to that in Prior to contact angle measurements, the freshly polished CuFeS The froth layer measurements were carried out in a glass froth column (GA-61, Shanghai Silicone Industry Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) with a height of 70 cm and an internal diameter of 4 cm. Prior to measurement, 100 mL of prepared pulp (2% solids) were poured into the column. Thereafter, the compressed air with 0.88 cm/s was introduced through the bottom of a glass sand filter. When the froth height was stable, the formed froth layer height was recorded. A Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Co., Ltd, Malvern, UK) was used to measure the zeta potential of CuFeS XPS analyses were performed using ESCALAB 250Xi spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., MA, USA) with an Al Kα monochromated X-ray source. The broad scans were collected from 1350 to 0 eV with a 100 eV pass energy, 1.0 eV step size and 0.1 s dwell time. The spectra were calibrated by setting C 1s peak at 284.8 eV for calibration. All XPS spectra were fitted using XPS Peak4.1 software.  In the presence of 50 mg/L SHMP, CuFeS   The addition of SHMP led to a more negative zeta potential (−70.3 mV) in freshwater while the zeta potentials of CuFeS Generally, the froth layer thickness responds to the frothing ability of pulp. An increase in froth ability refers to increased bubble-particle attachments, further improving mineral recovery ( It should also be noted that the addition of SHMP slightly decreased the froth layer thickness in all solutions, indicating that SHMP was detrimental to the frothing ability of the solution. Although this occurred, CuFeS   The detailed elemental composition of CuFeS Previous studies showed that SHMP had a complexing ability with ions such as Ca The results discussed above suggested that the negative effects of seawater on CuFeS  Reduced CuFeS The addition of SHMP significantly improved CuFeS This project is financially supported by the