Spent hydrodesulphurisation (HDS) catalysts from petroleum refineries, mostly constituted by aluminium (Al), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni) and cobalt (Co), are classified as hazardous wastes and disposal is restricted by environmental regulations; thus, the recovery of valuable metals is the most attractive option in the processing of these residues. Selective Mo leaching from two spent HDS (Ni–Mo or Co–Mo) catalysts, roasted at 500°C, was studied using three different approaches: conventional, ultrasound- and microwave-assisted methods. For the Ni–Mo or Co–Mo catalysts, 77% and 84% of Mo extraction, respectively, was achieved when a conventional (10g/L NaOH, 80°C, 120min, S/L=50g/L) approach was used. For both catalysts, ultrasound-assisted leaching (pulse 0.5s and 20% amplitude) with 10g/L NaOH and S/L=50g/L led to 66% Mo dissolution after 10min. Under microwave-assisted (four cycles of 30s) conditions, Mo leaching reached 89% and 91% for Ni–Mo and Co–Mo catalysts, respectively. The latter conditions represent the best compromise between Mo extraction and selectivity, since Al dissolution was between 6% and 9%.Hydrodesulphurisation (HDS) catalysts are extensively used in the petroleum refining industry; during operation, they are deactivated by the deposition of carbon, sulphur and metals (V, Fe, Zn, and As) ( Mo is the active metal of such catalysts, typically combined with Co and/or Ni on an alumina carrier. The composition of spent catalysts is mainly Al (15–30%), Mo (4–12%), Ni (1–5%), Co (0–4%), carbon and sulphur ( For this purpose, metal recovery industrial processes have been developed based on pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical or a combination of both processes. Although pyrometallurgical operations are usually less expensive, faster and provide higher metal recoveries, the release of harmful gases during smelting and the extremely high temperatures (> Several studies have been performed regarding the leaching of the spent HDS catalysts with aqueous solutions: direct leaching with concentrated sulphuric acid and leaching with prior sulphuric acid baking ( In recent years, intensive research on this matter evidenced the need to find a cost-effective and environmentally friendly process to treat spent HDS catalysts. In the last two decades, the application of ultrasound to increase chemical reaction rates underwent an abrupt increase ( Another environmentally friendly technique to extract analytes from solid samples is the application of microwave radiation. Microwave-assisted acid digestion is commonly used for treating samples and to determine the total metal content using instrumental methods. In this case, the sample is totally destroyed using a concentrated acid. However, the use of diluted solutions allows the selective extraction of trace elements from the solids. The leaching of metals from the solid instead of its digestion avoids total sample disintegration ( During the last decade, both microwave and ultrasound procedures have been widely studied at the laboratory scale using different chemical processes, with very promising results. Thus, investigations to develop these techniques for industrial use have been stimulated and some equipment has been developed ( Two different spent catalysts (Ni–Mo and Co–Mo), used in hydrodesulphurisation, were provided by a Portuguese refinery. Both catalysts have a trilobe extrudate shape and particle lengths varied between 2 and 8 Catalyst samples (2 After digestion of the roasted spent catalyst (performed using aqua-regia under microwave conditions), Al, Co, Mo, Ni, vanadium (V) and iron (Fe) concentrations were determined in the acid solution, after filtration of the solid residue, by atomic absorption spectroscopy with flame atomisation (AAS-FA) in a Perkin Elmer AAnalyst 400 spectrometer (Norwalk, CT, USA). A nitrous oxide flame was used for the determinations of Al, Mo and V and an acetylene flame for the remaining metals. Chemical speciation calculations were carried out using the MINEQL Analytical grade sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was used to prepare the leaching solution. For all experiments, the solid–liquid ratio (S/L) was kept constant at 50 After leaching experiments, the solutions were filtered to separate from the solid catalyst and analysed by AAS-FA to determine metal extraction yield. All experiments were done at least in triplicate. In order to understand which parameters are more relevant in the metal extraction from the catalyst, statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed. Sum of squares ( As a consequence of refinery operations, there is an accumulation of sulphur in the catalyst and metal sulphides are formed. During the roasting step, these metal sulphides are transformed into metal oxides, which are more easily solubilised in the subsequent step. During this stage, the weight loss is mostly due to the removal of carbon and sulphur. After 90 The extraction of metals from secondary resources implies further recovery of metals as commercial products with high purity. To reduce the number of subsequent separation stages, selective extraction of Mo from the spent catalyst was studied. In acidic medium, all metals in the catalysts were dissolved, as shown in other studies ( Mo oxide present in the roasted catalyst reacts with hydroxide ion (OH Computer simulations based on species equilibrium in aqueous solution, using the MINEQL The results of simulations showed the presence of MoO Concerning metal extraction under alkaline conditions, the evaluation of the behaviour of the catalyst samples collected at the refinery was performed using a conventional method using an agitated thermostatic bath, at atmospheric pressure, with uncrushed catalyst samples roasted at 500 The leaching solution chosen was aqueous sodium hydroxide; the time, NaOH concentration and temperature were varied whereas solid–liquid ratio was fixed. To evaluate the effect of the concentration of the leaching solution in metal extraction, NaOH solutions of 5 and 20 For both the 10 and 20 In order to evaluate if the previous results were similar for a different type of catalyst, experiments with the Co–Mo catalyst were also performed ( The concentrations of Ni and Co in the leaching solution were below the detection limits of AAS-FA, which means that their removal from the catalyst was not significant and did not reach values higher than 0.4% and 0.5%, respectively. These results were previously predicted by theoretical simulations ( When using the same solid/liquid ratio, the percentage of metals removed from the catalysts were analogous to the values obtained by From the experimental results of the present study, it can be concluded that when conventional leaching with NaOH solution is used, the most selective situation is obtained when 10 The conventional method for catalyst leaching indicated that a NaOH solution of 10  Even though no temperature control was performed during the experiments, the final temperature was measured; temperature values around 60 As a result of the high frequency that causes fissures in the solid surface, the particle size was reduced. The initial uncrushed catalysts had an average length of 4 to 5 PTFE bombs, which are usually applied in the digestion or dissolution of solid samples using strong acids or bases, were tested here using diluted hydroxide solutions to check if Mo leaching could be improved. PTFE bombs have the advantage of being transparent to microwave irradiation, which means that temperature only increases inside, where it is needed; outside, the temperature does not exceed 50 In this study, the efficiency of the microwave-assisted leaching was evaluated for the three different NaOH concentrations tested in the conventional leaching (5, 10 and 20 For the Ni–Mo catalyst, the results are presented in From the ANOVA analysis, performed considering two factors (the number of cycles and the NaOH concentration) at three levels each, we concluded that the influence of the experimental parameters on Mo leaching (Supplementary data, Table S5) followed the order: NaOH Additionally, the variation in the solid–liquid ratio was studied using 10 Experiments to determine if the use of uncrushed catalyst samples could affect microwave-assisted Mo extraction were executed and compared with crushed catalysts ( For both the Ni–Mo and Co–Mo catalysts, the results obtained when using 10 The comparative analysis between the results obtained after the application of four cycles with those obtained after leaching at 80 Higher temperature (which can be higher than 100 In this study, the application of ultrasound- or microwave-assisted leaching for selectively removing of Mo from the spent HDS catalysts, using NaOH solution as the leachant, was evaluated; these techniques were compared with the conventional method. Experiments performed in the thermostatic bath, at 80 The use of ultrasound resulted in faster dissolution of Mo; however, the maximum extraction achieved after 10 The microwave-assisted method, using a 10 This work was financially supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at