Background
                  The high rate of changes in the composition of saliva can be used for the monitoring of various biorhythms in order to study the physiological characteristics of the human body.
               
                  Research objective
                  The study of the dynamics of the near-24-h mineral composition of saliva in men and women.
               
                  Methods
                  The study involved 20 men and 20 women, age 23.1±0.9years. Saliva samples were collected every 3h during the day within 10min. The mineral composition of saliva was defined by the capillary electrophoresis technique. The cross-group differences were evaluated using the non-parametric criterion.
               
                  Results
                  It was shown that the maximum values of the mineralizing capacity fall to 7–8 a.m. and 18–19p.m., which is due to the change in the rate of saliva secretion. The near-24-h dynamics of the saliva pH practically coincides with the dynamics of the Ca/P ratio; there are evident maxima at 9:00 am and 15–18p.m. The values of the Na/K ratio are out of phase with the Ca/P ratio. There is one maximum, corresponding to 3 am in the night, and one minimum at 12–13p.m., which is due to a decreased level of sodium and increased potassium concentration. Statistically valid differences between men and women in pH (p<0.001), concentrations of inorganic phosphorus (p<0.001), as well as Ca/P coefficient (p=0.011) were identified.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The dynamics of the studied parameters during 24h is characterized by pronounced intervals.Every day, laboratory and functional diagnostic technologies are supplemented by alternative techniques that allow quick identification of many diseases at an early stage and evaluation of the physical condition of a person. The attention of many researchers is currently attracted to saliva as an informative material for clinical laboratory diagnostics ( It is known that the concentration of inorganic ions is important from a medical point of view ( the study of the near-24-h dynamics of the mineral composition of saliva in men and women. The study was conducted with the help of 40 healthy volunteers (20 men, 20 women, age 23.1 An experiment was carried out using the capillary electrophoresis system KAPEL–105 The measurement technique is based on filtering, dilution of the selected sample, further separation and quantification of components with indirect detection at a certain wavelength. We selected the conditions for the determination of cationic and anionic composition of saliva: volume of the sample aliquot is 100 The leading electrolyte for the determination of cations (ions of potassium, sodium, calcium) − 20 The quartz capillary L The statistical analysis of the obtained data was performed by means of Statistica 10.0 (StatSoft) program and R package (version 3.2.3) using the non-parametric method and Wilcoxon criterion in dependent groups and Mann-Whitney U-criterion in independent groups. The correlation analysis was carried out using Spearman technique. It was shown that the mineral composition of saliva in volunteers of the same age group significantly depends on the gender ( The dynamics of the studied parameters during 24 The calcium concentration also demonstrates periodicity with pronounced minima in the daytime hours (12:00–15:00) and at 24:00 ( The concentration of sodium ions reaches maximum during night and then monotonically decreases before 12:00–15:00 ( The comparison of the concentrations of sodium and potassium shows that since midnight sodium and potassium concentration is in antiphase, whereas between 15:00 and 21:00 the dynamics of the studied parameters is of the same type ( In general, the concentrations of the mineral components of saliva demonstrate rather complex changes within 24 So, the increase of Ca/P ratio is observed starting from midnight till 9:00a.m.; men have a phase shift 3 The mineralizing function of saliva is largely supported by electrolytic components, since the primary substance of enamel is hydroxylapatite Ca The micelle core consists of Ca The conducted studies have demonstrated that the mineralizing function of saliva is significantly dependent on the near-24-h dynamics of the calcium and inorganic phosphorus concentrations. It would be reasonable to assume that the dynamics of the saliva electrolyte levels largely stems from the diurnal changes in the saliva flow rate ( It is worth noting that the near-24-h dynamics of saliva pH practically coincides with the dynamics of Ca/P ratio, with evident maximum at 9:00 and 15:00-18:00. Apparently, the increase in acidity leads to an increase in mineralizing capacity because, in case of more alkaline pH, the resistance of hydroxylapatite and calcium phosphate micelles grows ( It was noted that men’ pH of saliva reaches minimum until 6:40a.m. The saliva becomes unsaturated with calcium and phosphorus under these conditions, and therefore turns into a demineralizing liquid. The charge of micelles is reduced and protective properties of the glycoproteid mucin weaken. Since the acidification of saliva makes H Na/K ratio has one maximum corresponding to 3:00a.m. and one minimum corresponding to 12:00–13:00 It should be noted that the Na/K ratio does not exceed the average during daytime hours. The identified features of Na/K ratio dynamics are due to a decrease in the sodium level and an increase in the potassium concentration, which can result from pronounced straining of sympathoadrenal system ( One of the reasons for the identified gender differences in the composition of saliva can be smaller salivary glands in women ( The dynamics of the studied parameters during 24 This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. All authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.