In the present study, the second stage of a sequential extraction method of rare earths from monazite is discussed. The high cost and environmental impact of the conventional extraction processes of rare earth elements (REEs) have driven the investigation of alternate treatment techniques. The first paper of this series detailed the solution conversion of rare earth phosphate in monazite to an oxalate salt. This was achieved via an oxalic acid leach that removed the phosphate ion from the matrix.
                  To determine the ability of leaching to release REEs from this residue, various other organic acids (citric, tartaric, acetic, lactic, crotonic, formic, maleic, gluconic, levulinic, mandelic and EDTA) were tested as lixiviants. An alkaline EDTA solution, which reported the strongest ability to extract REEs, was tested further to maximise recovery. A maximum single-pass extraction of >60% of the Nd (the most valuable REE in this material) was achieved in just 5 min at pH 10 and ambient temperature. >40% extraction of Ce and La was also obtained, with minimal proportions of phosphorus and iron released into solution. Where multiple passes of both leach stages were performed, greater extraction of all REEs was achieved. It is apparent that REE dissolution in this system is limited by the degree of conversion achieved in the first stage.
                  In an industrial context, the results achieved at a laboratory scale show the potential of this system to be developed into an alternative to conventional processing. The PLS generated contains far lower impurity levels than conventional processes and there is the potential for a degree of selectivity between REEs prior to separation. This system thus represents a possible reduction in technical complexity and energy requirement as well as both environmental and safety issues in comparison to conventional technologies. The ability to produce a REE hydroxide also allows it to replace conventional extraction while still employing the same separation technology.The methods of processing REEs involve highly corrosive conditions, high temperatures and consume large amounts of reagents ( The first paper in this series described the conversion of rare earth phosphate species in a monazite concentrate to a rare earth oxalate ( At the beginning of the Manhattan project, it was observed that some of the ions of uranium products of fission (zirconium, barium, strontium, tellurium, iodine and rare earth elements) can be eluted separately from the Amberlite IR-4 resin by using complexing agents such as ammonium citrate and ammonium tartrate ( EDTA is known to form complexes with almost all metal ions with a positive charge greater than one ( Research conducted by In the first paper of this series ( This study discusses an approach for the extraction of REEs from the pre-treated monazite concentrate described in The primary components of the monazite concentrate was determined by XRF, structural information analysis was performed by Powder X-Ray diffraction analysis (XRD) employing an Olympus BTX-II diffractometer and particle size distribution by Malvern Mastersizer 3000 Hydro EV with all data reported in The pre-treated monazite concentrate was studied under the effect of the following organic acids: formic (AR), acetic (AR), levulinic (AR), gluconic (AR), tartaric (AR), citric (AR), mandelic (AR), EDTA (AR), lactic (LR), crotonic (LR) and maleic (LR). Sodium hydroxide (AR) was acquired from Chem-Supply and sulphuric acid (AR) from Thermofisher. Oxalic acid pre-treatment, described in the first paper in this series ( Screening experiments were carried out to determine the most effective organic acids for extracting rare earth elements from the pre-treated monazite concentrate. The experiments were performed in stoppered 125 mL Erlenmeyer flasks. The acid species, concentration and solution pH were the first conditions tested while residence time, solid/liquid ratio and temperature were kept constant. Pre-treated monazite concentrate (5 g) was combined with 50 mL of 0.1 M solutions of each organic acid at the required pH. Once thoroughly combined, the flasks were placed in a Chiltern Scientific orbital shaker and agitated at ambient temperature for 24 h. The solutions were filtered and the solids were washed with deionized water. The solutions were analyzed by ICP-OES (Agilent 5100 Synchronous Vertical View SVDV). EDTA, the species which achieved the greatest extraction, and citric acid (previously described in REE chelation studies), were chosen for further study. Larger scale experiments were carried out in a 1 L Duran glass reaction vessel agitated by a Heidolph Model RZR-1 overhead stirrer with 100 g of pre-treated monazite concentrate at 25 °C for 72 h. Residence time, acid concentration, solution pH and stirring speed were all tested with 10 mL solution samples taken incrementally over time to examine leach performance. Optimal conditions were then further tested to determine the efficiency of the oxalate conversion leach. In order to generate a REE hydroxide from this system, a sample of the EDTA leach solution (50 mL) was combined with 100 mL of 2.5 M NaOH in a 250 mL round bottom flask and heated in an Analog Heating Mantle PTHW250 at 95 °C for an hour. The solution was filtered and the solid washed with deionized water. The solids were dried, coarsely ground and analyzed by XRD and the solution analyzed by ICP-OES. The previous article in this series ( The solution concentrations of cerium, lanthanum, and neodymium were selected for analysis as they represent the most prolific REEs in the sample. Phosphorus and iron solution concentrations were measured for comparison as they are the predominant impurity elements in the sample to determine if selective leaching of the REEs occurred. Varied results in the extraction of elements from the pre-treated monazite concentrate were found when immersed in different acids. Alkaline EDTA reported the highest extraction of REEs from the pre-treated monazite concentrate. Citrate, tartrate and lactate produced very similar results. In addition to EDTA, citrate has been chosen as another possible leaching reagent for several reasons. It was the first efficient eluent in the ion-exchange separation process of REEs ( EDTA was the most promising organic acid and as mentioned citrate had performed well in other applications, thus experiments on a larger scale were carried out to compare and optimize their performance. Upon more rigorous testing, both acids achieved significant extraction of the REEs and released low concentrations of the impurities (P and Fe) as shown in The REE concentration in the citrate ( Conversely, in the EDTA system ( The fact that Nd is leached to a greater extent in both systems than the more prevalent, but less valuable, metals displays a level of selectivity above simply preferential leaching of the REEs over impurity elements. The difficulty discussed above in separation and purification of the individual elements leads to the conclusion that any selectivity in the extraction stage, particularly in concentrating Nd, represents a significant potential value to downstream processing. One driver of this result lies in the difference in stability constants between the various elements and oxalic acid. The reported constant of the Nd complex with oxalate (K Directly comparing the release of REEs achieved in the EDTA leach of the pre-treated concentrate to the proportion of phosphorus released in the oxalic acid conversion stage it is clear that these are directly related. Conversion experiments conducted at various temperatures that achieved different levels of phosphorus release showed comparable variance in the levels of REE recovery in the EDTA leach ( The pH of the EDTA solution was varied between 6 and 10 with other parameters kept constant (0.1 M, S/L:0.1, 700 RPM, 5 min residence time and 25 °C), which showed a significant impact to increasing the alkalinity of the solution ( The proposed reaction (Eq. Speciation diagrams were prepared using the Medusa software package ( The stirring speed displays a moderate impact on REE dissolution in EDTA at ambient conditions ( It was observed in the first paper in this series ( Once a single pass of both the oxalic acid conversion leach (85 °C) and EDTA secondary leach were completed (achieving 21.9%, 22.8% and 27.4% recoveries respectively for Ce, La and Nd), a second pass was conducted. The results of the second EDTA pass ( The addition of further oxalic acid to the conversion leach was previously shown to continue the reaction. An experiment was conducted treating monazite concentrate under otherwise standard conditions (0.8 M oxalic acid (initial), pH 1, 65 °C, 100 gL A key requirement for this treatment to have a potential application is the ability to separate and purify the extracted elements. The simplest method was to attempt to produce a material or stream that can be treated with conventional technology. Standard conventional processing converts the rare earth oxalate precipitated from a sulphuric acid leach solution into a hydroxide to feed a solvent extraction circuit. Therefore, if a hydroxide could be generated from the EDTA leach solution, the process could then use conventional REE solvent extraction. The residue of the hydroxide preparation was analyzed by XRD and compared with the peaks obtained using the sample from conventional acid roasting treatment ( Furthermore, it can be observed that the creation of REE hydroxide was supported by the speciation diagrams in  A novel treatment for the recovery of REEs from monazite has been demonstrated. Extraction of REEs was achieved with 60% of the Nd being recovered from the monazite sample with >40% of both Ce and La. Any selectivity with regard to Nd over other REEs is of great potential benefit in simplifying purification and maximising value in the product. Rapid dissolution of the REE oxalate generated in the conversion stage previously described with minimal impurity release demonstrates the effectiveness and selectivity of the alkaline EDTA leach and stability of the REE-oxalate-EDTA complex. Extent of conversion in the oxalic acid stage was proven to be the limiting factor in REE dissolution, highlighting the need to maximise the efficiency of that reaction. Several attempts to improve conversion, resulted in a greater proportion of REE dissolution. A REE hydroxide was successfully generated directly from the EDTA leach solution suggesting that the treatment would be able to feed conventional solvent extraction. This is based on the fact that REE hydroxides are used in conventional processing as a feed material for solvent extraction circuits. Such an achievement greatly improves the potential viability of developing an applicable process with fewer units of new technology and thus decreased technical risk. Based on the success achieved a provisional flowsheet has been formulated outlining key challenges in process development. The authors would like to acknowledge the Western Australian School of Mines and Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship for supporting this research, as well as the contributions of Kensuke Seno, Alex Logan, Harry Watts and Mujesira Vukancic.