During image acquisition of crystalline materials by high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy, the sample drift could lead to distortions and shears that hinder their quantitative analysis and characterization. In order to measure and correct this effect, several authors have proposed different methodologies making use of series of images. In this work, we introduce a methodology to determine the drift angle via Fourier analysis by using a single image based on the measurements between the angles of the second Fourier harmonics in different quadrants. Two different approaches, that are independent of the angle of acquisition of the image, are evaluated. In addition, our results demonstrate that the determination of the drift angle is more accurate by using the measurements of non-consecutive quadrants when the angle of acquisition is an odd multiple of 45°.Images of crystals obtained in a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM), using a High Angle Annular Dark Field (HAADF) detector, provide a relatively uniform image contrast peaked at atomic columns that depends on the atomic number (Z-contrast) ( Over the years a number of software-based solutions designed to drift analysis have been developed. Real space approaches to identify drift rely on the statistical measurement of the distances between the nearest atomic columns in the whole image. The work of In this work, we introduce a method to determine the drift angle that uses only a single STEM image. The determined drift angle could be used afterwards to make an inverse affine transformation obtaining a free-distortion image. Our method is based on the measurements of the angle that is formed by the second Fourier harmonics in the Fourier Transform image and the acquisition angle regarding a principal crystalline direction of the crystal. The method has been demonstrated on a mathematical derivation and probed in experimental images on several semiconductor images. As we can see in the follow, the accuracy of the method has a high dependence of the choice of this angle of acquisition. A supercell of Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) containing all the information about atom positions, compositions, site occupancy and Debye-Waller factors has been generated. This model together with the parameters of a 100 kV dedicated VG Microscope HB501UX STEM constitutes the input to the SICSTEM program (  In As we have demonstrated in the appendix, linear drift could be determined by calculating the angles formed between the spots of the fundamental frequencies in different quadrants of the reciprocal space. However due to the limitation in the resolution of the FFT when assuming a discrete image ( Nevertheless, the position of these harmonics changes with the acquisition angle, so an in-depth study is needed in order to find the most accurate measurement of the drift angle. Firstly, we have measured the angle (β The drift angle (α) applied to an image can be calculated from the angle between the second harmonics in the first and second quadrants, Plots of the drift angles estimated by the application of Eq. Instead of using a single measurement, let us use the sum of two perpendicular measurements: the angle between second harmonics spots in second and first quadrant ( In order to quantify the error on the drift estimations, several series of 25 images are simulated varying the acquisition angle from −2° to 2° in steps of 0.1635° degrees (corresponding at minimum rotation angle that produces the displacement of some pixel in the image) around 0°, 30° and 45° of acquisition angle and adding two constant drift angles (in this case 5° and 10°). Then, we have calculated the absolute difference between the exact value (α) and the average estimates obtained by applying Eqs. In The results for an acquisition angle around 45° and using 5° and 10° as target drift angles respectively are also presented. In this case, the error estimates obtained by Eq. In order to estimate numerically the differences between the real drift applied in the simulated images and the obtained one by measuring the β angles, we change the acquisition angle in our simulated images, where the drift angle is regarding the The proposed methodology has been applied to a high-resolution aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image (2048 × 2048 pixels) of a Gallium Arsenide substrate sample. We have used a X-FEG FEI Titan probe- corrected STEM dedicated to advanced STEM imaging, at 200 kV along the [110] direction, with a 2 μs dwell time and 30.1 s of frame time. The operator manually set up the acquisition angle around zero degrees with respect to the vertical axis. The effect of the sample drift in a single image in HAADF-STEM images has been studied in the Fourier space. Two different approaches for the drift angle determination using the measurements of the angles among the second Fourier harmonics in different quadrants have been compared. The use of the mean of two perpendicular measurements has been proved to be the most accurate methodology independently of the acquisition angle. This methodology demonstrates that sample drift can be corrected, independently of the frame size or the amount of lineal drift effect. Additionally, we have demonstrated that the best acquisition angle in order to calculate the drift angles and correct the image is around 45 ° with respect to the vertical axis, which allows decreasing the error to calculate the real value of the lineal drift. We would like to acknowledge funding from the Consider the lattice vectors For an infinite two-dimensional lattice, defined by basis vectors Similarly, Assuming that the drift rate is constant ( Therefore, a constant drift rate produces a modified reciprocal lattice defined by reciprocal basis vectors The angle For small values of drift (below 10°), the calculated angle