The development of active corrosion protection systems for metallic substrates is an issue of prime concern. The objective of this work was to demonstrate the applicability of plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD) in growing protective top oxide layers over sol-gel deposited organosiloxane (R-SiOx; water based inorganic-organic hybrid coating formulation containing 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane and methyltrimethoxysilane, crosslinked with hexamethylmethoxymelamine) coating to improve its thermal stability, chemical inertness and corrosion resistance. [MgAl2(OtBu)4H4] and [AlH2(OtBu)]2 were used as single source precursors for depositing MgAl2O4 and Al2O3 thin films respectively. The coating systems namely, Al2O3/R-SiOx (ALSI) and MgAl2O4/R-SiOx (MALSI) were comparatively analyzed towards their corrosion protection behaviour. The post annealed PECVD deposited films were uniform, transparent and exhibited good adhesion as confirmed by focused ion beam scanning electron microscope (FIB-SEM) cross sectional analysis. ALSI and MALSI bilayer systems were found to be stable over temperatures as high as 600 °C. Corrosion performance of the coating systems effectively demonstrated the protective function of ALSI and MALSI bilayer system. However, it was observed that ALSI outperforms MALSI in this application.With increasing technological importance of nanomaterials, research interest in thin films and powders of functional materials has gained significance due to their intrinsic properties such as anticorrosion [ Aluminium alloy coupons were acquired from Popular Panels, and the composition as determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was: Al 98.37, Mn 0.049, Si 0.83, Cu 0.060, Ti 0.019, Zn 0.037, Fe 0.60 and Mg 0.022 (all in wt%). Aluminium panels were polished by emery papers of 400 and 600 grit sizes. Dry, cleaned samples were etched in 10% NaOH solution for 5 to 10 min and further washed with running tap water and acetone. Substrates were then dried and coated with as prepared sol-gel coating. MTMS and GPTMS were procured from Sigma Aldrich and HMMM resin was procured from Cytech Chemicals, India. All syntheses for alkoxide precursors were performed under an inert nitrogen atmosphere by using a modified Stock glass vacuum line. The used solvents were dried over and distilled over sodium and stored over molecular sieves. Anhydrous MgCl MTMS and GPTMS were used as inorganic silane precursors for the primary sol as reported by Pathak et al. [ The synthesized compounds [MgAl The phase analysis of thin films was studied by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD), operating in Bragg-Brentano mode (XRD Stoe Stadi MP vertical diffractometer with Cu Kα; source (λ = 154.18 pm)). The morphology of the deposits was investigated in a FE-SEM FEI 430 Nova NanoSEM system. The film composition was determined by ESCA using Surface Science Instrument, M-Probe, with Al Kα radiation and a total instrumental resolution (full width at half-maximum) of ca. 0.8 eV. Cross-sectional studies were performed using FIB-SEM. Corrosion performance of the coating systems was evaluated using electrochemical techniques. Potentiodynamic polarization and EIS was performed at room temperature in 3.5 wt% sodium chloride solution at 5.5 pH. In a three electrode system, with specimen (exposed area of 0.636 cm Homogeneous transparent films were observed for the cured OIH coating. The chemical homogeneity of the OIH coating was further confirmed using Si elemental mapping under SEM/EDS in accordance with the literature [ Highly volatile heteroleptic alkoxides [MgAl Corrosion performance of the coating systems was also evaluated using electrochemical techniques [ From the polarization curves in the 3.5% sodium chloride solution, it can be seen that the corrosion current of the unprotected OIH coated substrate is about one order of magnitude larger than that of bilayer ALSI and MALSI substrates. This is an indication that the coating is inhibiting the anodic process and acting as a barrier to the electrolyte by impeding its contact with the metal surface. Moreover, the open circuit potential of ALSI and MALSI coated substrate was lower than the unprotected OIH coated substrate, which might be due to effective suppression of cathodic reaction. Tafel extrapolations of polarization curves show the corrosion rate for OIH coating to be 0.6 mm/year while that for ALSI coating system to be the least at 0.04 mm/year [ The corresponding electrical equivalent circuit (EEC) [ Corrosion resistance of a given system is deduced from the mathematical sum of the R Since capacitance is directly proportional to the area of the capacitor, low values of Q The present work demonstrates the importance of bringing two complementary technologies (sol-gel and PECVD) to get more robust and efficient coatings for corrosion protection applications. Single source precursors [MgAl The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors thank IIT, Mumbai and University of Cologne for providing the infrastructure. The financial support provided by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at