The following study deals with the chemical composition, antimicrobial activity of essential oils of Vitex agnus-castus L. and their main constituents in vitro and in vivo. The main compounds in the oil of unripe fruits were sabinene (17.8%) and 1,8-cineole (17.5%), while in the oil of the ripe fruits dominant compounds were 1,8-cineole (16.3%) and sabinene (13.4%). The leaves oil contained an abundance of 1,8-cineole (22.0%), as well. All of the oils tested were rich sources of α-pinene (12.2%, 9.4% and 9.4%, respectively). Antimicrobial activity was tested using bacterial and fungal strains by the microdilution method. Using the same technique 1,8-cineole and α-pinene showed very high antimicrobial potency as well. As 1,8-cineole was the predominant constituent of the oils, we have chosen to test it further in an in vivo experiment. Randomly chosen apples were treated with 1,8-cineol solution and infected with Aspergillus niger in order to provoke Aspergillus rot in apples. Disease incidence was recorded.The growing awareness of consumers concerning the relation between food and health is revolutionary for the food industry. Current demand worldwide is to reduce or eliminate chemically synthesised additives from foods. Natural or synthetic products are used as agents with antimicrobial activity (as inhibitors, growth reducers or even inactivators) that control microorganisms’ growth. The application of preservatives to foods is crucial if their safety is to be maintained. The industries of food products nowadays are using synthetic chemical preservatives to prevent the growth of pathogens, but these chemicals, by increasing the activity of microsomal enzymes, convert the ingested materials into toxins and carcinogens ( Essential plant oils are of growing interest both in the industry and scientific research because of their antibacterial and antifungal properties which make them useful as natural additives in foods (  Traditionally, VAC fruit extract has been used in the treatment of many female conditions, including menstrual disorders (amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea), premenstrual syndrome (PMS), corpus luteum insufficiency, infertility, acne, menopause and disrupted lactation ( Aspergillus rot is one of the most important postharvest diseases in apples during long term storage ( The aim of this study was to investigate the chemical constituents of essential oils obtained from unripe and ripe fruits, as well as leaves of Plant material (unripe fruits, ripe fruits, leaves) of Qualitative and quantitative analyses of the oils were performed using GC and GC/MS. The GC analysis of the oil was carried out on a GC HP-5890 II apparatus, equipped with split–splitless injector, attached to HP-5 column (25 1,8-Cineole (purity ⩾99%) and α-pinene (purity 98%) were obtained from the Sigma–Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Germany. For the bioassays two Gram (–) bacterial species: In order to investigate the antimicrobial activity of the isolated essential oils and main constituents, the modified microdilution technique was used ( Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) determination was performed by a serial dilution technique using 96-well microtitre plates. The investigated essential oils (0.01–10.00 The minimum bactericidal (MBCs) and minimum fungicidal concentrations (MFCs) were determined by serial subcultivation of a 2 Streptomycin (0.1–2 Apple fruits used in the experiments were obtained from market place located in Belgrade (Serbia). Fruits were selected free of wounds and rots and, as much as possible, homogeneous in maturity and size. Fruits were stored at 5 For the Sensory evaluation of apples treated with 1,8-cineole emulsion was assessed by a group of 10 untrained panellists. Panellists were selected among students and staff of the Department of Plant Physiology (Mycological Laboratory). Apple samples were prepared by spraying apples with 3% 1,8-cineole solution, before the apples were given to panellists to eat. The panellists were asked to evaluate overall acceptance of the food samples on a scale from 5 to 1; indicating decreasing taste. A general taste score was calculated as the average of all grades. Overall acceptance was evaluated using a 5-point scale, according to a previous report ( The results of the experiments were analysed by two factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA). The Package programme Statistica (release 4.5, Copyright StatSoft, Inc. 1993) was used for statistical evaluation. Experiments on antimicrobial activity were replicated twice on the same occasions. All analyses were done in triplicate for each replicate ( The results of chemical analysis of different parts of Antibacterial effect of Fungi were more sensitive than bacteria to the effect of the essential oils. Essential oils from all parts of VAC exhibited fungistatic and fungicidal effect. The most sensitive species was The The results of Higher concentrations of 1,8-cineole, needed for the absence of apple infection and low disease incidence, in correlation to According to previous findings 1,8-cineole is safe for use at doses described in here. Oral therapeutic doses of eucalyptus oil for adults are 0.05–0.2  A list of the uses of VAC plant in food industry is long; it’s healthy and beneficial effects should be further analysed. Considering the essential oils obtained from different parts of VAC plants, it seems that 1,8-cineole was highly present in all samples tested. From the results given above it can be concluded that all essential oils and related components expressed antimicrobial activity. Antifungal activity was slightly higher in comparison to antibacterial effect of the essential oils. The authors are grateful to the