The P. V. Danckwerts Memorial Lecture is sponsored by Elsevier Science Ltd. and  TEN YEARS OF SUSTAINABILITY: WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE Presented by Dr. Robin J. Batterham Chief Scientist of Australia and Chief Technologist of Rio Tinto Limited, on 24th February 2003 at the Institute of Chemical Engineers, London, UK Robin Batterham is the Chief Scientist of Australia and Chief Technologist, Rio Tinto Limited. He has had a distinguished career in research and technology, in the public and private sectors. In this role as Chief Scientist he provides advice to the Federal Government on science and innovation matters. He plays a major role in promoting linkages between science, industry and government and helps to ensure public investment in science and technology is properly focussed on issues of national priority. He is executive officer of the Prime Ministers Science, Engineering and Innovation Council. After completing his Ph.D. at Melbourne University in 1969, Dr. Batterham was awarded a CSIRO post-doctoral fellowship, which he undertook at ICI Central Research Laboratories in the UK. On his return to Australia, he worked with CSIRO as a research scientist, progressing to the position of Chief of the Division of Mineral and Process Engineering in 1985. During this time, he undertook or supervised successful research activities between CSIRO and Australian industry, in areas such as mining, mineral processing, mineral agglomeration processes, and iron making. From 1988, Dr. Batterham has held senior position in Technology Development with CRA Limited, now Rio Tinto Limited. During this time, he developed a processing route for what is now recognised as the world's largest economic zinc mineralisation. Dr. Batterham is credited as having a major role in the HIsmelt process: a $650 million project to develop a novel direct smelting technology for iron making that is adding potential value of the order of $20 billion. Dr. Batterham is Chairman of the International Network for Acid Prevention and President of the National “Summer Science School”. He also holds a number of government appointments including membership on the Commonwealth-States/Territories Innovation Advisory Council, the Australian Research Council, the Cooperative Research Centres’ Committee and the Victorian Government's Innovation Advisory Council and the Queensland Government Board of the Australian Institute of Commercialisation. Dr. Batterham has lectured in higher education institutions in Australia and overseas, has been a member of a number of major reviews of higher education and government research organisations, and has produced nearly 200 papers, publications and patents. He was editor for 12 years of the International Journal of Applied Mathematical Modelling and is a recipient of the Kernot medal from Melbourne University.