A new testing technique, which relates the physical stress state of rock subjected to simultaneous coupled static and dynamic stresses, is presented. The method involves modification of a split Hopkinson pressure bar, such that the test specimen is subjected to coupled axial static pre-stress, axial impact loading, and optional confining pressure. Tests on siltstone specimens with different coupling loads showed that the strength of the specimens under coupling loads was higher than their corresponding individual static or dynamic strengths. In the grade size distribution, the percentage of small size particles of fractured specimen increases with higher coupling loads. The strength of rock under coupling loads decreases rapidly when the axial pre-compression stress is greater than 70% of the static strength of rock (with identical impact loading). However, with constant axial pre-compression stress and increasing impact loading, the strength of siltstone increases initially and reaches a maximum constant value.The experimental study of rock mechanics has achieved great developments Many new engineering activities have surfaced in recent years and practical solutions arising from these developments are demanded. To obtain the required solution, experiments are conducted to simulate the state of in situ rock, such as investigations into the deposition of nuclear wastes, oil exploitation, geological boring and mining in the deep recesses of the ground. For such problems, traditional theories on rock mechanics are not applicable. Studies have shown that traditional theory departs when it is used in rock at deep ground level Research on stress models with simultaneous static and dynamic loads is scarce, even though these stress states commonly occur deep underground. Thus, there is a need to investigate the behavior of rocks under such conditions as the community exploits deeper ground. This paper presents an innovative laboratory testing technique to simulate the stress state of rock under coupled static and dynamic loading. Test results are provided and the findings are discussed. A number of laboratory tests have been conducted at the Central South University, China, since 2001 to simulate the stress states of rock shown in The SHPB has been successfully used to investigate the dynamic characteristics of rock According to solid mechanics and wave theory, Eq. A new testing system for coupling load experiment at medium-to-high strain rate was successfully constructed and commissioned at Central South University. Diagrammatic details of the new test system are shown in During test preparation, the specimen is loaded with the desired axial pre-compression stress. At the same time, the confining pressure may be applied (optional). Once the setup is ready, the striker is launched. On impact, an incident wave is developed and this propagates along the elastic bars. When the wave reaches the interface of the elastic bar and specimen, part of it is reflected and part of it is transmitted. The transmission is dependent on the respective impedance of the steel bar and specimen. Reflected and transmitted signals are captured by strain gauges and these are displayed on the oscilloscope. The signals are then transferred to a personal computer for further processing. Thus, the results of specimens subjected to different coupling loads are captured, and the resultant stress–strain curve, strain rate history and other information may be obtained. The axial static pre-compression stress component is made up of a steel frame, baffled at one end with a pressure-loading unit. The pressure-loading unit consists of an oil cylinder, piston and seal rings as shown in The confining pressure component shown in With the confining pressure component, the lateral stress of the specimen is obtained and the stress model of rock in In order to check the feasibility of the designed system, axial pre-compression stress of 40 Trial tests without specimen aim to check the stability of the system and investigate the wave transmission through pre-stressed bars. During testing, there was no bending and off-axial vibration of the steel bars. The data recording system presented good and consistent signals of incident and transmitted waves as shown in Three specimens were also tested to investigate the feasibility of the system. All the specimens were cored from the same siltstone block and considered as homogeneous. Contact faces of each sample were abraded to achieve parallel faces between the two ends and perpendicular to the vertical central axis. Their physical parameters are listed in To avoid possible scattering of test results, all the specimens were cored from one homogeneous siltstone block. Before the coupling load tests, traditional static compression test and SHPB test were also conducted. Five specimens, with parameters shown in In the following tests, different combinations of coupling loads were used to investigate the response of siltstone. All specimens were prepared with a designed diameter of 50 The newly constructed equipment allows siltstone specimens to be tested under different combinations of coupling loads. Stress–strain curves of these specimens subjected to the same impact loading but different axial pre-compression stress are shown in From Once the axial static stress of specimen is greater than 80% of its static strength, the rock is at impending yielding or near to yield point, and the rock strength with coupling loads decreases rapidly. When axial static stress on the rock specimen is greater than 90% of its static strength, the rock is at near breakage and the system appears unstable. So, the derived stress–strain curve oscillates as shown by curve 6 in The dynamic strength under coupling loads changes when the axial static stress is set to 70% of the specimen's static strength. The trend of this change is evident in When the peak stress of impact loading is 150 The grade-size distribution after impact of the specimen is commonly used as an important index to assess the effect of fragmentation in underground blasting. Here, it is used to analyze the fragmentation of rock under different coupling loads. Sieving statistics was conducted on the fractured specimens using mesh sizes of 1, 2, 5, 10 and 20 With constant axial static stress and different impact loading, the grade-size distribution of specimens is shown in Investigations on the influence of coupling loads on material response have been conducted. An experimental methodology and specialized equipment was developed to verify theoretical considerations. A number of tests on siltstone specimens with various combinations of coupling loads showed that the new test system is robust and with achievable repeatable results. Altogether, 60 specimens were tested and the results of strength characteristics and grade-size distribution of fragments were examined and presented. The work reported here is supported by financial grants from both the National Natural Science Foundation of China (50490274, 10472134 and 50534030) and the Hunan Provincial Science Foundation of China. The authors wish to acknowledge their financial contribution and appreciation of the two organizations for supporting this basic research.