Extraction of uranium from fertiliser-grade phosphoric acid with a novel synergistic mixture of di-nonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (DNPPA) and tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) is reported in this paper. The effects of varying the concentrations of phosphoric acid, DNPPA and TBP on the distribution ratio of uranium have been studied. Batch counter-current extraction tests have been carried out. The extracted uranium in the organic phase was efficiently stripped at 65 °C using concentrated phosphoric acid containing ferrous iron. The stability of the solvent was investigated by extended contact testing as well as cyclic extraction and stripping tests. The data on the effect of temperature on the extraction showed that the enthalpy change is −24 kJ/mol when DNPPA-TBP is used as the extractant, more than double when DNPPA alone was used. Uranium extracted by DNPPA-TBP is further subjected to a second cycle of extraction using D2EHPA-TBP and scrubbing impurities. The uranium is finally converted to a high purity UO3 product using precipitation with hydrogen peroxide and heat treatment at 200 °C.Rock phosphates are industrially processed in large quantities to produce ‘wet process’ phosphoric acid (WPA), which is an intermediate in the production of fertilisers The quality of DNPPA used is an important factor affecting the process of separation. The earlier studies on phenyl phosphoric acids had used an extractant containing ∼12% monoester, and it was reported that fluoride solutions were necessary for stripping While the preliminary work was carried out using a highly pure sample of DNPPA produced in this laboratory in batches of ∼100 g The tri- An industrially produced concentrated phosphoric acid (∼12 M) was used as the feed-stock. It contained (% [w/w]): P The organic and the aqueous phases were equilibrated, after pre-heating if needed, in the required proportions in glass-separating funnels. The analysis of uranium and impurities was carried out using ICP. The addition of TBP in the organic phase is found to be essential for preventing the formation of a third phase during the alkali treatment of a solvent containing an organophosphoric acid such as D2EHPA or DNPPA. The presence of the neutral reagent TBP also leads to an enhancement in the extraction of uranium. The third significant effect of TBP addition is on the selectivity of extraction of uranium with reference to impurities such as iron and rare earths, which are present in phosphoric acid. The results on the effect of mole ratio of TBP: DNPPA on uranium extraction are shown in At a constant TBP/DNPPA molar ratio of 1:2, the extractant concentration was varied and the effect on extraction of uranium from 5 M AR grade phosphoric acid containing 240 mg/L of U The effect of phosphoric acid concentration on the extraction of uranium by 0.6 M DNPPA+0.2 M TBP was studied. The acidity of the feed was varied and uranium concentration was maintained at 230 mg/L by spiking with a standard uranium solution. The log–log plot of D and acid concentration is shown in  Fresh solvent containing 0.2 M TBP and 0.6 M DNPPA was contacted for 120 h with weak phosphoric acid using a magnetic stirrer at 60 °C. The extracted uranium was stripped with 12 M phosphoric acid containing 15 g Fe After confirming the stability of the solvent for extended contact, cyclic stability tests were performed. Phosphoric acid was equilibrated with solvent (0.6 M DNPPA+0.2 M TBP) at a 1:1 phase ratio. The raffinate was separated and analysed for uranium content. The loaded organic phase was stripped with concentrated phosphoric acid (∼55% P Based on the results of single shake-out tests, computer simulation showed counter-current extraction using 6–9 stages at 0.5–1.3 phase ratio (O/A) could be used for separation of uranium. An experimental test involving a batch eight stage counter-current extraction with a 1:2 phase ratio (O/A) acting on phosphoric acid containing 115 mg/L U During the extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid, impurities like yttrium and iron, which are present in the feed acid, are also extracted into the organic phase. One possible method for separation of the impurities is selective scrubbing of the loaded extract with an acid such as sulphuric acid. The extent of extraction as a function of the concentrations of phosphoric acid and sulphuric acid were, hence, studied separately. Aqueous feed containing 300 mg Y/L, 800 mg Fe/L and acids of varied concentrations were equilibriated in 1:1 phase ratio with 0.6 M DNPPA+0.2 M TBP. The results are given in Uranium stripping from the loaded extract using raffinate is generally preferred in the industry. The raffinate has been subjected to extensive pretreatment whereby ‘humic’ contamination from the phosphate rock has been reduced. However, the phosphate concentration in the raffinate is low and the acid can be used only after concentration by evaporation. Other efficient stripping reagents are ammonium carbonate, ammonium hydrogen fluoride and a HF–H The stripping reagent for the test-work was prepared by dissolving metallic iron in concentrated phosphoric acid to obtain an EMF of 60–70 mV. With this stripping solution, the results of three stage cross current stripping of uranium from loaded extract containing 356 mg/L U The strip solution obtained from the first cycle of extraction-stripping was found to contain uranium in a concentrated form, which, however, is not suitable for direct precipitation due to high level of impurities. The strip solution can be processed in a second cycle of extraction-stripping with an additional scrubbing step incorporated to obtain a uranium cake of high purity. The possible options for second cycle include an extraction process based either on DNPPA-TBP or D2EHPA-TBP. An important factor in the selection of the solvent for the second cycle is the requirement of high selectivity with regard to the co-extracted rare earths, iron and phosphates. Our studies show that with DNPPA+TBP extractant, the removal of impurities like yttrium and iron is far more difficult than it is with D2EHPA-TBP. Hence, a second cycle of extraction based on D2EHPA-TBP was carried out, similar to a process that is currently being patented The strip liquor containing 4.6 g/L uranium in 12 M phosphoric acid was diluted with water and oxidised with H Analysis of the product from a number of tests is given in The synergistic extractant DNPPA+TBP can be used for recovery of uranium from weak phosphoric acid. The solvent is stable and stripping with concentrated phosphoric acid under reducing conditions is efficient. An extraction mechanism for uranium has been postulated based on the results of slope analysis. High-purity uranium is recovered from the strip solution by a second cycle of extraction with D2EHPA-TBP wherein a scrubbing step has been incorporated and stripping is performed by an alkaline solution. From the resulting alkaline uranium solution, a two-stage precipitation process, comprising sodium diuranate precipitation followed by uranyl peroxide precipitation, yields a high purity uranyl peroxide cake suitable for feeding refineries. Drying of the uranyl peroxide at 180–200 °C leads to release of peroxidic oxygen, making the product very safe for storage, transport and further processing. The authors wish to thank their colleagues Shri N. S. Iyer, Shri A.B. Giriyalkar, Shri M. K. Kotekar, Smt. M. Anitha and Shri Ankur Chatterjee for their help in carrying out the test-work. The cooperation extended by Shri U.R. Marwah, Head SDS of BARC for supply of samples of DNPPA and TBP is invaluable. The spectroscopic analysis was performed courtesy Dr S.B. Manohar, Head RChD of BARC. The authors also wish to place on record the valuable suggestions received from Shri T.K.S. Murthy, former Director of Chemical Engineering Group (BARC) and also from Dr T. K. Mukherjee, Chairman and Managing Director, Indian Rare Earths.