In the present research, the monoethanolamine‑copper-ammonium novel system was studied systematically to develop an alternative sustainable process for the dissolution of silver. This paper presents the effect of varying the concentration of cupric sulfate, ammonium sulfate, monoethanolamine and temperature on the silver leaching kinetics. The study was complemented with SEM-EDS, X-ray diffraction characterization techniques and thermodynamic analysis in order to understand the phenomena taking place in this novel leaching system. The results revealed that an increase in the cupric sulfate and ammonium sulfate concentration favors the silver dissolution rate and recovery. However, a massive increase in the concentration of cupric sulfate and ammonium sulfate, e.g., 0.4M and 1.06M, respectively, promotes the significant precipitation of Cu(OH)2, which hinders the silver dissolution. On the other hand, when the system is operated with a Cu2+ and NH4
                     + concentration lower than 0.3M and 0.8M, respectively, the silver dissolution is favored. The thermodynamic and SEM-EDS analysis along with the leaching tests revealed that Cu(NH3)4
                     2+, Cu(MEA)4
                     2+ and Cu(OH)2 (partially precipitated on the silver particles) are the oxidizing agents for silver. Oxidized silver can be complexed by the free ammonia produced in the system and monoethanoamine (MEA). Temperature is an important variable to accelerate the silver dissolution kinetics, the results showed that 83% of silver can be leached at 360min employing 0.3M Cu2+, 0.8M NH4
                     +, 0.05M MEA at 45°C. Finally, the addition of MEA in the system is fundamental to decrease the massive precipitation of Cu(OH)2 species, promoting the silver dissolution rate at 45°C.Metallic silver can be found in several resources e.g., minerals and urban mines including, spent catalysts, printed circuit boards, fibers, etc. ( From a kinetic and environmental viewpoint, the thiosulfate systems seem to be the most promising to replace the cyanide ( On the other hand, the development of alternative leaching systems which avoid the use of thiosulfate (highly susceptible to degradation) has being intensified during the last years, e.g., ammonia has been considered an alternative leaching agent for silver and gold from minerals and alloys ( Recently, glycine and nitrite has been used as alternative complexing agents for silver in the presence of hydrogen peroxide and cupric ions as oxidizing agents, respectively ( This section describes all the materials, equipment, reagents, leaching solution composition and the experimental methodologies used in this research work. Leaching solutions were prepared with analytical grade reagents and deionized water. The reagents used were: metallic silver (99.999%, 1–3 The experimental work was divided in three main sections: In order to elucidate the predominant species in the ammonium‑silver-MEA system and ammonium‑copper-MEA system, species distribution diagrams were constructed at different potentials and room temperature using the Medusa© Software. The diagrams were constructed considering the equilibrium data contained in the Hydra database of the Medusa© suite software ( These diagrams were used to determine all the species that can be formed in the leaching solutions at different pH and potential conditions. All silver leaching experiments were performed in an agitated batch reactor (250 According to The solid residues formed at 6 The results obtained for the silver leaching with the MEA‑copper-ammonia system are presented and discussed in this section. In order to maximize the silver dissolution with this novel leaching system, the effect of the concentration of MEA, ammonium sulfate, cupric sulfate and temperature on the silver leaching kinetics and solid products was systematically studied. On the other hand, the formation of the Cu-MEA and Ag-MEA complexes is analyzed from a thermodynamic viewpoint. According to Based on the last results, the highest silver recovery is obtained at 0.4 The effect of (NH As regards to the copper speciation, When the ammonia concentration is increased up to 0.8 Having established from the previous results that the best ammonium ion concentration corresponds to 0.4 As can be seen, cupric tetraamine and cupric tetraMEA concentrations are practically the same when the cupric ion concentration is increased from 0.05 to 0.2 The regeneration of Cu(OH)  The previous results revealed that it is possible to recover 44% of silver at 360  In order to validate the formation of Cu(OH)  In order to determine the secondary products formed on the unreacted silver particles, the solid residues obtained at 35 and 45 Finally, the silver dissolution was assessed employing the system with 0.3  In this work a novel leaching system involving Cu-NH The presence of 0.05 Edith Reyes Sandoval is grateful to CONACyT (México) for the postgraduate scholarship received. Also, the collaboration of Ana Elena Muñiz, Felipe Márquez and Socorro García in this investigation is duly recognized.