Thermosets such as phenolic thermosets are brittle at room temperature. Thus, in applications where good mechanical properties are required thermosets must be combined with reinforcements to improve these properties. Composites based on thermoset matrices can substitute for steel and concrete in some applications of civil construction structures because of their higher resistance to oxidation than steel and better freeze–thaw resistance than concrete. Furthermore, phenolic composites can be produced with complex shapes, and with careful design, materials can be obtained with high strength and stiffness and excellent impact strength, making these materials alternatives to metals. Construction materials require fire- and high-temperature-resistant components, and moldings and laminates based on phenolics can be utilized due to their resistance to burning and minimal smoke and toxic fumes production. Phenolic composites can positively impact the building and construction industry by improving safety and reducing cost.Phenolic-type resins were first reported as products of the reaction between phenols and aldehydes by Baeyer in the early 1870s ( In 1920, Hermann Staudinger first postulated the existence of high The stories of both modern composites and phenolic resins are interconnected. In 1500 BC, composites were already being used by Egyptians and israelites, with mud bricks reinforced with straw used in construction. However, the beginning of the modern age of composites can be linked to the commercialization of glass fibers, which began in the 1930s. At that time, the aircraft industry had a production problem: new materials were required to actualize the innovative concepts and designs that these companies were creating. Furthermore, each change in a particular design required new molds, making it difficult to test new designs quickly. Metal molds were expensive and required long lead times, and the early plastic molds could not withstand the forces they were subjected to during the forging process. This issue led to the idea that reinforcing these plastics with glass fibers, which were already on the market, could increase their resistance to the stresses of the molding process. Molds were then made from phenolic resins and glass fibers, which proved to be adequate for the intended goal ( World War II (WWII, 1939–1945) accelerated the development of composites, with examples of composites of phenolic resins including phenolic-reinforced paper in the construction of a structural wing box beam (PT-19 aircraft) (  Phenolic resins are highly versatile, which has led to a broad range of applications in the aircraft, aerospace, automotive, electrical and electronic industries ( Phenolic resins are thermosetting resins produced by the condensation of aldehydes with phenols. Generally, the phenol is phenol itself and the aldehyde is formaldehyde; however, substituted phenols and higher aldehydes are used to produce phenolic resins with specific properties, including specific reactivities and functionalities ( The novolac phenolic resins can be obtained in a moderately acidic medium (pH 4–6) in the presence of divalent metal acetate catalysts (Ca, mg, Zn, Cd, Pb, Cu, Co and Ni) or in a strongly acidic medium (pH 1–4). Novolac resins obtained in a moderately acidic medium have many Novolac obtained in a strongly acidic medium is synthesized by reacting formaldehyde with a molar excess of phenol (1 The resole phenolic resin is obtained by reacting phenol with an excess of formaldehyde in an alkaline medium ( Benzoxazines are synthesized using phenol, formaldehyde and amine (aliphatic or aromatic) by employing solution or solventless methods ( Phenol is the monomer used in higher quantity in the production of phenolic resins. Phenol was initially derived from coal tar, but with the increased commercialization of phenolic resins, the demand for phenol grew significantly. Currently, the peroxidation of cumene is the predominant synthetic route for the production of phenol, accounting for over 90% of world production. In this process, cumene is oxidized with oxygen to produce cumene hydroperoxide. Subsequently, the peroxide is decomposed to phenol and acetone using a strong mineral acid as a catalyst ( Phenol has unique chemical properties due to the presence of a hydroxyl group and an aromatic ring, which are complementary in that they facilitate both electrophilic and nucleophilic reactions. The aromatic ring of phenol is highly reactive towards electrophilic substitution, which assists its acid-catalyzed reaction with formaldehyde. Phenol is a weak acid and easily forms sodium phenoxide (NaPh) in a base-catalyzed medium. In the presence of sodium phenoxide, the nucleophilic addition of the phenolic aromatic ring to the carbonyl group of formaldehyde occurs. Thus, phenol can react with formaldehyde under acidic or basic conditions, leading to either novolac or resole resins ( The use of alkyl phenols such as cresol in phenolic resin production reduces reactivity, hardness, cross-linking density and color formation but increases solubility in non-polar solvents, flexibility, and compatibility with natural oils. At room temperature, Xylenols are available in six isomeric forms, all of which are crystalline at room temperature. Xylenols can be obtained from the same natural sources as cresols and phenol. In addition to phenolic resins, xylenols are used in solvents and disinfectants ( Bisphenol-A (BPA) or 2,2- Formaldehyde is the most frequently used aldehyde in the production of phenolic resins. At room temperature, it is a pungent, colorless, highly flammable gas. Formaldehyde is highly reactive and commonly commercialized in aqueous solution stabilized with methanol, where it predominantly forms adducts with the solvent, that is, equilibrium mixtures of methylene glycol, polyoxymethylene glycols and hemiformals of these glycols with methanol ( Higher aldehydes react with phenol in the same manner but significantly more slowly than formaldehyde. The reaction is generally performed under strong acidic conditions to minimize aldol formation and in a water-free system by continuous aldehyde addition to the phenol melt. Paraformaldehyde is a white, solid, low molecular weight polycondensation product of methylene glycol. Paraformaldehyde is used to prepare special resins with high solids content or to avoid distillation of wastewater ( The raw materials used in the production of phenolic resins (phenol and formaldehyde) are obtained on a large scale from non-renewable sources. Therefore, the substitution of these reagents by equivalent chemicals obtained from non-fossil sources is an interesting alternative from both economic and environmental perspectives ( Lignin is a biomacromolecule present in wood and non-wood plants that is highly branched and has a wide variety of functional groups that can act as active centers for chemical and biological interactions ( The saccharification and fermentation of sugarcane bagasse or other lignocellulosic fibers in biorefineries is a promising process for the production of bioethanol ( Lignin contains aliphatic and aromatic groups, with several substituted phenylpropane rings linked by different bonds such as carbon–carbon or ether bonds ( Tannins are considered polyphenols due to the large number of phenolic rings in their structures ( Cardanol, a component of the agricultural by-product cashew nut shell liquid, also has a phenolic nature and can react with aldehydes under several conditions ( Cardanol has also been used in benzoxazine-type resins prepared from cardanol-based monobenzoxazine monomer, which in turn was produced by the reaction of cardanol with ammonia and formaldehyde ( Glyoxal (OHC–CHO) is a dialdehyde that can be obtained from several natural sources, such as from the oxidation of lipids or as a by-product of biological processes ( Thermosets such as phenolic thermosets are brittle at room temperature and usually have poor mechanical properties. However, due to the presence of cross-links, thermosets can be used at higher temperatures, as they have higher softening temperatures and better creep properties than thermoplastics. Thermosets are also usually more resistant to chemical attack than most thermoplastics, among other characteristics ( Composites based on thermoset matrices can substitute for steel and concrete in some applications of civil construction structures because they usually exhibit a higher resistance to oxidation than steel and better freeze–thaw resistance than concrete, potentially leading to structural components with improved weathering. One of the drawbacks to the application of organic materials in construction is their high combustibility. This disadvantage can be bypassed using phenolic-type resins to fabricate the composite, for Phenolic resins have been chosen for use in the production of thermoset composites for several reasons besides cost. Phenolics meet the specifications for fiber-reinforced composites used in applications that require fire, smoke and toxicity (FST) characteristics, such as in aircraft, interior panels, materials used in tunnels, and fire safety components ( Fillers and reinforcements are usually combined in the preparation of phenolic composites. For example, the organic filler fibrous wood flour can be combined with powdered mineral fillers to modify the hardness and surface characteristics of the composite. When the molding is exposed to continuous thermal stress, in addition to an organic filler, siliceous, carbonaceous, or similar inorganic fillers are used, and mica fillers are usually the materials of choice when the insulating power is critical ( Composites based on phenolic resins present flexibility as regards processing, and most of the conventional processes can be used to prepare such composites. At first, the fabrication processes can be divided into three broad categories, based on considerations on both cost and performance criteria for a given application. However, certain restrictions should be considered in this categorization, since limitations may arise due to availability of both fibers and resins that are compatible with each other, as well as with the processing itself. In this context, commodity-based composites are usually processed via hand lay-up; pultrusion and filament winding have been applied in the manufacture of high-performance composites, where properties and specific shapes are required. Fibers continuous and oriented along a specific direction are usually required for manufacturing advanced composites, where typically When a composite experiences a certain force, the matrix transfers the load to the reinforcement through the interface. The main function of the reinforcing agent is to carry the load along its length. The properties of short fiber composites are strongly influenced by the aspect ratio (length/diameter) of the fiber and their orientation and fraction. The criteria used to select the type, amount, length, orientation and other properties of the reinforcement depend on the matrix characteristics and the intended application. Macroscale reinforcements and composites have thus far received the most investigation and application. The remarkable advances in the development of these polymeric matrices composites in the twentieth century have made these materials prominent, which is expected to continue despite advances in smaller-scale, mainly nanometric, reinforcements. Glass fibers are widely used to reinforce phenolic composites, can be produced as continuous strands or filaments with different diameters, and are available in different compositions such as E-, C- and S-glass, which are characterized by different specific properties ( Glass fibers with tailored properties have been developed to meet specific applications, with some designed to be compatible with military specifications for ballistic performance ( Phenolic composites can positively impact the building and construction industry by improving safety and reducing cost. Phenolic/glass laminates are important alternatives for construction applications due to properties such as the availability of several processing techniques, allowing a significant degree of design freedom; the inherent fire resistance of the material, eliminating the need for mineral additives and thus reducing the total weight; and the reduced risk of the spread of fire due to fire-resistant properties and the Carbon fibers (CF) can be produced in different forms, for instance as mats, continuous filament tows, and chopped fibers. CF can be prepared from organic precursors (cellulose, pitch, polyacrylonitrile (Pan), some phenolic fibers) by controlling their pyrolysis. The properties of CF such as low weight, high strength and high modulus, fatigue resistance and vibration damping, corrosion resistance, good friction and wear qualities, low thermal expansion, and thermal and electrical conductivity are highly attractive for the aerospace industry; in fact, the requirements of this sector played a major role in stimulating the development of these fibers ( Concerns that have emerged from the last decades of the twentieth century relating to safety and environmental issues have led to further expansion of the applications of CF, including the production of natural gas tanks for vehicles due to their low carbon dioxide emissions and clean exhaust gas, and blades for wind-power generators ( Safety concerns have led to the use of CF-reinforced plastics (CFRP) and CF-reinforced concrete (CFR-concrete) as earthquake-resistant materials. In this area of application, CF-reinforced wood (CFRWood) may be useful in architecture because of its effectiveness in reducing carbon dioxide emissions and promoting environmental conservation. Investigations on CFRWood and PAN-based CF occurred almost simultaneously. One example is the development of CF-reinforced glued laminated timber (CFR-glulam) composed of wood, a phenolic-type resin and a CF composite sheet. Aside from good wettability for CF, the phenolic-type resin developed for this application exhibited reactivity towards the functional groups present at the CF surface. In addition, as both the CF-phenolic composite sheet and wood are rich in OH groups, the adhesion between the two is favored, and conventional resins can be used to glue them together. This type of material can be used as a board reinforcement material and for repairing house and bridge components ( Structural profiles based on FRP composites are produced for use in the construction industry for building and bridge superstructure applications ( Phenolic composites reinforced with CF are also used for load-bearing materials. Phenolics have good resistance to seizure and work well with steel or bronze journals when lubricants such as oil or water are used. In these applications, the low thermal conductivity of phenolics is overcome by the presence of CF because the phenolic thermoset usually has a thermal conductivity of approximately 0.35 W/m K, i.e., approximately 1/150 that of steel, which may lead to bearing failure by charring ( Aramid fibers are highly oriented fibers derived from aromatic polyamides, with Kevlar and Nomex as two prominent examples. The woven fabric of aramids combined with phenolic resins produces high-performance composites for ballistic applications, where the projectile energy is mainly absorbed by the fiber with a high strength and modulus ( Fiber-reinforced composites have high stiffness-to-weight ratios, but this ratio may be increased if, instead of a monolithic structure, two thin composite facesheets of the same weight (for example, plastics reinforced with phenolic glass or carbon fibers), separated by a cellular core, are used. A phenolic resin-impregnated aramid paper honeycomb (Nomex honeycomb) is commonly used in the core structure. These structures are appropriate for applications in which weight reduction and fire safety are critical, such as in ground and air transportation. Thermosetting phenolic resins are used in combination with other components as friction materials for brake systems. The design of such systems should account for the need to maintain a stable and reliable friction force under a variety of conditions, such as wide ranges of pedal pressure, vehicle speed, temperature and humidity. Fibers correspond to one of the ingredients and are used as reinforcement. Aramid pulp performs well as a reinforcement fiber in such systems because of its good filler retention, leading to enhanced wear resistance and friction stability ( The search for alternatives to raw materials derived from fossil fuels has accelerated in recent decades and has reached the area of polymer matrix composites. In the case of phenolic matrices, several alternatives have been considered, particularly for the phenolic component. Regarding reinforcements, interest has re-emerged in recent decades around cellulosic and lignocellulosic fibers, which were used in early phenolic applications. Phenolic resins are used as adhesives for binding wood in different composites, such as panels, molded products and engineering lumber materials (  The application of microscale reinforcements in phenolic matrices has not yet been well explored. Cellulosic-type reinforcements in varied processes have proven to be suitable for this purpose. The separation of bundles of filaments during processing can lead to reinforcements with microscale diameters as was observed for phenolic matrices reinforced with cellulosic textile fibers. Reinforcement with microscale diameter resulted from the excellent impregnation of the yarn by the liquid phenolic resin, in the first stage of preparation of the composite, that split the yarn ( The boom that has occurred in investigations on nano-reinforced composites is still focused on thermoplastic rather than thermoset matrices. Nanoscale reinforcements have inherent properties that lead to different properties than other reinforcements, such as high aspect ratios. However, for the potential of these nanomaterials as reinforcements to be realized, particular challenges must be met. For example, these nanomaterials must be homogeneously dispersed in the matrix and the adhesion at the interface must allow an efficient transfer of stress from the matrix to the reinforcement. if these and other drawbacks are not overcome, disappointing results can be observed, mainly when compared to advanced composites reinforced with high-performance continuous fibers ( The polar groups present in phenolics favor interactions with nanoclays, meaning that this material can be used as a reinforcement of phenolic-type matrices without any modification ( Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), discovered in 1991 by Iijima, are unique Despite the exceptional intrinsic properties of CNTs, CNT-reinforced composites may exhibit worse properties than expected. The surface properties of CNTs may affect their dispersion within the matrix, and the van der Waals interactions between the nanotubes may lead to bundles that may fail at stresses below the intrinsic capabilities of a single nanotube, necessitating the tailoring of CNTs to each particular application ( MWNTs have been used as dispersed CNTs and network CNTs as reinforcements of phenolic matrices. Composite phenolic-dispersed CNTs were fabricated through the melt mixing method, which may lead to the agglomeration of CNTs in the matrix and introduce defects in composites. The infiltration of the resin into the network CNT generated composites with better mechanical properties when compared to the dispersed CNTs because the CNTs in the network are longer and contain fewer agglomerates and defects ( Ablation resistance is an important property of composites, with thinner ablative structures desired to reduce the overall weight of aerospace systems. Phenolic resins easily char during endothermic pyrolysis, leading to the application of phenolic composites as ablative materials for rocket nozzles ( The formation of aggregates from CNFs affects their dispersion in resins, potentially leading to poor mechanical properties. Thus, it is mandatory to at least minimize the formation of these aggregates, which can be achieved by modifying the CNF surface. Functional groups such as esters, anhydrides Cellulose nanowhiskers (CNWs) are bio-based reinforcements with the intrinsic properties of reinforcements at the nanoscale (including large aspect ratios and high specific surface areas). However, for these highly desirable reinforcement characteristics to be translated into good composite properties, good dispersion of the CNWs in the polymer is necessary to allow the formation of a stiff percolating network by hydrogen bonds, in turn increasing the stiffness. As observed for other nano-reinforcements, the development of composites based on CNWs has mainly focused on thermoplastic matrices. Phenolic composites reinforced by CNWs have been fabricated as films through When a polymer and a reinforcement are mixed, interactions between these two distinct chemical components require the existence of contact areas ( The chemical structures of phenolic resins consist of low-polarity groups, such as aromatic rings, and highly polar groups, such as hydroxyls ( Lignocellulosic fibers are mainly composed of cellulose, hemicellulose (or polioses) and lignin, which correspond to macromolecules with chemical structures rich in hydroxyl groups; lignin also has phenolic-type aromatic rings in its structure. The similarities between the structural characteristics of phenolic resins and lignocellulosic fibers lead to a high affinity between them, favoring strong interactions at the fiber–matrix interface. Most of the polymeric matrices used in both thermoplastic and thermoset composites have a lower structural compatibility with lignocellulosic fibers than phenolics. moreover, the processing of phenolic thermosetting resins takes place at temperatures below 200°C, and the thermal decomposition of lignocellulosic fibers occurs above 200°C, which means that the fiber is thermally preserved during processing, which is not always observed in processing involving other polymers and lignocellulosic fibers ( Despite the compatibility among phenolic resins and some reinforcements, it is sometimes necessary to introduce modifications to improve adhesion at the interface. The adhesion between aramid fibers and resins is usually poor, mainly due to their high crystallinity. Treatment with cold plasma improved the interfacial adhesion between Kevlar fabric and phenolic resin ( The oxidation of CFs introduces hydroxyl groups at their surfaces, improving the interactions at the fiber–matrix interface. Other groups can also be introduced depending on the reagents used. The hydroxylated surface of CF has been treated with glutaraldehyde, a dialdehyde, producing hemiacetal-type groups. The bifunctionality of the aldehyde used as a reagent allows for a reaction between the group on the surface of the CF and sites present in the structure of phenolic resins. in this case, the reinforcement and matrix have been chemically linked, and glutaraldehyde has acted as a coupling agent, resulting in better mechanical properties ( In addition to the search for conditions that produce a good interface for phenolic composites, other issues must be addressed to ensure that the end material has the desired properties. One critical factor is the identification of conditions that minimize or, preferably, eliminate the presence of voids. Phenolic resins such as resol-type resins generate water and formaldehyde during curing as by-products of condensation reactions. Hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA) can be used as a source of formaldehyde for curing novolac-type resins, producing formaldehyde and ammonia as by-products. During curing, Volatile control is crucial for the production of void-free phenolic-type laminates. A commercial vacuum-bag moldable phenolic prepreg system was used to test two types of vacuum-bag (VB) processes, namely single- (SVB) and double- (DVB) vacuum-bag processes. The DVB process enabled better control of volatiles, with the point of application of vacuum pressure selected to avoid excessive extravasation of resin to achieve the target resin content in the final consolidated laminate parts. Void-free quality parts have been produced using the DvB process, which exhibited improved mechanical properties compared to the parts produced by the SVB process ( In some applications of phenolics such as in the inner lining of multilayered composites in fire-critical applications, besides the water produced as a byproduct during the curing reaction, the starting material may contain water as a diluent to control the viscosity and thus facilitate injection and mold filling. The use of water as a diluent leads to the volatilization of a large number of water molecules. This problem has been addressed by substituting water with ethylene glycol, which confers low viscosity to the resin and can also act as both a plasticizer and a reagent. in the latter case, ethylene glycol is introduced to the thermoset network through the curing. This substitution has led to a decrease in void content and to an increase in density, thus leading to a final product with improved mechanical properties ( For some applications, it is crucial to identify conditions that minimize moisture uptake, as moisture can degrade both the matrix and the fibers. An E-glass–phenolic FRP system has been used as a reinforcement of glulam (glued-laminated timber) beams, which can be applied for building and bridge construction. The reinforcement was designed and fabricated to be compatible with wood adhesives such as phenol-resorcinol-formaldehyde, leading to features such as a layered formulation and a graded void content. The moisture uptake in this case has been controlled by applying a primer to the FRP surface, filling the large voids and reducing the moisture uptake of the material compared to the unprimed material ( The substitution of HMTA, normally used to cure novolac-type resins, with epoxies has reduced void content. To retain the fire-retardant properties of phenolics, a network was formed with a higher phenol than epoxy content, Application of higher molding pressures at the gel point of a resol-type phenolic resin led to a reduction of voids in the matrix, improving the impact strength, as observed by megiatto Jr. The use of matrices based on benzoxazine (BZ) type resins should grow significantly because the curing of BZs occurs without the release of volatiles, potentially leading to the production of void-free composites. BZ thermosets exhibit low water absorption, low flammability (high char yield), high stiffness, and excellent dimensional stability. Composites based on BZs are promising matrix materials for composites in future aerospace applications due to their unique properties ( Mechanical properties are critical for many composite applications. The properties of the composites depend on the combination of the properties of the matrix and the reinforcing agent or fiber. The properties of polymer composites reinforced with short fibers depend on such factors as the fiber/ matrix interaction, the orientation and volume fraction of the fiber, the fiber aspect ratio (defined as The impact test evaluates the improvement of the thermoset properties (classified as fragile) compared to composites reinforced with fibers (synthetic or natural fibers) or thermoplastic materials ( Thermoset materials are brittle, and most of the time it is impossible to perform mechanical tests such as strength, flexural or traction tests. The phenolic thermoset exhibits impact strength values of approximately 12      The same fiber in different phenol-type matrices can lead to different impact strengths, with the lignin–formaldehyde composite–sisal fiber exhibiting an impact strength approximately 17% higher ( Chemical or physical treatments can be applied to natural fibers to modify their surface (polar groups) and/or their composition (lignin, cellulose and hemicellulose content). Several treatments may enhance the interaction between the phenolic matrix and natural fibers, such as mercerization, succinic anhydride, ionized air, and others (  Polybenzoxazines are a new class of thermosetting phenolic resin. These materials have received attention due to their highly desirable properties, such as low cost, good thermal stability, good flame retardance and low water absorption ( The more common techniques used to analyze thermosets and composites are thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), which can determine the thermal properties and also the best conditions for application of the materials. These techniques can be applied to polymers to determine their specific heat, degree of polymerization, flammability, degradation, cure, glass transition temperature (  TGa and DSC indicate that the residual cure stage of the phenolic thermoset lies between 100 and 200°C and releases water and other volatile by-products. The cure stage is observed as an exothermic peak in the DSC curves (    Phenolic thermosets are known to be resistant to high temperatures and generate high amounts of char during pyrolysis ( When lignin was used as a partial substitute for phenol, the lignophenolic (lignin–phenol–formaldehyde) thermoset exhibited a larger mass loss at 400°C than phenolic thermosets because the decomposition or condensation of the aromatic rings probably occurred between 400 and 500°C ( ‘Fiberglass-resin powder (FR powder)’ consists of glass fiber and resin powder from waste printed circuit boards (PCBs). FR powder can be reused as a reinforcing filler in phenolic molding compounds (PMCs). Phenolic composites reinforced with lignocellulosic fibers exhibit lower thermal stability compared to phenolic thermosets because lignocellulosic fibers decompose at lower temperatures than phenolic thermosets (  Cooling, heating and air-conditioning systems for buildings are major impediments to sustainable development because traditional refrigeration cycles consume high levels of electricity and fossil energy. Thus, a good insulating material is a fundamental tool for the design and construction of energy-efficient buildings ( To prepare thermal insulating materials, Thermal characteristics are also important in numerous industrial processes, and thus the development of composites with high thermal conductivity and a low coefficient of thermal expansion is important to achieve effective heat conduction (  Phenolic resins have demonstrated superior fire, smoke and toxicity (FST) properties compared to other polymeric matrices for fire-resistance applications. The FST properties of phenolic resins are decisive for the selection of these products in many applications. no other matrix material provides the same FST performance at a comparable price level ( Phenolic composites have been the material of choice when fire safety is the main criterion for the selection of building materials. Due to the intrinsic properties of the matrix, phenolic composites do not support a flame, and when exposed to fire they produce little or no smoke, which is less toxic than the smoke produced by other composites, particularly those containing certain halogenated flame retardants (  Phenolic thermosets can be recycled using a mechanical recycling system such as milling or crushing, and the obtained powder material can be used as a filler or additive for new thermosets ( Recycling of composites is not easy because recycling involves the matrix and the fiber, which are chemically different ( Thermoset composite materials can be recycled through mechanical comminution techniques, to reduce the size of the scrap to produce recyclates, using thermal processes to break the scrap down into materials and energy ( Phenolic thermosets and phenolic composites are solid, combustible materials with caloric values similar to that of coal. Therefore, products based on phenolic resins can be used as an alternative solid fuel to coal ( The interest in the use of raw materials derived from renewable sources, combined with the good properties that have been observed for these materials, have led to the perspective that composites based on bio-resins and lignocellulosic and/or cellulosic fibers will experience an impressive development in a near future. Furthermore, the coming years should see an increased number of investigations on nano-reinforced thermoset composites, including phenolic composites. The phenolic-type resins should remain an excellent option for thermoset-matrix composites, with these materials maintaining a prominent position in the area of composites based on their favorable cost/performance characteristics. The authors gratefully acknowledge FAPESP (The State of São Paulo research Foundation, Brazil) and CNPq (national research Council, Brazil) for financial support.