Rising single air bubbles were investigated in aqueous solutions of hexadecylamine (HDA) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as surface active agents at varying concentrations at a constant gas flow rate. Shadowgraphy was applied to determine main bubble characteristics, such as equivalent diameter, morphology, and rising velocity. From these characteristics, critical parameters like the concentration at the minimum bubble velocity were derived. Simultaneous application of Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) provided information about hydrodynamic parameters, e.g. the induced liquid velocities and vortex shedding.
                  From surface tension measurements, the concentration of adsorbed species on the interface and packing densities of HDA and MIBC on the bubble surface could be calculated. HDA exhibited a better adsorption and a higher packing density on the bubble surface compared to MIBC due to the ionic character and the straight hydrocarbon chain. The bubble characteristics were therefore more strongly affected by HDA than by MIBC.
                  Combining the Shadowgraphy and PIV results it was found that the mean liquid velocity as well as the amount of induced turbulent kinetic energy increased with increasing concentration of surfactants in the solutions, while the investigated bubble characteristics such as equivalent diameter and rising velocity decreased. The increase in mean liquid velocity and induced turbulent kinetic energy could be correlated with the oscillating frequency of the bubble trajectory, which also increased with increasing surfactant concentration. The vortex shedding process could be visualised using Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) revealing the micro-process of energy cascading.amplitude of oscillation [m], area [m activity [–] proper orthogonal decomposition coefficients [–] molar concentration [mol/L] initial surface concentration [mol/m equivalent bubble diameter [m] maximum diameter [m] minimum diameter [m] Eötvös number [–] frequency [1/s] elongation [–] acceleration due to gravity [m/s turbulent kinetic energy [m proportionality constant to the turbulent kinetic energy [m morton number [–] Avogadro’s number [1/mol] universal gas constant [J/(mol K)] regression coefficient [–] Reynolds number [–] saturation [–] bubble Strouhal number [–] absolute temperature [K] time [s] liquid velocity [m/s] mean liquid velocity [m/s] velocity in horizontal x direction [m/s] velocity in vertical y direction [m/s] bubble rising velocity in vertical y direction [m/s] horizontal position [m] vertical position [m] activity coefficient [–] surface excess concentration [mol/m surface concentration at monolayer adsorption [mol/m dynamic viscosity of gas/liquid [Pa⋅s] chemical potential [J/mol] density of gas/liquid [kg/m surface tension [N/m] proper orthogonal decomposition eigenfunctions [–] oscillation frequency [1/s] vorticity as rotation around z axis [1/s] critical coalescence concentration critical micelle concentration concentration at the minimum elongation concentration at the minimum bubble velocity dynamic foamability index fast Fourier transform frames per second hexadecylamine hydrophile-lipophile balance Konstanz information miner methyl isobutyl carbinol neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet polyether ether ketone particle image velocimetry poly(methyl methacrylate) proper orthogonal decomposition root-mean-squareunivers turbulent kinetic energy In many chemical processes, bubbly flow is present, e.g. in bubble column reactors ( It is well known that surface active agents have a great impact on bubbly flow, e.g. improvement of bubble stability, reduction of bubble diameter, and change of bubble morphology ( In a preceding study, the flotation process of glass particles was statistically investigated using hexadecylamine (HDA) as collector and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as frother ( To investigate the effect of surface active agents on the bubble behaviour with respect to the flotation process, studies of rising single bubbles in diluted surfactant solutions have been performed. It was found that significant effects on bubble characteristics and induced liquid velocity field were present already at low concentrations ( The present work continues and extends these investigations. As stated above, collectors will exhibit also frothing abilities. To investigate the frothing behaviour of the collector HDA, rising single air bubbles were observed in aqueous surfactant solutions at various concentrations at a constant volumetric gas flow rate. In addition to this, the frothing behaviour of MIBC, which is a common frothing agent in industrial processes ( The experimental setup is shown in The apparatus is made of transparent poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) with full optical accessibility. A polyether ether ketone (PEEK) capillary (supplier: Techlab) with an internal diameter of 500 µm was introduced at an angle of 45° at the bottom of the apparatus via a valve. The capillary was connected to a 50 mL gas tight syringe (supplier: Hamilton). The volumetric gas flow rate was kept constant at 0.1 mL/min during the experiments using a high precision syringe pump (supplier: Cole-Parmer, type: KD200P). A high-speed camera (type: Olympus i-Speed TR) equipped with a 12x zoom lens (supplier: Navitar) in combination with a 0.5x lens attachment (supplier: Navitar) captured 10 bit grey scale high-speed image sequences at 300 fps. The image resolution was 1280 × 1040 px with a pixel size of 21 µm. The measurement area was arbitrarily positioned approximately 35 mm above the capillary outlet. For Shadowgraphy measurements an LED backlight illumination (supplier: Dantec Dynamics), which operated at 10,200 lm at continuous illumination mode, was placed opposite to the camera. For PIV measurements, polyamide seeding particles with a mean diameter of 20 µm (supplier: LaVision) were added to the liquids. A continuous wave laser (supplier: Dantec Dynamics), which was placed perpendicular to the camera, illuminated the particles and, thus the flow. All image sequences were stored on a compact flash card and transferred to a PC via USB for further analysis. Shadowgraphy sequences were analysed automatically using a time-resolved analysing procedure in KNIME as proposed in ( Deionized water with a conductivity κ of 17 µS/cm from an in-house purification system was used as main liquid. Previous investigations ( HDA as ionic surfactant was used in smaller concentrations (5.2 – 34.5 µmol/L) than MIBC (79 – 7922 µmol/L). Approximately 120 mL of the given test liquids were filled into the apparatus. A volumetric gas flow rate of 0.1 mL/min was set to produce single bubbles with a bubble production frequency of less than 80 bubbles per minute. According to Rafiei et al. and Sam et al. an interaction between consecutive bubbles can therefore be neglected ( Additionally, surface tension measurements of prepared solutions were carried out at room temperature (22–24 °C) with an automatic force tensiometer (type: Krüss Easy Dyne K20) using the du Noüy ring method. Each measurement was repeated five times. Bubble characteristics were calculated from the parameters obtained using an automatic analysis procedure in KNIME as proposed in ( In this equation, d The domain of the elongation ranges from 0 to 1, with a value of 0 for a spherical particle. The bubble rising velocity w With these parameters, a set of dimensionless numbers, namely the bubble Reynolds number The Eötvös number Eo: For explanation of symbols see Nomenclature. The liquid velocity w was calculated using the scalar map function in DynamicStudio: In Eq. The vorticity is also an indicator for the flow direction of a vortex and can therefore be used to detect vortex structure patterns, e.g. that of a Kármán vortex street ( An analysis of the PIV statistics provides also an insight into the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) k, which is the mean kinetic energy per unit mass associated with vortices in turbulent flow ( In Eq. Lastly, the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) technique was applied to extract dynamic phenomena in the present unsteady flows. This technique was first proposed in the context of fluid mechanics by Lumley ( In Eq. In Eq. The surface tension measurement results of the prepared solutions are given in HDA decreases the surface tension in the investigated concentration range more strongly than MIBC. At approx. 35 µmol/L HDA the initial surface tension of 72.4 mN/m for pure water halved to 35.7 mN/m. In contrast to this, a decrease of only 12 mN/m compared to deionized water was measured at the highest concentration of MIBC (approx. 7900 µmol/L). For both surfactants, the critical micelle concentration (CMC) was not reached yet. For HDA a CMC of 8.3 × 10 In the following, some theoretical calculations regarding the adsorption of the two investigated surfactants are carried out. Using the surface tension-concentration ( In Eq. The surface excess concentration can be considered to be equal to the actual surface concentration without significant error, thus: In Eq. In Eq. In Eq. The efficiency of surfactant adsorption can be evaluated using the Frumkin equation ( In Eq. Assuming The bubble characteristics in dependency of surfactant concentration are presented in As stated in From the obtained velocity data in The elongation in The minimum equivalent bubble diameters, which are obtained at the maximum investigated concentrations of MIBC and HDA, are 2.23 mm and 2.40 mm, respectively. In contrast to w  From the presented experimental results it can be confirmed that terminal velocity of rising bubbles seems to be independent of surfactant concentration as was shown by The adsorption of HDA and MIBC on the bubble surface is schematically depicted in The above described adsorption of the surfactant molecules on the bubble surface takes place due to convective mass transport. However, diffusive mass transport will already be present during the formation of the bubbles at the capillary outlet. Pesci et al. investigated in their numerical studies the influence of initially adsorbed surfactant molecules on the bubble surface during bubble production ( In Eq. The bubble production time was about 0.85 s during the experiments. The determined initial surface concentration of surfactant molecules per square metre on the bubble surface is related to the maximum concentration on the bubble surface As the bubble centroids were tracked during the time-resolved analysis, the bubble trajectories could be reproduced. Bubble trajectories obtained in deionized water are shown in In Eq. In deionized water, the bubbles show large motion amplitudes in horizontal × direction with a range of motion Δx of nearly 5 mm (see The bubble motion in x direction for the highest investigated MIBC concentration of 7922 µmol/L presented in The calculated amplitudes A and frequencies ω of the trajectory oscillations according to the sinusoidal fit function in Eq. The bubble trajectories and the corresponding mean velocity vector fields for different MIBC concentrations obtained by PIV are presented in Obtained values for the mean liquid velocity The liquid vorticity fields for three different MIBC concentrations are shown From the vorticity plots it can be seen that the number of vortices increases with increasing MIBC concentration. The vortex shedding at a low surfactant concentration of 396 µmol/L is not as pronounced as at a higher concentration of 7922 µmol/L. From Clift et al. found that vortex shedding occurred in surfactant solutions already at The mean vector fields for the proportionality constant of the turbulent kinetic energy k As shown in For calculation of the bubble Strouhal number the bubble diameter d Saito et al. also found that addition of surfactants has an influence on vortex shedding ( As was shown in the present study, the increase of the hydrodynamic parameters k Proper Orthogonal Decomposition was applied to investigate dynamic structures of the flow. All results for POD in the following section are presented for MIBC solutions. Similar results were obtained in HDA solutions with some larger deviations in only a few cases due to less experimental data (see The difference of mode energy dependent on MIBC concentration is summarized in As explained in The time-resolved values for modes 1, 10 and 50 for deionized water and an MIBC solution with a concentration of 7922 µmol/L are presented in A temporal analysis of the POD modes via Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) provides information on the periodicity of the features captured by each POD mode. The FFT spectra corresponding to mode 1, mode 10, and mode 50 are presented in As was explained in The reconstructed liquid vector fields using the first four significant POD modes are presented in From the analysis of the POD results it can be concluded that dominating large scale structures are present independent of surfactant concentration, which correspond to the streamwise bubble-induced motions. Yet the mean liquid velocity and the amount of turbulent kinetic increase with increasing surfactant concentration (see The influence of surfactants, namely hexadecylamine (HDA) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), on the characteristics of single bubbles and the surrounding liquid was investigated using Shadowgraphy and Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), respectively. From Shadowgraphy measurements the following results were obtained: The concentration of investigated surfactants had a significant effect on the bubble characteristics (equivalent diameter, elongation as morphological parameter, and rising velocity) for rising single bubbles. A similar trend was observed for HDA and MIBC: with increasing surfactant concentration the values for each of the aforementioned characteristics decreased. For rising velocity and elongation similar threshold values were observed in both surfactant solutions (0.18 m/s for rising velocity and 0.08 for elongation). Hence, terminal velocity of rising bubbles seems to be independent of surfactant concentration as was shown by Comparison of determined concentration at the minimum bubble velocity (CMV) for MIBC with literature values showed large discrepancies. These could be explained by differences in experimental setup regarding the measurement position. Literature values for HDA were not available. A novel bubble parameter, the so-called concentration at the minimum elongation (CME), was introduced. It was found that the determined values of CMV and CME for HDA were much smaller than for MIBC. Theoretical calculations regarding the adsorption of surfactant molecules on the bubble surface showed that HDA adsorbs better on the bubble and achieves higher packing densities compared to MIBC. A sinusoidal fit was applied to the bubble trajectories. The analysis of oscillation amplitude and frequency showed that the former decreased, while the latter increased with increasing concentration of HDA and MIBC, until a threshold value was reached. An analysis of the hydrodynamic parameters of the surrounding liquid using PIV showed the following results: The mean liquid velocity Due to spatial averaging over the interrogation area in a PIV analysis, discussion of the quantitative values of the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) is not reasonable. Therefore, a constant k Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) coupled with a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for dominant frequency analysis was carried out to investigate the dynamic structures of the flow. It was found that for all surfactant concentrations similar large scale structures were present, which could be related to the bubble production frequency. A reconstruction of the liquid vector maps revealed the process of energy cascading, which is masked in the mean liquid flow fields. By combination of the Shadowgraphy and PIV results a correlation between bubble characteristics and hydrodynamics was found. It was found that the bubble trajectory oscillation frequency corresponds well to the rotation frequency of shed vortices. Furthermore, it was shown that with increasing bubble Strouhal number the hydrodynamic parameters The induced liquid velocity field was shown to be influenced by the surfactant concentration, leading to more energy dissipation and a higher mean liquid velocity in the measurement area with increasing surfactant concentration. This will also have an influence on the particle-bubble collision during the flotation process, because a certain amount of kinetic energy is essential for successful formation of heterocoagulates. Thus, the addition of surfactants could improve this micro-process from a hydrodynamic point of view. On the other hand, if the kinetic energy is too high, heterocoagulate formation will be hindered and elastic collisions will dominate in the flotation cell. This could also lead to a destabilisation of already formed heterocoagulates, resulting in detachment of particles from the bubble surface ( To verify the statements above, investigations of rising heterocoagulates during the flotation process are planned for the near future. In these studies the analysis of the effect of solid particles adsorbed on the bubble surface on the liquid velocity field and the flow structure will be a main subject. A comparison with the results from this study may help to improve the fundamental understanding of the flotation process. The author declares that there is no conflict of interest. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 