Traffic-related nitrogen dioxide (NO2) has been traditionally estimated using surfaces generated through land-use regression (LUR). Recently, air pollution dispersion has been used to derive NO2 exposures in urban areas. There is evidence that data collection protocols and modelling assumptions can have a large effect on the resulting NO2 spatial distribution. This study investigates the effects of various NO2 surfaces on the risk estimates of postmenopausal breast cancer (BC) and prostate cancer (PC), both of which have already been associated with traffic-related air pollution. We derived exposures for individuals in two case control studies in Montreal, Canada using four different surfaces for NO2. Two of the surfaces were developed using LUR but employed different data collection protocols (LUR-1 and LUR-2), and the other two surfaces were generated using dispersion modelling; one with a regional model (dispersion-1) and another with a street canyon model (dispersion-2). Also, we estimated separate odds ratios (ORs) using concentrations of NO2 as measures of exposure for both cancers. While the range of NO2 concentrations from dispersion (4–26 ppb) was lower than the range from LUR (4–36 ppb), the four surfaces were found to be moderately correlated, with Spearman correlation coefficients ranging from 0.76 to 0.88. The ORs for BC were estimated to be 1.26, 1.10, 1.07, and 1.05 based on LUR-1, LUR-2, dispersion-1, and dispersion-2. In contrast, the ORs for PC were estimated to be 1.39, 1.30, 1.13, and 1.04 based on LUR-1, LUR-2, dispersion-1, and dispersion-2. The four exposure measures indicated positive associations but we observed higher mean ORs based on the LUR surfaces albeit with overlapping CIs. Since LUR models capture all sources of NO2 and dispersion models only capture traffic emissions, it is possible that this difference is due to the fact that non-road sources also contribute to the spatial distribution in NO2 concentrations.In urban areas, emissions from traffic constitute the main air pollution source. A wide range of studies have linked exposure to traffic-related air pollution with increased incidence of asthma ( Traditionally, NO As an alternative to statistical techniques, dispersion modelling involves constructing a dynamic model of the dispersion processes occurring at the intra-urban scale. In this context, dispersion models capable of simulating air quality at the level of individual roads are grouped into 3 main categories: 1) Gaussian dispersion models, which are typically used for areas without obstacles or with obstacles of simple geometry; these models can be accurate at the top of the urban canopy and are mainly Gaussian plume and Gaussian puff models ( The main strength of LUR is the use of monitoring data and the relative ease of model development. Dispersion models have the advantage of incorporating both spatial and temporal variation of air pollution within a study area and can be applied at different spatial scales. Some of the limitations of these models include the assumptions about dispersion patterns (e.g., Gaussian dispersion), the need for validation against monitoring stations, and relatively costly meteorological and emission data inputs ( This paper compares four different NO Two different models were adopted in order to disperse traffic emissions in Montreal ( Hourly emissions for each road were used as input within two different dispersion algorithms in order to simulate hourly NO A street-canyon model (SIRANE), which is better suited at characterizing air pollution within the urban canopy, was also used. The SIRANE model ( Throughout the remainder of the paper, we refer to the NO We used two NO Briefly, More recently, another LUR surface for NO Before comparing the surfaces, we validated each surface with data obtained from 9 reference monitoring stations in the city of Montreal. In addition, we compared the observed NO While both LUR models were generated to represent a mean annual NO In order to compare the exposure surfaces generated using dispersion modelling against the Residences of 792 and 1,772 participants in the breast cancer (BC) and prostate cancer (PC) case-control studies were linked to the four NO In the present study, we adopted the same methodology and covariates as the original studies to estimate the ORs for both cancers using estimates of NO The predictions of the four surfaces were compared against NO  The scatter plots in  Finally,  The fully-adjusted ORs for BC and PC for an increase in the IQR based on exposures derived from the four surfaces are presented in The analysis we presented in this study sheds light on the use of four different measures of exposure to traffic-related air pollution. Our main objective was to compare the distribution of the spatial estimates of NO We estimated separate ORs using concentrations of NO To the extent to which dispersion models incorporate robust algorithms able to capture the temporal and spatial variability in NO The present study fills a gap in the existing literature by comparing the methods that are often used to derive air pollution exposure in epidemiological studies ( Application of these different approaches leads to differences in exposure estimation and interpretation due to the specific characteristics of each method. In this study, the four modelling approaches were found to reflect slightly different spatial variations in NO The higher ORs associated with the LUR surfaces indicate that the surfaces based on the dispersion models have led to potential misclassification in the exposure estimates, thus leading to lower estimates of risk. Indeed, by examining the distributions of exposures associated with the home locations of participants based on the four surfaces, we observe that the range and variability in exposures is higher with LUR models than dispersion models. This is an indication that the LUR models are able to better capture the intra-urban variability in NO This study was funded by a collaborative grant from the The authors report that they have no conflicts of interest.