Understanding the dynamics of N forms applied as manure is germane for appropriate rate and timing of applications of manure. Manure characterization and laboratory incubation were conducted for 120days to study the mineralization of poultry, cattle and goat manures. Results showed that manure properties differ. Net immobilization of N was recorded for goat and cattle manures while poultry manure mineralized marginally. The relationship between N release and time is polynomial (cubic). The release phases were: initial rapid N release at 0–30days; phase of constant release; 40–55days; decline phase in N release 70–90days and sharp increase in N release at 120days. Increasing the N rates of manures above 120kgNha−1 will improve their potential as plant nutrient sources. Complementing the manures with inorganic N fertilizers in integrated nutrient management will also improve its quality and effectiveness.The use of animal waste in maintaining soil organic matter is a popular practice in all parts of the world. It is not only a safe and effective way of recovery for lost plant nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus ( Most recommendations on manure N application are blanket, with the assumption that N release is same for all manures even though there is reported large variability in manure qualities between manures from the same animal species ( A yellowish red soil sample used for the study was of low fertility. It was air dried, sifted with a 2 This involved the use of triplicate samples of 200 A total of 108 experimental units were used for the incubation trial. During this process, care was taken not to disturb the soil either through stirring or shaking. Samples of all four treatments incubated for different timings (i.e., 10, 20, 30, 40, 55, 70, 90 and 120 Manure organic N mineralized (N N All data were statistically analyzed by factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the software package The soil is a sandy clay loam of low fertility status, it had a pH (water) of 5.9 and a pH (KCl) of 4.9 and contained 0.53 The chemical characteristics of the manures are shown in  Ammonification is the conversion of organic N to ammonium by microbes in the soil. The cumulative net ammonification is shown in The conversion of the N in the soil and that due to the manure addition to nitrate was identical at 10 and 20 The net mineralization and immobilization of the applied manure N is shown in The equations used to describe the kinetics of the N in the manures are shown in The results of this study have shown that the characteristics of the manure differ and hence recommendations on their use should be type specific, and also reflect the important manure properties like the C/N, C/P and N/P ratios. The results also implied that crops planting date coincides between 40 and 55 The financial assistance of Tshwane University of Technology towards this research is hereby acknowledged. Opinions expressed and conclusions arrived at, are those of the authors and are not necessarily to be attributed to the Tshwane University of Technology. The assistance of Ms. Ramphisa P.D. in the laboratory analyses is also gratefully acknowledged.