During the flotation process, a fuzzy distributional chance-constrained programming approach is proposed to design the circuit structure, equipment size and operating conditions considering stochastic and epistemic uncertainties. Stochastic uncertainties are irreducible, such as fluctuations in copper price and circuit feed mass flowrate, and epistemic uncertainties are due to the complicated flotation mechanism. To achieve the probability measure in the chance constraints, a finite number of scenarios are defined for the stochastic uncertainties by using discrete probability distribution sets. Moreover, the epistemic uncertainties are handled by fuzzy sets. In this context, a fuzzy probability-box of profits combining probability theory with fuzzy theory can be obtained to assess the distribution profile. The integral whole optimization of the flotation process is solved by using a rule-oriented genetic algorithm, adapted from the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II), and the design rules are embedded in initialization, crossover and mutation. Finally, the sensitivity analysis of epistemic uncertainties on the optimal designs is carried out to get the critical uncertain variable. The method proposed here can fully reflect the flexibility of the process design under mixed uncertainties, and the optimal designs are compromise solutions that take into account the economic indicator and uncertainty quantification.Flotation, one of the most critical procedures in mineral processing, is carried out through complex circuit structures, equipment size and operating conditions. In general, the flotation process recoveries valuable minerals through the physicochemical separation process, so as to obtain qualified concentrates and exclude tailings ( Fortunately, different techniques have been developed to deal with uncertainties in other industrial processes. For example, the interval-value theory is a convenient approach to express epistemic uncertainty in the system maintenance, because it requires a little knowledge and information to deal with uncertain parameters ( In the flotation process, the integral whole optimization of circuit structures, equipment size and operating conditions is a typical mixed integer nonlinear programming problem. Genetic algorithm has been widely used in mineral processing because of its ability to solve the complex problem. Combining the genetic algorithm with a robust model, a robust genetic algorithm was proposed to solve the single-objective optimization for the flotation circuit layout ( The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section In the mineral separation process, there are three mass flowrates related to a single cell: the feed mass flowrate ( In Eq. In Eq. Generally, it is difficult to obtain qualified final concentrates and remove most impurities through a single cell. Therefore, a flotation circuit structure is constructed by properly connecting multiple cells, and it usually meets specific design rules according to the process requirements and designer preferences. In this paper, the circuit structure with four cells is considered during the flotation process. In addition, the design rules considered here are described as follows: No cell self-circulation; The concentrate and tailing streams of any cell must not go to the same destination; The outputs of the first flotation cell are not the final products; At least one final concentrate and one final tailing in the flotation circuit; At least one stream fed to each cell. For the mathematical description of the circuit structures, the output stream of For the flotation plant that deals with the mineralogical species chalcopyrite, tennantite and gangue, the economical and feasible designs are selected by using the profit model with revenue and costs in Eq. During the process design, uncertainty propagation is to obtain the outputs under uncertainties. Two sources of uncertainties, stochastic and epistemic uncertainties, are considered in the flotation process. To obtain the best and worst distributions of profits, integrated simulation technology combining traditional probability theory with fuzzy theory is described in Section Concretely, the stochastic uncertainties involve the copper price and circuit feed mass flow rates during the flotation process. Since it is difficult to determine the precise model in the early design stage, the variables Firstly, the discrete probability distribution sets of copper price and circuit feed mass flow rates are utilized to generate different stochastic scenarios for the flotation design, and the scenario generation is stated mathematically as follows To reduce the computation burden, the simultaneous backward reduction approach (  In During the flotation process, the circuit structure, equipment size and operating conditions are taken into account, and At the stochastic scenario At the stochastic scenario  Note: three specific realizations of epistemic uncertainties, After introducing the scenario generation and fuzzy simulation, the flowchart of integrated simulation is shown in Under mixed uncertainties, the fuzzy probability-box of profits can be obtained by combining traditional probability theory with fuzzy theory. Concretely, the cumulative distribution functions (CDF) of According to the scenario probability To achieve the optimization under uncertainties, the fuzzy distribution This paper makes full use of the fuzzy probability-box of profits to optimize the circuit structure, equipment size and operating conditions of the flotation process with four cells, and copper is the metal of interest in the final concentrates. The specific fuzzy distributional chance-constrained programming approach is described as follows: To achieve a better profit distribution under less system uncertainty, two objectives are considered in the design and optimization of flotation processes. Concretely, the first objective is to minimize the system uncertainty and the second is to maximize the economic indicator. In this paper, the fuzzy boundary distributions of the fuzzy probability-box, To avoid over-conservative solutions under uncertainties, the fuzzy distribution In addition, the conditional value at risk (CVaR) is considered as a realistic risk measure in profits, defined as below In terms of In addition to the objective functions, the design of the flotation process needs to satisfy the upper and lower bounds of constraints. In general, the lower bound constraints of copper global recovery and copper concentrate grade are considered in the flotation design, and the arsenic grade in the final concentrates needs to satisfy the upper bound constraint. Furthermore, the mass flowrate fed to each cell has an upper limit to avoid unusually large cell volume. In this paper, a fuzzy boundary chance constraint (FBCC) approach is proposed by combining the fuzzy boundary distribution with chance constraint . In the design of the flotation process, the mathematical expression of FBCC is given as follows Integral whole optimization of the circuit structure, equipment size and operating conditions is a complex mixed integer nonlinear programming problem. As a mature evolutionary algorithm, NSGA-II is adopted to solve the multi-objective optimization mentioned in Section The flowchart of RONSGA-II is shown in The purpose of this paper is to achieve the integral whole optimization of the flotation process with four cells, and the circuit feed stream includes chalcopyrite, tennantite and gangue. Here, each circuit structure corresponds to one design of the equipment sizes and operating conditions. Firstly, the adjustable weights To demonstrate the superiority of RONSGA-II, RONSGA-II is compared with traditional NSGA-II, and they adopt the same parameter settings except for generation numbers. Concretely, the generation number of RONSGA-II is set to 1000, and the generation number of traditional NSGA-II is set to 1000 and 1500. The comparison results are shown in Considering the combinatorial stochastic scenarios of the copper price and circuit feed mass flow rates, the scenario reduction approach is achieved by minimizing the probability distance. For the Pareto optimal solutions, the values of objective functions and the probabilities of constraints at the reduced scenario set For the optimization design under uncertainties, the best and worst distributions of profits can be obtained through integrated simulation, and the proportion of the best and worst distributions in the economic indicator is coordinated by the adjustable weights As mentioned earlier, the reliability of the process design under uncertainties is related to the premeditated confidence level Owing to the epistemic uncertainties of variables Fuzzy distributional chance-constrained programming is proposed for handling stochastic and epistemic uncertainties during the flotation process. In this paper, the fluctuations of circuit feed mass flowrates and copper price are solved by scenario generation, and the variables The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors report no declarations of interest. Thanks are due to the