Purpose
                  The purpose of this preliminary study was to evaluate intraarticular soft tissues of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) using intraoperative arthroscopy during open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of condylar head fractures (CHF).
               
                  Materials and methods
                  26 patients (29 joints) were diagnosed in period of 5 years (2011–2015) with CHF, 5 patients had concomitant mandibular fracture. Fractures were diagnosed on basis of conventional orthopantomogram (OPG) and computed tomography (CT).
               
                  Results
                  Intraoperative arthroscopy revealed hyperemia and hypervascularity in all 29 joints, anterior disc dislocation in 26 joints, cartilage erosion in 21 joints and hemorrhagic clots were present in 10 joints. Major hemarthrosis or tear of the posterior band, as often described in MRI, could not be shown in our patients. Data from the study further the understanding of intraarticular pathology of the TMJ after acute trauma in a group with CHF.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Intraoperative arthroscopy is useful for direct evaluation and accurate diagnosis of the extent of soft tissue damage to TMJ in CHF. Larger and more long-term studies including comparison to MRI findings should be helpful to refine the treatment and postoperative management of patients after CHF.Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) condylar fractures account for between 21% and 52% of all mandibular fractures. Condylar head fractures (CHF) are found in one-quarter to one-third of all condylar process fractures ( Significant acute trauma to the TMJ has been reported to result in hematoma formation, intraarticular soft tissue damage, disc dislocation leading to scarring and potentially heterotopic ossification. These anatomical alterations can lead to hypomobility, pain and ankylosis. When both the condylar head and the surrounding soft tissues are damaged, the risks for subsequent pain, dysfunction and ankylosis increase ( In 1990, Goss and Bosanquet ( Since MRI has been widely used to assess the soft tissue damage associated with condylar fractures, there have been reports confirming post-traumatic intraarticular changes. Disc displacement, tearing of the retrodiscal tissue and lateral capsule, and hemarthrosis were the most frequent consequences described on post-trauma MRI evaluation. However, the most severe changes were seen in the group that sustained condylar head fractures ( Since severe hemarthrosis or tear of the disc and/or posterior ligaments as described by MRI studies ( This retrospective study was approved by local ethics board of Comenius University Hospital Ružinov in Bratislava. The study included patients with dislocated condylar head fractures (CHF) all treated by the same surgeon (DH). The study group consisted of 26 patients (15 men, 11 women, mean age 32 (range 14–62) years treated between January 2011 and December 2015. The etiologies of the CHF were: interpersonal violence (n = 5), sports injuries (n = 6), falls (n = 10), traffic injuries (n = 5). The mean time from injury to surgery was 6 (range 3–9) days. All 26 patients (29 TMJs) met the following inclusion criteria: unilateral (23 patients) or bilateral (3 patients) CHF, 5 patients had concomitant mandibular fracture (contralateral angle 1, symphysis 3, contralateral body 1). Patients with coexisting maxillary fractures and comminuted mandibular fracture were excluded. Fractures were diagnosed based on conventional orthopantomogram (OPG) and computed tomography (CT). All the fractures had a fracture line typically extending from supero-lateral to infero-medial and were classified using Neff's Classification ( Standard preauricular TMJ surgical approach was used in all patients. Before opening the lower joint compartment and identifying the fragments, an arthroscope (KARL STORZ endoscope 1,9 mm, Tuttlingen, Germany) was introduced to the upper joint compartment. Intraoperative arthroscopic examination of the upper joint compartment from posterior disc attachment to the anterior recess, including fossa and eminence cartilage, and medial capsule was employed. Intraoperative arthroscopy revealed intraarticular alterations resulting from significant acute TMJ trauma that led to the CHF. The most common findings were hyperemia and hypervascularity at the posterior disc attachment and medial capsule. These changes were seen in all 29 (100%) joints ( Anterior disc dislocation was present in 26 (90%) joints. In all cases with Type C fractures, the disc was displaced with the dislocated condylar bone fragment. Three joints, with fractures Type A, had discs in physiological position with regard to the lateral pole despite medial bone fragment dislocation. Arthroscopically, dislocated discs appeared elongated with stretched posterior attachments, missing intermediate zones, no physiological contact between these discs and the posterior slope of the articular eminences when the mandible was in the closed position ( Direct consequences of trauma to the fossa and the posterior slope of the articular eminence presented as cartilage erosion and local hematoma with reactive hyperemia in 21 joints (72%) ( The presence of adhesions and pseudowalls were difficult to distinguish from any pre-traumatic changes or internal derangement ( On MRI scans in TMJ trauma cases soft tissue alterations are often interpreted as tear and rupture of the disc or posterior ligament. In the present study, during arthroscopic evaluation, neither disc tears nor ruptures, except for lateral disruptions of the capsule as described for type B fractures ( There are few studies in the literature that discuss soft tissue injury within the TMJ associated with condylar fractures ( In the past, MRI has been used to evaluate TMJ soft tissue injury associated with condylar fractures. MRI is considered a reliable, noninvasive, diagnostic tool for objective imaging of the TMJ. Soft tissue TMJ trauma, including disc displacement, tearing of lateral capsule and retrodiscal tissue, cartilage disruption and effusion, are frequently reported to be demonstrated on MRI evaluation ( In contrast, for ORIF in CHF was reported physiologic disc position in up to 20% of CHF, whereas in cases of CHF with disc dislocation, the disc was repositioned into physiological position by the fracture reduction itself ( TMJ arthroscopy, also potentially subject to subjective interpretation, permits the direct visualization and evaluation of the intraarticular soft tissue structures and directly discloses pathologic changes. Arthroscopy has not been reported in the past as a useful standard diagnostic tool in acute TMJ trauma. Orthopedists often perform arthroscopy in the management of acute injuries of the knee and other joints to determine the nature of the injury to the intraarticular structures. In TMJ trauma, special attention should be focused on the high-risk CHF ( Knowledge of the nature of disc and soft tissue changes after acute TMJ trauma could add to the understanding of the soft tissue changes for the highest risk subtype of condylar fractures, CHF. A way to avoid or minimize post-traumatic intraarticular soft tissue changes as described in the literature could be use of intraoperative, post-traumatic arthroscopic lysis and lavage with disc and fracture repositioning by ORIF. This preliminary study and evaluation may provide preliminary data and support for the need to study further the use of intraoperative arthroscopy in patients after mandibular trauma. In addition, these findings support the need for further studies to reevaluate the significance of MRI findings by comparing and coordinating them with arthroscopic assessments in acute CHF trauma cases. Data from the present study adds to an understanding of TMJ intraarticular pathology after acute trauma. Almost all the displaced CHF in this series had displaced discs, therefore, the authors felt it necessary to reposition those discs at the time of reduction and fixation of the condylar fragments in accordance with the reports by For those mandibular trauma patients who do not have a condylar fracture, the injury of soft tissue may do more damage to TMJ than an injury connected with fracture. This is often overlooked, especially in cases where there is no indication to open the TMJ ( In conclusion, intraoperative arthroscopic evaluation in this small sample of cases suggests that TMJ condylar head fractures are associated with serious intraarticular soft tissue damage. Condylar head fractures have high incidence (>80%) (