Permeability of Luhui granite with 200 mm in diameter and 400 mm long was measured at triaxial stresses and elevated temperature using 600 °C 20 MN servo-controlled triaxial rock mechanics testing machine. It is found that 300 °C is the threshold temperature (Tc) of permeability change with temperature in thermally cracked granite. The magnitude of permeability is 10−7 D with a low increase below T
                     c and the permeability whose magnitude is 10−6 D increases drastically with high amplitude at 300–400 °C while the magnitude is 10−5 D at 400 °C. Simultaneously, the change of micro-crack quantity in thermally cracked Luhui granite at temperature up to 400 °C was quantificationally investigated by MPV micro-photometer. Two peaks of micro-crack quantity that the length is more than 5 μm and 10 μm respectively exist at temperature up to 400 °C. The temperature scope where micro-crack quantity peak appears in length >5 μm is less than that in length >10 μm. The quantity of micro-crack whose length is >10 μm increases sharply at the rate of one per ten centigrade at temperature above 300 °C. The drastic increase of micro crack above 300 °C is the main reason that permeability increases sharply at temperature above 300 °C in thermally cracked granite. Compared with preheated results, thermal and mechanical coupled effect can more heavily affect granite permeability than only thermal effect.In nuclear waste deep geological disposal and hot dry rock (HDR) geothermal energy extraction, thermal cracking in rock is a common phenomenon. The surrounding rock can be heated by nuclear waste and thermally induced cracks appear. The thermally induced micro-cracks propagate to interconnect each other and enhance fluid to flow through rock. Meanwhile, the water may be polluted by nuclear waste while flowing through this thermally induced cracking rock. In HDR geothermal energy extraction, thermal cracking always exists in both drilling process and constructing artificial reservoir, which is harmful to drilling and conducive to artificial reservoir construction. At early 1980s, many research focused on thermal cracking in granite that is selected to geologically dispose nuclear waste. Rock mechanics test machine was employed to study evolution of linear thermal expansion coefficient, elastic modulus, permeability and acoustic emission in thermally cracked rock. It was found that in granite linear thermal expansion coefficient was neither constant nor a single function of temperature or pressure Thermal cracking has significant influence on rock permeability. Summers studied the change of permeability during the flow of water through granite for period of time up to 17 days at temperature up to 400 °C and found that the initial permeability at elevated temperature was higher by 1–2 orders of magnitude than the permeability at room temperature In this paper, we employed high temperature and high pressure rock mechanics testing machine to perform permeability measurement in Luhui granite at temperature up to 600 °C and hydrostatic pressure of 25 MPa and 75 MPa in order to find the threshold temperature of granite. In addition, crack number was calculated by micro-photometer at different exposure temperatures. Four granite samples for permeability measurement is cut from a big block which is mined from a strip mine, located in Shandong province, China. The big block was first tailored into cylindrical roughcast by stone processing machine and then lathed carefully into the test-required sample of 200 mm in diameter and 400 mm long shown in All experiments of permeability measurement were performed on 600°C20MN servo-controlled rock mechanics triaxial testing machine ( The confining and axial pressure, 75 MPa (sample 1 The steady state flow method was used to measure granite permeability at different temperatures. The pore fluid pressure difference of 3 MPa was held during measurement. Nitrogen was used as pore fluid so that any chemical effect could be minimized. The upstream high-pressure nitrogen was controlled by a high-pressure valve and a high precision barometer. Where The Darcy’s law is applicable to laminar flow in rock. The condition for laminar flow in the sample is that Reynolds number is less than 5. Reynolds number can be calculated by the following equation. The kinematic viscosity of fluid can be calculated by dynamic viscosity and density. Hence, the equation above can be rewritten as: For nitrogen at 20 °C, the dynamic viscosity ( Thermally induced meso-crack at different temperature was observed by MPV micro-photometer produced by Leica. The instrument can heat rock sample up to 1350 °C and simultaneously take photo for rock sample. The magnitude can reach 250 and the objective lens can bear high temperature. The temperature was kept for about 1 min after heated to preset value with rate of 10 °C/min. Then photography was taken to observe crack evolution at different temperature. The observed thin sheet consisted of slide and sample sheet which bonded together by gum shown in Permeability order is 10 Sample 4   In After 350 °C especially the second quantity peak temperature of L > 10 µm, both of the micro-crack quantity decrease. The possible reason may be serious thermal cracking in granite results in many new micro-cracks whose length is less than 5 µm and the newly formed micro-cracks expand to close the gap among larger micro-cracks. It has been known that threshold temperature of thermal cracking in granite is 60–70 °C We believe that there is no theoretical threshold temperature of thermal cracking in granite from view point of AE detection. According to experimental results shown in In the heterogeneous rock, thermal cracking is rather random. Thermal cracking can occur once local thermal stress exceeds the binding stress among the same/different constituted particles, cemented materials and between particle and cemented material with temperature rising. Thermal cracking may appear at the beginning of heating and is just small in quantity and energy. It can be explained by the maximum shearing criteria in rock. The maximum shearing criteria can be expressed as following: Chen et al. studied permeability change of carbonatite and granite and found that there existed saltation of carbonatite permeability at 110–120 °C Granite is one of crystalline rocks, which is mainly composed of quartz, feldspar and other minerals. Thermal expansion difference among components can lead to thermal cracking which can form new micro-cracks. Thermal cracking in rock is actually a process of micro-crack evolution involving micro-crack initiation, propagation and interconnection. The interconnected micro-crack can form flow path for mass being transferred. The development of micro-crack network is characterized by the increase of permeability. Therefore, permeability change is an indicator reflecting the extent of thermal cracking and meanwhile thermal cracking also affects permeability change. It can be seen from It also can be seen in Because of different composition, particle size and cementing the change in physical properties of granite is rather complex while subjected to thermal cracking. Threshold temperature of permeability evolution in thermally induced granite should be a scope. In the experiment, large temperature increment was set as 50°Cand thus no detailed critical temperature scope was given. However, it is convinced that the critical temperature scope should be narrow to 300 °C. It is difficult to measure rock permeability at real-time high temperature and stresses due to sample sealing at high temperature. Hence, a number of researches into effect of temperature on permeability were done at room temperature after preheating and cooling down. 600 °C 20 MN servo-controlled triaxial rock mechanics testing machine and MPV micro-photometer were employed to study the permeability and micro-crack evolution of thermally cracked Luhui granite. The conclusions are drawn as following: 300 °C is a threshold temperature of permeability change in thermally cracked granite at triaxial stresses. When temperature is lower than the threshold temperature, permeability represents small value and exponentially increases once temperature exceed the threshold temperature. Thermal and mechanical coupled effect can more heavily affect rock permeability than only thermal effect. The magnitude of permeability is 10 Two peaks of thermally induced micro-crack quantity exist at temperature up to 400 °C. The peak temperature scopes of L > 5 µm micro-crack quantity are 100–150 °C and 250–300 °C, respectively. 150–200°C and 300–350 °C are peak temperature scopes of L > 10 µm micro-crack, which is greater than that of L > 5 µm micro-crack. It is debatable whether there exists thermal cracking threshold temperature in rock owing to limitation of sensitivity and resolution of monitoring equipment such as acoustic emission technology, computed tomography and scanning electron microscope. It is found from evolution of meso-structure and permeability in thermally cracked granite that granite has been significantly damaged after 300 °C and its physico-mechanical properties will also change significantly. Hence, 300 °C could be a threshold temperature for other parameters’ evolution such as strength. This work was supported by