Dry and semi-dry sausages are traditional products with a long history. These sausages have in most cases also been fermented before and/or during drying, offering a very special food, unique in aroma and with an excellent safety record. Drying and fermentation may be considered one of the oldest ways of preservation of meat. In fact, humans must have realized early that meat as such spoils very rapidly unless something is done to inhibit, or at least to slow down, this process. This was even more important for our ancestors (hominids) as it was rather troublesome to hunt successfully, and if and when they succeeded, they most likely tried to keep the meat somewhat longer. Later, when agriculture and animal breeding started, meat of slaughtered animals needed to be preserved. It was preserved most efficiently by salting and drying, a technique applied by the ancient Egyptians. Early Romans (who were also aware of the retardation of spoilage by cooling with ice and snow) cut meat and fat into small pieces, mixed it with salt and spices and stuffed it into animals’ intestines. In this way sausages were manufactured. They had an extended shelf-life, suitable for Caesar’s legions during wars. This sausage making process has been developed further, and although in some ways and in some cases it is still an art rather than a science, modern production methods based on scientific knowledge are available and are applied generally at large scale. The work of F. P. Niinivaara and C. F. Niven brought a real breakthrough in fermented sausage manufacturing by the application of pure bacterial cultures that ensured a much higher consistency in quality as well as in food safety by controlled fermentation, which could not be done earlier, or only to an extent by back-slopping (inoculation of a new batch with a small amount of successfully produced sausage). The terms dry and semi-dry applied to sausages are not always unequivocal; for this reason, some definitions are given here. Semi-dry sausages are generally of higher moisture content than dry ones, but they are also stable at ambient temperature because of a combination of lowered pH (<5.3) and lowered water activity, Several further distinctions exist, depending on the technology. Sausages may be manufactured traditionally without addition of starter cultures, or starter cultures may be applied; chemical acidulants (e.g. glucono-delta-lactone) may or may not be used; surface mould growth may be desired, or a mould-free surface may be required. Some types of dry sausages are intensively smoked, others (Mediterranean) are not. The latter are generally known as air-dried sausages. If no chemical acidulant, starter culture or carbohydrate is added, low-acid dry sausages are produced with a pH value usually above 5.6; then an This group of products has its origin in Mediterranean countries (Italy, Spain); it is thought that the name ‘salami’ comes from the early city of Salamis in Cyprus. These products can be considered ‘Old World style’ sausages, whose manufacturing method spread to other countries (France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, etc.). Basic features of this type of fermentation are that comminuted meat and fat, spices and curing salt are blended, stuffed into a casing (originally natural, these days most often artificial) and fermented and dried at low temperatures (<15 °C). Since the initial water activity is not sufficiently low to inhibit undesired microbes at ambient temperatures, low temperature is the only factor available for this purpose. As the Long fermentation and drying period, so that the final product has good safety (a low Either no carbohydrate or only a very small amount is added, and because of the long drying period a desirable protein hydrolysis with pH increase takes place and the final pH of these sausages is between 5.6 and 6.6 and sometimes even higher. The long drying time is determined by the fact that pH of these sausages differs from the isoelectric point of muscle protein, which thus binds moisture strongly, and only very slow drying can be used if one wishes to avoid case hardening, which not only represents a sensory fault, but may also involve spoilage and/or safety risks. Traditional long-ripened sausages were originally manufactured in a natural way without the use of starter cultures; today, only few are made without starters (e.g. Hungarian salami). If starter cultures are used, the traditional technology described above is changed accordingly: carbohydrate is added and the temperature requirement of the starter culture is taken into consideration. Micrococci are generally applied as starter culture. Practically all of these, usually short-ripened, sausages are manufactured with the help of chemical acidulants or starter cultures or, in a few cases, with both. There are still some places where either back-slopping is used or no additives are used for acidification, but controlled fermentation with starter cultures is a much more reliable technology, especially for very short-ripened sausages (such as Unlike long-ripened, low-acid sausages, short-ripened sausage batter always contains added carbohydrates as a source of lactic acid, which is formed by bacteria during fermentation and which plays a decisive role in the texture, taste, stability and safety of these sausages. Starter cultures are pure microbial cultures that are added alone or in combination with other pure cultures to sausage batter in order to control the fermentation. Aims of this control are: To achieve consistency in quality To make the technology reliable in producing the same results by application of the same conditions To ensure stability and safety of the sausages. Pure cultures have been in use as starters in the meat industry for about 50 years, due to the excellent research of F. P. Niinivaara in Europe and C. F. Niven in the United States. Application of starter cultures has a much longer history in the dairy industry, and although most cultures used in meat industry are isolates from meat products, there are some strains that find application in the meat and dairy industries. Use of starter cultures usually had emphasis on nitrate reduction in Europe and on acid production in the United States. Such a sharp distinction no longer exists and in most cases nitrate-reducing micrococci and acid-producing lactobacilli are applied as mixed cultures, and some yeasts are added as aroma formers. The most common microorganisms used as starter cultures are listed in The most important criterion is that a starter culture must be safe, i.e. it should pose absolutely no risk to the consumer. Other important requirements are: Good viability for competing with undesired microbes Rapid and reproducible acid production (lactic starters) Fair tolerance against lowered pH and lowered Since there is no method in dry and semi-dry sausage manufacture for inactivation of undesired microorganisms in the raw material, for example by pasteurization as in the dairy industry, it is vitally important to use starter cultures of good viability and in numbers that make it possible to control the growth of pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms. Rapid and reproducible lactic acid production is definitely needed with very short-fermented sausages (e.g. Clearly, cultures have to be selected that possess adequate tolerance against lower The inhibitory activity of starter cultures against other microbes may rely not only on their lactic acid production, but also on formation of some inhibitory substances called bacteriocins. Although intensive research has long been done with such bacteriocin producers, a real breakthrough in their wide application is still awaited. A relatively new field of research is the use of probiotic bacteria in semi-dry sausages, exploiting their favourable effect on the human health status (positive influence on gut microflora, better immune response, anticarcinogenic effect, etc.). Promising results have for example been found with Because there is no way of reducing the initial microbial contamination in these products, it is important to use raw materials and other ingredients of a high hygienic standard. During comminution, blending, stuffing, fermentation and drying, the precepts of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and Good Hygienic Practice (GHP) must be followed, and the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) system has to be operated. Major critical control points are shown in To achieve good quality, not only must hygienic requirements be met, but the composition of the sausages has also to be kept in mind. The following are some important factors to be considered: Hard fat should be used; fat from animals fed with excessive amounts of unsaturated fatty acid components does not give a firm, sliceable structure, and rancidity develops earlier. The right amount and type of carbohydrate must be used. Too little will not support adequate lactic acid production; too much may cause excessive acidity or even inhibit the growth of the starter cultures by lowering of the A low concentration (<2%) of curing salts (generally a mixture of 0.5% NaNO A relatively high concentration (>10 An acceptable compromise is also necessary for the right incubation and ripening temperature, considering that the temperature requirement of the starter culture. The aim is that the temperature should favour the starter cultures and inhibit undesired microorganisms as much as possible. In order to achieve an optimal rate of weight loss rate – an essential requirement from both an economic and quality points of view – the drying rate has to be controlled very carefully by adjusting the difference between relative humidity (RH) and equilibrium relative humidity (ERH) and air velocity depending on the type (low- or high-acid) and the diameter of the product. The typical process flow of dry sausage manufacturing is shown in For the manufacture of dry and semi-dry sausages, only casings with water vapour permeability can be used. Natural casings and some types of artificial casings are appropriate. For large-diameter sausages (salamis, 60–70 mm), horse and bovine natural casings have previously been used; because of insufficient supply (horse) and because of the risk of BSE (cattle), mainly artificial casings are now used. Most common artificial casings are of cellulose or collagen based. Fibrous cellulose and collagen casings have good water vapour permeability, which makes them suitable for dry-sausage production. For smaller-diameter sausages (25–38 mm), natural hog casing (small intestine) and collagen casings are mainly used. For intermediate calibres (40–50 mm), artificial casings are the appropriate choice. Low-acid dry sausages tolerate only slow drying rates that can be controlled via the velocity of the drying air; the closer the RH and ERH values, the higher is the air velocity that can be applied, and vice versa. Temperature has to be kept low (<15 °C) to control growth of harmful microbes. If a starter culture is applied, its requirements have to be met. High-acid semi-dry sausages tolerate high drying rates because the pH of the sausage is close to the isoelectric point of muscle protein, and the loosely bound moisture is easily lost. Starter cultures generally require higher temperatures (20 °C and above; in Northern Europe and the United States up to 37 °C) for their growth and metabolism, but the resulting pH drop controls the growth of harmful microorganisms. The rule of thumb, that the smaller the diameter the less risk is involved in drying, is valid for both types of sausages. Since elevated temperature also favours undesired microorganisms, acidification, which controls their growth, should for safety reasons take place as soon as possible. According to the voluntary guidelines of the American Meat Institute, the time elapsed until the pH drops below 5.3 can be up to 80 hours if the temperature is 24 °C, but only 24 hours if the incubation temperature is 38 °C. Cold smoking is applied in some cases and in some countries, less often in Mediterranean countries. Smoking has several advantages in addition to the special, very pleasant and typical flavouring effect. It helps by combating surface growth of undesired microorganisms; through its antioxidative effect it improves the stability of the product and owing to its NO components, colour formation and colour stability are also enhanced to some extent. One of the main inhibitory factors against pathogenic and spoilage microorganism is the low water activity. If During fermentation, ripening and drying significant changes take place resulting in a product with characteristic sensory qualities and a high level of safety. Numerous changes are common to both low-acid and high-acid sausages; some details are given below. During incubation, the pH is reduced in high-acid semi-dry sausages as a result of breakdown of carbohydrate to lactic acid ( As the ripening and drying proceeds, the sausages lose weight. This weight loss is larger with long-ripened products (it can be as high as 40–45%). The final moisture of long-ripened sausages can be as low as 20%. The moisture:protein ratio in this case is most often below 1.5:1. With short-ripened products the weight is lost more rapidly due to the low pH and because the drying lasts (much) less time ( The drying rate also depends on the initial moisture content, which can be adjusted by changing the meat: fat ratio or by lowering the moisture content with dry ingredients (non-meat protein, oligosaccharides, etc.). If the initial moisture content is low owing to a higher fat content (lower During drying, it is mainly muscle tissue of high moisture content that can evaporate water; fat dries only to a very limited extent. As a consequence, on the ‘active surface’ of sausages with a higher fat content is smaller and the drying rate is slower, and vice versa. In extreme cases, when a fat film has formed on the surface because of fat smear (wrong temperature of fat during comminution and stuffing), surface drying may slow down or even stop, causing not only quality defects, but also spoilage and health risks. Reduction of the In the rather complex process of aroma formation, enzymatic breakdown of protein and fat contributes mostly to the high sensory value of dry and semi-dry sausages in addition to the important effect of different seasonings (spices) as well as lactic acid and other special compounds produced by different microorganisms. In dry fermented sausages, endoenzymes (muscle tissue enzymes, e.g. cathepsin D) play a role only at the beginning of the ripening; it is mostly coenzymes from microorganisms that are active in the important breakdown processes of proteolysis and lipolysis. Proteolytic enzymes break down muscle proteins, as a consequence of which the amount of myofibrillar and sarcoplasmal proteins decreases while the concentration of non-protein nitrogen (NPN) compounds, polypeptides, amino-N and ammonia-N, increase, the latter contributing to the pH increase. Some lactobacilli ( Moulds are also active in the proteolysis as well as in other processes that have significance in mould-ripened sausages. Endo- and exoenzymes take part in this process, which plays a decisive role in aroma formation, but, as in proteolysis, microbial enzymes have significantly higher activity and greater importance. This rather complicated process can be characterized by hydrolytic and oxidative changes. Depending on the metabolic pathway and on its extent, lipid oxidation may contribute to develop a desirable flavour, but may also cause off-flavours. Lipid oxidation is autocatalytic, and is mostly associated with unsaturated fatty acids; this is also why higher concentrations of unsaturated fatty acids in the sausage have an adverse effect. Excessive amounts of unsaturated fatty acids can occur, if the fat of animals on diets high in these fatty acids is used or if a significant amount of fat is replaced by vegetable oil in the recipe. Both of these may occur due to an intention of improving the saturated:unsaturated fatty acid ratio with the aim of producing healthier food. The extent of oxidation can be reduced either by using an antioxidant (not always successful when the drying lasts several months) or by smoking, but mould growth on the surface also helps by protecting against light and oxidation by oxygen consumption and by physical protection against access of oxygen to the fat. It is supposed that humans became familiar with the effect of curing salt (KNO The very poisonous nitrite is used only in low concentrations (usually 100–150 mg kg Nitrite is depleted during ripening/drying; the depletion is slower if nitrate and smoking have been used. (Nitrate acts as a nitrite reservoir, and during smoking NO-compounds are deposited on the sausages.) Preconditions for safe and stable dry sausages are that the raw material and ingredients are of high hygienic quality and that GMP and GHP are observed during manufacture. In low-acid dry sausages, the low temperature inhibits the growth of harmful microorganisms, and the reduction of the water activity inactivates most of them. In high-acid semi-dry sausages, the low pH and the low Some pathogenic bacteria ( In high-acid semi-dry sausages staphylococci are also inhibited and inactivated in addition to Gram-negative microorganisms, but Some semi-dry sausages are heat-treated, either immediately after stuffing or after a short fermentation. This heat treatment is sufficient to kill practically all vegetative forms of microorganisms and the less resistant spores and consequently represents a ‘better start’ hygienically for drying than for raw fermented and dried sausages. However, in sensory terms the latter types excel because the microorganisms responsible for aroma formation are not destroyed and have a long period in which to metabolize the nutrients contributing to the richness in aroma. A long time is definitely needed for the formation of an excellent and rounded-off aroma, but anaerobic microbial metabolism in larger-diameter product also plays a role. Small diameter sausages are therefore less rich in flavour than larger-diameter salamis. Because of the realization of the potential risk of toxins produced by mycotoxic moulds such as Biogenic amines (tyramine, putrescine, cadaverin) mainly formed during fermentation by decarboxylation of amino acids may cause allergic reactions in sensitive consumers. The natural microflora of meat and other ingredients, as well as the starter cultures, play a role in amine formation, but a major factor seems to be the freshness of the raw materials. If high-quality meat and correct technology are used, dry sausages are not a health risk due to biogenic amines. If the  The surface is blurred, fat particles cannot be seen distinctly: temperature of the fat was not low enough during comminution, blending and stuffing. The sausage is deformed: too rapid drying, case-hardening, smeared fat under the casing (see above). Low-acid (high-pH) sausages tolerate only slow drying. Discoloration of the surface: smoking when the surface is wet; smoking with high RH; ripening with too high RH. Discoloration inside: insufficient curing salt; insufficient oxygen removal during comminution and stuffing; too old (rancid) fat. White spots (yeasts) or moulds on the surface: inefficient drying; ripening room is contaminated with yeasts and moulds. Too acidic taste: too high carbohydrate concentration; higher than necessary temperature (starter culture-dependent), starter culture-specific (production of acetic acid in addition to lactic acid). Poor sliceability: unsatisfactory pH-drop and/or Spoilage on the surface: under high humidity conditions micrococci, yeasts and moulds can grow causing characteristic off-odours (microorganism-dependent). Spoilage inside: too slow drying at elevated temperature; too low initial salt concentration; highly contaminated ingredients; failure of the starter culture; too high initial pH of the meat; too low carbohydrate concentration; insufficient oxygen removal. 