This paper reports the effect of redox potential (or Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio) on chalcopyrite leaching. The relationship between redox potential and other variables (iron concentration and temperature) is also evaluated. Leaching tests were performed in stirred Erlenmeyer flasks with 0.5 g of pure chalcopyrite and 100 mL of a Fe3+/Fe2+ sulphate solution. The redox potential ranged between 300 and 600 mV Ag/AgCl for the solution at a pH 1.8, 180 rpm, with temperatures at 35 °C or 68 °C. The results show that although ferric ion is responsible for the oxidation of chalcopyrite, ferrous ion has an important role in that it controls precipitation and nucleation of jarosites, which ultimately causes passivation of this sulphide. Chalcopyrite dissolves through the formation of an intermediary product (covellite, CuS) that is later oxidized by ferric ion, releasing Cu2+ ions.Chalcopyrite, the most abundant mineral in copper ore bodies, is also the most recalcitrant to hydrometallurgical processes ( The dissolution of chalcopyrite by ferric ion is normally depicted by the following chemical reactions ( The release of cuprous ion does not occur in a single step. A Pourbaix diagram ( After almost a century of research into the mechanisms of chalcopyrite leaching, no unanimous theory has been proposed to account for its slow kinetics. Nevertheless, there is consensus as to the formation of a passivating layer on the chalcopyrite surface that slows oxidation. The main theories were discussed in part I. Most of them point to the formation of a diffusion layer surrounding the chalcopyrite during dissolution, consisting of: bimetallic sulphide ( In addition, several authors have concluded that the chalcopyrite dissolution rate depends on the redox potential of the solution, the best results being achieved under moderately oxidizing conditions (  Kametani and Aoki identified a critical potential around 0.45 V vs. SCE, associated with the onset of pyrite oxidation. A relatively low redox potential has also been reported to have a favorable effect during bioleaching ( Temperature is another factor which directly affects chalcopyrite leaching rate. The high values of activation energy found by different authors: 71 kJ/mol ( This research was prompted by the debate as to the relative influence of ferrous ion and of a low redox potential on chalcopyrite dissolution. The specific aim was to study the role play by ferric and ferrous ions, which control the potential, during leaching. All tests were performed with a chalcopyrite mineral (approximately 80% CuFeS The mineral was dry-ground using a ball mill. The particle size distribution was determined by laser pulse. The average particle size was around 70 μm. Additionally a BET surface area of 0.07 m The different redox potentials of solutions were obtained by mixing ferric and ferrous sulphates while keeping total iron concentration constant at 5 g/L (in some tests 0.5 g/L) and pH at 1.8. Stock solutions of ferric sulphate were prepared with 0 K (modified 9 K medium of All leaching tests were performed in an orbital shaker at 180 rpm and 35 or 68 °C using 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks covered with hydrophobic cotton so as to admit oxygen while reducing water loss through evaporation. A low pulp density of 0.5% (100 mL of leaching solution and 0.5 g of mineral) was chosen to avoid sharp changes in the redox potential of the liquid medium during the onset of leaching. Periodically, water evaporation was restored, pH adjusted when above the initial value, redox potential recorded and 1 mL samples removed from the liquid to obtain kinetic information on metal dissolution. Copper and total iron concentration were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy and ferrous ion concentration using a photocolorimetric method based on the formation of a reddish colored complex of Fe The influence of redox potential on the chalcopyrite dissolution rate was tested at 35 °C and 68 °C. The redox potential values studied were 300, 400, 500 and 600 mV vs. Ag/AgCl. At 35 °C the effect of the initial redox potential was negligible, with very low copper extractions (< The evolution of the redox potential with time shows that Fe SEM examination of leaching residues did not show apparently passivating layers on the chalcopyrite surface. The micrographs ( X-ray diffractograms of these residues ( At high temperature (68 °C), unlike at 35 °C, the effect of the initial redox potential was very pronounced ( These observations tend to support the hypothesis of As noted earlier, various researchers have also observed better chalcopyrite dissolution rates at low redox potentials at 30 °C ( SEM micrographs of the leaching residue at 68 °C and an initial redox potential of 400 mV ( Under more oxidizing conditions ( Those differences were also related to a higher iron precipitation, during the initial stages, at high than at low potentials ( At low potentials, the fast leaching kinetics initial stage was followed by another very slow ( The passivating nature of jarosites is in good agreement with thermodynamic data. For the dissolution of jarosite at 25 °C,  These results point to that passivation of chalcopyrite during leaching is due to the formation of a layer of jarosite which prevents transportation of both electrons and ion species between the mineral surface and the leaching medium. Furthermore, the precipitation of iron, and hence the formation of jarosites, is directly related to the redox potential of the solution. Thus, redox potentials higher than the “critical” value (between 400 and 500 mV) favor Fe The above observation is supported by As in tests at 35 °C ( The leaching results at 68 °C seem to demonstrate that precipitation and nucleation of jarosites on mineral particles would occur even in tests with the fastest kinetics. Intermediate products were not detected in the long-term tests, probably because of a jarosite film covering the particles. In order to generate residues to identify possible intermediate products, new leaching tests were performed at shorter times (1 h, 5 h and 1 day).  Micrographs of the 5 h leaching residue ( Finally, the growth of a product over the chalcopyrite surface seems to start after 1 day of attack ( The fact that goethite formed prior to the formation of jarosite confirms the hypothesis that jarosite formation starts from Fe Even although the proportion of ferric hydroxyphosphate detected in the residue after 1 day of leaching is small, like jarosite it can be passivating. In fact, its chemical composition (Fe Another noteworthy finding was an increase of the CuS/chalcopyrite ratio, at least during the first day of attack, as shown in the diffractogram. The presence of CuS in the leaching products at short times suggests that chalcopyrite dissolves in two steps. First it oxidizes, forming CuS as an intermediary product: Then, covellite is oxidized by ferric sulphate, releasing Cu Also, we cannot rule out an initial reduction of chalcopyrite (reaction Some researchers have detected the formation of covellite from chalcopyrite under reducing conditions. Moreover, this transformation speeds up with temperature.  All this suggests, then, that CuS only forms at low redox potentials. Additionally, CuS formation can also occur during chalcopyrite leaching by direct reaction between cupric ions and previously-formed elemental sulphur, as follows: Nevertheless, the authors favor the idea that although this reaction is thermodynamically possible, it does not occur because of the hydrophobic nature of the elemental sulphur ( Therefore, chemical reactions The results reported in the previous section showed that precipitation and nucleation of jarosites on mineral particles led to passivation of chalcopyrite. In a first attempt to explain and control passivation, it was decided to study the effect of total iron concentration.  The SEM study of the leaching residue at high potential and low iron concentration showed chalcopyrite surfaces free of passivating layers ( These results indicate that in the Fe The positive effect observed in chalcopyrite leaching at 68 °C when iron concentration was increased from 0.5 to 5 g/L (or from 0.009 to 0.09 M) suggests that the process is at least partially controlled by the diffusion of ions towards the chalcopyrite surface. That is consistent with the findings of The effect of temperature was very pronounced, with negligible copper dissolution at 35 °C after 13 days of leaching (< The effect of temperature in the leaching of chalcopyrite with ferric sulphate was evaluated by calculating the activation energy in the experimental temperature range of 35 °C to 68 °C. Four assays were performed at 35, 46, 57 and 68 °C, while all other experimental conditions were constant, i.e.: 0.5% pulp density, The activation energy was calculated from the kinetic constants and the semilogarithmic plot of the Arrhenius equation. First, the fraction of reacted chalcopyrite was plotted vs. time for each temperature ( According to Eq. Most chemical reactions obey the Arrhenius equation ( The activation energy for chalcopyrite dissolution, deduced from the slope of the straight line of the Arrhenius plot, was appreciably higher (130.7 kJ/mol) than that reported by other researchers (71–88 kJ/mol) in the range of temperature between 50 and 94 °C and in sulphate medium ( Based on the parameters established by At the same time, increasing iron concentration from 0.5 to 5 g/L improves the leaching rate at 68 °C ( Researchers have not reached a consensus on the control steps governing chalcopyrite leaching. Our findings are similar to those reported by These results seem to indicate that hydrolysis and precipitation of Fe Decreasing pH or removing some ions that favor iron precipitation could be a way to prevent ferric ion hydrolysis. However, our attempts in that direction (results not shown) have not solved the problem of chalcopyrite passivation. Copper dissolution rate decreased when pH was reduced from 0.5 to 2.0, perhaps because of that the species responsible for the oxidation of chalcopyrite is not properly Fe On the other hand, minority iron-bearing minerals in the starting mineral (siderite and pyrite) could have an important role in leaching kinetics. Siderite is quickly dissolved in acidic media, increasing the iron concentration in solution: In the case of pyrite, there are evidences that this sulphide only dissolves when chalcopyrite is already passivated. Moreover, pyrite rest potential is higher than that of chalcopyrite and, therefore, pyrite enhances dissolution chalcopyrite through galvanic contact. Finally, the comparison between studies on chalcopyrite leaching is a difficult task because of differences in experimental conditions used. However, unlike at high temperature, chalcopyrite dissolution and ferric ion hydrolysis kinetics are very slow processes at low temperature (35 °C).  The redox potential is a key factor in the leaching of chalcopyrite. A high potential at the onset of leaching provokes rapid passivation of chalcopyrite. Ferric/ferrous sulphate leaching solutions tend to reach equilibrium when the activities of the two ions are equal, which is associated with a critical potential of approximately 450 mV. When the redox potential is very high initially, that tendency to equilibrium favors rapid precipitation of ferric ion as jarosite and consequently passivation of chalcopyrite. The activation energy during chalcopyrite leaching was 130.7 kJ/mol, which is a clear demonstration of the importance of thermal activation in this process. Increasing the iron concentration from 0.5 to 5 g/L had a positive effect in the chalcopyrite leaching at 68 °C. Chalcopyrite dissolves through the intermediate formation of covellite, CuS, which is later oxidized by ferric ion to release Cu The elemental sulphur that forms during chalcopyrite leaching is porous and does not form a passivating layer on the chalcopyrite surface.