Strontium-releasing bioactive materials have attracted considerable attention for patients with osteoporotic bone defects due to its ability to stimulate bone formation and decrease bone resorption. In the present study, type I collagen/strontium hydroxyapatite nanocomposite (cSrHA) was fabricated via a non-classical biomimetic mineralization pathway. Mineralized collagen fibrils with nanosized SrHA embedded in intrafibrillar interstices were obtained using poly(acrylic acid) as a biomimetic mineralizing director. The resultant nanocomposite was characterized by SEM, TEM, EDS, ATR-FTIR, XRD and TGA. cSrHA displayed morphologies, nanostructures and characteristics similar to those of natural hard tissue and calcium hydroxyapatite-mineralized collagen (cCaHA), indicating its potential value as a biofunctional material for bone engineering.In order to fabricate novel bone tissue engineering scaffolds, researchers have focused on the development of biomaterials that mimic the unique morphology and properties of natural hard tissue Strontium (Sr) is an essential trace element of human body that has a beneficial effect on bone metabolism. Thus, Sr-releasing bioactive materials are of particular interest to patients with osteoporosis as it can stimulate osteogenic cells proliferation and differentiation while impairing osteoclast activity Collagen/CaHA (cCaHA) and collagen/SrHA (cSrHA) nanocomposite were synthesized by a biomimetic method The morphology and composition of the obtained nanocomposites were evaluated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi SU8230, Japan), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI Tecnai 12, USA). Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) was used to identify crystal structures. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) images were taken at 800 k magnification. All specimens were spectroscopically investigated with attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR, Nicollet iS50, USA) and crystallographically-characterized by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) using a microdiffractometric system with a two-dimensional area detector (AXS, Bruker, USA) operated at 40 kV and 35 mA. The data in the 2θ = 17.5°-45° range were collected and analysed using JADE8 software (JADE, USA). The mineral content of collagen films was determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA; Stare V9.30, USA) from room temperature to 800 °C in N  This thorough infiltration was further confirmed by TEM micrographs ( Sr, Ca, and P were evenly distributed throughout the mineralized samples ( The ATR-FTIR spectra for mineralized collagen samples showed characteristic absorbance bands for carbonated apatite ( The typical apatite XRD patterns of both samples ( According to the TGA data, both composites contained a large portion of minerals ( In summary, we fabricated a biomimetic hybrid containing nanosized SrHA using collagen as a matrix. This nanocomposite exhibited morphologies and structures similar to those in human hard tissues and CaHA-mineralized collagen. Given that Sr not only enhances the proliferation of osteogenesis-related cells and bone matrix synthesis but also reduces osteoclast activity, this novel nanocomposite can serve as a valuable biofunctional material in bone tissue engineering.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Parts of this work were carried out in the Characterization Facility,