In this study, direct leaching of zinc sulfide concentrate was investigated in a solution that resembles the composition of solutions used in industrial leaching processes. The effect of different factors (temperature, Fe2+–Fe3+-concentration, H2SO4-concentration, SO4-concentration, pressure, size of the concentrate particles) on the rate of the zinc sulfide concentrate leaching was studied experimentally. H2SO4-concentration had no influence on the leaching kinetics. The obtained experimental data were used to model the reaction kinetics with mechanistic models as well with a more empirical model, and the reliability and the accuracy of the model parameters were studied with Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. The model that best describes the leaching system (R2
                     =97%) takes into account the reactions between the zinc sulfide concentrate and oxidizing agents at the reacting surface of the concentrate particles, the decrease in the active surface area of the concentrate particles as the leaching proceeds, the particle size distribution of the concentrate particles, the composition of the solution, and the oxidation rate of Fe2+ to Fe3+. The experimental results together with the modeling results clearly demonstrate that it is important to have experimental data for the kinetics of the leaching at the conditions of the reactor.The conventional method for recovering zinc from zinc ores is the Roast–Leach–Electrowin (RLE) process. An alternative to the RLE process is direct leaching, where the zinc sulfide concentrates are directly leached without roasting. Direct leaching processes can be divided into two categories, pressure leaching processes and atmospheric leaching processes. Both of these processes have many industrial applications ( The total reaction of zinc sulfide concentrate leaching can be presented by the equation: It is usually assumed that the reaction proceeds via an iron oxidation–reduction cycle (Eqs. The ferrous ion is then oxidized back to ferric ion with oxygen to maintain the level of oxidant: Ferric ion has an important role as an oxidant in the process, as can be seen from the reaction (Eq. Direct pressure leaching enables fast concentrate dissolution; standard residence time in the sphalerite pressure leaching process is 90 Knowledge of the chemical kinetics is crucial for the design and development of leaching processes. Mathematical modeling of leaching systems is usually used to interpret experimental results and to gain insight into the reaction mechanism. In mathematical modeling of chemical kinetics, kinetic parameters exist in the model that needs to be estimated from measured data. Obtained kinetic parameters are used to interpret the experimental data. Parameter estimates are often uncertain, since they are estimated from incomplete and noisy measurements. Hence, the uncertainty of the kinetic parameters should be closely examined. Quantifying of rate parameters is also important for the design and development of leaching reactors. The structural properties of the solid particles influence significantly the progress of the reaction, but also the reaction media has a great impact. In this study, direct leaching of zinc concentrate is studied in conditions used in industrial direct leaching processes. The aim of this work is to provide premises for process development of direct leaching processes of zinc sulfide concentrates by providing experimental data for conditions close to those of an actual industrial reactor and to examine modeling aspects of the process. The performance of the mechanistic models proposed in the literature for the direct leaching system of zinc concentrates is evaluated and a model for the leaching system presented. The model takes into account the reactions between the zinc sulfide concentrate and oxidizing agents at the reacting surface of the concentrate particles, the decrease in the active surface area of the concentrate particles as the leaching proceeds, the particle size distribution of the concentrate particles, the composition of the solution, and the oxidation rate of Fe The zinc concentrate used in the leaching experiments contains 54.2% zinc, 6.6% iron, 1.5% lead and 30.3% sulfur. The mineral composition of the zinc concentrate is: 89.6% sphalerite, 2% pyrite, 1.8% galena and 6.1% gangue silicates and carbonates. Quantitative XRD was used to determine the mineralogy. The chemical composition of the concentrate was analyzed by ICP after digestion. Mean particle sizes and particle size distributions are presented in Metal concentrations (Zn, Fe, Cu) of the solution samples from the leaching experiments were analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Thermo Scientific iCE 3000 Series AA spectrophotometer). Ferrous (Fe Leaching of the concentrate samples was conducted as batch experiments (0.7 The aim of the experiments was to provide data for the kinetics of leaching at conditions corresponding to those of an industrial atmospheric leaching reactor. Atmospheric direct leaching is carried out in large-scale mixed reactors. The reactors are tall and considerable hydrostatic pressure can be found, especially at the bottom of the reactor, as presented in a previous study ( Ensuring kinetic control is the first step of kinetic experiments. Direct leaching of zinc concentrates poses a challenge since the elemental sulfur produced in the leaching reactions (Eqs. The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on zinc extraction was studied with two different concentrations. From Previous studies have produced conflicting results as regards the effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the reaction rate. The question of the role of sulfuric acid is clearly not authoritatively answered. However, if the acid attack mechanism does occur, one would expect that the reaction rate would be strongly dependent on the concentration of the acid, as The zinc leaching rate at different temperatures is presented in Zinc leaching rates at three different pressures are presented in The zinc leaching rate at three different initial Fe Zinc leaching rates at different initial zinc sulfate concentrations are presented in The experimental results indicate that the composition of the solution has an effect on the leaching rate. Increasing initial Fe The effect of concentrate particle size on the zinc leaching rate is presented in  Kinetic models for oxidation of Fe The rate equation presented above includes the liquid phase concentration of oxygen. Gas–liquid mass transfer was negligible in the experiments and the dissolved oxygen concentration was calculated according to Henry's law. Oxygen solubility in the liquid phase is greatly affected by the ionic compounds present in the solution. Oxygen partial pressure is obtained when the solution vapor pressure is subtracted from the total pressure.  The reduction of ferric ion back to ferrous ion by the leaching, Eq. The zinc concentrate leaching is assumed to proceed according to reaction (2), and the reaction of the zinc is specified as a surface reaction. The zinc concentration on the solid surface of the particle is a characteristic of the concentrate and it is assumed to be constant. Therefore, The dependency of the reaction rate (Eq. Population balances were used when the dissolution rate of the zinc was calculated. The concentrate particles were divided into six classes. The dissolution rate for each class was calculated using an average particle size and the portion of particles in the class. Finally, all classes were summed up to obtain the overall leaching rate of the zinc. The dissolution rate of the zinc can be described by the following equation. According to the shrinking core model, the shrinkage of the core of the particle can be described with Eq. Eq. The ferrous ion oxidation rate (Eq. The model presented above is fitted to experimental data presented in the study. The coefficient of determination for the model was 96.63%. Comparisons of the measured and calculated ferrous ion concentrations and conversions for zinc are presented in The values of the estimated parameters are presented in It can be seen from The above-mentioned studies were carried out in different conditions and with different raw materials, which explains the wide variation in the activation energies. It is evident that comparison of the different studies is difficult, because the concentrates used in the experiments have different compositions and it is possible that the experiments were conducted in significantly differing conditions. However, it should be pointed out that the composition of the concentrate particles, composition of the leaching solution and the leaching conditions are the main factors that influence the leaching kinetics. These factors should be taken into account when the chemical kinetics of leaching processes is studied. The reliability and the accuracy of the parameters in a non-linear, multi-parameter model should always be evaluated because they affect the reliability of the model. This can be done by studying the identifiability and cross-correlation of the parameters. MCMC-methods provide good tools for evaluation of the reliability of model parameters. In MCMC methods, all the uncertainties in the data and the modeling are treated as statistical distributions. Up-to-date adaptive computational schemes are employed in order to make the simulations as efficient as possible ( Results from the MCMC-analysis are presented in Direct oxidative leaching of zinc concentrates involves the reactions of multiple components at the reactive surface of the concentrate, decrease in the reactive area as the reactions consume some compounds in the particles, and gas–liquid and solid–liquid mass transfer. It is evident that the mechanisms of the direct leaching process are complex and modeling of the direct leaching process becomes increasingly difficult when moving towards industrial applications. In view of the complexity of the process, it can be argued that the model presented describes the leaching system well, although uncertainty can be recognized in some parameters. The high value for the coefficient of determination (96.63%), reasonable values for activation energies and well identified parameters for zinc leaching justify the claim that the model presented describes the leaching system well. Direct leaching of zinc sulfide concentrate was studied experimentally in conditions that are similar to conditions used in industry. Results from the leaching experiments showed that temperature, pressure, particle size of the concentrate, and the iron and sulfate concentration of the slurry are the key parameters that have substantial effect on the leaching. The temperature had a great impact on the zinc concentrate leaching rate; the activation energy was calculated as 112  inner surface area of particle (reactive area) (dm parameter in the kinetic expression ((dm parameter in the kinetic expression (mol/dm concentration of Fe concentration of Fe dissolved oxygen concentration (mol O sulfate concentration in liquid (mol SO concentration of zinc in solids (mol Zn/dm initial concentration of zinc in solids (mol Zn/dm concentration of zinc at solid surface (mol Zn/dm zinc concentration at time zero (mol Zn/dm activation energy (J/mol) activation energy (J/mol) Henry's constant (atm reaction rate constant (mol reaction rate constant at mean temperature (mol reaction order for Fe reaction order for SO number of particles in reactor (1/dm portion of particles in the class partial pressure of oxygen (atm) vapor pressure of solution (atm) gas constant (J/mol reaction rate for iron oxidation (mol/dm surface reaction rate for zinc leaching (mol radius of shrinking particle (dm) radius of the particle at time zero (dm) temperature (K) mean temperature of the experiments, 368 (K) liquid phase reaction (slurry) volume Financial support from the