An incubation experiment was carried out with maize (Zea mays L.) leaf straw to analyze the effects of mixing the residues with soil and N amendment on the decomposition process. In order to distinguish between soil effects and nitrogen effects for both the phyllospheric microorganisms already present on the surface of maize straw and soil microorganisms the N amendment was applied in two different placements: directly to the straw or to the soil. The experiment was performed in dynamic, automated microcosms for 22 days at 15°C with 7 treatments: (1) untreated soil, (2) non-amended maize leaf straw without soil, (3) N amended maize leaf straw without soil, (4) soil mixed with maize leaf straw, (5) N amended soil, (6) N amended soil mixed with maize leaf straw, and (7) soil mixed with N amended maize leaf straw. 15NH4
                     15NO3 (5at%) was added. Gas emissions (CO2, 13CO2 and N2O) were continuously recorded throughout the experiment. Microbial biomass C, biomass N, ergosterol, δ13C of soil organic C and of microbial biomass C as well as 15N in soil total N, mineral N and microbial biomass N were determined in soil samples at the end of the incubation. The CO2 evolution rate showed a lag-phase of two days in the non-amended maize leaf straw treatment without soil, which was completely eliminated when mineral N was added. The addition of N generally increased the CO2 evolution rate during the initial stages of maize leaf straw decomposition, but not the cumulative CO2 production. The presence of soil caused roughly a 50% increase in cumulative CO2 production within 22 days in the maize straw treatments due to a slower decrease of CO2 evolution after the initial activity peak. Since there are no limitations of water or N, we suggest that soil provides a microbial community ensuring an effective succession of straw decomposing microorganisms. In the treatments where maize and soil was mixed, 75% of microbial biomass C was derived from maize. We concluded that this high contribution of maize using microbiota indicates a strong influence of organisms of phyllospheric origin to the microbial community in the soil after plant residues enter the soil.The mixing of plant residue particles into the soil generates steep gradients of microbial activity within the surrounding 1–3 In a litterbag field experiment, Source of colonizers: soil is an important source of decomposing organisms, colonizing dead plant materials after entering the soil ( Nutrient supply: soil provides nutrients enabling microorganisms the mineralisation of poor quality residues ( Microclimate: plant residues mixed into the soil are protected from rapid drying or high temperature amplitudes ( A microcosm experiment under favourable moisture and temperature conditions was performed to assess whether the beneficial function of soil on litter decomposition is different from the effect of nutrient (N) addition. The soil substratum used for the experiment was sampled in March from the upper 10 The experiment consisted of seven treatments: (1) untreated soil (S0), (2) non-amended maize leaf straw without soil (M0), (3) N amended maize leaf straw without soil (MN), (4) soil mixed with maize leaf straw (S0+M0), (5) N amended soil (SN), (6) N amended soil mixed with maize leaf straw (SN+M0), and (7) soil mixed with N amended maize leaf straw (S0+MN). The experiment was carried out in dynamic microcosms, constructed from a Perspex tube (14.4 Soil was moistened to 50% WHC and maize leaf straw in treatments without soil was moistened to water contents of 200–250% dry weight. No irrigation was provided during the experiment, however, the water contents of leaf straw (150–180%) and soil (18%) at the end of the experiment indicated that water was not limiting during the experiment. After 22 days of incubation in the dark at 15 Soil microbial biomass C and biomass N were measured by chloroform fumigation extraction ( Total N in the 0.5 Ergosterol was measured in moist soil of 2 All treatment means including cumulated data of trace gas emission were compared after one-way analysis of variance using the Tukey test ( CO The CO Cumulative CO No N Soil microbial C was significantly increased by the mixing of maize leaf straw into soil, but it was not affected by N fertilization ( The contribution of maize C to soil organic C (RSA) ranged from 6.6 to 7.5% at the end of the incubation and significant differences among the treatments were not detected. For the microbial biomass a much higher RSA of maize C of about 75% was found, which was also not significantly affected by the N fertilization or its placement ( At the beginning of the experiment, K Of the added mineral N, 93% were recovered in the mineral soil in the SN treatment. In treatments with maize addition (SN+M0, S0+MN) this recovery rate was significantly reduced to 72% ( Our study on the dynamics of maize leaf straw decomposition was focused on the importance of the soil as source of nutrient and colonizers. Our results show that the addition of N, the placement of N and the presence of soil had significant effects on the dynamics of maize residue mineralization. These findings support both the high importance of the zymogeneous phyllospheric colonization of plant litter ( The addition of N increased the CO The presence of soil caused roughly a 50% increase in cumulative CO At the beginning of the mineralization process plant litter provides a broad spectrum of C in different qualities ( The mixing of plant residues into soil results in the establishment of hot spots likely leading to anoxic micro-sites favouring N Fungal species are known to be the first colonizers on straw ( This hypothesis is in agreement with the high content of δ The highest microbial turnover for the labelled added N was found for the non maize treatment (SN). 25% of microbial biomass N derived from the added pool. The mixing of maize into the fertilized soil (SN+M0) treatment reduced the part of labelled N in the microbial biomass due to a dilution process: Microbial biomass strongly increased and C and N deriving from the maize residues were used to a large extent. Therefore, the portion of labelled N in the microbial biomass (RSA) was higher if the nitrogen amendment was placed directly on the residues (S0+MN treatment). In the case of maize residue with C-to-N ratio as close as 20 the dispersion of residue derived microbiota into the mineral soil was not driven by N limitation but rather resources other than N (e.g. water or mineral nutrients). The N saturation of the soil/residue system was also illustrated by the finding that more than 80% of the labelled N recovered from the soil was still extractable (i.e. in mineral form) after the incubation process. We assume that the low recovery rates of 72% in the SN+M0 and S0+MN treatments reflects the amount of labelled N that was associated with the maize leaf material. We found that the decomposition process of maize leaf straw was not depending on but favoured by soil presence. Phyllospheric microorganisms colonizing plant residues are obviously of high importance for the breakdown and the mineralisation of plant litter. Soil properties had regulating effects on the succession of maize leaf straw degrading microbial community leading to a higher mineralisation rate in the initial days of decomposition. Soil derived C in soil microbial biomass is exchanged by plant litter derived C to a large extent. This supports the hypothesis of a high contribution of phyllospheric microbiota to the microbial community in mineral soil after plant residues were mixed into the soil. This project was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG). The authors would like to thank Anja Becker and Lars Swzec for technical assistance. JD was partly founded by COFORD, Dublin (CARBIFOR project).