A study of the effect of different variables (inoculation, aeration, silver complexants, [Ag], [Fe3+], temperature and chemical activation stage) on the silver-catalyzed bioleaching of two different low-grade copper ores has been carried out in stirred tanks. The catalyzed bioleaching process was greatly affected by bacterial activity. Aeration and the use of different complexing agents (thiosulfate and thiosulfate plus cupric ions) did not enhance but also did not inhibit the copper kinetics in the silver-catalyzed process. On the contrary, the presence of 5 g/L Cl− inhibited the catalytic effect of silver. The effect of silver concentration was tested on two different low-grade copper ores in the range between 10 and 500 mg Ag/kg for the lower K-ore and between 1.4 and 35.7 g Ag/kg Cu for the PVD ore, the former with a higher content of copper. Silver catalysis was effective for both ores but the PVD ore was basically unaffected by silver concentration in the range studied. Maximum copper extractions and copper dissolution rates were obtained with a very small amount of silver (3.6 g Ag/kg Cu). In all cases, the copper recovery was at least twice that in the absence of silver (∼30%). High ferric concentrations have been tested in the absence and in the presence of silver. The presence of silver was essential to improve the copper extraction from chalcopyrite in acidic ferric sulfate solutions. However, bioleaching experiments conducted with silver and 1 g/L Fe3+ produced lower copper extractions (20%) compared to experiments where ferric iron was absent (55%). The copper dissolution in the silver-catalyzed lower K-ore bioleaching is temperature dependent, with an optimum temperature around 35 °C. The activation energies of the copper dissolution process were 109.7 and 20 kJ/mol in the ranges of temperature between 15 and 28 °C and 28 and 45 °C respectively. The chemical activation stage establishes optimum conditions that promote higher copper extractions in the presence of silver.The incomplete dissolution of chalcopyrite, typically with low copper extractions after many years of leaching, remains as one of the most striking phenomena in copper hydrometallurgy. As it was introduced in our previous work, different metal ions have been proposed as catalysts for the dissolution of chalcopyrite in acid medium. However, none of them but silver has proven effective in the chemical and biological leaching of chalcopyrite. In addition, the amount of silver required to increase significantly the copper yields is relatively small ( The mechanism of silver catalysis in chalcopyrite leaching has been profusely studied and attributed to the formation of a transient Ag Thus, the overall reaction, sum of both reactions, has the same stoichiometry as the uncatalyzed reaction:  If that is the case, a constant supply of oxidizing agent (Fe The enhancement in the copper extraction has been explained in terms of the galvanic theory. Initially, A new mechanism of the process proposed by Another interesting fact is that besides silver sulfide a smaller amount of metallic silver is formed during the process ( By an interchange chemical reaction similar to reaction By an electrochemical reduction with ferrous ions ( By photochemical decomposition of AgCl ( In any case, the formation of Ag Thus, the principal pursuit of the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite process is to create the optimum conditions for the formation of a permanent galvanic couple between chalcopyrite and silver sulfide. In this way, the effectiveness of the catalyzed process relies on two major aspects: silver availability (applicable to both chemical and biological processes) and silver toxicity (applicable only to the biological process). The most common reason given to interpret the low solubilization of silver in bioleaching experiments has been the deactivation of the process due to the toxicity of silver ions to microorganisms. Silver toxicity has been attributed to a competing mechanism between silver and ferrous ions for the active sites on the bacterial cell. Though there are silver-tolerant microorganisms with the ability to grow in as much as 100 ppm of Ag(I) ( On the other hand, silver availability is mainly affected by two factors: the formation of precipitates during the chemical or biological process and the mineralogical composition of the ore. Unlike ferrous ions, ferric ions enhance the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite process ( Furthermore, It has also been reported that the silver salt used could have an important role in the catalyzed chalcopyrite dissolution process. Besides silver sulfate, the most common source of silver used, other different silver salts have been tested. Different authors have considered the addition of silver to enhance the rate and extent of copper dissolution from chalcopyrite ores using acidic ferric sulfate solutions under both chemical ( Researchers of the University of Seville in Spain have developed two different sulfate hydrometallurgical processes to treat metal sulfide concentrates with the participation of silver ions: the IBES (Indirect Bioleaching with Effect Separation) and BRISA process (Fast Indirect Bioleaching with Actions Separation) ( The transient catalytic effect of silver has led to the consideration of the addition of complexing agents to improve the process. In the present work, silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite bioleaching has been investigated with two different low-grade copper ores in stirred tanks. The aim of this study was to establish the optimum leaching conditions regarding different variables: [Ag], [Fe Two different low-grade copper ores supplied by Magma Copper Company were used: the lower Kalamazoo ore, named lower K-ore, already tested in shake flasks and the Pinto Valley Dump ore, named PVD ore. The copper was concentrated almost entirely into the sulfide fraction as chalcopyrite mineral. The chemical analysis of the as-received ores is given in A particle size of < All bioleaching tests were inoculated with active maintenance cultures of Two different mesophilic cultures were subcultivated: in the absence and in the presence of silver as Ag For the sake of reproducibility of data, the same bacterial culture was used as inoculum in the study of each variable. Bioleaching experiments were performed in stirred tank reactors at 800 rpm and 35 °C, unless otherwise stated, using 2 L cylindrical covered reactors with four baffles and a gas inlet pipe into the bottom of the reactor to improve hydrodynamics of the system. Each stirred tank contained 1.875 L of 1/10th strength 0 K medium at pH 2.0 (except in tests where this variable was studied), 200 g of low-grade copper ore (10% pulp density), with or without additions of silver (as Ag After 1 day of chemical conditioning, the pH of the leach suspensions was adjusted to 2.0 and 125 mL of an active microbial culture, previously adapted to the ore used, was added. In the control experiments (abiotic tests), 125 mL of 2 g/L thymol in methanol was added instead of the inoculum. The redox potential was measured using a Pt combination redox electrode with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. pH was monitored using a gel-filled combination pH probe with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Evaporation water losses were compensated by adding deionized water. Periodically, pH was readjusted to 2.0 with 6 M H At the end of the experiments, the solids were filtered and the chemical analysis of the residues was used to complete the mass balance for the calculation of final copper and iron extractions. Previous shake flask experiments had confirmed that the copper dissolution mechanism from the low-grade ore is related to the oxidizing conditions in the medium and indirectly to the bacterial activity. Those experiments also showed that silver remains primarily in the residue but, during the early stages of bioleaching, silver in solution could have a harmful effect on bacterial growth. Different studies in the absence and in the presence of silver have demonstrated the beneficial effect of a previous inoculation on copper dissolution. Similar tests to those carried out in shake flask experiments were performed in stirred tanks but considering only the addition of silver (14.3 g Ag/kg Cu). At this time, the sterilized experiment with thymol was replaced by heating the solid sample at 110 °C 1 h/day for 5 consecutive days in a convection oven. The differences in copper dissolution observed in shake flasks experiments are less noticeable in these experiments ( Similar to the shake flasks tests, the redox potential curve of the inoculated experiment was characterized by an initial drop followed by a rise up to 850 mV ( Aeration of the solution can be important in bacterial oxidation processes as a source of both oxygen and carbon dioxide. These experiments were carried out in the presence of silver (14.3 g Ag/kg Cu) with or without an air/1%CO This variable had a slight effect on the parameters controlled during the process. The major difference observed was related to a higher acid consumption in the experiment without aeration. Copper extraction was unaffected by aeration ( Although oxygen and carbon dioxide transfer from the gaseous phase is not a concern in agitated reactor systems, it may restrict the rate of bacterial oxidation reactions in static processes such as those in column leaching reactors that will be discussed in the next work. The presence of small amounts of chloride ion in the nutrient medium could have an effect on the silver-catalyzed copper dissolution. Visual proof of precipitation of AgCl at the starting of the experiments was observed when silver was added as a liquid to the nutrient medium (1/10 0 K or 0 K). These experiments were performed with 14.3 g Ag/kg Cu and 1/10 0 K nutrient medium with and without chloride. The presence of chloride in the nutrient medium improved the copper extraction very slightly ( Material balances of the residues confirmed that the variable under study practically does not affect the chemistry of the silver-catalyzed bioleaching process of the lower K-ore ( Three different complexing agents were tested for the copper dissolution from the lower K-ore using 14.3 mg Ag/kg Cu: thiosulfate (15.5 g Na Copper extractions were not enhanced by the presence of any of the complexing agents tested ( The effect of different complexing agents on the final metal extractions is shown in The low copper extraction obtained in the presence of 5 g/L Cl The effect of silver concentration was studied in the range between 0.7 and 71.4 g Ag/kg ore for the lower K-ore ( For both ores, copper dissolution was dramatically affected in the presence of small amounts of silver ( Iron extractions display linear kinetics with recoveries slightly higher for the experiments with silver ( From the Eh curves it is clear that the oxidizing conditions are reached in stirred tanks in a shorter time than in shake flasks experiments, indicating that hydrodynamics and gas-liquid mass transfer play an important role in the catalytic process ( X-ray diffraction analyses performed on the residues of the lower K-ore without silver and with 14.3 g Ag/kg ore did not show appreciable differences in chemical composition, all peaks corresponding to the unleached material (mainly silicoaluminates and quartz). The effect of silver concentration on the final metal extractions is shown in Based on the Fe/Cu molar ratios of material balances, the degree of copper selectivity was more favourable for the K-ore than for the PVD and for the same ore when silver was added. However, variations in [Ag] had a minor effect. For both ores, the addition of silver diminished the consumption of acid during the process. The PVD ore is a higher acid consumer than the lower K-ore. This is due to a different level of gangue acid consumption. Our previous shake flasks experiments demonstrated that high ferric iron concentrations speed up the copper extraction from the lower K-ore tested. Four short-term experiments (11 h) in the absence of bacteria with or without silver (14.3 g Ag/kg Cu) and high [Fe The results show that copper extraction was largely improved by the addition of silver independently of [Fe Two different biotic experiments were carried out with 0.7 g Ag/kg Cu with and without the addition of 1 g/L of Fe Copper dissolution shows parabolic and linear kinetics in the absence and in the presence of Fe For these experiments, pH and acid consumption decreased with increasing ferric concentration as a result of iron precipitation as jarosite ( The redox potential values were mainly controlled by bacterial activity in the bioleaching experiments and by chemical reactions in the non-inoculated tests ( The optimum temperature at which the sulfide mineral oxidizes faster may not coincide with the optimum value for the growth of the bacterial culture. Each bacterial culture has a preferred growth temperature, which will depend on the environmental conditions (nutrients, toxic substances, pH, Eh, ore, etc.). The effect of temperature was studied in the range between 15 and 45 °C. All experiments were carried out under the same experimental conditions using 14.3 mg Ag/kg Cu. Copper and iron extractions ( The onset of oxidizing conditions depended on temperature with an anomalous behaviour at 45 °C that could be related to a modification of the nature of the culture due to the presence of moderately thermophilic bacteria ( The activation energy of the silver-catalyzed lower K-ore bioleaching in the range of temperature studied was calculated from the kinetic constants and the semi-logarithmic plot of the Arrhenius equation. The parabolic rate constants, In the case of copper, a consistent set of data was obtained with a single rate-controlling process operative over the 15–28 °C temperature range, different from that over the 28–45 °C range. The apparent activation energy calculated from the Arrhenius plot was 109.7 kJ/mol between 15 and 28 °C and 20 kJ/mol between 28 and 45 °C. For iron, a value of 38.1 kJ/mol was obtained in the range between 15 and 40 °C. In this sense, chemical rate-control usually has a large temperature dependence compared to mass-transfer rate control. The effect of temperature on the final metal extractions is shown in The chemical stage in this study refers to a step for the chemical activation of chalcopyrite by addition of silver. In this way, the chemical stage was part of the experimental procedure followed in the bioleaching tests. It consisted of 3 days of contact between the ore and the leaching medium during which chemical reactions took place and prepared the mineral surfaces for the bioleaching process. Two experiments were carried out under similar experimental conditions with 14.3 g Ag/kg Cu, added before or after the chemical stage, prior to the bioleaching process. Copper extractions only showed differences during the first days ( The onset of oxidizing conditions was clearly affected by this variable and accounted for the differences observed during the copper dissolution: with the increase of the redox potential in a shorter time for the experiment where silver was added before the chemical leaching stage ( Nevertheless, short-term experiments demonstrated that during the initial stages of the chemical leaching stage, a pronounced drop of Eh of the solution occurs in a very short time when the leaching solution, silver and ore are brought into contact ( The optimum conditions for the bioleaching of the lower K-ore in stirred tank were as follows: 1/10 0 K nutrient medium, ∼ The use of complexing agents (thiosulfate or thiosulfate plus cupric ions) did not affect the yields of copper and iron extraction. But high chloride concentrations (5 g/L) suppressed the silver catalytic effect. The effect of temperature on the copper extraction has a marked effect above 25 °C, with an optimum temperature about 35–40 °C.