>1 mm displacement Lateral intrascaphoid angle >35 degrees Bone loss or comminution Perilunate fracture dislocation Dorsal intercalated segment instability  The term Operative versus nonoperative intervention depends on the location of the scaphoid fracture and whether or not the fracture is unstable.  The patient must understand that nonoperative treatment duration and union rates differ based on the location of the fracture; distal pole fractures may heal more quickly than waist or proximal pole fractures. Accepted union rate for nonoperative treatment of distal pole fractures nears 100%, is 95% for waist fractures, and is only 70% for proximal pole fractures. Because of these data, nondisplaced fractures of the proximal pole or waist may be treated with open reduction internal fixation. Dorsal approach: proximal pole fractures, minimal displacement, and no evidence of humpback deformity (increased intrascaphoid angle >35 degrees). Volar approach: displaced distal pole fractures, comminution, increased intrascaphoid angle, and possible need for structural bone graft.  Patients are usually seen in the acute care setting, either in the emergency department or in the clinic. History might include fall on an outstretched hand ( Signs and symptoms include radial wrist pain, dorsoradial edema, and tenderness in the anatomic snuff box or on the distal pole of the scaphoid (  The incidence of false-negative plain x-ray diagnosis of acute scaphoid fracture approaches 25%. Patients can be splinted (thumb-spica) and brought back to the clinic in 2 weeks with repeat imaging when the fracture line is more radiolucent. Initial x-ray series should include three views: posteroanterior (PA), oblique, and lateral wrist x-rays ( Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most sensitive and specific imaging modality for identifying acute scaphoid fractures. Cortical disruption in the presence of bone marrow edema is diagnostic ( MRI is also useful to determine vascularity where the timing of the injury is unknown and avascular necrosis of the proximal pole is suspected.  Eighty percent of the scaphoid is covered by articular cartilage, leaving limited space for the entrance of an arterial supply. The axis of the scaphoid lies 45 degrees radial to the axis of the wrist. Because it is the largest bone in the proximal carpal row, the scaphoid articulates with the trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, lunate, and radius and serves as a mechanical link between the proximal and distal carpal rows. Although there are multiple intrinsic and extrinsic ligaments that attach to the scaphoid, the scapholunate ligament is the most important intrinsic ligament, providing stability and linking the bones of the proximal row. The most important extrinsic ligament is the radioscaphocapitate ligament, which acts as a fulcrum for rotation along the midaxis of the scaphoid ( The dorsal groove courses the length of the scaphoid and provides attachment surfaces for ligaments and blood vessels. The dorsal blood supply (branch of the radial artery), which delivers 70% to 80% of the blood supply, courses from distal to proximal through the bone. A second artery enters volarly and supplies the distal pole. Because of the distal-to-proximal blood supply, the proximal pole is at risk for avascular necrosis with proximal fractures ( This also explains why proximal fractures, on average, take longer to unite compared with distal fractures. A rolled towel can be used to aid in flexion or extension of the wrist.  We do not recommend the percutaneous approach to scaphoid fractures unless the surgeon has been trained and is particularly familiar with this approach because this technique could result in tendon or nerve injury or even worse, poor reduction and fixation of a scaphoid fracture that has one chance of fixation. If possible, the dorsal approach should be used because the starting point is easier to find and there are no other carpal bones obstructing the long axis of the scaphoid. With the volar approach, the trapezium is often trimmed to obtain perfect trajectory. For proximal pole fractures, the dorsal approach is preferred because the fragment is easier to capture with the threads of the headless compression screw. Distal pole fractures are better suited for the volar approach.  A 6-cm dorsal incision is designed ulnar to the Lister tubercle ( Under tourniquet control, a no. 15 blade is used to incise skin and subcutaneous tissue, exposing the extensor retinaculum.  The dense fibers of the scapholunate interosseous ligament should be clearly identified and dissected from the dorsal wrist capsule to avoid inadvertent injury. Preservation of the soft tissue attachments along the dorsal ridge at the scaphoid waist will ensure that the blood supply remains intact. An incision over the third compartment is performed and the extensor pollicis longus (EPL) is identified and protected. Continuing the incision through the interval between the third and fourth extensor compartments, the dorsal wrist capsule is identified. The plane between the dorsal wrist capsule and the scapholunate interosseous ligament (SLIL) is developed. Care is taken to ensure that the SLIL is identified and protected. Dissection proceeds along the dorsal surface of the scaphoid, separating the bone from the loose capsular attachments. The fracture can be identified by the presence of early callus formation. A Freer elevator is passed into the fracture line between the fragments. Debridement of callus and scar is performed using a rongeur or small bone curette (  If the fracture is displaced, a 0.062-in (1.57-mm) joystick Kirschner wire (K-wire) can be inserted into each fragment to facilitate reduction ( Fracture reduction is confirmed visually and radiographically.  With scaphoid waist fractures, the distal fragment often needs to be both extended and supinated in order to obtain anatomic reduction. Placement of a 0.045-in (1.14-mm) K-wire can be used for provisional fixation. This should be placed dorsoradially to be sure that it will not interfere with placement of the guidewire and screw.  Carefully examine all fluoroscopic views to ensure anatomic reduction. If placing a joystick K-wire radially, be aware of the position of the radial artery because it courses dorsally through the anatomic snuff box.  After confirming anatomic reduction and direction of the guidewire, advance the guidewire along the long axis of the scaphoid. Ensure that the tip is in the distal subchondral bone. The guide is placed along the wire and the screw length is estimated. The headless screw should be 4 mm shorter than the measured length to ensure that all of the threads are buried within the bone.  Imperfect guidewires can be left in place and used as a reference for placement of a new wire. Many attempts at passing the wire will create multiple pathways through the bone, making it challenging to direct the wire correctly along the long axis of the scaphoid.  The provisional K-wire will help to combat rotational forces during drilling that could result in lost reduction. Before hand drilling, the manufacturer’s depth gauge is placed over the wire to estimate screw length. One should subtract 4 mm from the estimate to ensure that the entire screw is buried within the bone. A hand reamer is used. We do not advocate using a power drill because it is difficult to control the trajectory of the drill over the guidewire and one may inadvertently break the guidewire, resulting in an erroneous path into the scaphoid. Constant assessment with fluoroscopy will ensure drilling up to the subchondral bone of the distal fragment and will maintain the path of the guidewire ( Maintaining reduction during drilling is paramount and can be aided using the joystick K-wires. This is particularly important in young patients with dense bone. Headless screws with guidewires of less than 0.045 in are particularly susceptible to shearing if drilling is not performed exactly colinear with the guidewire. Verify constantly with fluoroscopy.  The guidewire is advanced to capture the trapezium so that the wire does not come loose after drilling. An appropriately sized headless compression screw is placed under direct visual and fluoroscopic guidance ( The provisional K-wire is removed or, rarely, cut at the cartilage surface to provide additional stability during bony healing. Advancing the screw can distract the fracture if the fracture is not well stabilized or the drill holes are not aligned because the screw is driven across the fracture site.  The scaphoid is exposed via a curvilinear or chevron wrist incision. This incision extends from the radial aspect of the thenar eminence, across the wrist, and parallel and radial to the flexor carpi radialis (FCR) tendon ( A no. 15 blade is used to dissect sharply to the level of the wrist capsule. The FCR sheath is opened longitudinally and the FCR is retracted ulnarly. The radioscaphocapitate (RSC) and long radiolunate (LRL) are incised, and the joint capsule is entered, exposing the scaphoid. The fracture site can be identified by passing a periosteal elevator between the proximal and distal fragments ( Fluoroscopy is used to confirm the nonunion site. In the acute setting, minimal debridement is needed. A curette or rongeur can be used to debride any callus or hematoma.  Care is taken to identify and avoid the FCR tendon. The LRL and a portion of the RSC ligament should be preserved to stabilize the proximal pole of the scaphoid and maintain reduction.  After minimal debridement and mobilization of the distal scaphoid pole, manual reduction is performed. After radiographic confirmation of reduction, a 0.045-in (1.14-mm) K-wire is inserted from distal to proximal. It is important to start this wire slightly radial to the long axis of the scaphoid to avoid interference with final screw placement ( A second 0.045-in (1.14-mm) K-wire can be placed into the proximal fracture fragment and used as a joystick to aid in reduction (  With the provisional K-wire in place, the guidewire is directed from the distal scaphoid tubercle to the proximal ulnar corner of the scaphoid. Placement along the long axis of the scaphoid should be confirmed radiographically ( It may be necessary to trim a portion of the trapezium to perfectly direct the K-wire along the long axis of the scaphoid. This can be performed with a rongeur.  Before drilling, the manufacturer’s depth gauge is placed over the wire to estimate screw length. One should subtract 4 mm from the estimate to ensure that the entire screw is buried within the bone. After radiographic confirmation of trajectory, the guidewire is advanced to capture the radius and to maintain the path of the drill when the scaphoid is drilled from distal to proximal (  The K-wire must be in perfect position before estimating the screw length. To ensure an accurate estimate of length, there should not be any tissue between the guide and the distal pole of the scaphoid. Fluoroscopy is used to confirm that the scaphoid has been drilled up to the proximal subchondral bone.  An appropriately sized screw is placed over the guidewire ( Screw placement, entirely within the bone, is confirmed radiographically and the guidewire is removed. The provisional K-wire should also be removed ( The patient’s wrist should be taken through a full range of motion to confirm that the screw is not within a joint.  The patient is placed in a thumb spica splint that can be removed at 2 weeks postoperatively. The wound is examined and the sutures are removed. The patient is placed into a thumb spica cast and seen at 2- to 4-week intervals until healing is confirmed radiographically. At 24 months’ follow-up, Patients may experience a decrease in wrist flexion compared with the contralateral side. Computed tomography (CT) may be used to confirm union. Proximal pole fractures may take up to 3 months to heal. The patients may be instructed to protect the wrist until that time. 