Metamorphosed mafic-ultramafic rocks from the central portion of the Rio Grande do Norte Domain of the Borborema Province (BP), northeastern Brazil, have been studied here with the objective of gaining a better understanding of the Archean evolution of this portion of the BP. The study area is underlain by gneissic-migmatitic basement as well as biotite schists and paragneisses of the Seridó and Jucurutu formations of the Seridó Group. The mafic-ultramafic rocks (serpentinites, amphibole-schists and amphibolites) occur in lenses for 30 km along strike following the NNE regional foliation. The serpentinites occur as relatively small exposures of elongated bodies within paragneisses of the Jucurutu Formation and orthogneisses of the Caicó Complex. They consist of xenoblastic serpentine (75–99%) that has replaced the primary ferromagnesian minerals of the protolith. The amphibole schists and amphibolites are whitish gray to green, depending on the dominant mineral phase, tremolite, talc or actinolite. The mafic-ultramafic rocks present high MgO, Ni and Cr2O3 contents and very low TiO2, Na2O and K2O contents, being compositionally similar to mafic-ultramafic rocks from other Archean greenstone belts worldwide. U-Pb (SHRIMP) dating of zircons returned concordia ages of 3526 ± 5 Ma (MSWD = 0.0084) for the serpentinites of the Serra Verde Mine and 3747 ± 12 Ma (MSWD = 9.8) for serpentinites from the Oiticica Mine. The petrographic and geochemical characteristics as well as the Eo to Paleoarchean ages of the studied rocks are significant as the basement of this portion of the BP is dominantly of Paleoproterozoic age. It is envisaged that these results will lead to further debate and a greater understanding of crustal evolution of the BP. We propose that these mafic-ultramafic rocks are part of a dismembered Archean greenstone belt, which present the oldest ages so far determined for the South American Platform.The Archean is a time interval of the Earth's history known for presenting distinctive geological conditions. Mantle temperatures are commonly considered to have been significantly higher in the Archean than they are today, the plates were probably smaller than the modern ones, and their spreading rates were faster ( The Rio Grande do Norte Domain (RGND) is located within the northernmost part of the Borborema Province (BP) of NE Brazil and contains remnants of Archean crust, namely the 3.50 Ga ultramafic rocks of the São Tomé Intrusion ( In this paper, we present field relationships, petrography, whole-rock geochemistry and U-Pb (SHRIMP) geochronological data for zircons of metamafic-ultramafic rocks that yield Eoarchean and Paleoarchean ages. This study contributes to a better understanding of the origin of these previously poorly studied rocks of this portion of the BP, which represent the oldest rocks of the South American Platform. The Borborema Province (BP) ( The BP consists of Archean to Paleoproterozoic gneissic-migmatitic basement overlain by supracrustal sequences all of which were later being intruded by large volumes of Neoproterozoic granitoids ( The Southern Subprovince is located between the Pernambuco Lineament and the São Francisco Craton and is composed of the Pernambuco-Alagoas Domain and the Sergipano and Riacho do Pontal fold belts. The Central Subprovince or Transversal Zone lies between the Pernambuco and Patos lineaments and is subdivided, from east to west, into the Rio Capibaribe, Alto Moxotó, Alto Pajeú and Piancó-Alto Brígida terranes. The Northern Subprovince is located to the north of the Patos Lineament and is composed of the Rio Grande do Norte (RGND), Central Ceará and Médio Coreaú domains ( The study area is located within the RGND which is composed of a number of subdomains: the São José do Campestre and Rio Piranhas massifs, the Granjeiro Complex and the Orós-Jaguaribe and Seridó belts. The eastern block of the RGND is dominated by Paleoproterozoic rocks in addition to an Archean nucleus named São José do Campestre Massif, which is characterized by different episodes of crustal accretion and magmatism, reflected by six different orthogneisses assemblages ranging in age from 2.7 to 3.4 Ga ( Three Brasiliano-age deformational events have been identified within the RGND: D1 is associated with isoclinal to intrafolial folds and strong transposition and was followed by an event of tangential kinematics D2. The last tectono metamorphic event (D3) was marked by strike-slip to oblique shear zones and by the emplacement of late Neoproterozoic (Brasiliano) granitoids. Associated metamorphism varies from upper amphibolite to granulite facies in the vicinity of plutonic intrusions and crustal-scale shear zones to greenschist facies further afield ( The RGND was the scene of expressive Ediacaran magmatism during the Brasiliano orogeny, when large volumes of plutonic rocks with a wide range of compositions were emplaced between 600 and 500 Ma ( The study area is located in the eastern part of the RGND. The basement of the study area is the Caicó Complex of Paleoproterozoic (2.20–2.15 Ga) age ( The study area is characterized by metaplutonic unit of Caicó Complex as basement, with the major outcrop area composed by orthogneisses and migmatites. The Seridó Group is represented by biotite-muscovite schists (Seridó Formation); paragneisses, marbles and calc-silicate rocks of Jucurutu Formation; and restricted quartzite lenses of Equador Formation. This entire rock package was clearly affected by the placement of the granitic bodies and the associated shear zones. The serpentinites, amphibole-schists and amphibolites that are the subject of this paper, outcrop near the city of São Tomé, Rio Grande do Norte State ( A total of 18 samples of the mafic-ultramafic rocks were sent to Acme Labs™ (Vancouver, Canada) for geochemical analysis by two methods: 4A and 4B (see The samples selected for isotopic analysis were processed in the mineral processing laboratory of the Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, where the zircon grains were separated from the samples through crushing, sieving, grinding followed by electromagnetic separation and mechanical concentration by panning. The geochronological data was obtained for the zircon grains by the Sensitive High Resolution Ion Microprobe (SHRIMP) U-Pb method at the High Resolution Geochronology Laboratory of the Institute of Geosciences at the University of São Paulo, Brazil (see details in Until recently the mafic-ultramafic rocks (serpentinites, tremolite-actinolite schists and amphibolites) studied in this paper were thought to be part of Caicó Complex ( The serpentinites occur as small elongated bodies in the central-northern part of the study area in contact with paragneisses of the Jucurutu Formation and basement biotite gneisses. Serpentinites may also occur as rounded metric-thick enclaves in the gneisses, as observed in an old scheelite exploration trench (Oiticica Mine) and in the emerald mine (Serra Verde Mine) (green stars in The amphibole schists are usually white to green, depending on the dominant mineral, tremolite or actinolite; when talc is present, the schist is pale gray. These rocks are medium to coarse-grained with rare radial crystal growth and have a foliation defined by the amphibole grains ( The amphibolites occur as 100–200 m long ellipsoidal lenses and are medium-grained, dark green in color with well-developed foliation defined by oriented amphibole crystals, some radial crystal growth was also observed. These rocks are composed of tremolite-actinolite or hornblende (99%) as the major phases with minor opaque minerals (1%). Tremolite is millimetric, xenoblastic to hipidioblastic and is slightly oriented according to the foliation ( The three analyzed rock types have SiO2 contents ranging from 35.72 to 54.33 wt % and high MgO (17.25–34.63 wt %) and Fe2O3 (4.22–13.71 wt %) contents, confirming their basic to ultrabasic composition and mafic-ultramafic signature. SiO2, Al2O3 (1.04–8.29 wt %), CaO (0.02–12.16 wt %), K2O (0.01–3.33 wt %) and Na2O (0.03–0.77 wt %) show negative correlation with MgO. Loss on ignition (12.4–16.9 wt%) presents a strong positive correlation with MgO content and the high values reflect the presence of serpentine as well as being suggestive of hydrothermal alteration ( TiO2 (0.02–0.94 wt %) shows a negative correlation with MgO and Cr2O3 (0.08–1.64 wt %) displays a positive correlation with MgO. The positive correlation between Cr In order to assess whether the studied rocks have changed their initial compositions, molecular proportion ratio plots were made based on The ternary diagrams of Primitive mantle-normalized trace elements patterns show varying degrees of enrichment, increasing from the serpentinites to the amphibole-schists/amphibolites ( The normalized trace elements patterns of the serpentinites indicate some fractionation of the Large Ion Lithophiles Elements (LILE) with the patterns becoming more flattened towards the High Field Strength Elements (HFSE). Strong positive anomalies for U and Pb and weak depletions in Sr and Ti are observed. The pattern for the amphibole-schists are concave downward reflecting enrichment in LILE relative to primitive mantle values whilst the HFSE values are similar to the primitive mantle values with negative Sr, Zr and Ti anomalies. The amphibolites display differing patterns for the mobile elements (LILE), negative Sr, Zr and Ti anomalies, and flat patterns for Dy, Y, Yb and Lu. A discrete fractionation and enrichment occur in almost all elements when compared with the primitive mantle. Primitive mantle-normalized Rare-Earth-Element (REE) patterns ( A total of 72 zircon grains were analyzed; 14 zircon grains from a serpentinite sample collected at the Serra Verde Emerald Mine and 58 zircon grains recovered from the serpentinites of the Oiticica Mine. The zircons from the Serra Verde Emerald Mine are rounded, prismatic, subhedral, unfractured and range in size from 120 × 50 μm to 150 × 200 μm. Cathodoluminescence images show clear differences between the zircon cores and rims. Typical oscillatory zoning of magmatic origin was observed in the cores of the zircon grains indicative of original crystallization with later overgrowth forming the zircon rims ( The Oiticica Mine zircon grains are rounded, prismatic, euhedral to subhedral, with some fractures and fragmented grains and range in size from 140 × 70 μm to 330 x 80 µm. Cathodoluminescence imagery also identified concentric zoning in the cores with post-crystallization overgrowth forming the rims of these zircons ( The Serra Verde zircon grains gave an age of 3526 ± 5.0 Ma (MSWD = 0.0084) ( The Th/U ratios for the magmatic cores of the zircons ranged from 0.24 to 0.84, whilst the overgrowths displayed ratios between 0.02 and 0.14. Th/U ratios between 0.3 and 0.7 are considered typical for igneous zircons ( The Oiticica Mine zircon grains presented concordant to slightly discordant age data. The upper intercept age of 3747 ± 12 Ma (MSWD = 9.8) The Th/U ratios for the zircons from the Oiticica Mine vary from 0.05 to 1.09, with higher values (0.32–1.09) obtained from the magmatic cores and lower values (0.05–0.25) from the zircon rims indicating a metamorphic overprint. Should be noted that Ni is relatively immobile during alteration by hydrothermal events and/or regional metamorphism, as well as during weathering, ( Petrographic analysis identified tremolitite (amphibolite), chlorite-talc schists and serpentinites ( Despite the strong influence of metasomatic/metamorphic processes, the ternary diagrams given in Chemically, the studied rocks have many characteristics that permit their classification as komatiites. According to The trends visible on the molecular proportion ratio plots given in Outcropping Archean rocks worldwide are limited to a number of small Archean nuclei dispersed across the cratonic areas. Until now, the oldest dated rocks on South American platform are from the São Francisco Craton and Borborema Province returned ages of around 3.4–3.5 Ga, with some The Archean period in the RGND was characterized by a complex magmatic and deformational history, involving several episodes of magmatism between 2.7 and 3.4 Ga, related to melting of enriched mantle sources in the context of convergent margin ( Following earlier dating of the 3.4 Ga orthogneisses of São José do Campestre Massif ( According to Other Archean units of the RGND register Nd T Paleoarchean to Mesoarchean crust with slightly younger ages has already been identified in the Gavião Block of the São Francisco Craton and part of the cratonic basement is composed of 3.4 Ga TTG terrains and 3.2–2.9 Ga mafic-ultramafic rocks which are part of greenstone belts ( The literature on greenstone belts has grown exponentially over the past few decades as scientists increasingly realized that these terranes hold many of the clues to the evolutionary history of the early Earth and the advanced knowledge in respect of these granite-greenstone terranes has also aided mineral exploration and important new finds of gold and base metals are regularly being encountered ( The results of our study of the metamorphosed mafic-ultramafic rocks from the central RGND indicate that: The analyzed rocks can be divided into three types based on their petrographic characteristics. The serpentinites have serpentine as the major phase, but chlorite, tremolite, calcite-dolomite, opaque and zircons minerals are also present. The amphibole schists have tremolite-actinolite, chlorite and talc as their principal minerals and beryl, opaques, zoisite, carbonates and zircon as accessories. The amphibolites are composed principally of tremolite-actinolite or hornblende with opaque minerals as accessories. Independent of any specific tectonic setting, it is clear that the Mg- and Ni-rich mafic-ultramafic rocks are mantle derived and have strong affinities with komatiites, which supports the inference that they were part of a greenstone belt. The ages obtained for the serpentines of 3747 ± 12 Ma and 3526 ± 5.0 Ma (U-Pb in zircon) indicate that they are the oldest rocks (Eoarchean) so far dated on the South American Platform. We thanks to The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at