Millions of employees in the World are exposed to noise at work. Block cutting machine is one of the most important noise sources in the stone processing plants. In this study, the predictability of the noise from the block cutting machines in the stone processing plants was investigated by using the physico-mechanical and mineralogical properties of rocks. The noise levels of some block cutting machines were firstly measured during the cutting of the three different rocks. Then, the core samples of the same rocks were cut by an automatic cutting machine in the laboratory and the noise levels were measured. A conversion factor was obtained by dividing the site noise levels by the laboratory noise levels. Then, nineteen different rocks were cut by the automatic cutting machine in the laboratory and the noise levels were measured. Strong correlations were found between the laboratory noise level and the rock properties. The noise level increases with increasing rock strength, abrasive mineral content, and density. However, increasing porosity decreases the noise level. It was concluded that the laboratory noise level for a new rock type to be cut can be estimated using the derived relations. Then, the laboratory noise level can be converted to the site noise level using the derived conversion factor.About 20% of European labors are exposed to noise so loud that they would have to raise their voice to talk to other people. Exposure to noise is especially common in the construction and manufacturing sectors The level of noise allowed by most countries’ noise standards is generally 85–90 As per the long research experience of the authors, the noise level produced during rock drilling or cutting depends on the physico-mechanical properties of rock, mineral content and rock texture. Increasing the values of some rock properties such as strength and density generally increases the noise level. However, the increase in the values of some rock properties such as porosity generally decreases noise level. The abrasivity and the hardness of minerals may also have strong effect on the noise level. High noise level is produced during cutting the hard rock or the rock having hard and abrasive minerals such as quartz and feldspar. The texture of rock also effects noise level. The noise level produced during cutting the rock with strongly interlocked grains will be higher than that of the rocks with weakly interlocked grains. Another issue is that some rocks consist of matrix and mineral grains that affect the noise level during cutting. When cutting these rocks, in addition to mineral grains, the strength and hardness of matrix material also influence noise level. The harder the matrix, the higher the noise level produced during rock cutting. In the literature, there are some studies on the formation characterization by analyzing the noise or acoustic waves during drilling in oil and gas industries There are limited studies on the relation between the rock properties and the sound level during cutting rock by diamond saw in the literature. Karakurt et al. Estimating the noise level of the block cutting machine during the cutting a new rock type is useful for the noise management in the stone processing plants. In this study, the predictability of the noise level from the block cutting machines was investigated by using the physico-mechanical and mineralogical properties of rocks. Since in this work, only limited types of rocks are considered, to assess the site noise level from cutting a large number of rock types is very difficult. For this reason, a conversion factor for estimating the site noise level from laboratory noise level is proposed in this paper. The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows: Section The two stone processing plants located in Kayseri City of Turkey were visited for the site studies. The site noise levels of block cutting machines ( A total of 19 different rock types were sampled from the stone processing plants and fields and transported to laboratory. The collected rocks include granite, granodiorite, syenite, ignimbrite and tuff. The mineral contents of the samples were determined as percentages under the polarizing microscope. A point-counting device was mounted to the polarizing microscope for this purpose and the mineral percentages were determined with precision ( The rock blocks collected from the site were cored perpendicular to any visible bedding or weakness plane in the laboratory. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) tests were conducted on the smooth-cut core samples, which had a diameter of 38 The Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) tests were conducted on the core samples having a diameter of 38 The samples cored perpendicular to any visible weakness plane and the samples having weakness plane were discarded. The diametral point load test was carried out on the cores having a diameter of 38 The smooth-cut core samples were used in the determination of dry density. The specimen volume was calculated from an average of several calliper readings. The dry mass of the specimen was determined by a balance, capable of weighing to an accuracy of 0.01 The porosity values were determined using the saturation and calliper techniques. The pore volumes were calculated from the dry and saturated weights and the sample volumes were obtained from calliper readings as suggested by ISRM NX core samples were cut using an automatic cutting machine with a diamond saw of 300 The average values of the physico-mechanical and the noise measurement test results are given in As stated above, to assess the site noise from the rock properties is very difficult because the limited types of rocks are cut in each stone processing plant. For this reason a conversion factor which converts the laboratory noise level to the site noise level was developed. The explanation of the development of the conversion factor is given as follows: As shown in The test results given in The UCS, BTS, I A very strong linear relation is found between the density and the noise level ( As shown in The relation between the noise level and the AMC is very strong as shown in As stated in the introduction section, it is theoretically known that if rock strength, density, and abrasive mineral content increase the noise level from cutting increases. On the other hand, the increase in the porosity of rock generally decreases the noise level. As far as the authors’ knowledge goes, there is only one study As shown in Although the correlations between the noise level and rock properties are strong or very strong, this does not necessarily identify the valid model. On the other hand, the data points are scattered in some correlation plots such as The significance of r-values can be determined by the The analysis of variance for the regression is employed to test the significance of regressions. If the computed F-value is greater than tabulated F-value, the null hypothesis is rejected that there is a real relation between dependent and independent variables. As shown in The noise measurements were performed on site and in the laboratory during cutting nineteen different rock types in order to evaluate the noise from the block cutting machines in the stone processing factories using the physico-mechanical and mineralogical properties of rocks. The statistical analysis of the results indicates that there are strong correlations between the noise level from cutting and the rock properties. The noise level increases with increasing rock strength, abrasive mineral content, and density. However, increasing porosity decreases the noise level. It is concluded that the laboratory noise level for a new rock type to be cut can be estimated using the relations derived. Then, the laboratory noise level can be converted to the site noise level using the derived conversion factor. There is scope for future work with respect to the present work carried out: (i) further research should be carried out to investigate the effects of the textural properties of rocks on the noise level from their cutting, (ii) the regression coefficient values in each case can be improved by using neural networks or support vector machines. This study was supported by the scientific research project unit of