During the remelting of automobile scrap in an electric arc furnace, the contained volatile metals and evolved particulates are captured in the oxidizing off-gas system as a dust. In most countries, this dust is considered as a hazardous waste but contains economically attractive amounts of various non-ferrous metals, such as zinc and lead. One method for recovering these metals is selective reduction, in which the non-ferrous metal oxides are reduced and the metals are simultaneously vaporized and separated, while the iron is maintained in oxide form. In the present research, the utilization of metallic iron as a selective reducing agent was investigated and the equilibrium composition of the reaction products was calculated using the equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry® 5.1. For the standard conditions, a typical electric arc furnace dust composition was utilized and the temperature was varied from 1273 to 1873K at atmospheric pressure (1bar). The zinc and lead recoveries were determined and the separation of the metallic zinc or lead from the iron oxide, was quantified in terms of the selectivity factor (β). In addition to temperature, the effects of the following variables on the zinc and lead recoveries were determined; reactant ratio (moles of metallic iron per 100g of dust), dust composition, addition of a non-reactive gas such as nitrogen and also reduced total pressure. The results show that under the appropriate reducing conditions of temperature, reactant ratio and reduced pressure, both high recoveries and selectivity factors can be achieved for both zinc and lead. The calculated results are in reasonable agreement with experimental results, which have been previously published in the literature.When automobile scrap is remelted in an electric arc furnace (EAF) a dust is produced, which is referred to as electric arc furnace dust. About 10–12 Considerable research has been performed on various methods for dealing with the dust and there are two major options: disposal or metals recovery The zinc and lead oxides in the dust are less stable than iron oxide and also metallic zinc and lead have relatively low boiling points in comparison to metallic iron and the other various oxides in the dust. Therefore, in the pyrometallurgical processes, the selective reduction and separation of these metals from the iron is a common approach A number of experimental studies have been performed on the reduction of EAF dust with metallic iron, with considerable effort being devoted to the iron-reduction distillation process From a thermodynamic viewpoint, the primary reactions of interest in the selective reduction of EAF dust by metallic iron are as follows; For zinc oxide, reduction to zinc plus wustite has a lower standard free energy change than reduction to zinc plus magnetite at temperatures above about 900 In order to quantify the separation of the zinc or the lead from the iron, in oxide form, in a selective reduction process using iron as a reducing agent, the concept of the selectivity factor ( The equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry The input of the elements iron, zinc, lead, calcium, carbon, silicon and oxygen into the HSC equilibrium module, generated a list of 169 possible species. Since, the majority of these species would be considered unstable, under the conditions of this study, then only the 31 species shown in The reactant to dust ratio or more simply the reactant ratio (RR In order to fully understand the reduction of EAF dust by metallic iron, it is useful to consider the behaviour of the EAF dust in the absence of any reducing agent. For the standard dust composition and for 100 The reaction of 1 The behaviours of the lead-containing species are shown in  The zinc and lead recoveries as a function of the reactant ratio and the temperature for reduction by metallic iron are shown in As mentioned previously, since lead oxide is less stable than zinc oxide, then the reduction of lead oxide occurs more easily than zinc oxide, and as a result the range for the maximum in the lead recovery occurs at lower temperatures. As shown in The selectivity factors for zinc, lead and zinc plus lead as a function of temperature and reactant ratio are shown in It would be expected that a reduction in the total pressure would promote the reduction reactions for both the zinc and lead oxides since the non-ferrous metals are produced in the gas phase. As mentioned previously and as shown in  The selectivity factors for zinc and lead and zinc plus lead are shown as a function of temperature and pressure in the three dimensional mesh plots in With regards to lead, as shown in The combined zinc plus lead selectivity factors, as shown in The amounts of the various species in the dust can affect the equilibrium composition of the reaction products in three major ways. Firstly, an increase in the amount of free calcium oxide, which is a very stable oxide and therefore not reduced under the present conditions, could result in an increase in the amounts of the various calcium ferrites. Secondly, an increase in the amount of an oxide, which is relatively easily reduced, such as the non-ferrous metal oxides and the hematite and magnetite, would result in an increased consumption of reducing agent. Thirdly, an increase in the amount of calcium carbonate results in an increase in the amounts of both calcium oxide and carbon dioxide, when the calcium carbonate decomposes. As mentioned previously, the calcium oxide can affect the equilibrium product composition but, in addition, the carbon dioxide can react with iron to produce carbon monoxide as described by Eq. It would be expected that the addition of an essentially inert gas, for example, nitrogen, would promote those reactions that result in the production of gaseous species, such as those for the non-ferrous metals, while the reduction of the iron oxides would not be promoted, which should lead to improved separation. The effect of nitrogen gas on the equilibrium amounts of both the zinc- and the lead-containing species are shown in   The equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry The degree of separation of the zinc or lead from the iron was determined quantitatively using the selectivity factor ( Significant improvements in both the non-ferrous metal recoveries and the selectivity factors could be achieved by reducing the total pressure. The reactant ratio was fixed at 0.003 The composition of the dust had a significant effect on the zinc and lead recoveries. The addition of lime or calcium carbonate resulted in an increase in the non-ferrous metal recoveries due to the increased formation of calcium ferrites. This decreased the amount of free iron oxide and therefore the amount of the reducing agent consumed by the iron oxide. On the other hand, the addition of calcium ferrite or magnetite resulted in a decrease in the non-ferrous metal recovery due to the increased consumption of the reducing agent by the additional iron oxide. Nitrogen additions can be utilized to improve the zinc and lead recoveries at a given temperature and reactant ratio. The author would like to acknowledge the support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).