Introducing collagen the basic ingredient of bone tissue into the structure of chitosan gels that are formed at physiological body temperature, aims to create so-called biomimetic structures, which are close in composition to the natural composition of bone tissue. The aim of this study was to determine the influence of mineralization on the structural properties of thermosensitive chitosan-collagen gels containing alkaline phosphatase (ALP) by SEM, XRD FTIR and XPS analyses, compared to the previously presented structure of chitosan-collagen gels before mineralization.Chitosan, as a biomaterial, has unique properties (biocompatible, biodegradable) and is used to formed scaffolds for cell culture. They are produced as either dried forms or gels [ Hydrogels are especially interesting materials for scaffolds which are formed by increasing the temperature. They are characterized by the presence of water in the structure, increased flexibility (creating a structure similar to tissue) and the possibility of injecting the scaffold into diseased tissue [ In order to give the chitosan scaffolds osteoinductive properties, it is necessary to introduce calcium phosphate compounds into the structure, creating composite systems (i.e. where the so-called mineralization is conducted). The method of creating mineralized scaffolds relies mainly on introducing hydroxyapatite micro- or nanopellets into a chitosan salt, and then obtaining a 3D structure by phase separation or freezing and lyophilisation, or both processes one after the other. For the preparation of chitosan structures containing hydroxyapatite, the process of ion exchange is also used. Chitosan scaffolds are created at the same time as hydroxyapatite during the formation of the scaffold. In this case, reactions of phosphoric acid H Moreover the mussel-inspired chemistry is an important method for fabrication of different functional materials e.g hydrogels for different applications especially in the biomedical field. Biomineralization was adopted for the fabrication of hydroxyapatite termed polydopamine-assisted hydroxyapatite formation, to integrate hydroxyapatites within scaffold materials [ In recent years, alkaline phosphatase has often been used in research into mineralization of scaffolds intended for osteoblast culture because ALP is the enzyme which participates during the bone mineralization processes. A new trend in the process of mineralization of chitosan scaffolds is the introduction of ALP into the structure. During the incubation of the gel in a solution of calcium glycerophosphate (CaGP), ALP incorporated into the structure of the hydrogel induces the formation of the mineral calcium phosphate. The first research on introduction of ALP into the structure of chitosan gels formed under the influence of temperature were patented and presented in scientific papers [ Composite chitosan-collagen gels, including those formed at physiological body temperature are known in literature [ The current research concerns the evaluation of the structure of composite chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP after mineralization. The study references a previously published study on chitosan and chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP before mineralization by the same authors [ The influence of collagen on the structural properties of thermosensitive chitosan gels before [ The influence of ALP on structural properties of: chitosan gels before [ chitosan-collagen gels before [ Thermosensitive chitosan gels were prepared according to the method described by Chenite [ Thermosensitive chitosan gels containing ALP (Sigma Aldrich Product No. P7640) were created by adding 1 ml of ALP dissolved in deionized water (at the concentrations: 2.5, 10, and 25 mg/ml) to the 16 ml chitosan chloride solution containing Na-β-GP. The final concentration of ALP in each hydrogel was 0.156; 0.625; 1.562 mg/ml, respectively. Thermosensitive chitosan-collagen gels were created by adding 0.5 and 1 ml of collagen (Sigma Aldrich Product No. C4243) to the 16 ml chitosan chloride containing Na-β-GP. Thermosensitive chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP were created by adding 1 ml ALP dissolved in deionized water at concentrations of 2.5, 10, and 25 mg/ml into a chitosan solution containing Na-β-GP with collagen. The final concentration of ALP in each hydrogel was 0.156; 0.625; 1.562 mg/ml respectively. All resulting solutions were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h in order to complete their gelation. The mineralization was conducted in static flow conditions. The gels containing ALP and gels with ALP and collagen were incubated in a solution of CaGP (Sigma Aldrich Product No. 50043) for 36 h. 50 ml 0.1 M CaGP solution was changed twice per day. After that, the samples were lyophilized. The structural properties of the gels were determined by infrared spectroscopy with Fourier transformation (FTIR) using a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer from Thermo Nicolet equipped with a snap Photoacoustics MTEC model 300. Room temperature powder X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) were collected using a PANalytical X'Pert Pro MPD diffractometer in the Bragg–Brentano reflection geometry. Copper CuK The influence of collagen on the structural properties of thermosensitive chitosan gels before mineralization are shown in The presence of collagen in the chitosan gels does not cause any significant changes to the oscillations of chemical groups. After the introduction of collagen, we noticed a lower intensity of the arm of amide I band occurring at wavenumber 1700 cm Mineralization of chitosan and chitosan-collagen gels has a similar effect on the change of gel structure. Mineralization of chitosan gels shows a very strong influence of this process on the resonant frequencies of grouping vibrations in the whole spectral range, observed in deformation of oscillators In the spectra of chitosan and chitosan-collagen gels a band is visible next to the wavenumber 2450 cm The main changes are observed for wavenumbers corresponding to amide I band and amide II band of secondary amides, the saccharide structure and in the range of wave numbers connected with the presence of phospate ions. In all cases the asymmetry of the band at 1660 cm In the saccharide band in spectra of chitosan gels and chitosan-collagen gels is observed similar change. In the spectra of chitosan gels, bands at 1110 cm In the spectra of chitosan-collagen gels the shape of the band at 1050 cm The mineralization of chitosan gels with the addition of collagen take a place without any major impact of the collagen concentrations on the observed changes in the molecular and supermolecular structure. XRD diffraction patterns before and after mineralization of chitosan and chitosan gels containing collagen (0.5 ml and 1.0 ml) samples are shown in The FTIR spectra of chitosan and chitosan-collagen hydrogels containing 1 ml of ALP in the concentration of 0, 2.5, 10 and 25 mg/ml before mineralization are presented in The spectra before and after mineralization of chitosan hydrogels ( Changes in the spectra in asymmetrical band corresponding to O Stretching vibrations of aliphatic groups In spectra of chitosan-collagen hydrogels before mineralization a very wide band was also observed at 2500 2050 cm In spectra before mineralization of chitosan and chitosan hydrogels containing ALP ( Before mineralization in spectra of chitosan and chitosan-collagen with and without ALP ( For low ALP concentrations in chitosan-collagen ( After mineralization in the spectra for chitosan hydrogels with ALP ( The FTIR spectra of chitosan-collagen gel samples with and without the addition of ALP show a strong influence of ALP addition on the conformation and the intermolecular form of gels. This is probably triggered by blocking of the polar groups by ALP. This influence is, in turn, stimulated by collagen. In the spectra deformation oscillations of groups containing C Significant changes in the crystalline structure are observed after the introduction of ALP into the chitosan gel ( A change of the structure of chitosan-collagen hydrogels before and after the mineralization process was determined on the basis of FTIR spectra and confirmed by XPS analysis. The XPS results are presented in The results of the XPS analysis suggest that, after the introduction of collagen into the chitosan gel structure, the number of NH-(C In the case of the addition of ALP to the chitosan-collagen gel a clear decrease of NH-(C After the mineralization of both chitosan gels and chitosan-collagen gels the bonds most likely break because oxygen bands corresponding to bonds β(1 → 4) disappear. After the mineralization of chitosan gels containing ALP, significant changes were observed in relation to chitosan gels before the mineralization; the proportion of NH-(C After the mineralization of chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP, significant changes in comparison with pure chitosan-collagen gels take place at the following bonds: the proportion of NH-(C 24-h mineralization of chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP allows compounds of Ca and P with Ca/P atomic ratio close to 1.0 to be obtained, while mineralization of chitosan gels containing ALP results in an atomic ratio of Ca/P equal to approximately 0.6. After the mineralization in the gels containing ALP, 1.7% of Ca was obtained and 8.3% SEM images of freeze-dried hydrogels after incubation in mineralization solution after 24 h can be seen in All samples, both containing ALP and collagen contained platelet-shaped structures. However, such structures displayed different, rougher morphologies in samples containing ALP and collagen after mineralization in comparison to the structure of gels without ALP. After mineralization especially, in gels containing ALP the mineral-like deposits were present. Mineralization of chitosan gels and chitosan-collagen gels have a similar effect on the changes of the gel structure. The spectra indicate a very strong influence of this process on the resonant frequencies of the grouping vibrations in the whole spectrum. We observed a deformation of the band of oscillators Mineralization of chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP indicates the influence of ALP on aliphatic phosphatase and it is probably connected with a strong interaction on the N The XPS analysis suggests that collagen and chitosan in a solution of hydrochloric acid is connected through C1 carbon, and also amine and hydroxide groups; ALP in the chitosan-collagen gel reacts with NH-(C 1.7% of calcium was obtained after the mineralization chitosan hydrogels containing ALP and 8.3% in the structure of chitosan-collagen gels containing ALP, thus it is five times more Ca, and the Ca/P ratio is close to that of hydroxyapatite and such chitosan hydrogel containing collagen and alkaline phosphatase may pretend for use for biomedical applications. The research was financed by the