Saline water electrolysis (SWE) plays a key role in mineralizing CO2 to carbonate products (e.g., NaHCO3) as it determines the conversion and energy efficiency of the whole CO2 mineralization process. SWE is highly energy intensive and cation exchange membranes (CEMs) represents the highest resistance contributing component of the overall system. Hence, the use of highly Na+ ion-conductive membranes can effectively reduce overpotentials and lower the energy consumption in a SWE system. Motivated by this, a double-layered cation exchange membrane composed of perfluorinated sulfonic acid (PFSA) and perfluorinated carboxylic acid (PFCA) ionomer layers is investigated as an alternative to the commercially available Aciplex-F® membrane, and its performance is evaluated in terms of current-voltage polarization, energy consumption, and caustic current efficiency in single cell mode, followed by technical reliability, electrochemical durability, and the purity of produced NaOH in stack mode. Finally, CO2 reduction achieved by replacing the conventional Aciplex-F based SWE system with the proposed CEM based SWE system is estimated for various electric power sources.Carbon capture and utilization (CCU) is about capturing carbon dioxide (CO CO A key component of the CO To date, there have been diverse approaches to reduce SWE energy consumption. These efforts include a SWE cell using a fuel cell configuration [ In this study, the use of novel double-layered cation exchange membrane composed of perfluorinated sulfonic acid (PFSA) and perfluorinated carboxylic acid (PFCA) ionomer layers is investigated as a way to reduce the ohmic resistance of CEM in order to lower the energy consumption. The efficacy of the idea is tested via electrochemical performance comparison between the experimental double layered CEM and a commercially available SWE membrane in both single cell and stack modes. All the electrochemical evaluations were conducted in the SWE cells employing the above-mentioned approaches except the ODC. The study was also intended to test whether the experimental CEM can maintain the electrochemical durability under an accelerated SWE operation condition. The overall CO Sodium chloride (NaCl, 99.5 %) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 97.0 %) were purchased from Samchun Chemicals (Republic of Korea) and Daejung Chemical (Republic of Korea), respectively, and used as received without any further purification in preparing the anode and cathode feed solutions. For the SWE electrodes, titanium foam and Pt-coated titanium foam (CNL energy, Republic of Korea) were used as the anode and the cathode for easy emissions of Cl The SWE cell configuration used in this study was similar to that of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell ( For CO Electrochemical evaluations of the SWE systems were conducted in both single cell and stack modes. Their current-voltage polarization curves were obtained using a power supply (EDP 3050, PNCYS, Republic of Korea) controlled via LabVIEW (National Instruments, USA). The voltage limit was set to 4.0 V per cell to prevent undesirable cell damages. The feed flow rate for both the anode and cathode was 75 mL min The theoretical voltage of saline water electrolysis is about 2.20 V, which is the sum of standard reduction potentials at the anode and cathode as shown below: The realistic cell voltage is, however, much higher than the theoretical one, owing to the overpotentials resulting from the ohmic resistance of each cell component and interfacial resistance between adjacent components. Among the cell components, cation exchange membrane has the highest resistance value since the mobility of Na    It is essential to improve the electrochemical efficiency in order to achieve a reduced energy consumption. Generally, the electrochemical efficiency is described in the term of Faraday efficiency (in other words, caustic current efficiency) associated with how efficiently the current is used to generate NaOH. The caustic current efficiency (η The caustic current efficiency in The electrochemical performance obtained from the single cell mode may be somewhat different from the average performance obtained from each unit cell in the stack mode. In most cases, the average electrochemical performance becomes worse than the single cell performance, when individual unit cells are assembled in the stack module. These unexpected phenomena may come from a combination of various factors (e.g., insufficient supply and local distribution of the reactants, inappropriate design for serpentine flow field channels on the bipolar plates, and the deviation of clamping pressure) to influence the electrochemical stack performance. Another factor may be the lack of technical reproducibility frequently encountered with laboratory scale cell components fabrication. Thus, it is required to confirm the variation in the electrochemical single cell performances of the DKU membranes derived from different synthetic batches, before the membranes are applied to a stack module.  In spite of repeated on-off cycles with an interval of ∼6 h, the stack voltage is maintained with a very narrow variation range of ±1%. When the SWE stack system was off, all the reactants were replaced with deionized water to prevent OH It is essential to verify the purity of NaOH generated from the DKU SWE stack module for calculating the theoretical CO The use of the SWE stack modules with low energy consumption, such as the DKU SWE module developed in this study, not only can improve the economic feasibility of the resulting CO It is interesting to estimate the carbon footprint reduction when the proposed CO A perfluorinated cation exchange membrane in the form of double-layered structure composed of PFSA and PFCA ionomer layers was employed as a SWE membrane. The membrane showed Na The SWE system developed in this study is also expected to provide a feasible and effective avenue in designing modules for energy-intensive SWE applications including CA SWE. Finally, the synthesis and evaluation of the perfluorinated ionomer membrane will be addressed in a separate publication in membrane-oriented journals.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Technology Development Program to Innovative Hydrogen Energy of the