A study was performed in order to elucidate the effects of the interactions between powder particle size and binder viscosity on the mechanisms involved in agglomerate formation and growth. Calcium carbonates having mean particle sizes in the range of 5–214 μm and polyethylene glycols having viscosities in the range of approximately 50–100 000 mPas were melt agglomerated in a high shear mixer. Agglomerate growth by nucleation and coalescence was found to dominate when agglomerating small powder particles and binders with a low viscosity. Increasing the binder viscosity increased the formation of agglomerates by immersion of powder particles in the surface of the binder droplets. With a larger powder particle size, an increasing binder viscosity was necessary in order to obtain an agglomerate strength being sufficient to avoid breakage. Due to a low agglomerate strength, a satisfying agglomeration of very large particles (214 μm) could not be obtained, even with very viscous binders. The study demonstrated that the optimum agglomerate growth occurred when the agglomerates were of an intermediate strength causing an intermediate deformability of the agglomerates. In order to produce spherical agglomerates (pellets), a low viscosity binder has to be chosen when agglomerating a powder with a small particle size, and a high viscosity binder must be applied in agglomeration of powders with large particles.Agglomeration is an important and established technology in many industrial processes. However, the knowledge of the mechanisms and kinetics involved in agglomeration is still sparse, and the need of additional research in the matter is evident. Some of the important early contributions to theory on agglomeration were made by In melt agglomeration, the formation of agglomerates can proceed by two different mechanisms ( The nuclei formed initially in the process might grow in size by coalescence between nuclei. This agglomerate growth is determined by a balance between coalescence and breakage. Coalescence will be the dominant growth mechanism if the agglomerates possess a high agglomerate strength ( The agglomerate strength becomes increased by a smaller powder particle size, a higher binder viscosity, and by a densification of the agglomerates ( According to Agglomeration of powders with a mean particle size below approximately 10 μm has traditionally been troublesome and has often led to an uncontrollable agglomerate growth. This is because of the high liquid saturation needed in order to obtain a sufficient deformability to counteract for the high agglomerate strength caused by the cohesiveness of the small particles ( The powder particle size is especially critical if pellets have to be produced. Powder particles that are too small will result in oversized agglomerates and a wide agglomerate size distribution because of an uncontrollable growth. Powder particles that are too large will result in a wide size distribution and agglomerates with a non-uniform shape due to breakage. The optimum particle size of a raw material to be melt pelletized has been indicated to be in the size range of 20–25 μm (  Six different grades of calcium carbonate powders with different mean particle size, manufactured from a white marble, and produced by comminution and classification (Omya, France), were used as starting material. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 1500 S, 3000 S, 6000 S, 10000 S, 20000 S, or 35000 S (Hoechst, Germany) was used as meltable binder. ‘S’ indicates that the PEGs are used as flakes. Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) (Merck-Schuchardt, Germany) was used as an antioxidant in order to prevent thermal decomposition of the binder during the agglomeration process ( The size distribution by volume of the calcium carbonates was determined by a Malvern 2601Lc laser diffraction particle sizer (Malvern Instruments, UK). The span is calculated as the difference between the diameters at 90 and 10 percentage points relative to the median diameter, A Gemini 2375 Surface Area Analyzer (Micromeritics, USA) was used for the determination of the BET multipoint surface area of the calcium carbonates. The true density of the calcium carbonates and of the solid PEGs was determined by an Accupyc 1330 gas displacement pycnometer (Micromeritics, USA) using helium purge. The poured and tapped densities of the calcium carbonates were determined according to the test for apparent volume ( The size distributions of the PEGs were estimated by sieve analysis with a series of 12 ASTM standard sieves in the range of 75–4000 μm. A sample of about 100 g was sieved for 5 min at low vibration level by a Fritsch analysette 3 vibrator (Fritsch, Germany). The mass median diameter and the span were calculated. The densities of molten PEGs were estimated at 70, 80, and 90°C as previously described ( The melting range and the peak temperature of the PEGs were estimated by a Perkin-Elmer DSC 7 differential scanning calorimeter (Perkin-Elmer, USA) as previously described ( The viscosities of the molten PEGs were estimated at 70, 80, and 90°C by a Rotovisco RV 12 rotation viscometer (Haake, Germany) as previously described ( The agglomeration experiments were performed in an 8-l Pellmix PL 1/8 laboratory scale high shear mixer (Niro, Denmark) ( The heating jacket was preheated to 50°C. Calcium carbonate (1500 g), the amount of PEG, and 3% BHA (%, m/m, of PEG) were dry mixed at an impeller speed of 1300 rpm. The amount of PEG (%, m/m, of calcium carbonate) used was 15.5% with the 5-μm powder, 15.0% with the 13-μm powder, 13.5% with the 34-μm powder, 12.0% with the 39-μm powder, 9.5% with the 80-μm powder, and 4.0% with the 214-μm powder. Because of formation of frictional heat caused by the impeller rotation, the product temperature increased during mixing to a temperature exceeding the melting point of the PEG. The melting point was observed as an inflection point on the recorded product temperature curve. This inflection point was defined as the start of massing time. Two minutes after the melting point was observed on the temperature curve, the impeller speed was lowered to 800 rpm. After 8 min of additional massing time, the agglomeration procedure was terminated. At the end of each experiment, the agglomerates were sieved on a 4-mm Jel-Fix 50 vibration sieve (J. Engelsmann, Germany) for about 10 s, until the fraction finer than 4 mm had passed. The agglomerates were then spread out in thin layers on trays allowing them to cool at ambient temperature. The adhesion of mass to the bowl was estimated as previously described ( The size distributions of the agglomerates were estimated by sieve analysis of a sample drawn by scooping approximately 100 g from the cooled fraction finer than 4 mm. A series of 14 ASTM standard sieves in the range of 75–2000 μm was vibrated by a Fritsch analysette 3 vibrator (Fritsch, Germany) for 10 min. The mass median diameter and the span were calculated. The intragranular porosity of the agglomerates was estimated by a mercury immersion method similar to that described by The actual binder concentrations (%, m/m, of calcium carbonate) of the fractions (250–2000 μm) were estimated indirectly from the true densities of the milled agglomerate size fraction, determined by helium pycnometry as earlier described ( Photographs of agglomerate size fractions 250–2000 μm were taken by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Jeol JSM 5200, Japan). A sample was drawn by scooping approximately 200 g from the cooled fraction finer than 4 mm. A series of 7 ASTM standard sieves in the range of 180–1400 μm was vibrated by a Fritsch analysette 3 vibrator (Fritsch, Germany) for 10 min, and the single size fractions were collected. The actual PEG concentration of the single size fractions was estimated by helium pycnometry as described in Six calcium carbonates of different particle size were agglomerated with each of six types of PEG. The experiments were carried out in duplicate giving a total of 72 experiments. The experiments were performed in a randomized order. All data presented in this paper are mean values of the repeated experiments. The data were analysed for the effect of viscosity by a one-way analysis of variance for each calcium carbonate grade. The particle properties of the calcium carbonates are shown in The true density of the calcium carbonates is slightly decreasing with a rise in powder particle size. This could be due to voids within the larger particles. As to be expected, the specific surface area of the particles lessens with a larger particle size. The interparticular porosity reflects the compactability of the powders. For small particles, the number of contact points between the particles per volume will rise, the binding forces between the solid particles will be higher, and the powder resistance to compaction will increase resulting in a higher interparticular porosity. This is seen in The physical properties of the PEGs are shown in The binder concentration necessary for agglomeration usually becomes increased with a smaller powder particle size (     The corrected porosity and the liquid saturation of the agglomerates are shown in For the calcium carbonates of a particle size of 13 μm and larger, the porosity is independent of the binder viscosity, but for the 5-μm powder there is a significant ( The liquid saturation has a great influence on the agglomerate growth, and it is controlled by the amount of binder solution and by the intragranular porosity ( The temperature of the product rises during processing because of a formation of heat of friction. The effect of type of PEG on the temperature rise is significant (0.000< The adhesion of material to the bowl varied between 1 and 11% (m/m) and was generally higher for the calcium carbonates with a smaller powder particle size. This is because of the higher cohesiveness of the smaller particles ( The mass median agglomerate sizes obtained in the experiments are outlined in  Since the agglomerate size distributions are rather different, the mass median diameter alone is insufficient in order to evaluate the agglomerate growth mechanisms. The discussion of the agglomerate growth mechanisms, therefore, is based upon the agglomerate size distributions. The histograms show the mean of two agglomeration experiments, and the error bars represent the range.  No data are presented for PEG 35000 S owing to an insufficient agglomerate growth. For these experiments, the end product consisted of a mixture of unagglomerated powder particles and powder particles immersed in the surface of binder particles. This is because the combination of a cohesive powder and a highly viscous binder impedes the distribution of binder. With the PEG 10000 S and 20000 S, the viscosity is still so high that the binder distribution becomes difficult. Therefore, a marked amount of particles below 75 μm is seen, especially with PEG 20000 S, indicating the presence of unagglomerated powder particles.  When applying a high viscosity binder, the dominating agglomerate formation mechanism is immersion ( For the 13-μm powder ( When the powder particles become larger, a higher binder viscosity is needed to give the necessary strength to the agglomerates (  As for the smaller particles, an optimum binder viscosity can be found above which a further increase in binder viscosity decreases the growth. For the 34-μm powder ( The larger powder particle sizes of the 34-, 39-, and 80-μm powders made it possible to obtain a uniform distribution of PEG 35000 S and consequently to form agglomerates. These agglomerates were oblong and formed like the original binder flakes, indicating that immersion was the dominating mechanism involved in the agglomerate growth. The appearance of agglomerates from the 34-μm powder agglomerated with PEG 3000 S to 20000 S, the 39-μm powder with PEG 6000 S to 20000 S, and the 80-μm powder with PEG 20000 S indicated that distribution and coalescence were the mechanisms dominating in the agglomerate formation and growth.  The distribution of the binder in size fractions of the agglomerates was examined for a few agglomeration experiments ( When a small powder particle size is agglomerated with a binder of high viscosity ( When a large powder particle size is agglomerated with a binder of low viscosity ( The present work documents that the mechanisms of agglomerate formation and growth depend on the interaction between powder particle size and binder viscosity. For small powder particles and low binder viscosities, the dominating agglomerate growth mechanisms are growth by nucleation and coalescence. When the binder viscosity becomes very high, immersion of particles in the binder droplets will be the agglomerate formation mechanism dominating, and growth will proceed by continued layering of particles on the surface of the agglomerates. If the powder applied has a large particle size, a high binder viscosity is necessary in order to achieve an agglomerate strength that is sufficient to prevent breakage of agglomerates. In this study, particles with a mean particle size of 214 μm could not be satisfactorily agglomerated, even with a very high binder viscosity (∼100 Pas at 80°C). The study demonstrates that agglomerate growth is favoured by an intermediate agglomerate strength. An intermediate strength makes the agglomerates resistant to breakage and, at the same time, sufficiently deformable for agglomerate growth by coalescence. The results presented in this paper verify the hypothesis that it will be possible to obtain a controllable agglomerate growth with powders having a particle size up to 80 μm by combining the particle size and binder viscosity in order to optimize the agglomerate strength. In order to produce pellets, a low viscosity binder has to be chosen when the powder particles are small and cohesive, and a high viscosity binder must be applied in case of large powder particles. This strategy can broaden the interval of powder particle sizes being suitable for pelletization. The authors wish to thank Omya, France, for supplying the calcium carbonates and Clariant GmbH, Germany, for supplying the PEGs.