A thermodynamic description frame for oxide glasses and melts in unfolded, starting from one-component systems and reaching to systems with many components. The description frame is based on the identification and exploitation of the constitutional relations of mineral phases in the crystalline standard state of a given system at 298K. Glasses and their melts are described as mixtures of the constitutional phases in their vitreous or liquid state, respectively. This description allows to predict integral thermodynamic properties of glasses and glass melts at an accuracy of <5%, and activity coefficients of individual oxides at <±0.3 on a logarithmic scale. The relative concentrations of components for a given composition reflect the coexistence of short-range order structural entities termed chemical structure. The temperature dependence of the configurational entropy S
                     c is calculated for a multicomponent basalt and float glass melt. Viscosities derived from S
                     c by the medium-range order Adam–Gibbs theory are in excellent agreement with experimental data.The crystalline state of matter is comparatively well understood. Extended data bases are available comprising information on structure, (thermo)dynamics, phase relations, phase transitions etc.. A prevailing challenge is the consistent and quantitative description of systems with a large number of components. Yet even in this area, considerable progress has been achieved. By contrast, the understanding of matter in the glassy state has been lagging behind this development. Data are available for simple systems, mostly one-component and binary ones, but hardly for multicomponent systems. The solid equilibrium state of a multicomponent oxide system is essentially a heterogeneous (multiphase) state. In accordance with Gibbs’ phase rule, a crystalline The relation between a glass and a crystal of identical chemical composition is sketched in Eqs. In one-component systems, the crystalline counterpart of a glass may (and usually does) occur in a polycrystalline microstructure, however, of chemically identical phases. For systems with more than one component, the nature of the crystalline counterpart of a glass changes fundamentally. In general, the crystalline reference state (CRS) of such systems is heterogeneous chemically, characterized by the coexistence of different crystalline phases. Thus, in order to determine the CRS of a multicomponent glass, constitutional relations have to be evaluated. Unfortunately, phase diagrams for systems with many components are usually not available. By experience, however, the majority of practical glass forming systems, such as: industrial glasses, igneous and metamorphic rocks, metallurgical slags, can be represented by a predominant quaternary comprising more than 85% of the oxides on a molar basis. Beyond this, stoichiometric compounds comprising more than three different oxides are typically not formed. This parsimony of nature enables a swift and surprisingly simple approach to the description of multicomponent systems. The quaternary CaO–MgO–Al The above procedure is more than just only a favorable way to calculate thermodynamic properties of glass forming systems. It reveals something essential about their structure. Indeed, there is ample experimental evidence that the heterogeneous nature of the CRS is reflected by the properties of a glass and its melt. Typical examples are: the concentration dependence of vapor partial pressures above the melt With the chemical structure (or the CRS) known, a glass and its melt can be characterized thermodynamically in a fully quantitative way. The quantity The approach via Eqs. The modeled data in It is important to note that the quasi-heterogeneous nature of species distribution does not at all imply that glasses are heterogeneous systems. It is a feature of SRO, hence, does not even imply the existence of a medium-range order within the glasses; MRO is an additional feature of glasses beyond the scope of chemical structure. It is already present in one-component glasses and my be considered as the feature substituting the far-range order translational symmetry of the corresponding crystals. In fact, there is ample experimental evidence that oxide melts are not homogeneous down to the molecular scale Here, Based on the description frame of Eqs.  A description frame was unfolded by which the thermochemical properties of multicomponent melts, undercooled melts, and glasses can be calculated from their chemical composition. At the present stage of development, the accuracy is better than 5% for integral quantities (such as total enthalpies or Gibbs energies), and better than a factor of two for activity coefficients of individual oxides. The accuracy is limited by both the quality of the model itself and the database employed for the calculation. The basis of the calculation is the determination and exploitation of the constitutional relations in the crystalline reference system (CRS) of a given composition. The constitutional relations in the CRS and the chemical structure or short range order (SRO) of a glass and its melt are closely related to each other. While the coexistence of phases in the former case is governed by the stringent concept of Gibbs’ phase rule, the chemical structure is governed by a softer concept of coexistence of its structural entities, equivalent to the coexistence of species in an aqueous solution. In the same way as the coexistence of two species in the latter case defines (i.e., buffers) a distinct pH value, is the species distribution in oxide glasses and melts subject to relatively abrupt changes with composition. From a structural point of view, the relation between the chemical structure and the medium range order (MRO) is not yet clear. From the thermodynamic point of view, however, both features definitely are related to each other. The quantity providing the bridge is the configurational entropy