The aim of this research is to present a novel 3D simulation procedure to assess microwave induced stresses in inhomogeneous hard rocks at a microstructure level. For a realistic rock model a two-component 3D microstructure is generated by a Voronoi tessellation algorithm. The two components are microwave absorbing (phase A) and transparent (phase T), respectively. In order to calculate the electric field inside the inhomogeneous rock, a 3D finite difference time domain (FDTD) simulation is performed. The absorbed heat is computed and applied as temperature distribution in a subsequent thermo-mechanical finite element (FE) analysis in order to calculate the thermally induced stresses. Two irradiation times (15s and 25s) and a microwave power of 25kW at 2.45GHz as well as three different morphologies are analyzed. Moreover, the phase transformation of quartz at 573°C is considered in the FE model. The influence of the anisotropic nature of the quartz grains is assessed by comparing the stress formation in the isotropic with those of the anisotropic case. A comparative analysis with a homogeneous model is performed in order to draw conclusions on the influence of the microstructure on the microwave induced stress formation. High maximum principal stresses on the boundaries of the microwave absorbing phase (phase A) exceeding the tensile strength are observed in the 15s irradiation model. After 25s of microwave irradiation even higher stresses as a consequence of phase transformation of quartz are determined. In the anisotropic case significantly more areas with high maximum principal stresses especially in phase T are observed. Microwave irradiation experiments on granite samples are performed in order to correlate the numerical results with experiments.Classical mechanical comminution is a highly energy-intensive process which consumes up to 2% of the total energy in several mining countries such as USA, Australia and South Africa ( The physical process of microwave heating is described by the complex dielectric constant The main advantage of using microwave heating of inhomogeneous hard rocks is that only the high-absorbing minerals are affected and therefore selective heating occurs. However, experiments on rather homogeneous rocks such as basalt also show significant microwave induced damage without any high absorbing particles ( The goal of the current research is to present a novel 3D simulation procedure in order to determine microwave induced stresses at a microstructure level and further to apply the proposed analysis on a hard rock model. Due to the lack of extensive thermo-physical measurements of different minerals occurring in hard rocks, a two phase model with data from literature was built up. The two components are microwave absorbing (phase A) and transparent (phase T), respectively. For a real rock phase T might be quartz and phase A a mixture of plagioclase, pyroxene and ilmenite. The dielectric properties of the two phases are derived from the effective medium theory ( In order to identify microwave induced stresses, a simulation chain is set up starting from the numerical solution of Maxwell’s equations by means of a finite difference scheme (FDTD – finite difference time domain, see Calculating the stress state inside a realistic 3D microstructure requires a comprehensive simulation methodology connecting different simulation modules. This work presents a simulation chain, for the time being without taking into account any feedback of temperature changes on the electromagnetic properties as well as a weak coupling between the displacements and the thermal field ( The simulation process starts with the collection and pre-processing of input data such as physical and thermo-mechanical material properties, numerical parameters and model dimensions ( As mentioned above a Voronoi tessellation algorithm with statistical distributed grain size combined with phase assignment according to a constant filling factor is used. However, a more realistic phase distribution could be achieved in future works by considering spatial correlation in the microstructure model as presented by First, a cube is partitioned into polyhedra representing the grains of the material by a Voronoi tessellation algorithm provided by the open source software Neper ( In the next step the material phases (phase A and T) are assigned to the different grains of the microstructure by a C++ script ( In order to assess different morphologies (different phase assignments) with the same filling factor Significant variations in the phase distribution are visualized in An FDTD algorithm explicitly solves Maxwell’s equations describing the evolution of the electric field. A second order accurate central-difference approximation for space and time derivatives in the curl equations is applied ( In A microwave beam with a typical technical frequency of 2.45 Since the dielectric constants of the various minerals vary strongly, depending on the experimental setup, water content and purity, an effective medium approach was chosen. The complex relative permittivity of the two phases of the model rock is calculated by assuming an effective permittivity Since the FDTD code is using an explicit solution scheme a stability condition has to be fulfilled (Eq. Usually, a Courant number of 0.5 is chosen for 3D simulations. For avoiding numerical dispersion the lattice constant should be smaller than the wavelength divided by 20 ( A 3D finite element model has been developed using the FE package Abaqus ( The two domains (microstructure cube and homogeneous part) are joined together by means of tie constraints of the respective surfaces. The thermo-mechanical material properties including the phase transformation of quartz are taken from the literature and are discussed in detail in Section In the heat transfer model the Cartesian coordinates of the integration points of every finite element are read out by a FORTRAN subroutine. Afterwards, the absorbed power density ( In the mechanical model the same FE mesh again using linear elements as in the thermal analysis is employed. Furthermore the same two steps (heating and cooling) are analyzed. The mechanical model has 3,000,519 degrees of freedom. As an input the time varying temperature field calculated in the previous analysis is applied. On the The presented methodology is limited to temperature independent dielectric properties since no strong coupling between FDTD – and FE simulation is considered. Future work will also include this effect in a more sophisticated simulation procedure. Unlike the permittivity, the thermo-mechanical properties of minerals are well known in literature. Therefore the main constituent of phase A and of phase T is chosen for the FE simulations. In the paper at hand, quartz represents the microwave transparent phase T and plagioclase as the main component of phase A the absorbing phase. These two minerals are typical constituents of hard rocks. At typical pressure levels quartz transforms from trigonal quartz ( In Sections The thermal material behavior of quartz is depicted in The heat capacity Based on the thermal strains reported in In Based on symmetry considerations of the crystal structure in quartz seven elastic constants have to be defined in order to fully describe the elastic behavior. Actually, in the  The simulation methodology described in Section Based on the outlined numerical model of a reference phase distribution the electric field inside the microstructure is determined. To this end the time averaged squared electric field ( By analyzing From From the results of the FDTD analysis, the absorbed power density distribution can be worked out ( As described in Section In Since no By comparing the same microstructure model with 15 Using the transient temperature field (obtained in Section In the reference model high maximum principal stresses are observed in phase A grains near the front face of the rock model inside the main Gaussian beam ( In order to investigate the influence of the microstructure on the formation of the stress distribution, a comparative analysis including a homogeneous material definition is performed. By comparing In addition to brittle failure under tension, crushing due to compressive stresses has to be investigated. By comparing the minimum principal stresses ( The maximum principal stress is an appropriate measure as long as brittle behavior of the constituents is assumed. However, it has to be pointed out that in realistic rock materials different damage mechanisms might occur especially at elevated temperatures where non-negligible amounts of plasticity are to be expected. In that case an alternative failure criterion would allow more accurate predictions of the failure behavior of the rock. This is demonstrated on the example of the Tresca stress distribution function displayed in Tresca stresses exceeding the yield strength are observed in By comparing the maximum principal stresses along the Gaussian axis of the three different morphologies (model A, B and C, see Considerable variations in the maximum principal stresses between the three models are observed ( In The influence of longer microwave irradiation times followed by In order to investigate the influence of phase transformation and longer irradiation time in detail a statistical analysis of the stresses at the integration points of the finite elements located in the microstructure cube is performed. For that purpose the total stress range is divided into classes with a width of 1 In By visualizing the frequency density distribution of the minimum principal stresses ( At elaborated stress levels the Tresca stress distribution of the both constituent is nearly coincident ( The influence of the anisotropic behavior of the quartz grains (phase T) after 25 In  Microwave irradiation experiments on granite blocks (50 As illustrated in Regarding the effect of the microstructure on the microwave induced stresses in inhomogeneous rocks with strongly absorbing phases the stripe-like In the inhomogeneous case significant crack initiation is expected at the boundaries of the phase A grains near the Gaussian axis which will propagate along the phase boundaries in areas where high principal stresses occur as has been observed in the 2D case by By comparing the stress field of three different morphologies with the same filling factor ( The stresses increase if the anisotropic nature of the quartz crystals is taken into account. By comparing the stress field after 25 The set of stress results presented in Section A novel comprehensive 3D simulation chain for determining the microwave induced stresses in realistic microstructures has been presented. The concept comprises the analysis of the electric, the thermal and the stress fields of a two-component microstructure in a block of a model rock irradiated with a microwave beam. In order to apply the derived numerical methodology a model with thermo-physical properties taken from literature was built up. After 15 Comparing the maximum principal stress field of the inhomogeneous model with the homogeneous one reveals substantial differences. Obviously microwave induced stresses in materials with strongly absorbing phases depend on the microstructure. Sufficiently strong heating triggers a phase transformation in the quartz grains which leads to even higher stresses in both constituents. The stress state significantly changes when the anisotropic material behavior of quartz is taken into account. Then the quartz grains near the Gaussian axis, which were subject to strong compression in the isotropic case, change to tension in the anisotropic model. Therefore a different crack pattern is expected in the anisotropic case. The phase transformations as well as the anisotropic behavior of quartz crystals have the potential to promote damage in rocks with high amounts of quartz (i.e. granite, quartzolite, rhyolite, dacite). In future work not only damage initiation but also crack propagation will be modeled. The presented simulation chain allows assessing different grain diameters, morphologies, constituents and filling factors. Moreover, the methodology can easily be extended to more than two constituents as well as an actual microstructure as measured by crystallographic investigations. For further investigations a more realistic grain size distribution including a spatial correlation will be taken into account. So far the reported methodology is limited to temperature independent dielectric properties since no strong coupling between FDTD and FE simulation has been considered. Future work will also include this effect in a more sophisticated simulation procedure. Moreover, a comprehensive measurement setup has to be devised in order to correlate the numerical models with the microwave experiments quantitatively. Afterwards, a general conclusion on the improvement of comminution efficiency due to microwave irradiation of hard rocks can be drawn. Nevertheless, the presented 3D simulations confirm that microwave treatment has the potential to induce high stresses which can eventually lead to damage formation. Financial support by the