This study details the development of a simple procedure of separating amines with long hydrocarbon chains. We describe the separation of monooctylamine (MOA), dioctylamine (DOA) and trioctylamine (TOA) from a mixture of three amines.
                  The separation of these substances is carried out by liquid–liquid extraction of MOA and TOA from an aqueous mineral acid solution and a nonpolar organic solvent. The results obtained show that the procedure described permits the separation of the three amines and their recovery with minimal losses.Primary, secondary and tertiary amines with long hydrocarbon chains, such as trioctylamine (TOA), are frequently used in the extraction of metals The existing methods for separation of mono-, di- and trialkylamines are various and are based on their physiochemical properties. The separation requires several steps involving techniques such as: distillation, steam distillation, crystallisation, filtration and adsorption on solids In this study, we propose a simple procedure of liquid–liquid extraction for the separation of amines with long hydrocarbon chains. We describe the procedure for synthetic mixture of monooctylamine (MOA), dioctylamine (DOA) and TOA. Amines (MOA, DOA, TOA), hydrochloric (32%) and perchloric (60%) acids as well as sodium hydroxide 99% were Merck products. Acetic anhydride, salicylic aldehyde, ethanol and hexane were the purest quality Fluka products. pH-metric measuring of the pure amines is carried out by simple titration of samples (0.1 g) diluted in ethanol (20 mL) using 0.1 M perchloric acid solutions in ethanol. The amines obtained after separation are titrated according to the method of Infrared spectra  Densities and refractive indexes were measured at 20 °C, respectively using a Supelco pycnometer and a Euromax Honland refractometer. The physiochemical and spectral data of MOA, DOA and TOA are detailed in MOA, DOA and TOA amine separation tests are carried out by liquid–liquid extraction. The principle of the procedure consists of the initial conversion of the amines into their corresponding ammonium salts with a mineral acid (HCl). This procedure allows the transfer of the octylammonium chloride salt into the aqueous phase. In the next step, trioctylammonium chloride salt is separated from the dioctylammonium salt by extraction using a nonpolar organic solvent (hexane). Following these steps, separate ammonium salts were converted into their corresponding amines by action of an alkaline solution (NaOH). The amines obtained were finally washed in distilled water, dried and then analysed by various analytic techniques. MOA extraction tests were carried out by agitation in separating funnels of the MOA, DOA and TOA mixtures (3–8 mmol) with hydrochloric acid solutions (≈2 M). After separation of the phases, the lower phase was added to an aqueous soda solution 1 M (volumetric ratio of soda solution to lower phase=2). Two phases still appeared, the upper phase was separated, washed in distilled water and finally dried by vacuum water evaporation ( These experiments were carried under the following conditions: agitation times ( TOA separation from DOA was also carried out by liquid–liquid extraction with hexane as solvent. The tests are carried out after conversion of the two amine mixtures (3–4 mmol) with a 1 M solution HCl (molar ratio of HCl to amines=1) into a mixture of trioctylammonium and dioctylammonium chlorides which are soluble in the organic phase. The mixture of ammonium salts was stirred with hexane at a temperature between 35 and 40 °C. The two phases obtained (upper S and lower I) were separated with a separating funnel and each phase was stirred with a 1-M soda solution (volumetric ratio of soda solution to phase=2). After separation of the lower soda aqueous phase, the two remaining organic phases were washed with distilled water. The product washed and obtained from the phase S (TOA) was evaporated at 70 °C to remove the hexane. The products obtained from the phases S (TOA) and I (DOA) were dried by water evaporation under vacuum ( The extraction experiments of TOA salts by hexane were carried out under various operating conditions by fixing times of agitation ( The method suggested in this study for the separation of amines from a mixture of MOA, DOA and TOA consists, in first instance, of the conversion of these bases into their corresponding ammonium chloride salts according to Preliminary tests showed that octylammonium chloride (MOA salt) has more affinity for the aqueous phase and that dioctylammonium chloride (DOA salt) and trioctylammonium (TOA salt) remain in the organic phase. Tests have shown that TOA salt can be selectively extracted from a DOA salt with hexane. These results suggest a simple procedure to separate the amines of a MOA, DOA and TOA mixture. The first step is the extraction of MOA with an acid aqueous solution (HCl). Secondly, the TOA salt is selectively extracted with hexane. MOA separation experiments from the MOA, DOA and TOA mixture were carried out under various operating conditions according to a factorial design 2 These results show that MOA separation yields increase slightly (<10%) with agitation time. The MOA neutralisation and transfer of the salt formed towards the aqueous phase seemed to be fast. The increase of Other tests were also carried out by repeating the extraction operation three times ( These results show that the yields The maximum of MOA separation yield was 97% and was obtained for the following conditions ( TOA separation from DOA was also carried out by liquid–liquid extraction using hexane starting from TOA and DOA ammonium chloride salt mixtures. The experiments were also carried out while following a factorial design 2 The agitation time of mixtures TOA and DOA salts with hexane does not influence TOA separation yields (Δ A scheme representing the MOA, DOA and TOA mixture separation procedure is detailed in The MOA, DOA and TOA amine mixture is completely separated into respective amines with a recovery of better than 95% using the separation procedure described in This study suggests a simple method that allows, on the one hand, TOA purification by separation from the other amine impurities that can affect its metals extracting capability and, on the other hand, the separation and the recovery of two other amines (MOA, DOA).