Blunt trauma to the pelvis can cause fractures and ligamentous injuries to the pelvic ring and can fracture the acetabulum. Pelvic and acetabular fractures often occur with high-energy blunt trauma, including motor vehicle and motorcycle crashes, car vs pedestrian accidents, and falls. The presence of pelvic ring injuries affects clinical decision-making in several ways. Unstable patients with pelvic injuries may benefit from emergent angiography or retroperitoneal pelvic packing Pelvic fractures commonly cause pelvic bleeding. Most bleeding is self-limited, arising from venous structures or bone edges. However, 5%-20% of patients with pelvic fractures have potentially life-threatening arterial hemorrhage that may be amenable to angioembolization. Bladder injuries complicate less than 10% of blunt pelvic fractures. Urethral injuries are also rare, but are more likely in male patients with anterior pelvic ring disruption. Predictors of urethral injury include diastasis (≥1 The adult osseous pelvis is formed by the sacrum posteriorly and the bilateral innominate bones (formed by fusion of the ilium, ischium, and pubic bones) ( A total of 2 types of stability, rotational and vertical, are considered ( Vertical stability implies that each side of the pelvis maintains a normal craniocaudal relationship with the sacrum with upward forces, such as from standing upright. If a patient were to attempt to stand on a vertically unstable pelvic ring, the affected hemipelvis would move superiorly relative to the intact sacrum. This usually happens through a completely disrupted SI joint, but can occur through complete fractures of the ilium or the sacrum. A vertically unstable pelvis is also rotationally unstable, whereas rotational instability does not imply vertical instability. The presence of either rotational or vertical instability requires internal fixation. Although pelvic stability is ultimately determined on clinical examination, radiology reports tailored to describe the disrupted bony and ligamentous elements of the pelvic ring would aid the surgeon׳s decision-making. Pelvic ring injuries are commonly classified according to the Young-Burgess classification system, summarized in In anteroposterior compression injuries, disruption of the pubic symphysis alone results in anterior pelvic ring widening ( Lateral compression injuries are characterized by obturator ring and anterior sacral impaction fractures. The obturator ring fractures may be ipsilateral or contralateral or both to the sacral injury. Obturator ring fracture orientation may be axial, coronal, or comminuted. The most common finding indicating rotational instability is a crescent fracture that ranges in appearance from a tiny avulsion of the posterior ilium to a large iliac wing fracture ( Cephalad displacement of the hemipelvis in vertical shear injuries is best assessed posteriorly, using the relationship of the sacral arcades with the sciatic buttress ( Young-Burgess also includes a catchall category of combined pelvic ring injuries representing a variable combination of anteroposterior, lateral, or vertical directed forces. A radiology report using the Young-Burgess classification system to describe pelvic ring disruption would reliably convey information among providers during initial clinical decision-making. Optimal imaging of pelvic ring disruptions has not been validated in the literature. Although, it is generally accepted that CT is highly sensitive, an appropriate diagnosis can be made with radiographs in most cases. Acetabular fractures are uncommon but important injuries, which frequently require surgical reconstruction. The most common fracture patterns overall are posterior wall fractures, associated both-column fractures, and transverse with posterior wall fractures. Radiographic features of acetabular anatomy are highlighted in The classification system of acetabular fractures developed and refined by Emile Letournel and RobertJudet is widely used and guides surgical approach and operative fixation.    Some acetabular fracture imaging features not included in the Judet and Letournel system predict poor clinical outcome and should be reported. Characterization of acetabular fractures was originally performed with anteroposterior and bilateral oblique Judet views (iliac oblique and obturator oblique). Though uncommon, pelvic ring injuries and acetabular fractures are important diagnoses in patients with blunt trauma. Associated injuries, including pelvic hemorrhage, bladder and urethral injuries, and other abdominal organ injuries, are frequently present. Concepts of stability and force trajectory guide decision-making regarding surgical fixation for pelvic ring injuries, and the Young-Burgess system is useful for communication of imaging findings. Orthopedic surgeons use the Judet and Letournel system to classify acetabular fractures and to guide surgical approach. Radiology reports should include features relevant for surgical decision-making.