The hydrophobic flocculation of sphalerite fines in aqueous suspensions induced by ethyl and amyl xanthates has been investigated using laser diffraction, electrophoretic light scattering and contact angle measurements. The investigation includes studying the effects of various parameters, namely hydrocarbon chain length of xanthate ions, xanthate concentration, pH, original particle size and stirring strength, and approaching the mechanisms of the hydrophobic flocculation. The experimental results have demonstrated that the hydrophobic flocculation arises as a result of the adsorption of ethyl and amyl xanthate ions on sphalerite, which imparts hydrophobicity to the particles, and thereby hydrophobic interaction between the particles. It closely correlates with sphalerite particle hydrophobicity and original particles sizes. The more hydrophobic and the smaller the particles, the stronger is the hydrophobic flocculation. There are critical ethyl and amyl xanthate concentrations at which the hydrophobic flocculation start to increase sharply, which well accords with the contact angle and negative ζ potential of sphalerite. The hydrophobic flocculation increased with increasing xanthate concentration despite an simultaneous increase in the negative ζ potential of sphalerite, meaning that hydrophobic interaction between the particles increased much more strongly than electric double layer repulsion from the adsorption of the xanthate ions. Also, it has been found that there is a direct relationship between particle hydrophobicity and stirring strength for the hydrophobic flocculation.The flotation response of minerals falls substantially when the particles are present in a fine size range. For instance, sulfide minerals flotation were found to have the lower size limit of 6 μm for galena, 8 μm for sphalerite, 9 μm for pyrrhotite, 15 μm for chalcopyrite and 20 μm for pyrite through investigations in laboratory as well as in operating mills Hydrophobic flocculation arises as a result of hydrophobic interaction between particles in aqueous suspensions There are also many reports on the hydrophobic flocculation of other oxide minerals fines induced by surfactants, namely, apatite fines by sodium oleate Sphalerite is the most common zinc mineral, and its flotation with alkyl xanthates as collectors has been practiced worldwide since early in 20th century. Numerous reviews are available in this regard, including the recent ones by Fuerstenau In this work, the hydrophobic flocculation of sphalerite fines and the adsorption of ethyl and amyl xanthate ions on sphalerite were studied using laser diffraction and electrophoretic light scattering measurements, versatile techniques in studying colloidal particles. The particle hydrophobicity was determined through contact angle measurements. The objectives are to characterize the behavior of the hydrophobic flocculation of sphalerite fines as affected by several parameters, namely xanthates concentration, hydrocarbon chain length of xanthates, pH, original particle size and stirring strength, and to study the mechanisms of the hydrophobic flocculation. The sample of sphalerite used in this study was received from the Naica mine, in Chihuahua, Mexico. The mineral was crushed by a hand hammer, and then purified by hand sorting. Several pieces of sphalerite were cut to obtain rectangles with 2-cm length and 1-cm width for contact angle measurements. Fines of sphalerite were obtained through grinding in a vibrating cup mill. By gravity sedimentation, two particle size fractions were produced, i.e. −2 and +2 to 5 μm, for aggregation and electrokinetic studies. Potassium ethyl and amyl xanthates were supplied by the Industria Quı́mica de Mexico, and were purified in the following procedure. Xanthate powders were first dissolved in acetone, followed by filtration; next, the filtrate was mixed with ethyl ether or amyl ether to precipitate potassium ethyl or amyl xanthate. This procedure was repeated twice to obtain pure potassium ethyl and amyl xanthates. Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide analytical reagents were obtained from J.T. Barker that were used to adjust pH of aqueous suspensions. The water used was distilled first, and then treated by passing through resin beds and a 0.2-μm filter. The residue conductivity of the water was less than 1 μS cm Hydrophobic flocculation of sphalerite fines in aqueous suspensions was performed in a conditioning tank of 10-cm internal diameter with four 1-cm width baffles. The mixer head was connected to a Servodyne mixer controller and a mixing shaft equipped with a 6-cm width and 2-cm height S-shape impeller. Mineral suspensions were prepared with 1-g sphalerite and 100-ml water, and were adjusted for pH with either hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide solution. Then the suspensions were conditioned at a given stirring speed for a given duration in the absence and presence of ethyl or amyl xanthate before they were transferred to the particle size analyzer to determine floc size distributions. A Shimadzu SALD-1100 laser diffraction particle size analyzer was used to determine the size distribution of dispersed and flocculated suspensions. This instrument utilizes a 3-mW laser diode as the light source, showing excellent stability under output and oscillation. The calculations of particle size distributions are based on the Fraunhofer diffraction theory for large size range and the Mie scattering theory for small size range. Different from sedimentation method The dispersion and aggregation of the sphalerite suspensions were also evaluated and reported as aggregation degree (  A Rame-Hart NRL-100-00 goniometer was used for contact angles measurements. The surface of the sphalerite piece used for the measurements was polished using first a fine sandpaper and then a diamond paste. The piece was conditioned in an xanthate solution at a given pH for 10 min. Solid/water/gas interface was obtained by attaching a small air bubble to the surface immersed in water, from which the contact angle was determined. The hydrophobic flocculation of sphalerite fines induced by ethyl and amyl xanthates was performed on the −2 μm sphalerite. As already stated, there is a lower size limit for sulfide mineral flotation. Hence, the percentage of fine particles (under lower size limit) in flocculated suspensions is an important factor for floc flotation.  The effect of original particle size on hydrophobic flocculation was studied using the −2 μm and +2 to 5 μm sphalerite samples. Stirring strength in a mixing system is mainly determined by stirring speed as long as the impeller, reactor size, slurry volume and solid concentration are constants The adsorption of both ethyl and amyl xanthate ions on sphalerite was studied through electrokinetics. The Xanthate ions adsorb on sphalerite with their non-polar group (hydrocarbon chains) orientated toward the bulk suspension, thereby imparting hydrophobicity to the particles. The effect of sphalerite contact angles on the size distributions of flocculated sphalerite suspensions induced by amyl xanthate is shown in As already stated, hydrophobic flocculation arises as a result of hydrophobic interaction between particles. The stronger the hydrophobic attractive force between the particles, the more powerful is the hydrophobic flocculation. Hence, from the foregoing experimental results, it is clear that the hydrophobic interaction closely correlates with particle contact angles. During last two decades, there were numerous literatures on hydrophobic interaction The If The hydrocarbon chain length of adsorbed surfactants was considered to be an important factor for hydrophobic flocculation induced by the surfactants. Zollars and Ali As suggested by Lu and Song The relationship between stirring strength and particle hydrophobicity in the hydrophobic flocculation of sphalerite fines induced by amyl xanthate was given in  It has been demonstrated from the present study that hydrophobic flocculation is effective on sphalerite fines in aqueous suspensions through the addition of either ethyl or amyl xanthate. It has been found that this hydrophobic flocculation arises as a result of the chemisorption of the xanthate ions on sphalerite, which imparts hydrophobicity to the particles, and thereby the hydrophobic interaction between the particles. It strongly correlates with the degree of particle hydrophobicity, namely that the more hydrophobic the particles, the more powerful is the hydrophobic flocculation. The experimental results suggest that the hydrophobic interaction might be proportional to the particle contact angle. A surfactant with a short hydrocarbon chain can induce a powerful hydrophobic flocculation, indicating that hydrocarbon chain length might be not a dominant factor for a surfactant-induced hydrophobic flocculation. Also, this flocculation can not be depressed by increasing surface charges from surfactant adsorption, because the adsorption might increase the hydrophobic attraction much more strongly than the electric double layer repulsion. The stirring strength activates the hydrophobic flocculation before it reaches maximum at a high value of stirring strength. It has been found that there is a direct relationship between the particle contact angle and the stirring strength for the hydrophobic flocculation, showing that a lower magnitude of stirring strength is needed for the flocculation when the particles have a greater contact angle. The hydrophobic flocculation is also influenced by the size of original particles. The finer the original particles, the more powerful is the hydrophobic flocculation. The financial supports to this work from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a (CONACyT) of Mexico under the grant #485100-5-25840A and the Fondo de Apoyo a la Investigación (FAI) of the Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosi (C99-FAI-11-7.64) are gratefully acknowledged.