Background
                  The optimal treatment strategy for burst fractures of the thoracolumbar junction is discussed controversially in the literature. Whilst 360° fusion has shown to result in better radiological outcome, recent studies have failed to show its superiority concerning clinical outcome. The morbidity associated with the additional anterior approach may account for these findings. The aim of this prospective observational study was therefore to compare two different techniques for 360° fusion in thoracolumbar burst fractures using either thoracoscopy or a transforaminal approach (transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF)) to support the anterior column.
               
                  Methods
                  Posterior reduction and short-segmental fixation using angular stable pedicle screw systems were performed in all patients as a first step. Monocortical strut grafts were used for the anterior support in the TLIF group, whilst tricortical grafts or titanium vertebral body replacing implants of adjustable height were used in the combined posteroanterior group. At final follow-up, the radiological outcome was assessed by performing X-rays in a standing position. The clinical outcome was measured using five validated outcome scores. The morbidity associated with the approaches and the donor site was assessed as well.
               
                  Results
                  There were 21 patients in the TLIF group and 14 patients in the posteroanterior group included. The postoperative loss of correction was higher in the TLIF group (4.9°±8.3° versus 3.4°±6.4°, p
                     >0.05). There were no significant differences regarding the outcome scores between the two groups. There were no differences in terms of return to employment, leisure activities and back function either. More patients suffered from donor-site morbidity in the TLIF group, whilst the morbidity associated with the surgical approach was higher in the posteroanterior group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The smaller donor-site morbidity in the posteroanterior group is counterbalanced by an additional morbidity associated with the anterior approach resulting in similar clinical outcome. Mastering both techniques will allow the spine surgeon to be more flexible in specific situations, for example, in patients with neurological deficits or severe concomitant thoracic trauma.There is still a high degree of controversy regarding the optimal treatment strategy for burst fractures of the thoracolumbar junction. Numerous treatment options with a wide range from nonoperative treatment There is increasing evidence that 360° fusion results in better radiological outcome in terms of postoperative loss of correction in comparison to nonoperative treatment and sole posterior fusion. The short-segmental posterior fixation and fusion using angular stable pedicle screw systems are widely considered to be the gold standard and first step for reduction and stabilisation. The anterior column of the thoracolumbar junction, however, may be approached either by using an additional anterior approach using deep lateral thoracotomy or thoracoscopy The study was approved by the institutional review board. Inclusion criteria were (1) burst fractures (type A3 according to the Magerl classification) of the thoracolumbar junction (Th12–L2), (2) no neurological deficits (Frankel/ASIA E) and (3) age <60 years. Exclusion criteria were (1) fractures above Th12 or below L2, (2) fractures with intact posterior wall (A1 and A2 according to the Magerl classification), (3) neurological deficits (Frankel/ASIA A–D), (4) pathological or osteoporotic fractures, (5) incomplete radiological or clinical follow-up and (6) non-resident patients. At admission, X-rays in a supine position and computed tomography (CT) scans were performed and the neurological status was assessed in all patients using the Frankel/ASIA score. The fractures were classified according to Magerl using preoperative CT scans. There was no randomisation. The patients were treated according to the surgeon's preferences in a single university-based trauma centre. As a first step, posterior reduction and short-segmental posterior fixation using angular stable pedicle screw systems (USS™ pedicle screw System, Synthes Medical, Oberdorf, Switzerland) as well as posterolateral fusion were performed in all patients. The approach to the anterior column was different between the two groups. In group A, an unilateral TLIF procedure was performed. The radiological follow-up included a postoperative CT scan. X-Rays were performed postoperatively, at the time of implant removal and at final follow-up. All postoperative X-rays were performed in a standing position. The surgical correction of kyphosis was assessed by calculating the mean difference between the pre- and postoperative values in a lateral projection. The postoperative loss of correction was assessed by calculating the mean difference between the postoperative values and the values at final follow-up. The clinical follow-up included the assessment of the morbidity associated with the surgical approaches and the donor-site morbidity on the iliac crest as well as the return to employment and leisure activities. The following validated outcome scores were additionally assessed at final follow-up: the VAS, PASW 18.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) was used for the statistical analysis. Metric scaled data are reported as arithmetic mean Between January 2003 and December 2005, 147 patients with fractures of the thoracolumbar spine were treated at our trauma centre. Thirty-five patients, who met the inclusion criteria, volunteered to participate and signed written informed consent. There were 21 patients in group A (TLIF) and 14 patients in group B (combined posteroanterior fusion). The demographic data are shown in Surgery was performed after a mean of 5.9 (0–18) days in group A and 4.6 (1–8) days in group B ( There were no significant differences between the two groups regarding length of hospital stay (group A: 11.8 (±5.2) days; group B: 14.4 (±6.4) days, The final clinical and radiological examination was performed after 20.2 (±6.1) months in group A and 20.4 (±3.9) months in group B ( Our data show that: Posterior reduction and fixation using angular stable pedicle screw systems allow for a restoration of the anatomic spinal alignment after thoracolumbar burst fractures. 360° fusion of the injured motion segment results in a small degree of loss of correction after implant removal with the TLIF technique showing a slightly higher loss ( The majority of patients was able to return to their employment and leisure activities with no or only mild restrictions and with no significant differences between the two groups ( According to five validated outcome scores, a complete recovery without any remaining impairment after thoracolumbar burst fractures was not achieved using either the combined posteroanterior fusion technique or the TLIF technique. The two major goals of internal fixation of long bone fractures are reduction and maintaining reduction, until healing has occurred. These goals apply for spinal fractures as well. In burst fractures of the thoracolumbar junction, however, ‘healing’ typically requires fusion of the injured motion segment to address the injured intervertebral disc. The short-segmented posterior internal fixation and fusion using angular stable pedicle screw systems have shown to be the gold standard for both reduction and stabilisation. Both techniques have its pearls and pitfalls. The combined posteroanterior approach allows for a better visualisation of the anterior column and a more thorough removal of the ruptured disc. It additionally allows for either mono- or bilateral anterior fusion. The use of a titanium vertebral body replacing implant reduces the donor-site morbidity at the iliac crest. The rate of donor-site related complaints at final follow-up was 21.4% (3/14) in the posteroanterior group and 28.6% (6/21) in the TLIF group ( The TLIF technique avoids the morbidity associated with this second approach. It allows for a direct decompression of the dural sac and entrapped nerve roots. We found a significantly higher degree of surgical decompression in the TLIF group ( We did not find any significant clinical differences between the two groups regarding return to employment and leisure activities as well as back function at final follow-up ( The use of inappropriate outcome measurements might be an additional point. One interesting finding of our study is the relative discrepancy between the high rate of return to employment and leisure activities with no or only mild restrictions ( Some limitations of our study have to be noted. First, this is a prospective observational study in a single university-based trauma centre, but it is not a randomised controlled study. The patients were treated according to the surgeons’ preferences. Second, there were 35 patients included in the study. Including more patients would have increased the power of the statistical analysis and reduced the risk of false negative results. Third, the number of patients was not equal between the two groups with 21 and 14 patients, respectively. In conclusion, there were no significant differences between the two treatment groups regarding clinical and radiological outcome. The smaller donor-site morbidity in the posteroanterior group is counterbalanced by an additional morbidity associated with the anterior approach. The relevance of the slightly higher loss of correction in the TLIF group and the differences regarding decompression of the spinal canal still remain unknown. Overall, mastering both techniques will allow the spine surgeon to be more flexible in specific situations, for example, in patients with neurological deficits or severe concomitant thoracic trauma. No author has a conflict of interest that relates to the content discussed in this manuscript.