The prediction of carrying capacity for a given flotation technology has been commonly achieved using a simplified expression based on a representative particle size and density of the floatable material. However, this expression was derived with several assumptions and limited data ranges that limits accuracy for all materials and conditions. A new expression has been derived which incorporates the effects of particle size distribution and aeration rate. To evaluate the accuracy of the new expression, laboratory, pilot and full-scale data obtained from treating various US coals using the Jameson Cell have been applied to the model. A statistical analysis reveals that the new model provides significant improvement in the carrying capacity prediction. Based on Jameson Cell data, aeration rates below 1.8 cm/s have a significant impact on the carrying capacity. Particle size distribution, which was not included in the earlier expression, was found to significantly affect the carrying capacity by approximately 35% from a narrow to broad size distribution. An analysis, using the mineral data applied to validate the earlier expression, has shown that the new model can be extended to all other column flotation technologies treating feed material other than coal.Column flotation has been used in the mineral industry for several years. However, its application in the coal industry has been a relatively recent development. It has been a practice in the industry to apply the same experience gained from mineral flotation in evaluating coal flotation processes. However, significant differences exist between the two, since coal is naturally more hydrophobic than most minerals. The impact of this inherent difference is more pronounced in assessing the carrying capacity that can be achieved by a flotation column. A major difference is that, in coal flotation, a significant portion of the feed material reports as product in the froth concentrate, which results in a condition commonly referred to as carrying-capacity limited. Under this condition, the amount of product generated from a flotation column is dependent on the bubble surface area flux exiting the top of the column. In addition, coal flotation involves treatment of particles significantly coarser than those treated in many mineral applications. The need exists to develop a carrying capacity model from basic fundamentals that accurately predicts the maximum carrying capacity achievable by flotation columns in the treatment of coal and, possibly, other minerals in general. The equation most commonly used for the prediction of column carrying capacity was developed by To estimate the mineralized bubble density, the following assumptions were utilized: (a) particles are small relative to the bubble; (b) each particle (mean diameter, (c) bubbles load to a fraction The relationship between the bubble diameter It has also been observed by the authors that the effect of The carrying capacity of a flotation system is a function of the total mass of particles that can be floated per unit volume of air, which is commonly referred to as the mineralized bubble density. The estimation of the mineralized bubble density requires the knowledge of the method by which the particles pack onto a bubble surface. In the model developed by An alternative assumption equates the area of the bubble surface occupied by a particle to the area of the bubble subtended by a disk having a diameter equal to the particle diameter ( To illustrate the impact from the differences of the two assumptions, consider a particle of size 100 μm attaching to a bubble size of 1000 μm. The area coverage calculated as the square of the particle size yields 0.01 mm The number of particles of size It has been realized that the contact angle, which is dependent on the hydrophobicity of the particle, will have an influence on the observed carrying capacity. The bubble loading will vary as a result of different penetration levels of the particles into the bubble, which is the subject of an on-going investigation by the authors. This will impact the number of hydrophobic particles that can actually occupy the available bubble surface area. In the absence of accurate information regarding the hydrophobicities of the coal sources utilized in this investigation, a constant Thus, the mineralized bubble density ( If A convenient way of representing It has been shown by The empirically determined value of 0.25 for Though the ratio The mean particle size of the product can be calculated from the feed size distribution by considering the size distribution of the floatable material in the feed. The mean particle size ( It is a common observation that the froth drop-back is particle size-dependent, i.e., an increase in particle size results in a corresponding rise in the amount of particle drop-back into the collection zone. There is a notable lack of understanding regarding this issue. It is evident that the preferential drop-back of coarser particles can have an influence on the carrying capacity as well. Thus, the carrying capacity based on the mean particle size of the floatable particles in the feed may not be achieved. This reduction in the expected carrying capacity is expected to be proportional to some fractional power of the mean particle size itself (i.e., In addition to the carrying capacity of a flotation column being dependent on the mean particle size of the floatable material, it can be easily visualized as also being dependent on the “spread” of the floatable particle size distribution. With a close particle size distribution, the weight of particles carried by a bubble per unit bubble surface area will be higher. For a very wide particle size distribution, the bubble surface will be covered by some very fine and some coarse particles, for which the net weight of all particles will be lower than that of the monosized particles. This effect can be clearly illustrated in the following examples. Consider a bubble of diameter 0.564 cm and a total surface area of 1 cm Consider floatable material comprised of 0.005 and 0.015 cm particles (both of specific gravity 1.4). To maintain a mean particle size of 0.01 cm for the particles covering the bubble, equal weights of particles of each type must occupy the surface. It can then be calculated that 0.0035 g of each particle species can be recovered, the coarse occupying 25% of the bubble area and the fine occupying the remaining 75%, thus maintaining a comparative mean particle size of 0.01 cm. The total material recovered in this case is 0.007 g as against 0.0093 g recovered with uniformly sized particles. Thus, it seems necessary that a factor representing the spread of the particle size distribution be incorporated in the proposed model. To estimate the size distribution modulus of the particle size distribution, the Gates–Gaudin–Schumann (GGS) model was used. The model provided a reasonably accurate fit for all the coal sources considered. Another particle size distribution model, namely the Rosin–Rammler distribution was also considered and was found to be less useful in defining the particle size distribution modulus. The GGS model is given as: Several forms of the carrying capacity model incorporating the modifications mentioned in the previous sections were evaluated and the ultimate expression was determined as: To validate the proposed model, flotation separation performances and throughput capacity data obtained from the treatment of fine coal samples using laboratory-scale, pilot-scale and full-scale units of the Jameson Cell were used along with feed characterization information. The fine coal samples covered a range of coal ranks from low-to-high volatile bituminous coal and originated from several locations in North America. Several of the fine coal sources were obtained from active fine coal processing streams comprised of nominal −1 mm, −150 μm or −44 μm material, while others were collected from refuse ponds. The fine coals represented several U.S. coal seams including Illinois No. 5, Illinois No. 6, Indiana No. 7, Coalberg, and Pittsburgh No. 8. The laboratory experimental program was performed using a 10-cm diameter Jameson Cell equipped with a 3.2-cm diameter downcomer. The volumetric feed flow rate was varied by changing the size of the orifice located in the downcomer from 3 to 5 mm. Pre-conditioning the feed slurry with diesel fuel No. 2 was provided for approximately 10 min prior to each experiment. A polyglycol frother was added continuously to the feed stream before the injection into the downcomer. The frother concentration was pre-determined based on volume treated and typically varied between 10 and 15 parts of frother per million parts of slurry volume (ppm). A submersed froth washer was utilized along with a froth depth of about 30 cm to ensure a positive bias factor of at least 0.3 for every experiment. The laboratory cell can be operated with or without recirculation of a portion of the tailing stream back to the feed stream. The bias factor is defined as the fraction of the wash water reporting to the tailings. This is calculated as: The pilot-plant unit was evaluated at various operating coal preparation plants using a representative split stream of the fine coal feed stream. The unit has two 46×46 cm The full-scale carrying-capacity data were obtained from 5-m diameter units operating at two coal processing plants. The unit employs multiple 20 cm diameter downcomers. The main operational difference between the full-scale and pilot/laboratory units was the use of a wash water system that was positioned above the froth, which is a trademark of most Jameson Cell units. The benefits include better froth movement and reduced plugging of the small wash water orifices. The carrying capacity of a given flotation system can be measured by determining the concentrate mass flux (tph/m Data from numerous laboratory-scale, pilot-scale and full-scale operations of the Jameson Cell treating a wide variety of coal sources was generated and used to establish a functional relationship determining the carrying capacity of a flotation column. The mean particle size and the size distribution modulus of the floatable material in the feed were determined for each coal source fed to the Jameson Cell. The coal sources and the relevant operating conditions used for establishing the carrying capacity equation are presented in Given the knowledge of carrying capacity (  To ascertain the true validity of the developed model, a detailed statistical analysis was conducted to test the significance of the regression fitted constants, their confidence intervals and the overall goodness of fit for the model ( To test the overall significance of the model, an analysis of variance was performed. The results are presented in It is well known that a linear model is very well behaved in terms of ease of obtaining the least-square estimator and its straightforward interpretation. However, several complex physical processes cannot be suitably modeled using a linear model. Thus, it becomes imperative to choose nonlinear models and obtain the parameter estimates using nonlinear regression techniques. In such a situation, however, it is necessary to evaluate the degree of nonlinearity of the model–dataset combination used for the parameter estimation to justify the use of the statistical tests used in assessing the goodness of fit of the model.  The calculated biases for the parameters being estimated in this exercise expressed as a percentage of the parameters themselves are presented in The curvature measure of nonlinearity was estimated for the proposed model. The intrinsic and parameter-effect curvatures for the model–dataset combination used in this investigation were found to be 0.22 and 0.23, respectively. The calculated critical Since both the bias measurements of The proposed model for the carrying capacity of flotation columns, especially the Jameson Cell, provides a significant improvement in its ability to accurately predict the carrying capacity. To evaluate the generalized nature of the new model, the model was used to predict the carrying capacities of the mineral flotation column dataset, which was applied in the development of the existing model ( The initial work on column carrying capacity reported by According to the model predictions, the superficial air velocity ( An expression quantifying the carrying capacity of the Jameson Cell has been developed based on fundamental principles with empirical fitting constants and data collected from the treatment of several fine coals. The model presents a significant improvement in the accuracy of carrying capacity predictions (with an average absolute error of 4%) over the models being presently used. The new model provided a superior prediction of carrying capacity, even for the dataset used in the development of the earlier model. The influence of particle size distribution has also been incorporated in the model. It has been observed that a closely sized feed can increase the carrying capacity of the column. The model also included the superficial gas velocity as a parameter influencing the carrying capacity. Consistent with previous findings, it was observed that the influence of superficial gas velocity on the carrying capacity diminishes above a value of 1.8 cm/s. At values lower than 1.8 cm/s, the impact of the superficial gas velocity is more significant for the flotation of relatively coarse material. 