The newest digital photogrammetric technology is applied to investigate the deformation characteristics of rock mass when it changes from open pit to underground mining. First, the calculation formulas of pixel deformation and instrumental error were derived. Based on this, the calculation of digital camera calibration were obtained and used to calibrate the physical model for rock mass undergoing the changing mining process. Finally, the deformation characteristics of rock mass were revealed based on a geotechnical engineering of Daye iron mine and the monitored results of digital photogrammetry were compared with the dial indicators. It was found that the surface deformations measured by digital photogrammetric technique are similar to the results using dial indicators. The maximum error between these two was less than 0.02mm. These tests demonstrate the efficacy of digital photogrammetry as a powerful technique for deformation measurement in the geotechnical model tests.elasticity modulus (Mpa)     Internal friction angle Strain modulus (Mpa)      Specific weight (KN/m In recent years, more and more high-steep slopes were formed through years of open-pit mining around the world. Open pit to underground mining transition is normally resulted from exhausting of shallow resources Despite all the applied techniques, the model test is usually an appropriate procedure that is required in engineering practices. Reliable model test can accurately simulate the real strata movement influenced by engineering activities and therefore provide adequate engineering suggestions Unfortunately, fewer works on the use of digital photogrammetry for study on slope stability that is influenced by open-pit to underground mining transition. The possibility of use of digital photogrammetry for the mining engineering could be significant as apart from accuracy and resolution. It is non destructive and low cost. The objective of this study is to demonstrate use of digital photogrammetry technique for physical modeling of open pit to underground mining technology. Laboratory model tests were conducted to validate the theoretical development. Given this, this work is devoted to fill in this research gap. The paper is organized as following. The literature review of the existing techniques is introduced following the introduction section. After this, the detailed procedures of using the digital photogrammetric technology for monitoring the rock masses are discussed and described by three steps. First, the calculation formulas of pixel deformation, instrumental error correction and digital camera calibration are derived. Second, the physical similarity model is established based on the calculation formula. Then, the deformation characteristics of rock mass are revealed based on the engineering practice. Based on these proposed measurement and model setting procedures, a case study is conducted based on a mining area located in Hubei, China. The precision and accuracy of digital photogrammetry technique in measuring the physical model test are investigated later on. Finally, all the conclusions of this study are summarized. Field experiments, mechanics analysis, numerical simulations and model tests are currently the most commonly applied research techniques in many engineering fields for studying the geotechnical problems In all of the above literature, it was found that accuracy and resolution of “measurement equipment” is one of the most significant features influencing their respective findings. As far as authors are aware, the traditional equipment rarely measures the deformation change of a physical model containing soil during model testing, the accuracy of the traditional equipment depends on the quality of the calibration procedure, the measurement position, the measurement capacity, the precision of the equipment and other influences such as time, stress path, and stress level However, due to recent technological developments, the newly developed non-contact optical measurement techniques can be applied to measure the total and local deformation changes of physical models during model testing, such as electro-optical laser scanner, X-ray computerized tomography, and photogrammetry In the photogrammetric measuring method, only a commercial digital camera is required to capture images of physical model during model testing. Using these images, the real-time deformations can be then obtained from the optical models. Photogrammetry theories were first proposed by Yamaguchi et al. To further exploit the functionality of photogrammetry for the model test, a fundamental study on the calculations in photogrammetry is provided herein. As one of the branch of remote sensing and surveying science, digital photogrammetry technique can be adopted to measure the shape, size and motion state of measured object by photography There are generally three kinds of coordinate systems in photogrammetry, see When a light beam from an object point passes through the pinhole (perspective centre of the camera) of camera lens and forms a pixel point on a photo, the spatial coordinates of the pixel point (represent the smallest controllable element in a picture) on the image plane can be identified. The fundamental characteristic of the imaging process is that the pinhole, the pixel point, and the object point all at the same direction in space. In the process of photogrammetry analysis, the spatial coordinate system including the pixel point of a photo is by default set as the origin of the coordinate system. In the ancillary space coordinate system, the spatial coordinate of pixel point (x, y, f) will be transformed to ancillary space coordinate (x, y, z), and the physical coordinate system in which shows the real coordinate of the object point (X, Y, Z), the transform formula will be derived as follows. The exterior and interior parameters of photogrammetry are the key factors to estimate the position and orientation of each pixel point. There are 6 exterior parameters of a photo which are bearing line parameters (X Then Linear transformation method are applied to analyze the position relationship between the pixel points and objects and the relationship can be given by Based on the direct linear transformation (DLT) Considering the influence of optical distortions such as radial distortion, decentering distortion and lens distortion, Eq. A simplified form of Eq. Therefore, by introducing the corrected coordinates of pixel points, e.g. And the error terms can be expressed as After the pixel deformation calculation equation is formulated, the next step is to find a numeric way of solving the calculation equations. As observed in Eq. (1) Solving coefficient L Based on Eq. (2) Solution of object coordinates When the L coefficients are obtained, the next step is to calculate the object coordinate. We used two photos and listing three equations for each object coordinate, e.g. (3) Solution of exterior-interior parameters and optical distortions Furthermore, based on the calculated L coefficients, the value of ancillary space coordinate (X The interior parameters and optical distortions can be solved as: 4) Iterate criterion The whole calculation steps were repeated to calculate (5) Object coordinates The final object coordinates can be estimated based on Eq. The mean square error of object coordinate which includes azimuth precision m After the calculation method is established, the next step is to organize the whole digital photogrammetric measurement procedures. In summary, there are 4 steps in a digital photogrammetry process when measuring the point deformations in a physical model test. Step 1, after camera calibration, choose controlling points, monitoring point and planar marks which are in a suitable size and clear. Step 2, take photos for the physical model in different directions before and after every step of the physical model test and obtain digital image in TIF or BMP format. Step 3, measure the pixel deformations and calculate pixel coordinates by image processing technology. Step 4, based on (Eqs. A detailed flowchart for the digital photogrammetry process is illustrated in Camera calibration is the first step to ensure the real information from digital image is correct. Generally, it is divided into three steps. First, take images of planar marks at different direction. Second, obtain and check the position errors of mark pixels. Lastly, calculate the exterior and interior optical distortions parameters. The detailed calculation steps are given as follows. The object coordinates are set as (X,Y,Z) Usually, only two-dimensional images are needed in digital photogrammetry, so Eq. Substitute Eq. In this study, Canon 600D camera is chosen to be used in the digital photogrammetry for model test. The plain patterns of equal-interval array are drawn as the calibrated pattern. 4 kinds of different marks are set at the corner of the array as the controlling points which are shown in Before taking photos for the plain patterns of equal-interval array, the canon 600D camera is fixed on the frame. The plain patterns are pasted on the wall at 0 degree and Deformations of controlling points can now be measured by the camera. Based equations derived in Section In order to demonstrate applicability of the proposed measurement method in the open pit to underground mining transition problem, a case study is performed based on a mining area located in China. The investigated area is the east part of Daye Iron Mine which is a mining valley located in Hubei province, middle of China. The open pit area is 600 To perform the model tests for this mining valley, the estimates of the similar principles are quite important to guarantee to the reliability of the prototype. According to elastic-plastic mechanics equation and dimensional analysis method, the balance of model, geometry, physics and boundary condition equations were considered. The geometric similarity constant in this test is set at 300, the determined basic similarity criteria of the model and the prototype is as follows The similar constant The materials of the underground caving mining which consists of iron ore powder, barite powder, quartz sand, unsaturated resin, gypsum are been tested through 1000 times mechanics tests in nearly 10 Because the similar materials are quite friable, the forming of the physical model for the caving mining is quite difficult. Herein, the block masonry was adopted to mould the entire model. The equipments used to perform experiments are consisted of a block making equipment, a framework, a canon 600D camera and some dial indicators. The blocks are made by a block making equipment which is shown in The controlling points and checking points are fixed in the whole process of model test to ensure the precision of digital photogrammetric measurement. The controlling points are laid at the outer edge of the model framework and the checking points are laid at the corner of model framework. The model framework is rigid and fixed during the whole process of test. A detailed layout of these points is shown in Furthermore, by setting the origin at the boundary between strip mining and underground mining, the coordinate system is established for the digital photogrammetric measurement. In order to simulate the strip mining and non-pillar sublevel caving processes, several procedures are provided here. For strip mining, the blocks of soil materials were removed gradually. This resulted in some steep slopes around the mining point. For underground mining, the simulation procedures involved segmental drillings in the blocks along the ore boundary. The simulated sublevel caving has a height of 40 Digital photogrammetry was used as the main method to monitor the model deformation and failure characteristics. To verify the monitoring data obtained by digital photogrammetric measurement, ten dial indicators are adopted to monitor the slope deformation data in real-time before and after each mining steps. For overcoming the discreteness of displacement on a single point, all the displacements below are the average of the points nearby the toe, top, and midpoint of slope surface.  The failure characteristics of the model test are shown in  In this paper, the calculation formulas of a digital photogrammetric measurement method are derived for the model test. It is then applied to a physical similar model test for investigating the open pit to underground mining transition problem. The material and prototype is taken from an iron mine located in Daye, a city of China. The deformation characteristics of rock mass are measured by the digital photogrammetry and compared with dial indicator. Results showed the precision of controlling points is quite high which only has a deviation of 0.004 There are there limitations about the proposed method, one is the numerous computation requirement and a computer program should be developed to perform the required calculations, two is the accuracy of spatial coordinates of the pixel point are depended on the distinguish ability of camera lens and the accuracy will be improved because of the fast developing of optical photography, the last is the inside deformation characteristics of rock mass can’t be obtained and transparent similar material should be developed for the inside observations. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of