Pulp-enriched cloudy apple juices were manufactured from two apple varieties by blending of apple puree with natural cloudy apple juice in order to enrich bioactive secondary plant substances. Finishing of the puree with a 0.6-mm mesh screen and final product homogenisation revealed as the optimum processing technology for the novel 100% fruit beverage. The presence of large particles originating from the puree prevented long-term cloud stability, but due to the proportion of cloud-stable juice a complete phase separation did not occur. Optimal drinkability was achieved at a viscosity of 11.5mPas. Polyphenol compositions and concentrations were determined by means of RP-HPLC/PDA. The results ranged from 109 to 610mg/l. All samples showed the typical polyphenol pattern of apples with dominating hydroxycinnamic acids followed by flavanols and flavonols. The puree addition to the cloudy apple juices increased the polyphenol concentrations by average 100%. Relatively, the highest increase could be observed for dimeric procyanidins. Different technological variants did not affect significantly the polyphenol concentrations. The dietary fibre contents of the pulp-enriched cloudy apple juices ranged from 5.8 to 9.4g/l.Apples and apple juices contain bioactive secondary plant substances like e.g. polyphenols and also different amounts of dietary fibres. These substance classes are characterised by health-promoting effects, but are no nutrients ( During processing of apples to apple juice losses of 50–90% of the healthy polyphenols are unavoidable ( Among apple-based beverages, natural cloudy apple juices manufactured from cider apples are containing the highest polyphenol amounts. For that reason, they are in the focus of nutrition research. In animal studies their significantly increased effectiveness against colon cancer compared to clear apple juices could be shown ( All products were monovarietally produced from the table apple Cloudy apple juice: washing, crushing (BTM macerator, Seepex, Bottrop, Germany), extracting on a horizontal press (HPL-200, Bucher-Guyer, Switzerland), dosage of 200 Apple puree: washing and crushing as above, addition of 350 IFU-methods (International Fruit Juice Union) were used for the routine parameters. Soluble solids (Brix) and density were measured by means of digital refractometry (Abbemat, Dr. Kernchen, Seelze, Germany) and densitometry (DMA 48, Anton Paar, Ostfildern, Germany). Total titratable acid (expressed as malic acid at pH 8.1) and pH were determined potentiometrically. Glucose, fructose, sucrose, and sorbitol were analysed with enzymatic kits, minerals with AAS (model 4100, Perkin Elmer, Jügesheim, Germany). Ash was determined gravimetrically in platinum dishes. The lyophilised pulp-enriched apple juices were analysed for dietary fibres after the combined enzymatic–gravimetric method (AOAC #991.43, total dietary fibre). The TEAC assay on antioxidant capacity was performed according to Single polyphenols were determined on a Surveyor HPLC/PDA system (ThermoFinnigan, Dreieich, Germany). Chromatographic separation was achieved on a 150 Total and single polyphenols were determined from the supernatants after centrifugation as well as from the solvent-extracted lyophilised samples. Freeze-dried material was post-dried in a vacuum oven until weight constancy and powdered in a laboratory mill (IKA MF10, Staufen, Germany). The sugar-rich and hydrophilic powders were kept closed in the dark until analysis. Solvent extraction studies with acetone and methanol in different concentrations (20/60/100%) and different extraction times (30/60/120 The viscosities of the cloudy apple juices were measured with an automated micro viscometer (AVMn, falling ball principle, Anton Paar), whereas a rotation viscometer (MC1, Anton Paar, measured at a shear rate of 500 One cloudy apple juice and four pulp-enriched cloudy apple juices were produced from each of the varieties Samples of the 100% purees were frozen at −20 Before the final blending of apple puree and cloudy apple juice test samples in the ratios 60:40, 50:50, 40:60, and 30:70, respectively, were prepared and tasted. Tasting was done by the authors, who decided unanimously for the blending of 40% puree with 60% cloudy apple juice as a standard ratio for the ongoing experiments. At that ratio the balance between mouthfeeling, viscosity, and sensory acceptance was at an optimum point. As demonstrated in  For the determination of the basic juice parameters all samples were centrifuged and analysis was done from the supernatants. The results are presented in For the determination of total phenolics, cloudy apple juices are mainly used directly or after centrifugation. However, the portions of the centrifugeable solids of the pulp-enriched cloudy apple juices were rather high (8–15%, see In contrast to the total phenolics the HPLC-determinations of the single polyphenols showed clear methodical advantages for the solvent extraction of the freeze-dried powders. Extraction with 20% methanol revealed an average polyphenol increase of 12.6% (SD 1.3%) compared with the direct HPLC-injection after centrifugation and subsequent 0.45 Normally the antioxidant capacity measured with the TEAC assay correlates with the polyphenol concentration ( The dietary fibre contents of the pulp-enriched cloudy apple juices measured after the AOAC method ranged from 5.8 to 9.4 Based on the above results, finishing of the apple puree with a 0.6-mm mesh screen and the final Supraton homogenisation were found to be the optimum processing technology for the puree used in the novel product. During blending, a puree proportion of 40% and a cloudy juice proportion of 60% turned out to be the optimal ratio to obtain a product which showed still real beverage characteristics. The homogenisation step was necessary to reduce the viscosity for a pleasant drinkability. The aim to increase bioactive substances like polyphenols and dietary fibres could be attained in the 100% fruit product. Polyphenol concentrations were doubled in the pulp-enriched apple juices, which in the marketing field are known as smoothies. Particularly the procyanidins, which are highly estimated for health reasons, were increased by factor 3–6. In spite of this increase, the full potential of the apples present in the 100% purees could not be reached. There we found 1449–3539 The project was funded from the German Ministery of Education and Research (BMBF, project #01EA0104). The authors would like to thank the colleagues from the Federal Research Center for Nutrition and Food Detmold for the dietary fibre determinations.