Aluminium matrix composite (AMC) is used widely in various industries such as aerospace, marine, automobile, power plant, house hold and substrate in electronics equipments etc due to excellent corrosion resistance, better weight to strength ratio and so on. There are several manufacturing technique to produce AMC but stir casting method used commonly due to less expensive and ability for mass production. There are some restrictions along with advantages i.e poor wet-ability of reinforcements with the molten Aluminium. Present study indicates briefly about manufacturing method, reinforcement’s composition, size and shapes of the reinforcements in AMC. Further, the experiment tends to intricacy to taking part of quite a few parameters which influence the composite properties. Moreover, inadequate experimental data is existing because difficulties to reinforcements in composite. In this study, Aluminium metal matrix composites reinforced with SiC have been reviewed and the future scope presented briefly.Researchers are trying to improve continuously properties of composite materials due to their wide application. Composite materials are combination of two or more materials which is insoluble to the matrix or other reinforced materials. There are two phases in composite, first one is matrix phase which is continuous and other one is reinforcement and it is discontinuous phase. The composites have superior properties than matrix phase and it cannot be obtained separately Aluminium metal matrix composites have high strength, low specific density and better wear resistance with fiber reinforced composite. In particulate reinforced AMCs not only have good wear and mechanical properties but are also inexpensively Present study requires a lot of effort to explore up to greater extent due to poor wetting properties of the reinforcements, minimum cost and high demand due to good corrosion resistance, good mechanical properties and thermal stability of silicon Carbide reinforced AMMCs. The main objectives of present review paper is to discuss the effect of reinforcement as SiC on Aluminium for various properties such as mechanical and corrosion, when aluminium matrix composite is fabricated by Stir casting route. Composite material may be fabricated through two different methods such as powder metallurgy (P/M) and conventional casting methods. Powder metallurgy fabrication route is much economical than any conventional or stir casting methods, that’s why this route is preferred. Stir casting is experienced as best fabrication process to fabricate MMCs with better homogeneity and strength but it is much expensive than P/M. This method is adopted widely in industrial application due to unavoidable advantages such as economic consideration and easy operation. In stir casting technique matrix metals/alloys melted and mixed with preheated reinforcement. Stirring action required to homogenize the entire volume with reinforcement and got better mixing in melt as shown in In metal matrix composite metal used as a matrix and reinforcement depends upon requirement. Present review is related to metal matrix composite and aluminum used as a matrix phase. Reinforcement can done in as in particle, fiber or/and continuous form Aluminum matrix composites are used extensively due to their better weight strength ratio, less deterioration rate and high thermal stability. The topical development adopted two steps mixing in matrix processes and eradicates the gaseous layer just about the reinforcements. In first step matrix phase heated over the liquidus temperature after that cooled between liquidus and solidus temperature range and then preheated reinforcement mixed in it. In second step temperature raised above the liquidus temperature and stirring with the help of stirrer Present study emphasizes the mechanical properties of the aluminium matrix composites (AMCs). Authors were fabricated metal matrix composite by using stir casting method with wt. % of 0, 5, 10, and 15 of SiC as a reinforcement and AA 6063 matrix phase. They have investigated mechanical properties such as hardness and tensile strength of AMCs and have found that these properties increases by increasing the reinforcement in aluminium alloy matrix. Hardness and tensile strength were improved by 56% and 24% respectively of 0% to 15% of SiC reinforcement Similarly, other authors were also studied for AA6061 matrix with reinforcement of SiC for wt% of 0, 5, 10 and 15, and they have reported that mechanical properties such as hardness and tensile strength improved 133.33% and 65.2% respectively by increasing the reinforcement Md. H Rahman et al. have fabricated aluminium metal matrix composites (AMMCs) by the help of stir casting method where they have reinforced SiC as wt. % of 0, 5, 10, and 20 in pure aluminium, and 1 wt% of Mg has been added to increase wetting properties in melt. They have investigated hardness (VHN) and tensile strength of the composite such as 24.50, 38.67, 42.30, 45.40 and 28.45, 59.36, 50.17, 77.56 Mpa for wt. % of 0, 5, 10 and 20 of SiC reinforcement respectively.   Bandil et al. have investigated density, hardness (HRB), wear resistance and corrosion resistance of Al-Si alloy reinforced with SiC composite. They have found that density reduces as increasing SiC reinforcement, hardness and corrosion resistance increases up to 15% of reinforcement, and then reduces when more reinforcement done. Wear resistance increases by addition of SiC in Al-Si alloy matrix In this review paper stir casting method is adopted frequently due to easily excessive and low cost production. High rate of production results economical and available for mass production. Effective and efficient route to fabricate composite is Stir casting in all aspects such as homogeneous distribution. Reinforcement in matrix phase is limited up to 30 wt% in stir casting. Hardness, tensile strength and wear resistance of the reinforced composite materials have improved. Hardness and corrosion resistance increases up to 15 wt% reinforcement but reduces hardness and corrosion resistance when reinforcement done more than of 15 wt% of SiC in aluminium/aluminium alloy matrix. A highest ductile with minimum stress have got in unreinforced but reinforced composite shows lower ductility with enhanced strength value. All the reported properties derived from density of the composite, as increasing the reinforcement porosity increases, and then density reduces of the composite. Wear resistance improved by reinforcement in aluminium or aluminium alloy matrix and this is due to surface hardness. An application of metal matrix composite is wide due to excellent required properties which motivate for further research. Matrix phase and reinforcement in composites are depends upon purpose of the composites. Fabrication technique also influenced the properties of the composites. Present review paper shows various combinations of matrix or reinforcements which support for replacement of matrix as well as reinforcements to get better applications. After reviewing all these papers, no one has used nano size of SiC as reinforcement. Therefore, there are lot of scope to fabricate and study effect of nano-materials of SiC in aluminium/aluminium alloy matrix. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.