As 75 up to 85% of the exhausted energy in mining and mineral processing industries is used for comminution processes, more energy efficient crushing technologies such as high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) can help to reduce the consumption. Differing chemical compositions and physical properties of minerals due to origin and pre-treatment aggravate a wear prediction of the roller material, a key indicator for cost efficiency. To determine the wear characteristic of different minerals with respect to the complex wear system, consisting of abrasive wear (scratching) and surface fatigue (indentation), a laboratory scale apparatus is put into operation.
                  The main wear influencing variables are roll speed, geometry and composition, grinding pressure and characteristics of the feedstock. Scaling up gained data on industrial processes assumes fundamental understanding of the coherences between these variables. Therefore, the influence on wear behavior of three selected parameters, grinding pressure, grain size and moisture of the feedstock are presented in this paper. The tests are carried out with rolls made of the martensitic hardened steel AISI L6 with a diameter of 100mm. The feedstock consists of silica sand (Bottrop, Germany) with grain sizes ranging from 0.2mm to 2mm to meet all demands concerning comminution in a confined material bed. Accompanying to the tests, traces of wear on the roll surface are examined with a scanning electron microscope (SEM).
                  The tests add up to an increase in wear rate, i.e., volume loss per 1000 revs, as a result of increasing grinding pressure, an increase of the maximum feedstock grain size and an increase of feedstock moisture. Assumed wear mechanisms could be verified.
                  The results provide for a better understanding of the complex wear system of HPGRs. More precise wear estimations of varying minerals is part of the ongoing work.Roller presses are used for more than 100 years for briquetting and compacting several minerals such as coal fines The first HPGR was installed 1985 as a pre-milling unit in a cement plant. The product leaving the HPGR goes to a mill-classifier circuit, followed by a ball mill, grinding the product down to the designated fineness. Another way to implement a HPGR is the fine-milling mode. Thereby the product gets partly recirculated after deagglomeration. Last option is a hybrid mode, separating the product for a partly reuse in either a HPGR or a ball mill Since 1985 the number of industrial applications increased rapidly. In the cement industry a reduction in energy use of 10 up to 50% compared to closed circuit ball milling operations, depending on the circuit configuration, is reported by Madlool et al. Machine availability and operating costs are the most important aspects for a cost efficient use of HPGR's. Both are most significantly influenced by the wear resistance of the roll's surface. Regarding preventive maintenance the lifetime prediction of the rolls with respect to wear is wishful. Especially for the comminution of ores reliable estimations of the wear behavior are quite difficult due to differing compositions of the ore. Furthermore ores are a mixture of at least two minerals and even within one mine they may be highly variable. Depending on the point of origin, the degree of weathering of the feed material can also be fairly different Accompanying to detailed analyses of the materials such as chemical composition and micro hardness of the particular phases, experimental tests in a downscaled HPGR are essential to represent the complex wear system within such a mill. Before wear predictions for particular materials can be issued, a fundamental understanding of the influencing variables is necessary. The parameters which are most significant to wear are geometry, material and speed of the rolls, grinding pressure and the characteristics of the feed material. The results described in this paper should help to understand the influence of three variables on the wear rate: grinding pressure, grain size and moisture of the feedstock. The wear system in high pressure grinding can be classified as three-body abrasive wear, whereas the two rolls represent the body and counter body, the feedstock is the material in between which is free to move and slide in air or maybe water for weathered feed material as the ambient medium. Concerning HPGR Theisen After reaching area II no relative movement between the particles and the roller surface takes place, just realignment processes within the material bed. The high compression load on the material bed results in indentations upon the roller surface. In contrast to area I, where abrasion (scratching) is the predominant mechanism, the material removal occurs due to mircofatigue. After reiterate deformation, tiny parts of the surface spall off. As there is no movement, the compression process can be compared to a material bed in an axially moving piston press with the height Usually the fraction of particles coarser than the width of the gap As previously mentioned, wear of the rolls accounts for a big part to the operating costs. The more abrasive the feed material is, the higher the costs get. To counter this problem most effectively, the wear protection should be aligned to the prevailing mechanisms as good as possible. In case of abrasive wear, hard phases like carbides, nitrides or borides in a metallic matrix material are an assured solution. For the application in HPGR, the characteristics of these hard phases should be different for the areas I and II. For pure abrasion ( In the initial period after installing the first HPGR, the wear protection of the rolls was chosen upon the experience gained in briquetting and compacting industry. Oberheuser Tires of wear resistant iron alloys mounted on the roll body, e.g., a group of nickel alloyed cast irons, well known under the name “NIHARD”.Particular NIHARD 4 (Fe82–Cr9–Ni5–C3), a material whose microstructure is built up of primary and eutectic carbides embedded in a martensitic matrix is widely used. Hardfacing layer weld on the body of the roll, which can be refurbished after the entire abrasion of the coating. To optimize the feed intake, certain patterns are welded on the roller surface. Beside these two wear protection systems, two more are state of the art today. In both cases the tool (tire or segment) consists of two different materials: Cylindrical pins being composed of wear resistant cemented carbides, so-called studs, which are pressed or glued into holes drilled into a base material ( Hexagonal tiles ( All types were tested in ore applications but only stud lining and HEXADUR® show promising results. For hard rock grinding hardfacing and white cast irons aren't able to protect the rolls adequate. The laboratory-scale HPGR at RWTH Aachen University, located at the Institute for Materials Applications in Mechanical Engineering, is powered by a 0.55 The average maximal pressure in the gap (see The bulk density is defined as the mass of a packed material bed divided by the volume it occupies and is strongly depending on the way the material is handled. The flake density could theoretically be determined by measuring the thickness of the flake at the smallest width of the gap. As this is not possible, the flake density was determined in a piston die press. A servo-hydraulic testing machine (MTS 810), with a maximum pressing force of 100 The laboratory HPGR ( A jet nozzle is targeted on each bottom side of the rolls ( For the abrasive feed material, pure quartz sand was chosen. The sand was provided by the Quarzwerke GmbH from a quarry in Bottrop, Germany. Due to storage conditions water content u of the sand was 0.1%. The grains are in a range of 0.2 Microscopic analyses of the roller surface were done with a scanning electron microscope type LEO 1450 VP (Zeiss). To be able to install and inspect the whole roll surface inside the SEM a special device ( In order to determine the wear rate, the rolls were weighed before and after a test. Prior to measuring the surface was properly cleaned. The measuring range of the balance has been adjusted custom-specific. Thereby the rolls can be weighed with sufficient accuracy. To ensure comparability between different roll materials the gravimetric data was converted into the volume loss per 1000 revolutions. This quantity, designed as The influences of three different system parameters on the wear behavior were analyzed for this paper. A standard experiment for obtaining a data point for a certain set of parameters is done with 5 In a first series of test, the specific pressing force was varied from 1.28 The effect of moisture was analyzed in a third test series by varying it from 0 to 10%. The water content was adjusted with an EIRICH Intensive mixer and measured with a moisture analyzer afterwards. During the test two inductive sensors are attached on top of the bearing blocks to record the width of the gap. Another inductive sensor is directed at perforated disk mounted on the driving axle of the rolls to monitor the number of rotations. The power input of the drive system is measured via a clamp-on ammeter. The roll surface has been investigated after doing the tests in a SEM. As can be seen in For the piston die experiments an amount of 7.72 Four test series were conducted to figure out the influence on the wear rate of three different parameters, the pressing force, the grain size and the moisture of feed material. Beside the gravimetric measurements of the rolls, microscopic analyses of the worn surface were done. The results of both were also used to understand the wear mechanisms acting in HPGR's. As described earlier in this paper, Theisen The comparison at a magnification of 500× already shows explicit differences. The amount of silica sand (dark areas) sticking to the metallic roller surface is tremendously lower for the test without any pressure. With just a very few exceptions, only abrasion grooves can be seen and the few silica cakes don't seem to stick deep inside the roller surface. Even though small cracks are visible, clear indications of material loss due to indentation cannot be seen. Having in mind that the test has been performed with no external pressure, the scratches are quite impressive. Besides very small scratches ( In the second case, clear evidence of microfatique can be detected. Although abrasion is still affecting the surface, typical scratches are missing ( To get further information concerning the wear mechanisms, one roll ( The first parameter examined was the pressing force. As a strong influence on the product fineness, is well known and is reported in the literature In the range 100 As expected the (pressure dependent) mechanism of indentation seems to dominate the overall wear rate in the system. The step from As already mentioned, high pressure grinding is only one step in the comminution of mineral particles. The grain size distribution of the feed material can therefore be influenced by the previous crushing and screening operations. Thus, a good knowledge about the influence of the minerals grain size on wear behavior is essential. The first test series to be discussed now was conducted with respect to all requirements of confined bed comminution. The number of grains being bigger than the width of the bed was kept below 20% for all fractions. The strong influence of single grain comminution can also be seen in To look closer at the grain size influence, analyses in the SEM were made. After doing wear tests with the fractions 0.3 to 0.5 Evaluating the influence of grain size upon the wear behavior, the constant pressing force should be considered. While no changes of the local pressure Transportation and pretreatment of minerals lead to different moisture and make knowledge about the influence on wear behavior beneficial. While previous studies The reason for the increase in wear rate can be seen in the lubrication characteristics of moist loose material ( The complex wear system in HPGRs gave rise to set up a laboratory-scale machine in order to investigate the wear behavior under conditions as close as possible to practical applications. Three of the influencing system parameters were chosen, to gain fundamental understandings. Additional to the wear tests, a designed device has been developed to analyze the worn roller surface inside a SEM. Pictures could be taken after wear tests in the mill. The first tests described in this paper were done in order to verify the currently assumed wear mechanisms taking place inside a HPGR. For the test without external pressure, the wear traces can be best described by the abrasion mechanisms of microcutting and microploughing. Raising the force to a specific pressing force of 6.4 The wear rate behaves as a logarithmic function on the pressure. Nevertheless, in the pressure range which is relevant for practical applications, this function can be approximated by a linear relationship. An increase of the pressing force leads to an increase of wear rate. The same counts for the local maximum pressure inside the roll gap. At specific pressing forces higher than 5 An increase of the maximum grain size of the feed material leads to an increase of wear rate. This coherence counts as long as the lower end of the grain distribution stays untouched. Therefore a better wording would be, coarsening of the grain size distribution leads to an increase in wear rate. The tests have shown that in particular the oversized grains, meaning the grains being bigger than the width of the gap, lead to high stresses in the roller surface and elevated wear rates. Moisture does not only affect handling of loose materials such as silica sand, it also increases the wear rate. An increase of moisture leads to an increase in wear rate, at least in a moisture range up to 10%. Analysis of higher values of free water doesn't seem to be technically reasonable. For porous materials such as slag, a more detailed investigation on the role of moisture is necessary. Coherence between So far, the results presented here only reflect the wear behavior for a material combination of a martensitic hardened steel and silica sand. The focus of future work will be laid on the influence of different roller and feed materials.