Low expansion aluminium–silicon eutectic alloys are cast to produce most of the automotive pistons. The structure and properties of these alloys are very much dependent on the cooling rate, composition, modification and heat treatment operations. In this study, locally available automotive ‘scrap pistons’ were used as basic raw materials and a natural gas fired crucible furnace was used for melting purpose. The wear behaviour of both as-cast and heat treated specimens were studied under dry sliding conditions at room temperature using a pin-on-disc type wear testing apparatus. The extent of wear damage and the type of wear were investigated by means of weight loss measurement and optical microscopy techniques. The full heat treatment showed a great influence on the wear properties of the aluminium–silicon piston alloy as it reduced the wear rate of the specimens. The exceptional high tensile strength and hardness were attributed to the heat treatment condition with decrease in ductility. Significant changes in structure were also observed to occur specially in the primary and eutectic silicon phases. Some of the results of this study can be recommended for tribological use of this alloy in manufacturing automobile spare parts.Wear is a major problem in industry and its direct cost is estimated to vary between 1 and 4% of gross national product Aluminium–silicon alloys have the potential for excellent castability, good weldability, good thermal conductivity, high strength at elevated temperature and excellent corrosion resistance. They are, therefore, well suited for aerospace structural applications, automobile industry, military applications, etc. The low expansion group of aluminium–silicon eutectic or near eutectic alloys are referred to as ‘piston alloy’ which provide the best overall balance of properties The general aim of the present investigation was to observe the structure and wear behaviour of the aluminium–silicon piston alloy in the as-cast and heat treated conditions so that specific recommendation can be put forward towards the tribological use of this alloy for local automobile spare parts manufacturers. Locally available scrap pistons were first melted, and then cleaned and cast to make small sized piston alloy ingots. The analysis of the ingot is shown in The melting operation was carried out in a natural gas fired pit furnace, where the charge materials were placed in a graphite crucible. The temperature was measured using a digital chromel–alumel thermocouple. The melt was superheated to a temperature of 750°C and was finally poured at 700–720°C into a green sand mould. These conditions gave the best results for aluminium–silicon alloy Full heat treatment, i.e., solution, ageing and precipitation treatments were carried out for some of the tensile specimens. The solution treatment was carried out in a resistance heating muffle furnace at 520°C (±5°C) for 8 Tensile tests were conducted with Tenius Olsen testing machine using 5 The percentage porosity of the specimen was calculated from the following relationship: In order to obtain the maximum density or pore free density of a sample, the sample was compressed to about 80% of its original thickness under a compressive load Cylindrical pins of 8.0 The pin was first weighed and then placed in the sample holder of the lever. Its curved surface was brought in contact with the flat surface of the counter body. In this work, the loads of 0.5, 1 and 1.5 After testing, the worn surface of the pin was examined by optical microscopy. The pin was then cleaned thoroughly in running water, dried with acetone and again examined. It was then weighed and the loss in weight was calculated. At least three tests were carried out for each set of conditions and the average weight loss was taken. Metallographic specimens were polished in the usual manner and final polishing was carried out with fine alumina powder by hand. The specimens were then etched in 3% HNO  Again, due to completion of homogenisation more solutes come to the solid solution. Hence, instead of very sharp primary crystals, somewhat thicky and less sharp structures are obtained in the heat treated sample ( The piston alloy under investigation contains numerous alloying and impurity elements (  The wear rate in the form of weight loss of the alloy is graphically shown in  A general increase in wear with an increase in load and time is observed for both as-cast and heat treated specimens but for as-cast specimen wear is more pronounced. For heat treated specimens a mild wear is observed at the wear surface, and for as-cast specimen an adhesive wear with plastic deformation is observed. The overall investigation shows that the heat treated aluminium–silicon piston alloy has higher strength, hardness and wear resistance properties. However, in order to obtain best combination of the structure and properties in this material, further investigation is needed. The authors are grateful to the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET) authority for a research grant in the course of this investigation.