This paper describes the effect of heating mode on the densification and microstructure homogenization during sintering of Cu–12Sn alloy. The bronze compacts were sintered at two temperatures (775 and 830°C) in a radiatively heated (conventional) furnace and a microwave furnace. As compared with conventionally sintered bronze, the microwave-sintered compacts exhibit higher densification and relatively lower microstructural homogeneity. This has been correlated to the dependence of Sn diffusion in Cu to the heating mode. The as-received water-atomized Cu [ The green (as-pressed) compacts were sintered at 775 and 830 Unlike a conventional furnace, the temperature of the samples inside a microwave furnace cannot be monitored using a thermocouple. Therefore, temperature measurement was done using an infrared pyrometer (model: M680, supplier: Mikron Corp., USA). The pyrometer is emmissivity based; therefore temperature could not be measured below 350 The density of the sintered samples was determined through dimensional measurement as well as by Archimedes’ displacement method. To take into account the influence of the variation in the initial as-pressed density, the compact sinterability was also determined through a densification parameter, which is expressed as: The microstructural analyses of the samples were carried out through an optical microscope. The quantitative elemental analyses of the sintered compacts at various temperatures was performed using an EPMA (JXA-8600SX Superprobe, JEOL, Japan) equipped with WDS and X-ray imaging.    To correlate the above EPMA observations, the distance that Sn diffuses into Cu was determined as a function of both heating mode and sintering temperature. The problem therefore simplifies into evaluating the diffusion of tin during both the heating and the isothermal hold at the sintering temperature. The diffusion distance of Sn in Cu during the non-isothermal condition was determined using a modified approach proposed by Soucail and Bienvenu In summary, this study shows that Cu–12Sn bronze can be consolidated through microwave sintering with a significant (∼75%) reduction in processing time. As compared with conventional heating, microwave sintering results in higher density. However, due to less time available for diffusion, microwave-heated compacts are more predisposed to microstructural inhomogeneity during sintering. The authors thank Pometon Spa, Italy for supplying the powders. The authors also appreciate helpful suggestions from Professor Dinesh Agrawal of Pennsylvania State University, USA. The funding from Defense Research and Development Organization (DRDO) is gratefully acknowledged.