Ion selective membrane electrode doped with amide functionalized dendritic [CH2C(O)NHC(CH2CH2C(O)OtBu)3]2 macromolecule was evaluated as anion sensor. The ability of the membrane has been explored by incorporating it into a plasticized PVC matrix on glassy carbon electrode. The effects of membrane composition, pH and the influence of anion additives, and also the nature of the plasticizers on the response characteristics of the electrode were investigated. The resulting electrode exhibits an anti-Hofmeister selectivity pattern with remarkable specificity towards iodide over other lipophilic inorganic anions. The optimum membrane composition for best potentiometric performance was achieved with a DPE-plasticized membrane (DPE=diphenyl ether) doped with 15% TBAB (TBAB=tetrabutyl ammonium bromide), suggesting that the ionophore operates via a neutral carrier mechanism. It has a linear response to iodide with a detection limit of 4.46×10−7
                     M and a slope of 59.6mV/decade, a satisfactory reproducibility and a rapid response time. The selectivity coefficients for I− towards interferences from ClO4
                     −, NO3
                     − and Cl− were estimated to be 
                        
                           
                              K
                              
                                 
                                    I
                                    −
                                 
                                 ,
                                  
                                 anio
                                 
                                    n
                                    −
                                 
                              
                              
                                 pot
                              
                           
                           =
                           1.25
                           ×
                           
                              
                                 10
                              
                              
                                 −
                                 4
                              
                           
                        
                     , 1.99×10−4 and 7.94×10−5, respectively. Application of the electrode to the potentiometric titration of iodide ion with silver nitrate is also reported.The design and synthesis of anion ionophores (receptors) for ion selective electrodes (ISEs) have been more challenging than cation ones, due to their proven difficulty in controlling selectivity among anions, their wide range of geometries, low charge to radii ratio, pH sensitivity and high solvation energy the host molecule must contain functionalities which can electrostatically attract a charged species, the host molecule must have a organized structure which can selectively hold the guest molecule, and the binding event must be detectable by either spectral or electrochemical techniques. Iodine is an indispensable microelement to humans; hence determination of iodide ion is very important, especially in environmental, medicinal and food samples. Several iodide ion selective electrodes based on a variety of ionophores have been reported in the literature The ionophore topology plays an important role in determining the overall ionophore–ion interaction, thereby having profound effect on the behaviour of the ISE. Combination and preorganization of various anion binding groups like urea Research interest on functionalized dendrimers has exploded in recent years due to their macromolecular properties exhibiting a well-defined chemical structure with the possibility of containing selected chemical units in predetermined sites for ion recognition. There has been considerable interest in the incorporation of functional units on the surface or in the interior core of the dendrimer so as to generate supramolecular assemblies having applications in chemical sensors We report here the study on the feasibility of employing amide functionalized dendritic molecule [CH High molecular weight PVC was obtained from Fluka. Potassium iodide, tetrabutyl ammonium bromide (TBAB), sodium tetraphenylborate (NaTPB), the solvent mediators dioctylphthalate (DOP), dibutylphthalate (DBP) and diphenyl ether (DPE), were purchased from Aldrich. Glassy carbon electrode (3 Membranes containing different PVC/plasticizer/ionophore ratios were prepared and the composition of the membranes was 1–2 A solution of the primary anion (0.1 The incorporation of dendritic [CH The potentiometric response characteristics of the electrodes containing the ionophore in the plasticized membrane in buffered solution of pH 7.0 were studied. It was found that ISEs prepared with membranes containing molecule Since the sensitivities and selectivities for a membrane significantly depend on the membrane ingredients and additives used The nature and amount of plasticizer influences the dielectric constant of the membrane phase and the mobility of the ionophore, and is known to play an important role in controlling the detection limit, sensitivity and the selectivity of an electrode The response of the electrodes prepared with DPE and varying amount of ionophore was also studied and is given in Incorporation of lipophilic electrically charged additives is known to improve the potentiometric behaviour of certain anion selective electrodes As mentioned above, the responses of ISE membranes containing various ionic sites can be used to distinguish whether the ionophore acts as charged or neutral carrier. It has been shown that ISEs with neutral carriers can only function if sites with a charge opposite to that of the analyte are present The electrode consisting of ionophore The pH response of the membrane electrode was obtained by measuring potentials in solutions containing 1.0 As seen from The response time of a sensor is an important factor for any analytical purpose. The IUPAC method of reporting response time is a defined rate (Δ The response time of the electrode was less than 15 The stability (chemical and structural) of an ionophore over time under operational conditions is a very important characteristic and is very well studied using potentiometry. The state of the ionophore directly influences the interfacial potential generated, due to the ability of the carrier to complex the target ion. Any signal drift, loss in sensitivity or selectivity is thus a measure of the ionophore’s stability. Therefore, the sensitivity of the ISEs based on ionophore The membrane with ionophore The electronic absorption spectrum ( The most important characteristics of any ion selective electrode are its response to the primary ion in the presence of other ions in solution, which is usually expressed in terms of potentiometric selectivity coefficient. It describes the preference of the membrane for an interfering ion A As evident from the data, the electrode based on The modified separate solution method was used for calculations of unbiased selectivity coefficients. In determining the selectivity coefficients iodide was taken as an internal filling and conditioning solutions. Calibration curves for each of the discriminated anions were generated followed by calibration towards the preferred anions. The potentiometric selectivity coefficient values of the electrodes were also evaluated by the matched potential method (MPM). In this method, the selectivity coefficient is determined from the concentration of the interfering ion that induced the same potential change as the increase of the primary ion concentration from 10 The high selectivity of the electrode towards iodide over other anions (CH The proposed iodide electrode was found to work well under laboratory conditions. The electrode was used an indicator electrode for the titration of 50 The high selectivity exhibited by the proposed membrane electrode prompted us to explore the possibility of using it in monitoring the concentration of iodide in natural water. Thus, experiments were performed to study the feasibility of using the electrode in measuring the iodide content in river water. The collected river water samples were filtered through 0.45-μm membrane filter and stored in polythene bottles. The water samples were then diluted 1:10 with phosphate buffer, pH 7.0. The results are compiled in PVC supported membrane electrodes incorporating newly synthesized [CH S.C. gratefully acknowledges a Post-Doctoral Fellowship granted by the Alexander