The leaching recovery of gold is low caused by the arsenic inclusion and gold encapsulation in the two-stage roasting pyrite cinder. It is necessary to pretreat the cinder to improve the recovery of gold. In this study, sulfuric acid was employed to remove arsenic and iron from the cinder, and then the arsenic was transferred to precipitates from the leaching solution by ferric ion precipitation for harmless disposal. The vast majority of the arsenic and iron were leached into the solution at 80 °C under atmospheric pressure. The recovery rate of gold in residue after non-cyanide extraction was greatly improved, and the gold content in residue decreased from 11.2 g/t to 3.8 g/t. The leached iron was partly precipitated by controlling the additive amount of hydrogen peroxide and pH value to precipitate the arsenic. The arsenic concentration in the solution was reduced to about 5 mg/L after 1 h of precipitation. The size of the precipitates was increased to >100 μm when the pH value was >5.69. In addition, the precipitates had a strong adsorption capacity to absorb many other impurity ions such as ammonium. This study indicates that the removal of arsenic and iron from cinder is beneficial to increase the recovery of gold, and it is effective to remove the arsenic from the leaching solution through co-precipitation with ferric ion.Gold-bearing ores ordinarily contain variable types of arsenic compounds that will interfere with gold extraction efficiency ( Acid leaching is one of the methods to pretreat the pyrite cinder, and the arsenic will be leached into solution ( The pyrite cinder obtained by two-stage roasting process used for this study was collected from one gold smelter in Xinjiang province, China. The chemical composition of valuable elements in this material was determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES, optima 8000) and Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS, WFX-130A), as the results were presented in The pyrite cinder and sulfuric acid with certain concentration were put into a 250 mL erlenmeyer flask heated in a water bath pot at a specific temperature. After stirring for a certain time, the pulp was filtered through a vacuum suction filter. Then, the residue was dried and its composition was determined by XRD, ICP-OES, AAS and SEM-EDS (JSM-7001F + INCA-MAX). The leaching solution was collected for arsenic-removal experiments. A specific amount of mixed liquid adjusted pH using ammonia at the temperature of 30 °Cwas taken in an erlenmeyer flask, and put iron power to react with Fe The experimental results shown in The effect of acid concentration between 5 and 20 wt% was studied under the conditions of S/L = 1:5, 80 °C, 6 h of leaching time, and the results were presented in To investigate the influence of solid to liquid ratio, leaching tests were performed with the solid to liquid ratio between 1:3 and 1:10, as shown in The effect of leaching time was studied under the conditions of S/L = 1:7, 20 vol% H The residue after acid leaching was used for non-cyanide extraction experiment under the conditions of 30 °C, pH >11, 48 h. The non-cyanide agent called Jin Chan was purchased from the market which was produced by Guangxi Senhe High Technology Co., Ltd. The content of gold in the residue after non-cyanide extraction was about 3.8 g/t. The leaching rate of the gold was greatly improved compared to the non-acid leaching residue which gold content was about 11.2 g/t after non-cyanide extraction. Therefore, it is beneficial to remove the arsenic and iron from the pyrite cinder for the gold recovery. As(III) is the predominant arsenic species in the leaching solution, while it is much more toxic than As(V). Therefore, it is important to oxidize As(III) to As(V) so as to reduce the toxicity and mobility before the arsenic precipitation ( In addition, Fenton reaction occurs between Fe(II) and H According to this principle, Fenton reaction has been used to oxidize As(III) to As(V) by some researches ( The present work added the hydrogen peroxide to oxidize the arsenic and iron for generating ferrihydrite. The additive amount of hydrogen peroxide was based on the contents of As(III) and Fe(II) to form FeAsO In order to investigate the effect of pH on the arsenic removal efficiency in the leaching solution, experiments were conducted at pH = 4–8 with the conditions of 30 °C, addition ratio of 2 (the molar ratio of H In addition, iron in the solution decreased gradually with the increase of pH. The iron concentration dropped to 8.3 g/L at pH = 7.26. Excess amount of Fe(II) can be reacted to form precipitation of Fe(OH) The amount of hydrogen peroxide has a significantly influence on the oxidation of Fe(II) and As(III). A better arsenic removal could be obtained by a sufficient amount of Fe(III), which was formed by the oxidation of Fe(II). To increase H The oxidation time is one of the critical factors influencing arsenic precipitation. A series of experiments were conducted at 30 °C, addition ratio of 2, pH of 5.0–5.5, and the results were shown in The arsenic precipitates were characterized to investigate the state of arsenic and iron. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the precipitates under different pH values was illustrated in Furthermore, Fourier transform infrared spectrometer tests (FTIR) were conducted to indicate the structures of the precipitates. SEM images of the precipitates obtained at different pH values were shown in The present work used sulfuric acid to remove the arsenic and iron from the two-stage roasting pyrite cinder, and the arsenic in the leaching solution was treated by precipitation. The arsenic and iron contents in the cinder were reduced to about 0.14% and 3.6% respectively after leaching by sulfuric acid under the conditions of 80 °C, S/L = 1:7, 20 vol% H The effects of pH and H We would like to thank the