Stable magnetic magnetite nanoparticles (Fe3O4 NPs) were synthesized using the chemical co-precipitation method of ferrous (Fe2+)/ferric (Fe3+) mixed aqueous salt solutions in presence of well-defined biocompatible low generation (poly)amidoamine (PAMAM)-based dendrimers with end-grafted n ethylene glycol ether (n
                     =1, 2, 9) moieties, accessible by means of straightforward consecutive divergent synthesis methodologies including addition and amidation cycles. Addition of NH4OH to the respective dendritic nanoreagent containing iron salt solution produced dendritic stabilized uniform shaped magnetite nanoparticles. The structural and magnetic properties of Fe3O4 NPs were analyzed by FT-IR spectroscopy, thermogravimetry (TG), X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM). The coherence of affecting the average magnetite particle diameter in range of 5.6 (±1.4)–10.1 (±1.9)nm by the dendritic scaffold, the number and length of the attached ethylene glycol ether termini, as well as the adjusted stabilizer-to-Fe3O4 ratio is discussed along with their magnetic peculiarities.Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have generated considerable interest in the scientific world especially in the area of biomedicine and technology, particularly, magnetic storage media In spite of significant progress in the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles, preventing agglomeration or precipitation of MNPs remains an important issue. Stability still is a crucial parameter for almost any application of the magnetic nanoparticles. The main difficulty arises due to the susceptibility of the nanoparticles towards oxidation which increases with decrease in particle size Towards this direction, we report here on a straightforward and time efficient approach facilitating in situ synthesis of dendritic stabilized MNPs using the chemical co-precipitation method. The readily accessible flexident biocompatible organic coatings with ethylene glycol-based tentacles provide stability to the MNPs surface and hence protect from particle coagulation. The resulted MNPs were characterized with TEM, XPRD, TG, FTIR and SQUID-VSM magnetometry. All synthesis procedures were performed under dinitrogen atmosphere. Water was deoxygenated prior to use. Iron(II) chloride tetrahydrate, iron(III) chloride hexahydrate, ammonium hydroxide solution and methanol were purchased from SIGMA ALDRICH and used without further purification. The (poly)amidoamine (PAMAM)-based dendrimers Size and morphology of the magneto-dendrimer NPs were determined using TEM imaging, performed on a PHILIPS CM 20 operated at 200 In a typical experiment, in situ dendritic stabilized Fe Data for Data for Data for Data for Data for Data for Data for Data for Data for End-grafted ethylene glycol ether-functionalized amidoamine-based low-generation dendrimers The resulting black colored Fe The nature of the chemical bonding in the newly formed hybrid materials was investigated using FT-IR spectroscopy. Since stabilizer As an evidence for surfacing the colloids by the applied dendritic stabilizers the strong band at around 1095 The phase and crystalline nature of dendrimer stabilized Fe The magneto-dendrimer NPs were imaged by TEM. The TEM determined particle size for, The thermal decomposition of the hybrid-material Magnetic measurements were carried out on all samples in powder form using a SQUID-VSM. FC and ZFC magnetization recorded at two different fields for colloids Fe This study was generously supported by the