Background
                  Fracture of the capitellum is an often missed or inadequately treated serious elbow injury. Anatomic reduction and proper stabilization are essential to obtain articular congruity so that late-onset arthritis can be avoided. The main areas of interest in this intriguing fracture are the choice of implant and the surgical approach. We describe the use of anterolateral approach and headless double-threaded compression screws for the fixation of this fracture.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This prospective study included 16 capitellar fractures. A computed tomography scan was done for delineating the fracture line and planning the fixation technique. All fractures were treated with headless double-threaded compression screws using an anterolateral approach, over a period of 3 years, with a mean follow-up of 2.3 years (range, 1.5-4 years).
               
                  Results
                  The average time to bony union was 3.5 months (range, 2.5-5 months) with no malunion or nonunion. The mean range of flexion was 132° (range, 125°-135°). The average extensor lag was 10° (range, 0°-25°), but the range of motion remained functional in all patients. On the final follow-up, no evidence of osteonecrosis, post-traumatic osteoarthritis, or heterotrophic ossification was seen. The outcome was excellent in 10 patients, and 6 patients had a good result.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The success of management of a capitellar fracture depends on an early diagnosis by keeping a high index of suspicion and timely management. Adequate exposure of the fracture is of paramount importance to achieve accurate reduction. This can be satisfactorily achieved by an anterolateral approach to the elbow. An adequate fixation of the fractured fragments can be achieved by the use of headless double-threaded compression screws.Fracture of the capitellum is a rare injury accounting for 1% of total elbow injuries and 6% of distal humeral fractures. Bryan and Morrey Type I: Coronal shear fracture through the capitellum, resulting in a hemispheric fracture fragment (Hahn-Steinthal fracture). Type II: Involves a shell of articular cartilage with a thin layer of subchondral bone and appears as though the capitellum has become “uncapped” (Kocher-Lorenz fracture). This is the most common type. Type III: Comminuted, often impacted fracture. McKee et al Inadequately treated fracture may lead to a severe compromise in function owing to the restricted range of motion (ROM). Various modalities of treatment and fixation of the fracture have been described. These range from conservative treatment with closed reduction and immobilization to open reduction and fixation. Open reduction and fixation can be done with Kirschner (K) wires, partially threaded cancellous screws, headless double-threaded compression screws (HCSs), 3.5-mm lag screws, horizontal mattress cross-stitched suture technique, excision of the fragments, and prosthetic replacement. The intra-articular nature of the fracture makes it necessary that the head of the implant should not be prominent and preferably countersunk. The HCS, with its property of differential pitch and countersunk head, is a good option for fracture fixation. The second debate is the ideal surgical approach based on the understanding of the blood supply of the capitellum. The main blood supply of the capitellum is mainly from the posterior aspect. Yamaguchi et al These difficulties can be circumvented by the use of the anterolateral approach. This report presents the results of a prospective study of 16 capitellar fractures treated with HCSs using the anterolateral approach during a 3-year period, with an average follow-up of 2.3 years (range, 1.5-4 years). This is a case series of 16 consecutive patients with capitellar fractures who were treated with open reduction and internal fixation with 2 HCSs using the anterolateral approach. All patients with a capitellar fracture presenting to the tertiary referral center were included in the study, with 18 patients included from June 2010 to July 2013. Two patients were lost to follow-up. The patients were a mean age of 32 years (range, 18-50 years). Ten patients had a history of fall on an outstretched hand, 4 had fallen on the flexed elbow, and 2 had unclear mechanisms of injury. Fractures were classified according to the Bryan and Morrey classification by anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs. Ten patients sustained a type I fracture, 5 were type II, and 1 patient had a type IV. Two type 1 fractures were associated with an olecranal fracture. No other concomitant injuries were noted in the other patients. All patients underwent computed tomography (CT) scans for better definition of the fracture line and to rule out any other concomitant injuries. The careful preoperative plan was made regarding fixation technique. All patients were operated on under general anesthesia, in the supine position, and under tourniquet. Examination under anesthesia was performed to rule out concomitant ligamentous injury. The anterolateral approach to the elbow joint was used. In the supinated forearm, a serpentine incision was initiated laterally, just proximal to the biceps tendon, and was extended distally in the forearm along the medial border of brachioradialis. Care was taken to avoid crossing the flexion crease at 90°. The interval was made between the brachialis and brachioradialis. The lateral cutaneous nerve of the forearm needs to be protected in the superficial plane. The recurrent branch of the radial artery may need to be ligated if it comes in the plane of dissection ( The fracture surface was cleaned by removing blood clots, loose pieces of bone, and any interposed tissue. The joint was inspected to scan the whole articular surface. The fractured fragment is usually proximally migrated and needs to be brought down distally. A useful maneuver for reduction of the fracture is flexion and pronation. The fracture was reduced by matching the articular fracture lines. A guidewire for the HCS is passed across the fracture site where the planned screw track is to be inserted. The screw length is measured from the guidewire using an appropriate device for measuring depth. The wire is drilled with a cannulated drill bit, and a pilot hole is made. The chosen screw is inserted over the wire and buried under the cartilage. The fixation is best achieved by the use of 2 screws, preferably crossing each other in the lateral view, to avoid any rotational displacement of the fracture. Final reduction and position of the implant is checked under an image intensifier. The elbow is made to go through the full flexion-extension and rotation arc to check for the stability of fixation. Hemostasis is achieved, and the closure is done in layers over a drain. An associated olecranon fracture was found in 2 patients. In these cases, a posterior approach was used to fix the fracture with tension band wiring of the olecranon. A posterior elbow splint was applied routinely, which was kept for 1 week. Active ROM was started on postoperative day 7. Patients were evaluated by the Mayo Elbow Performance Score for stability, pain, and ROM. They were further assessed for the status of the bony union visualized on X-ray images, signs of avascular necrosis (AVN), wound healing complications, ROM, and any other significant complications. Sixteen patients (10 men, 6 women) were available for follow-up and were included in the study. Fractures were on the right side in 12 patients and on the left in 4. Ten fractures were noted in the dominant hand. Associated olecranal fracture was seen in 2 patients, who had type I capitellar fractures according to the Bryan and Morrey classification. The average time of bony union was 3.5 months (range, 2.5-5 months). There were no malunions or nonunions in the present case series. There was no weakness of the extensor power, and there were no limitations of forearm rotation. The average range of flexion was 132° (range, 125°-135°). The mean extensor lag was 10° (range, 0°-25°), but the ROM remained functional in all patients, except 1. One patient sustained postoperative posterior interosseous nerve palsy that recovered completely in 7 weeks, with no residual compromise. Postoperative restriction of elbow extension developed in 1 patient due to keloid formation in the scar on the anterior aspect. The patient was treated with multiple injections of intralesional steroid, but there was an extensor lag of 25°. The overall ROM in this patient was 25° to 110°. No patient complained of residual pain. At the 2-year follow-up, no evidence of osteonecrosis, post-traumatic osteoarthritis, or heterotrophic ossification was seen. Outcomes were excellent in 10 patients, and 6 had good result according to the Mayo elbow score. A 45-year-old man presented with history of trauma to the left elbow after a fall on his outstretched hand. The patient reported to the outpatient department with persistent restriction of ROM. Radiographs and CT scan of the elbow revealed a fracture with displacement of the capitellum ( A 32-year-old man reported to the emergency department with history of road traffic accident and painful swelling in the right elbow. The exact mode of injury was not clear. Plain radiographs of the elbow revealed a fracture of the olecranon, with suspected fracture of the capitellum. A CT scan of the elbow with 3D reconstruction was done for precise delineation of the fracture anatomy ( Capitellar fracture is a rare injury in adults that usually presents with deformity in the elbow after a history of fall on the outstretched hand or on the flexed elbow. It is commonly missed on AP radiographs; therefore, careful evaluation should be done in the lateral view. Examination under anesthesia should be done as a routine to rule out concomitant posterolateral, varus, and valgus instability. Among the various modalities of treatment, closed reduction and immobilization seems to be biologic. However, maintaining reduction of the fragment is difficult, and longer duration of immobilization is required. Anatomic reduction is difficult to achieve by the closed method and may lead to early post-traumatic arthritis, and hence, open reduction, anatomic reduction, and internal fixation is considered ideal. The points of discussion in the literature have been the surgical approach and the method of fracture fixation. The usual surgical methods described for fixation of the capitellum are the extensile lateral, the universal posterior approach, and the anterolateral approach. The anterolateral approach to the elbow has been described in the literature for approaching the anterior aspect of the elbow. The anterolateral approach used in the present study has the potential advantages of no need for elevation of the extensor origin, direct visualization of the fracture, ease of achieving the ideal AP direction for perpendicular fixation to the fracture site, and also avoiding the posterior blood supply ( The only disadvantage with this approach is that the dissection is near the neurovascular bundle. The radial nerve dissected in this approach can be easily retracted. The incidence of radial nerve injury is very small with direct visualization and careful retraction, as seen in only 1 patient in the present series. Anterior scarring that may be associated with the anterolateral approach and may lead to extensor lag can also be avoided by not crossing the elbow flexion crease at 90°. Another tip to achieve complete extension postoperatively is to perform anterior capsulectomy at the time of fixation to avoid postoperative capsular scarring and restriction of movements. Various means of fixation for this fracture have been used. Fixation by the means of K wires is not desirable because it does not bring compression at the fracture site and also mandates later implant removal. Previous reports of the use of HCSs through the extensile lateral approach have shown satisfactory results. Good results after the capitellar fracture can be expected by keeping a high index of suspicion, timely management, accurate reduction, and adequate fixation, and finally, early ROM. All of these can be easily achieved by the use of the HCS for fixation through the anterolateral approach to the elbow. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.