This work demonstrates for the first time the phenomenon of continuous percrystallization using a carbon membrane derived from the pyrolysis of food grade sugar. In addition, it is also the first demonstration of membranes separating solute from solvent and delivering dry crystals in a single step. This is contrary to membrane crystallization, which requires two further processing steps to filter crystals from a solution followed by drying the wet crystal particles. The results indicate that carbonised sugar membranes can confer ideal conditions of super-saturation, leading to instantaneous and continuous percrystallization of compounds at the permeate side of the membrane. As a result, very high percrystallization production rates of up to 55,000kgm−2 per year are achieved. It is proposed that the percrystallization occurs in a wet thin-film modulated by solution permeation via the mesopores of the membrane, where vapour and crystals are separated at the membrane's solid-liquid-vapour interface. The potential deployment of this novel technology is further demonstrated for a wide range of crystallization applications in chemical, hydrometallurgy, food and pharmaceutical industries.Crystallization is an important industrial process generating a wide range of products throughout the world. Examples include sugar Membrane crystallization remained a dormant field for almost a century following the initial observations of Kober This work demonstrates for the first time the phenomenon of continuous percrystallization through porous carbon inorganic membranes. There are differences between membrane crystallization and percrystallization concepts. In the case of the former, crystals nucleate on the feed side of the membrane as the solute concentration increases as the solvent permeates through the membrane. In the case of latter as in this work, both solute and solvent diffuse through the membrane, leading to a combined phenomena of solvent evaporation and solute crystallization on the permeate side of membrane, hence the concept of percrystallization. Porous carbon membranes are generally derived from synthetic polymers This first demonstration was observed following a permeation study of a salt brine solution (NaCl 17.5 Carbon membranes were prepared using supermarket white refined food grade sugar. The sugar was dissolved in deionised water to a 20%wt solution. The solution was coated on the outer shell of commercial α-alumina substrates (tubes of OD = 10 A series of membranes were also tested to determine if percrystallization also occurred with different inorganic materials and pore size diameters (d The experimental set-up for the continuous percrystallization study is shown in The water flux (F) was calculated based on the total mass (m) collected in the cold trap for a pre-determined interval (Δt) per area of membrane (A) as F = m/(A × Δt). The solute flux (F) was determined similarly to the water flux as F = m/(A × Δt). A pre-determined volume of water was used to rinse the conical beaker (i.e., vacuum chamber) and the surface of the membrane in order to ensure that all solute in the permeate side of the membrane was collected and analysed. The concentration of the substances in the feed (C All chemicals were used as received without any additional processing. These included NaCl (99.7 MW cut-off tests were carried out using an aqueous solution containing a single compound such as 36 or 400 Carbonised sugar xerogels were prepared by dispensing a sugar solution into a petri dish. The samples were then placed inside a closed desiccator where a vacuum was applied for 120 Video AV1 (see web link in the Appendix) demonstrates for the first time the instantaneous and continuous percrystallization process observed for all substances tested in this study. In this example, small white crystals were formed on the surface of a carbonized sugar membrane. Subsequently, the white crystals were ejected off the membrane surface into the conical flask, which is under vacuum. At the same time, water evaporated from the membrane surface which was collected in a cold trap as schematically shown in In addition, this study is also the first demonstration of membranes separating solvents (i.e., water) from solutes (i.e., solid crystals) in a single step, contrary to membrane crystallization which requires three processing steps. The structural characterization of carbonized sugar xerogels proved to be difficult resulting in dense carbon structures from nitrogen sorption analysis. The characterization of xerogels generally offer a semi-quantitative analyses between xerogel structure and film structure. This is not the case here as the carbonized sugar membranes delivered high water fluxes ( The percrystallization phenomenon in this work occurred under vacuum conditions only. In the case of tests under pressure, this phenomenon was not observed. For instance, the mesoporous carbonised sugar membrane delivered high flux as a function of pressure and NaCl concentrations where salt rejection was insignificant (see The continuous percrystallization of salts via the carbon membrane is schematically idealized in An interesting finding is displayed in The percrystallization of NaCl using inorganic membranes is shown to be efficient. For instance, the production of table salt using evaporation ponds is very slow even in a dry continent like Australia. The Whyalla plant uses 4000 ha of salt pans to produce18 kg m It is interesting to observe the range of crystal shapes and sizes obtained from percrystallization. The SEM images in Therefore, this novel technology has a broad spectrum of percrystallization application. It can be used in chemical / mining / hydrometallurgical operations to recover substances of interest such as metals or acids, with the added benefit of also recovering water/solvent and complying with new environmental regulations of zero liquid discharge. In addition, inorganic membrane percrystallization can spearhead developments in wide range of fields of interest in the human endeavour, particularly in health and bio-crystallization of proteins, food/flavour additives and pharmaceutical compounds. This work demonstrates for the first time that porous inorganic membranes can be used to percrystallize mineral salts, food and pharmaceutical compounds. A practical aspect of this novel approach is that the dry solute is separated from the solvent in a single step. The reaction appears to take place in a wet thin-film on the permeate side of the membrane. Membrane mesoporosity is a key variable in achieving the ideal process conditions. The wet thin-film under vacuum pressure confers ideal condition of super-saturation, nucleation and crystallization of compounds. As a result, dry crystals are continuously ejected off the membrane surface and production rates are high up to 55,000 The authors acknowledge the financial support for this research from the Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Project Grant (DP140102800). J. C. Diniz da Costa gratefully thanks the support given by the ARC Future Fellowship Program (FT130100405). The authors would like to thank Professors S. Bhatia, V. Rudolph, D. D. Do and E. White from The University of Queensland for discussions and feedback. See See See See Details of the XRD patterns of the crystallised materials obtained in this study as per Sodium chloride (NaCl) determined as cubic (Fm-3m) space group number 225 pdf file reference number 01–077-2064. Potassium chloride (KCl) as cubic (Fm-3m) space group number 225 pdf reference number 01–075-0296. Nickel chloride pattern as nickel chloride tetra hydrate (NiCl2*4H2O) as monoclinic ( Nickel sulfate pattern as nickel sulfate (VI) hexahydrate (NiSO4*6H2O) as tetragonal (P41212) space group number 92 pdf with reference number 01-079-0106. Vitamin C as ascorbic acid as monoclinic (P21) crystal structure space group 4 with reference number 00-022-1560. Oxalic acid as monoclinic ( Paracetamol as acetaminophen as monoclinic ( This short video displays the instantaneous and continuous per-crystallization process observed for all substances tested in this study. In this example, small white crystals (Vitamin C) are formed on the surface of a carbonized sugar membrane. Subsequently, the white crystals are ejected off the membrane surface into the conical flask, which is under vacuum. Video SV1 – please open the following video file available on (outbox.eait.uq.edu.au/uqjdiniz/J_Membr_Sci_per-crystallisation_inorganic_membrane.mp4):