The inorganic polymer, geopolymer, has emerged as promising material in various fields for its better properties with respect to ceramics and cement-based materials. This paper focused on examining the effects of five kinds of water-soluble organic polymers on the mechanical and physical properties of uncalcined-kaolinite geopolymer. It was found in the current work that the addition of polyacrylic acid (PAA) and sodium polyacrylate (PAANa) can obviously improve the compressive strength (maximum: 29.0%), cross-bending strength (maximum: 64.9%) and volume weight of kaolinite Na-PS. In addition, after boiling the samples for 2 h, their weight losses and remnant compressive strength of the composite geopolymers were also improved to 7.5% and 61.2% (maximum values), respectively. On the contrary, polyacrylamide (PAm), polyethylene glycol (PEG) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) will greatly decrease the volume weight, weight loss and remnant compressive strength (except for PEG), whereas their contributions to the improvement of mechanical property were not as effective as PAA and PAANa.Since 1972, French Prof. Joeselph Davidovits has been developing a kind of mineral polymer materials with the structure of 3D-cross-linked polysialate chains ([-(Si-O) A two-step mechanism As we know, chemical bonds of SiO and AlO are among the most stable covalent bonds in nature. In addition, the polycondensation degree of geopolymer is much higher than cement-based materials Recently, Australia scientist J.S.J. Van Deventer has published a series of papers about his thorough investments on fly ash-based geopolymer It is well known that the mineralization processes of inorganic component in bone Polyacrylic acid (PAA), sodium polyacrylate (PAA Reagents were obtained from the following sources: kaolinite, with average grain size of 1.5 μm, was purchased from Geshan kaolinite and dried at 105 °C for 8 h before experiment; NaOH (AR) was obtained from Tianjing Chemical Reagents; Na Kaolinite is an inexpensive aluminosilicate mineral and can easily be obtained. In the most previous investigations on geopolymer, kaolinite or metakaolinite have been added as one of the source materials. But, little work has been done on studying the uncalcined kaolinite geopolymer system. Therefore, the uncalcined-kaolinite Na-PS was firstly synthesized. Dried powder kaolinite was mixed with activator solutions on different mass ratio ((0.5–0.6) kaolinite/(0.3–0.4) water/(0.1–0.3) activator) at room temperature and stirred for 10 min. The resulted slurry was cast into steel molds measuring 20×20×20 mm and the molds were then transferred into a curing equipment instantly to keep the temperature (40–90 °C) and humidity (ca. 99.0%) constant during each treatment. After curing for the given period of time (1–8 h), samples were demolded, dried and analyzed. It was found that the parameters of water/solid, activator/kaolinite, curing temperature and curing time were very important and directly affected the mechanical properties of kaolinite geopolymer. Generally, more water resulted in lower mechanical property. In view of operability, mass ratio of 0.5 for water/solid was used; comparing with the activator NaOH, composite activator consisting of Na The process to prepare OMPSs was around the same with that of uncalcined-kaolinite Na-PS except that various organic polymers were firstly dissolved in the activator solution and then kaolinite powder was added. The OMPS samples were treated according to the optimized parameters determined in the synthesis of kaolinite Na-PS. Compressive strength testing was performed according to GB/T 1964–1996 with the load increasing ratio of 2.0 MPa/s. Cross-bending strength was measured complying with GB/T 1965–1996 with the load increasing ratio of 2.0N/s. Porosity and volume weight were obtained according to GB/T 1966–1996. Water boiling experiments were carried out by boiling samples in distilled water for 2 h, and weight losses was then measured. For the abovementioned testing, each sample was tested five times and the values were averaged as the experimental result. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images were collected with LEO 1530 VP (Germany). The relationships of compressive strength of OMPSs with respect to organic polymer loadings were shown in The maximum compressive strength, cross-bending strength and volume weight of OMPSs were listed in It is evident that PAA and PAA Polyacrylamide could greatly reduce the volume weight of PAm–OMPS (ca. 1.05 g/cm PEG can greatly improve the ability of water resistance of Na-PS in that the weight loss was reduced to 3.4% and the remnant compressive strength was improved up to 8.9 MPa, which was 32.8% higher in respect to the kaolinite Na-PS. As for PVA–OMPS, the compressive strength was only 5.6% higher than the kaolinite Na-PS and the remnant compressive strength was only 3.1 MPa. It is worth noting that the weight loss (2.5%) and volume weight (0.98 g/cm In the present work, both PAA and PAA