Previously, caustic residues such as red mud and sodium oxalate have been used to provide filler and as a supplementary source of alkali for geopolymers. However, rather than incorporation of dilute alkali residues within geopolymer precursors, a significant counter-intuitive approach is to synthesise geopolymers using Bayer process liquors as a primary source of caustic sodium aluminate and to add locally available fly ash as a source of reactive silica and additional alumina.
                  In addition to the potential for using significant quantities of industrial residues to manufacture geopolymers, these relatively new cements have the ability to bind a range of contaminants. As the Bayer process could achieve significant process impurity removal by utilisation of plant liquor, synergy between the alumina and geopolymer industries could be achieved.
                  Geopolymers with a Si/Al ratio of 2.3 and a Na/Al ratio of 0.8 were targeted. With only synthetic plant liquor as the alkali activator, geopolymers with a mean compressive strength of 33MPa were synthesised, while use of processed plant liquor resulted in compressive strengths of 43MPa.Aluminosilicate inorganic polymers or geopolymers are amorphous materials that have the potential to replace Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) as cementitious binders. Advantages geopolymers have over OPC include; their high compressive and flexural strength, high temperature resistance, and impressive acid resistance Geoploymers have been formed from a range of aluminate and silicate materials including metakaolin, fly ash, blast furnace slags and mineral processing wastes The standard preparation of geopolymers usually requires a solution containing a high concentration of caustic soda with dissolved silica (or sodium silicate) being added to a soluble source of silica and alumina (usually fly ash, metakaolin or blast furnace slag) Geopolymers are commonly cured at slightly elevated temperatures (∼70–90 In the Bayer process for the production of alumina from bauxitic ores, gibbsite and/or boehmite rich materials are digested in highly caustic solutions at elevated temperatures. The remaining solids, usually iron oxides, quartz and other resistant minerals, are separated from the sodium aluminate slurry in a sand trap and thickener. The solids (red mud and red sand) are counter current washed to recover the caustic solutions and then pumped to drying beds. The mud and sand may be treated and stored separately and have been recovered for reuse Economic evaluations of geopolymer production recognise that the supply of caustic is the most significant cost factor. The economic benefit of utilising concentrated sodium aluminate from the Bayer process varies between locations and would be considered commercially confidential, but has resulted in a patent application Processing the Bayer liquor so that it is a suitable feedstock for the geopolymer industry, transforms the export of that liquor and its replacement with fresh sodium hydroxide into an impurity removal process Further advantages are that the alumina industry is well established with significant infrastructure such as road, rail and port hubs and it has teams of skilled scientists, engineers and operators that are trained in working with caustic aluminate solutions. The industry has traditionally been a major consumer of caustic and has significant quantities of “low value” steam (i.e. saturated temperature <100 The composition of the reactive component of the fly ash was determined using the method of Williams and van Riessen The crystalline composition of the precursor fly ash and the geopolymers were obtained on an absolute scale using Rietveld refinement with XRD data. The samples were prepared by milling to ∼5 Crystalline phases were identified by using the Search/Match algorithm, EVA 15.0 (Bruker-AXS, Germany) to search the Powder Diffraction File (PDF4 Compressive strength tests were carried using ASTM C39 for concrete specimens. For small specimens (25 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was conducted to determine the extent of reaction of the alkali activators with the aluminosilicates and the homogeneity of the microstructure. Gold coated fracture surfaces were viewed with a Zeiss Neon 40EsB. Synthetic Bayer liquor, i.e. a clean sodium aluminate solution, and processed plant liquor were tested. The synthetic liquor corresponds to typical process plant concentrations without the associated impurities. The plant liquor provided by Alcoa of Australia Limited was processed to provide an activated feedstock. Class F fly ash, used as a source of reactive silica and additional alumina, was obtained from the Collie Power Station, Western Australia. The elemental composition (XRF) in the oxide form is given in To achieve specific Si/Al ratios, silica fume (Doral Fused Materials Ltd., 94% purity) was also included in the formulation. On the basis of previous research with Collie fly ash, a geopolymer composition with a Si/Al For 100% replacement of sodium hydroxide by synthetic or plant Bayer liquor, fly ash was mixed with silica fume as dry powders, followed by the addition of Bayer liquor. These were mixed for a period of 10 The crystalline phases in the fly ash were identified by search/match of the PDF4  XRD patterns of the plant liquor geopolymers showed the expected phases quartz, mullite, maghemite and hematite from the fly ash plus a new minor phase, sodium aluminium silicate hydrate (PDF# 00-042-0216). The amorphous geopolymer was recognisable from the broad hump in the pattern centred at ∼26°2 The compressive strengths of the synthetic and plant Bayer liquor geopolymers are shown in SEM images of fracture surfaces show a homogeneous microstructure for all samples. There were no obvious differences between samples made with different levels of Bayer. The reference geopolymer produced without Bayer liquor had a compressive strength of 45 The research project has demonstrated that Bayer liquor can be utilised for the production of geopolymer products. The use of plant Bayer liquor as feed stock for the formation of geopolymer, acts as an impurity removal process for the Bayer process. This can partially offset the cost disadvantages associated with replacing the caustic liquor and suggests that the synergy between the alumina and geopolymer industries could be significant, even industry changing. The combination of fly ash and plant Bayer liquor is a synergistic combination of two industrial by-products. The potential for extending this synergy further is significant and could lead to a new industry with attractive economic and environmental credentials. Emily Xie is thanked for her efforts in sample preparation and data collection.