Numerical simulations based on the discrete element method (DEM) were conducted to study the die compaction of iron ore fines and the mechanical strength of formed compacts under the uniaxial unconfined compression. To mimic the strength gained after the die compaction and brittle behaviour of compacts under compression, a bonded particle model was introduced between contacting particles. The simulated stress–strain responses were comparable with those observed from the physical experiments, confirming the validity of the model. The analyses of the evolutions of the structure and force during the die compaction indicated that the consolidation was initiated from the upper moving punch and gradually propagated to the lower stationary punch. The inhomogeneity of density and force trees was also observed. In the unconfined compression, the main characteristics of the stress–strain response, i.e., the linear increasing part, peak value and residual stress state, were captured in the simulations. The brittle failure of the compact was due to the broken inter-particle bonds by shear and tensile stress. The compressive strength of compacts increased with the consolidation pressure, bond thickness and bond strength. This work indicated that the DEM model with a proper interparticle bond model is able to study the mechanical strength of compacts.Iron ore fines are created as a result of mining, crushing and processing large iron ore particles, and may account for 50% of the total ore mined. For many processes (e.g. iron-making), lump ores (size larger than 10 Compaction is a method to compress iron ore fines into a denser compact using pressure ( The mechanical strength of a compact is critical to maintaining geometrical and mechanical integrity of the compact in the downstream operations ( Under compression, different failure patterns, such as crack/breaking lines and shear bands, have been observed ( It is understood that brittle behaviour of a compact under unconfined compression is caused by mechanical interlocking between irregularly shaped particles but also solid bridges due to high level of stress concentration ( Little work, however, has been conducted to link the die compaction with the strength and failure pattern of the compact under the uniaxial unconfined compression. This work is thus to develop a DEM model to establish such relation. The BPM model proposed by In the DEM model, the translational and rotational motions of a particle with radius An elastic-perfectly plastic contact model proposed by The tangential force is described by The capillary force used in our previous study ( The BPM model proposed by The die compaction of particles followed by unconfined compression were simulated in this work. As shown in To ensure quasi-static compaction, a strain rate smaller than 10  To calibrate and validate the numerical model, physical experiments under comparable conditions were also conducted. In the experiments, the die compaction and unconfined compression of iron ore powders were tested using a Universal Testing Machine (Instron 5566). At the beginning of the test, the iron ore powders were sieved and the powders of size 25–75   It is important to understand the evolution of internal structure and stress during the compaction process. Four different stages therefore have been selected from Case 1, corresponding the beginning, middle and end of the loading process and the end of unloading process. As shown in  The compaction process can be further understood by analysing the evolution of internal forces (  The mechanical strength of the compacts is tested by the unconfined compression.  Similar to the die compaction, different stages are selected to study the evolution of the compact structure. As shown in    With the implementation of interparticle bonding in this work, the macroscopic bulk response and mechanical strength of compact is directly linked to the properties of these bonds. Therefore, it would be interesting to investigate how the bond parameters affect the behaviour of compact under unconfined compression. Two bonding parameters have been varied: bonding thickness characterized in terms of radius multiplier and bond strength.   The compaction behaviour and mechanical strength of compacts were investigated using the DEM simulations. By introducing the interparticle bonding between contacting particles, the predicted bulk response showed good agreements with experiments in terms of pressure–density relationship and stress–strain response. The analyses of the compact structure and forces showed the following. In the die compaction, the densification was initiated at the moving punch and propagates to the stationary punch. A clear inhomogeneity in density distribution along the compression direction is observed. A network of axially-aligned stress path was developed during loading stage and the applied load was largely transmitted by heavily stressed chains of particles. In the unconfined compression, three main characteristics of the stress–strain response, namely the stress increasing part, peak value and stress softening state, were captured in the simulations. A shear-dominated bond failure mode was obtained, forming localized shear banding concentrates within the bottom part of the compact. Consolidation pressure, bond thickness and bond strength increased the compressive strength of formed compact but had no influence on the dominating bond failure mode. The authors are grateful to the