Tellnes ilmenite is an important feedstock for the production of high-grade titanium pigment. The present study investigated the oxidation of ilmenite from Tellnes, Norway, at 700°C in air and compared the leaching ability of pre-heated and non-heated Tellnes ilmenite in 20% HCl solution at 160°C. Through the heat treatment, ilmenite (FeTiO3) is oxidized to hematite (Fe2O3) and rutile (TiO2) via a solid-state reaction mechanism. The leaching experiments revealed that after the pre-heating step the iron dissolution in the leaching process is limited due to the lower solubility of ferric iron in the hydrochloric acid. Furthermore, in both experiments the impurity phases such feldspar and orthopyroxene are less soluble in the hydrochloric acid and pollute the replacement product rutile because Si released from the impurity phases is incorporated in the rutile. The leaching reaction mechanism is interpreted as a pseudomorphic, interface-coupled dissolution–reprecipitation process, through which the external form of the parent ilmenite as well as its crystallographic orientation is inherited by rutile.High-grade titanium dioxide pigment is used in the manufacture of paints, plastic, and papers due to its whiteness and opacity. However, nature does not provide high-grade titanium oxide as feedstock and titanium-rich ore is usually associated with iron, most commonly ilmenite (FeTiO Commercial-grade ilmenite concentrate of the Tellnes ilmenite deposit in Norway was kindly provided by Kronos Worldwide, Inc. The Tellnes deposit is one of the most important ilmenite feedstocks for the production of titanium pigment and is located in the Rogaland Anorthosite Province (SW Norway). The deposit is a hard-rock ore body of igneous origin, which is mainly sourced by norite lenses in the anorthosite complex ( A part of the ilmenite concentrate was oxidized at 700 The batch leaching experiments were carried out in 20% HCl solution at 160 The starting materials as well as the pre-heated and acid treated material were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and electron microprobe analyses (EMPA). Powder diffraction data were obtained with a Phillips X´Pert diffractometer using monochromatic Cu-Kα Secondary electron (SE) SEM analyses of the grain surfaces were performed using a Zeiss 1540 Crossbeam equipped with a field emission gun and operated at 5 X-ray powder diffraction spectra of the starting non-heated ilmenite and the pre-heated ilmenite (treated for 12 The morphology of pre-heated ilmenite is shown in  After the acid treatment the typically metallic black colour of ilmenite changed to yellow in the case of the non-heated ilmenite (  The results of electron microprobe measurements of the two dissolution experiments are given in The behaviour of the impurity phases present in the ilmenite concentrate is significantly different from the ilmenite during acid treatment. Previous studies have shown that silicates are more resistant to leaching in hydrochloric acid than ilmenite. Feldspar and orthopyroxene, the two dominant impurity phases, have either not reacted or very slightly reacted with the hydrochloric acid ( The heat treatment of ilmenite at 700 The textural observations made during this study strongly suggest that the transformation of ilmenite to rutile proceeds via an interface-coupled dissolution–reprecipitation process rather than a solid-state process. The understanding of the reaction mechanism is a fundamental step in optimizing the beneficiation process and the purity of the final titanium pigment. In addition, this study demonstrated that the extensive energy consuming pre-heating step has no advantages in the titanium pigment production. Instead, direct acid treatment yields better results. We thank Kronos Worldwide, Inc for the ilmenite concentrate and the