There are many physical phenomena and properties associated with diffusion in linear friction welding (LFW) process. Many of these phenomena are not observable by known and conventional methods. The molecular dynamics (MD) is an advantageous and practical method to study the diffusion process and atomic behavior of welded materials. In the current research, we used MD simulations to model the LFW process between copper and nickel metals. The effect of defects in the structures and also the addition of alloying elements to the copper structure was also studied. Our findings revealed that the surface and subsurface imperfections in the copper structure were gradually eliminated in the friction stage. In contrast, these imperfections in nickel structure disappeared in the forging stage. Also, we showed that adding alloying elements to copper structure leads to an increase in the amount of the mean square displacement (MSD) of the atoms and the diffusion coefficient in copper.Linear friction welding (LFW) is a solid-state joining process [ In the LFW process, filler, flux and protective gas are not required [ The LFW process is often used to manufacture these subassemblies for industrial printers, material handling equipment, as well as automotive, aerospace, marine, and oil applications. Due to the widespread use of this technique, a great deal of research has been done on LFW to optimize its products. The research has generally been done on the mechanical properties of materials, but physical properties such as atomic behavior of material are also of great importance to scientists in recent years and have been conducted at atomic scale [ Simulation methods are used to study the joining process and the effect of various factors on it. Based on these methods, welding conditions can be optimized, and favorable results of the welding process can be achieved. The molecular dynamics (MD) method is one of the most accurate simulation methods used to simulate complex multi-particle systems. In this method, the complicated and multi-constitute systems involving thousands of interacting particles are obtained by solving the Hamilton equations under suitable boundary conditions. By analyzing the path of particles in the phase space and using statistical mechanics, which are the interfaces between microscopic and macroscopic quantities, one can obtain information about the various properties of the system, including energy, structural, dynamic, mechanical properties. In the simulation of MD, the subsequent configuration of a system is achieved by integrating Newton’s motion laws. Using MD paths, thermodynamic and time-dependent properties can be calculated [ Song et al. [ In this study, we aim to simulate the LFW process between copper and nickel using the molecular dynamics method. Also, the effects of several imperfections such as asperity and hole, in both copper and nickel structures, as well as the addition of alloying elements in the copper structure, are studied. We used MD simulations to model the LFW process between copper and nickel metals. All simulations are performed with LAMMPS package [ Copper and nickel structures were selected for the simulations. These two metals have a simple configuration and can use the EAM potential for both of them.  In this study, the effect of the presence of defects and the addition of alloying elements are investigated. The results of each case are presented and discussed below. Since the surface of the welding material is not entirely flat and usually has peaks and valleys, studying the effect of surface roughness and its variations during the LFW process can provide useful information on the behavior of the asperity on the mating surfaces [  The comparison of the behavior of the asperity on both structures shows that the peak and valley on copper disappear in the friction stage ( In this section, the behavior of a hole is investigated. Sub-surface imperfections such as cracks and holes, which are usually present in materials, cause various problems. These defects can affect the physical properties and mechanical properties of the material [  The hole in the nickel structure is shown in With the comparison of holes in copper and nickel, it can be concluded that the hole in copper disappears during the friction stage, while the hole in nickel disappears at the end of the forging stage. The reason for this is that nickel has a more robust structure, and its strength at the processing temperature is higher than copper. There are two ways to close this defect in nickel earlier: Firstly, raising the friction time, secondly, increasing the friction pressure. Therefore, the temperature, the diffusion of nickel atoms and the mechanical work are promoted because of the weaker bonds. The comparison of surface defects with subsurface defects shows that surface defects disappear earlier than subsurface defects. The reason for this can be owing to two issues: first, the temperature at the joint was higher due to the friction process, causing the atomic bonds to loosen and diffuse more. The atoms of copper on the interface move further from their equilibrium due to the friction process and the high temperature, and the defects disappear. Second, deformation also helped defects to disappear. The difference between the strength at the processing temperature of copper and nickel is high, and in friction welding, the increase in the temperature is not high enough to cause the atoms of nickel to flow and diffuse. Although, in the forging stage, which is the final stage of friction welding, nickel structure deforms and the defects in it disappear. Addition of alloying elements to copper and making copper alloys leads to increased tensile strength, increased elongation, better machining, and improved cold and hot workability [   The comparison between the two alloys indicates that the addition of aluminum increases the displacement of atoms from 10,436 to 15,514 nm In order to analyze more accurately, the MSD and the diffusion coefficient of these alloys and pure copper are compared in We modeled the linear friction welding (LFW) process of the dissimilar joint between copper and nickel in the atomistic level using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The effects of surface and subsurface defects in both copper and nickel structures and the addition of alloying elements in the copper structure was investigated. Our findings can be concluded as: The asperities on the copper surface were smoothed in the friction stage. The contact surface of the two studied materials increased during the welding process. Nickel surface roughness disappeared in the forging stage. The final configuration was independent of the surface roughness. In copper, the subsurface defects closed during the final steps of the friction stage, while, in nickel, the subsurface defects closed during the final steps of the forging stage. The effect of temperature and mechanical work on the atoms of both materials, which were adjacent to the interface (where the surface defect was present) was more significant than the other atoms; therefore, the surface defects were quickly eliminated. Nickel, which had a stronger structure, had more resistance to the destruction of its defects. For copper with a weaker structure, surface roughness and subsurface defects closed during the friction stage and by atomic diffusion. However, in nickel, these defects closed in the forging stage and with the help of mechanical work (forging). Adding aluminum and iron atoms to copper as alloying elements increased the displacement of the atoms from 10,436 to 14,031 nm The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.