Our new hydrothermal salt model provides improved explanations for the seemingly inexplicable occurrences of salt in deep-water rift basins that were never desiccated. This is highly relevant to the Red Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, and other large salt accumulations. Aftabi and Atapour have questioned the amount of hydrothermally produced salt and request evidence for hydrothermal brine feeder zones. The short answer to this is that salts have been produced hydrothermally during a period of more than 3 billion years of subduction and rifting. Feeder zones may take different forms. Salt may be part of volcanic activity, be embedded in granites, but also emanate onto the surface or onto the bottom of the sea to form brine lakes.
                  Our detailed replies to the queries recalls concepts already expressed in our two papers, that large salt accumulations are caused by repeated episodes of hydrothermal activity through geological times.We thank In the Conceptual Elements addressed in Part 1 ( Our two review papers were meant to be thought-provoking, for all geologists and geophysicists who were taught to treat giant salt accumulations merely as solar evaporites. The hydrothermal salt-forming model is of general nature, and is related to real geologic and thermodynamic processes. Such processes have occurred on Earth for billions of years. Results from one stage of the process, always serve as input for the next stage of the geologic and thermodynamic processes. Observation of different salts and minerals on or close to the surface may, therefore, not be representative for understanding the full picture of what has happened at depth (and, which may still be remaining at depth). To fully define the exact processes, one would need to define all starting point parameters and ingredients, as well as their development during the geologic/thermodynamic process. This is, of course, not possible with a very high degree of accuracy. Our model is, therefore, to be regarded as a new perspective within which much additional work has to be performed to explain the details. With the work of We will restrict ourselves to mainly comment on aspects that have been treated in Part 1 and 2 ( We do not deny that salts may also form as a result of solar evaporation of sea water. A natural question to ask, is: what fraction of the salt accumulations on Earth could possibly be the result of hydrothermal processes? With present day type rifting and subduction having been active for the last 3 billion years, many thousand kilometers of slab length (and width) have been subducted, bringing with them saline water content, as well as interacting with rocks to leach out certain elements found in salts. The combined length of all rift systems also amounts to thousands of kilometers during this period. Oceanic rifting and formation of oceanic crust, leads to influx of seawater, hydrothermal activity and increased salinity of remaining brines within the crust, compared to that of seawater. Oceanic crust will sooner or later be subducted, including most of its fluid content. As subducted water also engages in mineral processes, salts are forming both as a result of thermodynamics and loss of water due to uptake of hydroxyl groups in minerals. Rifting and subduction processes produce salts that may combine into one salt system several million years later. Hence, the amount of salts formed over the years is staggering, although not always visible (yet). Subduction is one of the most important processes for the formation of continental crust. As this inevitably will involve formation of salts, all continents probably have major deposits of salts in the subsurface. For humans to observe this salt as part of a hydrothermal process, one must first recognize that the processes are taking place and observe the evidence in this context. Salts from the depth of the crust or mantle has to find a way back to observable locations. The transport mechanisms may include halokinesis, precipitating brine flow, condensing/precipitating vapors or intercrystalline salts in erupting minerals. In the following, we will deal with queries that we have numbered, as raised in  We use the term “Salt” deliberately to avoid confusing it with the common term “Evaporites”, that selectively implies salts formed by solar evaporation. More specifically, we are dealing with marine systems and therefore with marine salts. However, the interaction between rocks and hot hydrothermal solutions are also bringing other salts into solution; e.g. the enormous quantities of borates found in the Andean salt lakes. By the way, we do not deny that salt accumulations also form as the result of solar evaporation of sea water or hydrothermally derived brines in (1) dry and hot climates, (2) cryogenic phase separation in cold climates, (3) boiling of seawater (in contact with hot igneous rocks) and (4) phase separation in the supercritical domain of seawater and brines. (5) Another important process for producing concentrated brines is in hydrolysis reactions involving seawater, such as serpentinization processes, where salt is rejected (  Our two papers (  The evaporite theory was established long before the concept of plate tectonics, - earlier than the knowledge of solubility of supercritical waters was known, - and even earlier than the ability to model realistic geologic systems with respect to chemistry, thermodynamics, and fluid flow in the subsurface. The only explanation available, for a long time, therefore, was formation of salt accumulations by solar evaporation. (As geothermal heat on a square meter basis, was considered too small compared to the energy from the sun). The first experimental observations of marine salts (solutions with sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) in the super-critical domain was performed by Many so-called solar evaporites are in fact hydrothermally derived salts and, thus, discussions regarding unexplained observations and anomalous features are still ongoing, as is the case for studies of Zechstein salts, Mediterranean salts, Red Sea salts, etc. A good introduction to some of the questions not answered by the solar evaporite theory can be found in the book on the Zechstein salts, by We also recommend reading  The difference between typical cases, like the Red Sea and East Pacific Rise, is explained, in principle, in our two papers. See page 6, in Part 1 - and our discussion around the Red Sea, in Part 2, page 13. Reference is also made to the work by  We thank  During rifting at or near a previous subduction center, a combination of dissolved salts from subduction processes may become mixed with “newly” formed salts from hydrothermal circulation. Nobody can say in advance what the mixing ratio might be, and, hence, many signatures will be observed. See also our answer to Query # 2 and  We sincerely appreciated reading the study of the presumed salt dome on Hormuz Island described by  No two subduction zones are exactly the same; even within one zone, different slabs behave independently. Hence, no fixed temperature is correct for all subduction zones at a particular depth. We refer to our Part 2, Fig. 9, page 13 (  We did not include the Atacama Desert salts in our papers, but the comments of  See our paper, Part 1, page 6 ( Salts deposited at mantle depth during subduction processes do not easily flow back to the surface. The intragranular nature of the salts and the depth to the deposits requires a transport mechanism, a transport medium and an opening towards the surface. To bring salts to the surface in a subduction setting one might need undersaturated vapors picking up salts on their way. Such flow would be located at the right place, both geographically as well as in pressure and temperature. This is demonstrated in the Andes, where salt lakes are forming above the steepening parts of subducting slabs, in the vicinity of major strike slip faulting. In areas above flat slabs, this is not observed (Lake Titicaca is fresh). We might also add that many ores, volcanoes, basaltic and granitic eruptions have salts in them that was produced in subduction zones. They might also be considered feeder zones.  As explained in our answer # 3, we believe this map is ripe for revision, based on our new theory ( After presenting our work on salt in two papers and dealing with the relevant questions raised by