Ion flotation is a separation technology for recovering and removing metal ions from dilute aqueous solutions. In this process, an ionic collector is utilized to transport non-surface active colligend ions of the opposite charge from a bulk solution to the solution–vapor interface. If a sufficiently large solution–vapor interfacial area can be provided by sparging gas through the solution, the colligend can be concentrated and removed along with the collector in a foam phase. Ion flotation has a long history for laboratory-scale metal separations, and has been tested at the pilot scale for recovering gold from leach solutions. Although ion flotation has not yet been adopted in commercial hydrometallurgical operations, the process has many attractive features that are promising for treating dilute solutions and effluents.
                  Here, the fundamental characteristics of ion flotation are reviewed in the context of their implications for commercial applications. These characteristics include the kinetics of metal ion removal, the ability to separate target ions selectively from mixed solutions, the ability to manipulate selectivity, the ability to recover metal values from the foam product and a comparison of the performance of ion flotation with widely adopted separation methods such as solvent extraction, ion exchange and precipitation. It is evident from consideration of the kinetics of ion flotation that the equipment traditionally used for ion flotation is far from optimized, and that significant improvements in throughput could be achieved with redesigned equipment.Ion flotation, first described by Several reviews have summarized the extensive work on foam separation processes, principally for applications for analytical chemistry Although ion flotation has not yet been adopted in commercial hydrometallurgical operations, the process has many attractive features that are promising for treating dilute solutions and effluents. High upgrade ratios have been achieved, and with recycling of reagents, the process could be economically attractive Here, the fundamental characteristics of ion flotation are reviewed in the context of their implications for commercial applications. Particular emphasis is given to recent developments that point the way for commercially viable ion flotation systems. A serious limitation of ion flotation processes has been their relatively slow operation. Laboratory batch tests, performed in columns or modified Hallimond tubes, typically show that it takes thirty to hundreds of minutes to approach 100% removal of colligend from dilute solutions, depending upon conditions In order to address the slow kinetics of ion flotation, it is necessary to identify what controls the removal rate of metal ions under normal operating conditions. The apparent time needed to achieve equilibrium adsorption densities in nonturbulent systems, determined by surface tension relaxation experiments, varies significantly for different surfactant systems, from less than a second, to several minutes  From the perspective of practical applications in hydrometallurgy, the demonstration that the kinetics of removing both anionic and cationic colligends can be predicted using models based on equilibrium adsorption behavior is significant. It suggests that straightforward, surface tension measurements could be used to predict the ion flotation kinetics expected from a wide range of potential collectors. This could first facilitate the selection of collectors for specific applications, and then assist the process engineering, thereby reducing the need for protracted testwork. It was stated above that if the adsorption density of collector and colligend at the vapor–solution interface is at equilibrium with the solution, efforts to improve mass transport or increase the residence time of bubbles would be futile because the kinetics of ion removal from the solution could only be improved by increasing the interfacial area. From the perspective of reactor design and selection, this statement should be recast as a question, in view of the experimental evidence that equilibrium adsorption densities are reached rather easily in laboratory equipment with bubble residence times of a few seconds. Might poorer mass transport or significantly shorter bubble residence times yield the same performance that has been achieved in laboratory or pilot-scale flotation columns? Poorer mass transport is not attractive for ion flotation equipment because transport is driven by the rising gas bubbles. It would be counterproductive to reduce the gas flow rate because the overall rate of material removal is linearly dependent on the surface area of gas bubbles introduced into the column per unit time. To date, most workers have used columns for ion flotation, influenced (possibly at a subconscious level) by the superior performance of columns for the froth flotation of minerals. However, it is important to recognize the difference between the flotation of particles and ions. In the former, bubbles must be large enough that the mean density of the bubble with attached particles is less than the density of the pulp. Furthermore, shear must be controlled to ensure that particles do not detach from bubble surfaces. However, particle-bubble detachment is moot if all species are dissolved, and it would be advantageous to have extremely small bubbles because these provide a larger surface area for a given gas flow rate. Although Considering next the residence time of bubbles in a column, it is reasonable to assume that the mixing provided by rising gas bubbles would eliminate any significant concentration gradients along the length of the column. Most solutions encountered in hydrometallurgical processes contain more than one metal ion. As a result, it is often necessary to separate one colligend of interest from other ions that might also be collected, for either economic reasons or compliance with environmental restrictions on waste composition. Information on the selectivity between different ions is, therefore, important for designing new ion flotation processes to recover valuable components from process solutions and waste treatment. Moreover, it would be advantageous to acquire a mechanistic understanding of the reasons for selectivity of one ion over another, to assist in selecting appropriate collectors and ion flotation conditions for a specific application. In general, for two ions with different charges of the same sign, the higher the valence of a colligend, the higher is the selectively for that species over other colligend ions with lower valence Ion flotation depends on adsorption at the interface between vapor and a solution containing surfactant  While this understanding of the impact of ionic radius on selectivity is edifying, it is not directly useful if one wants to separate specific ions, unless they fortuitously have dissimilar radii. For example, in hydrometallurgical circuits where the feed water contains some hardness, one would probably want to selectively float metal ions of value but leave behind benign alkaline earth ions. Unfortunately, because the cationic radius of Ca To confirm the effect of different chelating agents on selectivities, Liu and Doyle have examined the effects of: (a) a neutral, hydrophilic chelating agent that is selective for transition metal cations; (b) an anionic, hydrophilic chelating agent that alters the metal ion radius; and (c) an anionic, surface active chelating agent that has chemical specificity for different metal ions. The effect of a neutral chelating ligand was examined, using triethylenetetraamine (Trien), with dodecylsulfate as collector The disodium salt of ethylenetriaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was selected as an anionic, hydrophilic chelating agent that alters the metal ion radius, along with the charge of complexes. EDTA complexes copper preferably to magnesium. In the absence of EDTA, copper is removed more selectively than magnesium In the presence of sufficient EDTA to complex all metal ions present, the selectivity order for ion flotation with a cationic collector differs from that seen for ion flotation of simple cations with an anionic collector. Dodecyldiethylenetriamine (Ddien) was selected as an anionic, surface active chelating agent that has chemical specificity for different metal ions. The effect of Ddien on the ion flotation of Cu These studies demonstrate that a mechanistic understanding of the phenomena responsible for adsorption at the solution–vapor interface points to strategies that can be taken to manipulate the selectivities of different metal ions by judicious modification of the solution chemistry. This ability will clearly be crucial to the success of ion flotation in hydrometallurgical processes. In conventional froth flotation of minerals, the specific surface area of the mineral particles is low, and hence very little collector adsorbs on the mineral particles. The value of the collector adsorbed onto the mineral particles is, therefore, negligible compared to the value of the minerals themselves. In contrast, stoichiometric amounts of collector are needed in ion flotation. Hence, for ion flotation to be economically viable, it would be essential that both the metal values Chemical stripping involves increasing the sodium concentration in solution sufficiently to exceed the solubility product of the sodium dodecylsulfate: Electrolysis appears to be more promising than other approaches for recovering metals and regenerating collector. This process has been used to decompose precious metal–collector complexes  It was mentioned in the introduction to this paper that ion flotation shows promise for treating dilute solutions and effluents. In addition, however, it is clear from the foregoing discussion of the process that it is unsuitable for concentrated solutions. There are two fundamental reasons for this. First, ion flotation requires a stoichiometric equivalent of collector, and the solubility of surface active collectors in aqueous solutions is very limited. In addition to it being difficult to exceed the CMC when preparing collector solutions in the first instance, we have observed that the salts formed by collectors with many metal ions are even less soluble For concentrated solutions, then, ion flotation would not be competitive with solvent extraction, ion exchange, precipitation or direct electrolysis for separating and recovering metal values. All perform well under given circumstances, are well understood from a theoretical and engineering perspective, and are accepted as proven technology. Ion flotation is promising for different applications. As environmental regulations become increasingly stringent, new techniques are needed for removing metal ions from dilute solutions as a polishing step after more conventional separations. This is a niche for which ion flotation appears to be particularly promising. As recognized in the early 1990s, ion flotation is also promising for treating very dilute leach solutions, such as typically encountered in precious metals processing With ion flotation, the final quality of the effluent can be adjusted, among other ways, by adjusting the chain length of the collector. Ion flotation has been used for laboratory separations for about half a century. Modern environmental constraints are driving the search for new separation processes suitable for the commercial treatment of dilute solutions. Just as changing technical developments triggered the adoption of solvent extraction as a hydrometallurgical separation process half a century ago, so these new constraints suggest that ion flotation could be useful in commercial hydrometallurgical processes. Our improved understanding of the mechanisms of ion flotation suggests numerous strategies for manipulating selectivities in ion flotation systems, and our understanding of the kinetics of this process should guide us in our development of effective reactors for this process.