Brazil has achieved significant advances in climate mitigation by reducing its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the last decade. Additionally, Brazil commits to furthering its actions through the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC), issued during the Paris Agreement. The country also anticipates a significant increase in GDP in the years to come. Chen et al. (2012)'s main conclusion was that if deforestation were to be greatly reduced, the burden of cutting CO2 emissions from energy use and industrial processes would be minimal. However, recent data on land-use emissions show that additional efforts might also be required in the energy sector. Using Brazil's industrial structure, we evaluate the minimal changes needed in domestic final demand to meet both the NDC target and the forecasted economic growth. Our results show that it may be possible to meet both objectives with policies that incentivize a service-oriented economy while lowering investments in the manufactuing and extracting sectors. Furthermore, this strategy could be net job-creating, would rely on fewer imported products, and would generate tax revenue. However, wages could decrease.Given the increasing awareness about climate change and the growing concern about the potential negative consequences of a temperature increase beyond +1.5 It is now generally accepted that shaping a low-carbon economy at a large scale, as urged by Prior to the Paris Agreement and under the scope of the Law 12.187 passed by the Brazilian government in December 2009, Several studies have explored the impact of implementing climate policies–mainly taxes–on energy use and industrial processes, CO To understand how differences emerge regarding the level of employment within each sector, we utilize a growing body of literature in employment decomposition that belongs to the tradition of Input-Output framework–see, for instance The paper is structured as follows: Section Brazil's endowment of energy resources is sufficient to meet the country's need and to comply with international environmental agreements. According to the Sustainable Energy for All database (  Similar dynamics can be seen in the electricity generation, as shown in Brazil's early determination to move forward with alternatives to fossil fuels was a natural choice due to the country's large hydropower potential, their agricultural capacities, as well as the rising concerns over energy security. However, the large “pre-salt” oil and gas discoveries in the Santos basin (See The growing use of carbon intensive energy sources in Brazil decreases the country's chance to meet their CO In its NDC, Brazil intends to commit to reducing its GHG emissions by 37% (resp. 43%) below 2005 levels in 2025 (resp. 2030). According to ( The objective of this section is to understand the minimal changes in the final demand by sector that are required in order to meet the 2025 NDC We proceed with the assumption that the productive inter-relations remain those of 2014, the latest available SUT at the desired level of details. Moreover, we assume that for each constant monetary unit ( In addition to achieving the emissions target, we assume that the minimal required changes in the final demand should satisfy a real GDP in 2025 that is consistent with the projected economic growth of Brazil, and should provide a higher employment rate in 2025 than in 2014. Thus, the minimal changes in demand will result from the solution of the following program: In this optimization program, the 2014 final demand is selected as the optimal share that policymakers should target. We argue that these 2014 shares in final demand are the consequences of past socioeconomic forces that have led the economy to this particular distribution. Therefore, a deviation from this target would require a complete reorientation of the industrial process, and thus steer the economy away from its historical socioeconomic equilibrium. As climate policy is adding new constraints to the system, the objective function of policymakers would be to minimize the cost of redirecting the economy and to create new opportunities such as increasing employment rate. We proceed in line with traditional static input-output analysis by assuming fixed prices and a fixed technical coefficients matrix. Furthermore, we assume a steady adoption and dissemination of cleaner technologies reducing industrial CO    These results operate in conjunction with those presented in Such results highlight one of the greatest challenges for Brazil in its path towards a low carbon economy. Indeed, by moving away from carbon intensive activities and towards a service-oriented economy, Brazil would be renouncing its key industries in favor of those with lower interconnections and hence with lower potential to boost economic activity across sectors. However, if this shift is oriented towards services, it would generate more jobs since these sectors have a higher employment content. In the next section, we push our analysis of the employment effect a step further by providing a qualitative assessment of the composition of the employment to understand the mechanisms at stake when it comes to analyzing the shift between activities. Following import rate of final demand ( import rate of intermediate consumption ( taxes and subsidies ( wage share in value added ( the inverse of wages ( The allocation of taxes and imports by product and industry is key in this methodology. Hence, to avoid any bias due to conversion methods, we employ the most recent official input-output tables for Brazil (2010), which include all required matrices. We first consider the standard deviation of each factor derived in  The detailed results for the application of this methodology to the Brazilian input-output tables (2010) are shown in The contrasting results for the oil refining industry and that of biofuels provides a first scenario of substitution to consider.  Before starting the analysis, a caveat arises; an increase in the demand of one      By combining input-ouput data, GHG data, and employment data, we provide a qualitative explanation of changing activities in terms of employment as this shift contributes to both the Paris Agreement and economic growth objectives. To our knowledge, this paper is the first one applied to Brazil that is able to study the factors explaining the differences in employment of shifting activities. We began our analysis by exploring whether achieving NDC targets in 2025 with a forecasted yearly economic growth of 2% are still possible if final demand shifts from coal extraction, oil refining and carbon intensive manufacturing industries (such as the food-manufacturing and the vehicles industries) to services sectors (such as the provision of health and education, or the tourism-related industries). In other words, if the economy is becoming increasingly service-oriented, both objectives can be met. Moreover, we show that such a shift in demand could be net job-creating. We have complemented our own analysis with The authors are grateful to two anonymous referees for their fruitful comments and suggestions. A special thanks is due to Antoine Godin for his valuable ideas that originated this paper. We are also grateful to Tim Jackson, Michel Aglietta, Etienne Espagne, Emmanuel Bovari, Rafael Cattan, participants of the workshop “Climate Change, the energy transition, and the financial system” ( The Brazilian statistical agency, Throughout the paper, SUT are transformed into industry-by-industry input-output tables (IIOT) using standard conversion methods. In the cases in which basic price information is not available, we follow the methodology detailed in The rectangular use table and final demand matrix at basic prices are obtained by subtracting the values in the valuation matrices (i.e., matrices showing the distribution of taxes and trade and transportation margins) from the original information at purchasers price. The principle of proportionality by which the valuation matrices are constructed ensures that the total supply and total demand will be balanced. For the year 2010, the official input-output table published by the IBGE is composed of 67 industries and 127 products. The industry and production corresponding to Although the final demand is decomposed into six institutional sectors, we only considered one aggregate sector in this analysis, resulting in a final demand vector which includes stock variation. In brief, The IBGE provides as well matrix of domestic technical coefficients, for symmetric input-output table (industry-by-industry). The procedure detailed in Following standard input-output conventions, and by using the We decompose the throughput by industry, The information from the IBGE is complemented with that of the EORA global supply chain database, which provides input-output tables augmented for emissions by industry and country. Although it uses 55 industries –in contrast to the 68 reported in the tables published by the IBGE – the matching between both matrices is straightforward. EORA may cluster similar sectors and provide a single value of CO  The intermediary objective of the methodology is to define the employment content of a given economy, as the absolute number of direct and indirect full-time equivalent jobs ( Let, Multiplying the employment factor, Let the final demand addressed to domestic firm Let Let Finally, let    Let Finally, by defining, Set as a reference decomposition, The spread with respect to the mean employment content for industry It is worth mentioning here that the average employment content is 24.671.