Epigenetic changes, such as alteration of DNA methylation patterns, have been proposed as a molecular mechanism underlying the effect of alcohol on the maintenance of adult stem cells. We have performed genome-wide gene expression microarray and DNA methylome analysis to identify molecular alterations via DNA methylation changes associated with exposure of human dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) to ethanol (EtOH). By combined analysis of the gene expression and DNA methylation, we have found a significant number of genes that are potentially regulated by EtOH-induced DNA methylation. As a focused approach, we have also performed a pathway-focused RT-PCR array analysis to examine potential molecular effects of EtOH on genes involved in epigenetic chromatin modification enzymes, fibroblastic markers, and stress and toxicity pathways in DPSCs. We have identified and verified that lysine specific demethylase 6B (KDM6B) was significantly dysregulated in DPSCs upon EtOH exposure. EtOH treatment during odontogenic/osteogenic differentiation of DPSCs suppressed the induction of KDM6B with alterations in the expression of differentiation markers. Knockdown of KDM6B resulted in a marked decrease in mineralization from implanted DPSCs in vivo. Furthermore, an ectopic expression of KDM6B in EtOH-treated DPSCs restored the expression of differentiation-related genes. Our study has demonstrated that EtOH-induced inhibition of KDM6B plays a role in the dysregulation of odontogenic/osteogenic differentiation in the DPSC model. This suggests a potential molecular mechanism for cellular insults of heavy alcohol consumption that can lead to decreased mineral deposition potentially associated with abnormalities in dental development and also osteopenia/osteoporosis, hallmark features of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders.Heavy alcohol consumption could result in a range of health, social and behavioral problems. Studies have demonstrated the potential toxic effects of alcohol in many organs and have shown deleterious molecular effects on cellular physiology, including the potency and maintenance of stem cells. Based on our previous study demonstrating the epigenetic effect of alcohol on embryonic stem cell pluripotency ( Alcohol consumption has been shown to have detrimental effects on the brain, liver, muscles, skeleton and fetal development ( Dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs), also known as dental pulp-derived mesenchymal stem cells, are a multipotent adult stem cell population that has a high proliferative potential. DPSCs in this study isolated from adult teeth are easily accessible and cryopreservable for long periods ( It has been shown that Early passage DPSCs (P1–P2) that were isolated from adult teeth (molars) were cultured in α-MEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum ( Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Carlsbad, CA). Samples were prepared in biological duplicates. An equal amount from each sample was subjected to biotinylation using the BioArray High Yield RNA Transcript Labeling System (Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY, USA). An equal amount of cRNA from each sample was labeled, purified and fragmented by using the GeneChip Sample Cleanup Module (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Following the manufacturer's protocols, the Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) was applied for gene expression analysis (UCLA Clinical Microarray Core Facility). Methyl-DNA immunoprecipitation was performed according to a previous standard protocol from our laboratory by using antibody against 5-methylcytidine (Eurogentec, San Diego, CA) ( The fastq files generated have been processed using GALAXY and aligned to the human genome version 19 (hg19) ( Total RNA was purified and the quality of RNA was determined by using Agilent Bioanalyzer. The samples were processed for RT DPSCs were grown in mineralization-inducing media containing 100 GP2-293 cells were grown in DMEM containing 10% FBS and transiently transfected with Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) to produce retroviral MSCV-KDM6B. DPSCs were cultured to 60% confluency and stably transduced with either control retrovirus or retroviral MSCV-KDM6B to generate KDM6B expressing DPSCs. Exponentially growing DPSCs were grown in mineralization-inducing media as described above and treated with different concentrations of EtOH diluted from absolute EtOH (FW For validation of gene expression by quantitative RT-PCR analysis, total RNA was first subjected to DNase digestion with a Turbo DNA-free kit (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). 2 For validation of gene expression by quantitative RT-PCR analysis, total RNA was first subjected to DNase digestion with a Turbo DNA-free kit (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). 2 For alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining, after induction, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and incubated with a solution of 0.25% naphthol AS-BI phosphate and 0.75% Fast Blue BB (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) dissolved in 0.1 6.0 To test our hypothesis that alcohol may have deleterious molecular effects on the maintenance and regulation of adult stem cells, we have used multipotent dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and acutely exposed them (24 or 48 To test our hypothesis that alcohol may have deleterious molecular effects on the maintenance and regulation of adult stem cells, we have used multipotent dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) and acutely exposed them (24 or 48 Since we were interested in more physiologically relevant effects of EtOH, we focused on 20 Since we were interested in more physiologically relevant effects of EtOH, we focused on 20 To examine EtOH-induced changes in known epigenetic modifiers in DPSCs we have performed a pathway focused RT-PCR analysis and assessed the effect of EtOH on the levels of known epigenetic chromatin modification enzymes, fibroblastic markers, and stress/toxicity genes (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). We have used two different EtOH concentrations (20 and 50 To examine if EtOH treatment has any functional effect on the mineralization of DPSCs, we have cultured DPSCs under odontogenic/osteogenic differentiation conditions and examined the molecular effect of EtOH on the expression of differentiation-related lineage markers ( Following the analysis of the acute effects of EtOH in DPSCs, we investigated the chronic effects of EtOH on mineralization. We investigated these long-term effects on differentiation Our findings support that EOH treatment resulted in suppression of To further assess the direct functional significance of EtOH-induced suppression of The resulting transduced cells were subjected to odontogenic/osteogenic differentiation for 24 or 72 The effect of KDM6B expression on the EtOH-induced suppression of odontogenic/osteogenic differentiation genes was determined. As shown in We found that the forced expression of KDM6B significantly altered the response of DPSCs to EtOH treatment. As shown in Alcohol abuse appears to lead to periodontal disease, tooth decay and mouth sores that are potentially precancerous ( The negative, long term effects of alcoholism on bone mass have been well-established ( While chronic alcohol abuse has been linked to an increase in the risk for osteoporosis, light to moderate consumption has been correlated with a reduction in osteoporotic risk. Some studies have identified that light to moderate concentrations of EtOH exposure has resulted in higher bone mineral density and a reduced risk of osteoporosis ( In this study, we have used DPSCs as a model to examine the effect of EtOH on the mineralization process. Our findings show that EtOH treatment resulted in altered mineralization in DPSCs. The dysregulation of odontogenic/osteogenic differentiation in DPSCs treated with EtOH is reminiscent of previous findings with reductions in bone mineral density and volume. We discovered that EtOH treatment results in the reduction of several known mineralization-related gene expression profiles, including Based on our findings on genome-wide, epigenetic effects of EtOH on DPSCs, we analyzed known epigenetic modifiers to elucidate a potential epigenetic link between alcohol and osteoporosis. Consistent with our conclusion, KDM6B, a known epigenetic modifier involved in osteogenic and odontogenic differentiation, was found to be significantly dysregulated in response to EtOH. Knockdown of Recent studies show that KDM6B is involved in the control of calcium-induced differentiation ( In conclusion, our findings confirmed that EtOH has a significant impact on the dysregulation of The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was supported by a research grant award from