An inverse reconstruction investigation is presented to determine the inner boundary location (corrosion points) for the heat transfer in composite walls from measurement data on exterior boundary. Finite Block Method (FBM) is utilized in this paper to deal with transient heat problems across the multilayered composite walls. Starting from one-dimensional problems, Lagrange interpolation with equally spaced nodes is applied to create first order differential matrices and thereafter the higher order differential matrices are obtained. Then combining with mapping technique, physical domain is mapped into a normalized domain for two-dimensional or three-dimensional problems with 8 seeds or 20 seeds respectively. Both time-spatial approach and Laplace transform technique with Durbin's inversion method are employed in the simulating procedure. In addition, roots of Chebyshev polynomial of first kind are considered in FBM for the first time, which can improve the degree of convergence significantly. Three numerical examples are presented to validate the accuracy of FBM. Comparisons between Finite Element Method (FEM), FBM and Point Collocation Method (PCM) are demonstrated respectively. Numerical observation indicates that FBM has much higher degree of accuracy even with few collocation points.Detecting the corrosion boundary of multilayer materials occurs extensively in engineering applications such as metallurgy. In the procedure of iron-steel-making, corrosion will take place on the inner surface of steel-smelting furnace which is always made of multilayer materials with different physical properties. We need to monitor the corrosion timely to prevent accidents. The corrosion degree inside steel-smelting furnace can be simulated through outermost layer information such as temperature or heat flux which may be measured easily. This kind of problem is always ill-posed and belongs to inverse problems. The identification of corrosion boundary in heat transfer problems has been studied numerically by Aparicio and Atkinson Differential Quadrature Method (DQM) developed by Bellman The aim of this paper is to propose an inverse reconstruction procedure to determine the inner boundary (corrosion points) location in the problem of heat conduction for composite walls from measurement data of both temperature and heat flux on exterior boundary. FBM is extended to reconstruct the shape of corrosion boundary line (or surface) for 2D (or 3D) problems. First, with Lagrange interpolation where collocation points are distributed uniformly along a straight line, the first order differential matrix can be constructed for 1D problem, after which differential matrices of higher order can be obtained directly. Partial differential matrices for 2D and 3D problems can be evaluated similarly. Object with irregular boundary configuration in physical domain should be divided into quadratic blocks. With several quadratic shape functions, each block is mapped into a normalized square. In this procedure, elements with 8 (or 20) seeds are employed for 2D (or 3D) problems. Thereafter, the continuity conditions of heat flux and temperature along interface between two blocks should be satisfied and the partial differential operators in each block should satisfy a strong form too. Two approaches are proposed to deal with time dependent behavior in this paper, i.e. time-space approach (TS) where we do not distinguish time and space variables, and Laplace transform approach (LT), where the dependence on time variable The paper is organized as follows. Fundamentals of FBM which can be used directly to solve time independent problems are given in For 1D problem in normalized domain, collocation points are equally spaced along ξ axis, as follows For all nodes, the first order derivative can be expressed, in matrix form, as Similar to 1D problems in normalized domain, we have For 2D problems, collocation nodes in normalized domain are shown in So the first order partial derivative of ψ The nodal value of the first order partial derivative Higher order partial derivative in 2D problems with respect to both ξ and η can be calculated by For 2D problems, physical domain with irregular boundary is subdivided into several quadratic blocks. Mapping technology is used to transform quadratic blocks in physical domain with For smooth function By solving equations above we can obtain So the first order partial derivatives are obtained as Consider 3D problems with 20 seeds and the coordinate transform Similar to 2D cases, we have In metallurgy engineering, the inner part of steel-smelting furnace is always unreachable and corroded. Therefore, we need to rebuild and simulate the corrosion boundary (or surface). In the dynamic model, three layers of composite walls are assumed to simulate the structure of furnace. We assume that In the first time-space approach named TS-I, a series of equidistant nodes are used in Lagrange interpolation, while the second time-space approach (TS-II) utilizes roots of Chebyshev polynomial of first kind as The 1D time dependent problems in space coordinates are called 2D problems in time-space approach in the following numerical examples because there are two variables time coordinate Temperature Applying Laplace transform over both sides of Introducing differential matrices over The continuity conditions at interfaces in the Laplace domain become A powerful method proposed by Durbin In order to obtain the location of smelting points By using the Newton–Downhill method, we can obtain the roots ( In this section, the computation of the moving boundary with corrosion points The perturbation relative root mean-square errors  An inhomogeneous heat problem across multilayer furnace First, we consider an inhomogeneous inverse heat conduction problem across The exact location Two time-space approaches (TS-I, TS-II) and Laplace transform approach (LT) with uniformly distributed nodes are implemented respectively. In FBM (LT), the free parameters in Durbin's inverse method are selected as σ = 5, In the Point Collocation Method (PCM) with radial basis functions, smooth function The relative errors  A homogeneous heat problem across multilayer furnace Consider a 2D homogeneous inverse heat transfer problem though a multilayer furnace with moving boundary in time-spatial domain. In this case, both FEM and FBM (TS) are employed with different level of noise. In FBM (TS), the maximum length and observing time are assumed as Neumann boundary is given by ∂ Moving boundary is supposed as  Comparisons between analytic solutions and numerical solutions of corrosion location without noise and with noise δ = 0.05 when  Three-dimensional homogeneous heat problem across monolayer plate For simplicity, we only consider a 3D homogeneous inverse heat transfer problem in monolayer plate in time-spatial domain as shown in Similar with Similarly δ ∈ [0, 1] is the level of noise. Numerical results are presented in An inverse computational procedure to determine the inner corrosion location of heat conduction composite walls from Cauchy measurement data of temperature and heat flux on the exterior boundary is proposed in the paper. FBM is employed to simulate the moving boundary of the inner surface of multilayer composite materials. First, transient heat transform for both 1D inverse problems in Laplace space in space coordinates and 2D/3D inverse problems in time-spatial domain are investigated. Then Lagrange interpolation and Newton–Downhill method are applied to obtain the location of the corrosion points. Comparisons between FBM, PCM (RBF) and FEM are given to study the stability, convergence and efficiency of FBM. Compared with Radial Basis Functions (RBF), there are no free parameters in FBM (TS-I, TS-II) and FBM (LT) due to the use of Lagrange interpolation. Roots of Chebyshev polynomial of first kind are utilized in the FBM for the first time, leading to a marked improvement in the convergence degree. Three different working cases with various corrosion boundaries (surfaces) are investigated. All the results indicate that FBM is well preformed to detect the corrosion location with its unique efficiency and stability. FBM (TS-II) is of much higher degree of convergence over FBM (TS-I) for large number of nodes. The work of this paper was partially supported by a grant from the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 