Based on slip flow at pore level a theoretical model is presented to predict the gas permeability and thereby the overall pressure drop for flow through a porous medium. The model maps the porous structure to a number of parallel micro-channels of arbitrary but constant cross-sectional shapes which remains uniform along the flow path. The gas permeability is found to follow Klinkenberg's equation. The Klinkenberg's slip factor is obtained as a function of matrix porosity and no-slip permeability as well as gas properties. Results are generalized by assuming an arbitrary polygonal shape for the pores. The proposed methodology is simple to follow and easy to implement. Theoretical predictions are then compared to existing experimental data in the literature to observe good agreement.Industrial applications like electronic cooling, MEMS, fuel cells, micro-reactors, medical and biomedical devices, keep microscale transport phenomena interesting to the research community A porous medium can be thought of as interconnected solid obstacles. Depending on the shape and distribution of the solid phase different flow channels can be formed and modelled. The simplest model can be constructed based on having thin parallel plates allowing for unmixed flow in the area in between the plates; see For slip flow (through a channel) to occur, the Knudsen number, Kn, has to be in the range 0.001 and 0.1. Lower Kn values lead to no-slip flow while for higher Kn values (than 0.1) the continuum assumption is no longer valid. Defining the Knudsen number as This gives the criterion for the slip flow at the pore level as When the above criterion is met, the flow has to be solved subject to a slip-flow boundary condition at the pore walls while the bulk flow is modelled using the Navier–Stokes equations which reduce to our Eq. The general solution of the Poisson's equation, in the cylindrical coordinate is The unknown coefficients Using the geometrical symmetry for polygonal ducts, only the hatched portion of the cross-section, depicted in Applying the symmetry conditions and considering the fact that the velocity magnitude should be bounded, Eq. Alternatively, the velocity distribution takes the following form Following Sparrow and Haji-Sheikh Furthermore, the pressure gradient, as a function of flow rate This pressure gradient can be related to that of no-slip flow, following Comparing the above with the Darcy model that assumes linear dependence of pressure gradient on viscosity and velocity and reciprocate of This is very similar to Klinkenberg's correlation for gas permeability for flow through a porous medium, i.e.: There are a large number of papers in the literature to predict the Moreover, the permeability, Eq. Before we move on to compare the predictions of our current model with those available in the literature, it is worth mentioning that some earlier investigations have reported a permeability-dependent slip factor ( Results of the total pressure drop, local velocity, permeability ratio (slip to that of no-slip) and the Klinkenberg equation can be compared to those available in the literature. As a sample of our results, we present the Klinkenberg slip factor versus experimental results of Finally, A theoretical model based on slip-flow at the pore level is presented to predict the pressure drop and permeability for gas flow through a porous medium. The results from the model are compared to different sources of experimental data available in the literature to observe a good agreement. Our results show that the Klinkenberg slip factor inverse-linearly depends on the pore hydraulic diameter. Assuming a Carman–Kozeny type of permeability-hydraulic diameter correlation, the Klinkenberg slip factor can be expressed in terms of reciprocal of the square root of permeability. This is in line with experimental observation and numerical results available in the literature. This research was partly supported by the