Introduction
                  Quadrilateral plate fractures constitute one of the most challenging components of acetabular fractures. The objective of this study is to describe and evaluate the novel technique of buttress screw fixation of the quadrilateral plate component of the acetabular fractures.
               
                  Patients & methods
                  Forty cases of acetabular fracture with associated quadrilateral plate component were included in the study. Mean age was 35 years (range, 16−68years), with a mean follow-up 16.4 months (range, 9−36months). Fixation of the quadrilateral plate was achieved by one or more buttress screws. The screws were inserted through the reconstruction plate, and placed close to the edge of the pelvic brim. To effectively achieve the 3-point fixation principle, the screw was inserted through the plate hole then outside the bone rubbing on the pelvic surface of the quadrilateral plate.
               
                  Results
                  Anatomical reduction of the quadrilateral plate component of the fractures was achieved in all but one patient. The modified Merle D’Aubigné and Postel score was excellent in 13 cases, good in 23 cases, fair in three cases, and poor in one case. No screw displacement or failures were observed during follow-up evaluation. No major complications related to this technique were observed in this series.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Buttress screw fixation of the quadrilateral plate fracture component in associated acetabular fractures is a safe and effective technique for reduction and fixation of these challenging fractures with no major complications related to this novel technique.The principles of acetabular surgery were first described by Letournel in 1964 In the current study, we present a novel screw technique, the Cairo University Hospitals (CUH) Buttress screw for fixation of the quadrilateral plate component of acetabular fractures. We report the early results in 40 patients that were underwent this novel surgical method. A total of 40 patients (19 females and 21 males), admitted to the Cairo University Hospital, Egypt, between January 2011 and December 2012, were included in the study. The inclusion criteria were patients presenting with acetabular fractures with an associated fracture in the quadrilateral plate. The exclusion criteria included pathological fractures, neglected fractures (>3 weeks). Quadrilateral plate fractures involving a complete or incomplete fracture line, separating the quadrilateral plate from both the anterior and posterior columns, were included in the study, Nineteen fractures showed variable degrees of comminution in the quadrilateral plate, while 21 patients had simple separation of the quadrilateral plate without comminution. Mean patient age was 34.9 years (range, 16 The majority of the fractures were associated both column fractures (23 fractures; 57.5%), followed by T-Fractures (16 fractures; 40%), and anterior column fractures (1 fracture; 2.5%). Seven patients had associated injuries that required operative intervention (6 ipsilateral lower limb fractures and one bilateral upper limb fracture). Four patients had associated pelvic fractures (1 Tile B3, 2 Tile C2-2, 1 Tile C2-3). Seven patients had associated posterior wall fractures that required a separate posterior approach. General anesthesia was used in 17 patients (42.5%), and combined spinal/epidural anesthesia was used in 23 patients (57.5%). All patients received first generation cephalosporin 1 Reduction of the anterior column fracture and fixation with a 3.5 The length of the screw varied according to the fracture pattern, the aim was to effectively buttress the fragment. A 3.5 (in 35 cases) or 4.5 Operative time, blood loss, intra-operative complications, and quality of immediate post-operative reduction in all patients were assessed according to the methods described by Matta 1996 Range of motion and anticoagulation treatment with enoxaparin sodium 40 Results are expressed as minimum, maximum, mean, standard deviation, number and percent. Correlation between different variables was performed using Spearman Rank correlation coefficient. SPSS software (version 16 for Windows) was used for data analysis. A A Total of 40 patients were included in this study; small fragment (3.5 The mean pre-operative interval was for all 40 patients was 5.4 In the group fixed with small fragment plates, the immediate post-operative radiographs showed successful anatomical reduction of the quadrilateral plate component in all but one case, which exhibited a 3-mm gap (imperfect reduction). The overall reduction of the acetabular fracture was anatomical in 23 cases (66%), imperfect in 9 cases (26%), and poor in 3 cases (8%). The group that was fixed with the large fragment screws showed 1 case of anatomical reduction, 3 cases of imperfect reduction and 1 case of poor reduction. The mean follow-up period for all patients was 16.8 An injury of the peroneal division of the sciatic nerve occurred in 1 patient, who had sustained a T-fracture together with a comminuted quadrilateral plate fracture, and was managed with an ilio-inguinal approach. The patient later regained full motor power and sensation after 4 months. One patient developed superficial wound infection at post-operative day 10, which was managed with antibiotics according to culture and sensitivity, and this patient recovered uneventfully by 3 weeks. Another patient developed deep infection in the posterior approach that was employed to address the posterior component. Serial wound debridements and lavage were carried out for management of infection and the patient recovered uneventfully 2 weeks later. One male patient, aged 32 years, developed avascular necrosis of the femoral head that necessitated total hip replacement. This patient sustained a T-fracture with a posterior wall fracture of the acetabulum, together with a posterior hip dislocation. He presented 7 The final functional score using the modified Merle d’Aubigné method at the end of the follow-up period, for the group which was fixed using the small fragment screws; was excellent in 12 patients (34%), good in 19 patients (54%), fair in 3 patients (9%) and poor in one patient (3%). The group which was fixed using the large fragment screws showed one case of excellent outcome, 3 cases of good outcome and one case of fair outcome. The mean functional score in this series was 16.5 (range: 12–18). Statistical analysis demonstrated a significant correlation between the immediate post-operative quality of reduction and the functional score at the end of the follow-up period (r Quadrilateral plate fractures are a heterogeneous group of acetabular fractures They are not included in any of the currently used classification systems, and there has been no consensus reached regarding the ideal method for their reduction/fixation. In the current study we present a simple novel technique for their fixation using the CUH Buttress screw technique, and report early results in 40 patients. The majority of the fractures included in this study were associated both column fractures, followed by T-Fractures then anterior column fractures. Harvinsalo noted that quadrilateral plate fractures are associated with the same group of fractures Our results established that this technique was able to achieve anatomical reduction of the quadrilateral plate component in the majority of the cases, maintain the achieved reduction, and prevent medial subluxation of the femoral head in all cases, with very satisfactory radiological and functional outcomes when compared to other techniques in the literature ( Anatomical reduction of the quadrilateral plate was achieved in all but one case, which was an early case in our series and had a comminuted quadrilateral plate that was fixed only by one screw. Later in the series, we did not encounter this problem when we utilized an appropriate number of screws in comminuted fractures. We observed four post-operative complications including a case of partial sciatic nerve injury, with recovery after 4 months. Although the exact etiology of this injury is unknown, it could be due to fracture manipulation. A case of avascular necrosis of the femoral head was also observed, which could be due to the late presentation of the patient, as the posterior hip dislocation was left without reduction for 7 Sen et al. studied the use of a spring plate combined with an infra-pectineal plate in a 90° construct, to fix comminuted quadrilateral plate fractures using the iliofemoral approach on 36 patients with mean age 38 years (Range 15–56). In their study they achieved anatomical reduction in 83.3% of the patients, compared to 60% in this study ( Other techniques described in literature have demonstrated complications, which could be directly associated with the technique employed. Laflamme et al., who utilized infrapectineal plates for fixation of quadrilateral plate fractures in the elderly, reported two cases of loss of reduction. However, their study involved a different age group, and a valid comparison regarding this point would not be feasible. They also reported a case of traumatic obturator nerve injury, two cases of adductor muscle weakness, and three cases of mild heterotopic calcification were also reported in the study The present study; to our knowledge; is the largest case series of quadrilateral plate fractures reported to date in the literature. The strict inclusion criteria, where fractures of the quadrilateral plate were considered only when there was a separation of the whole plate or part of it from the anterior and posterior column. These results demonstrate that the buttress technique is an effective, simple and safe method for fixation for quadrilateral plate fractures. However, future studies with a longer follow-up period and a larger sample size, together with a comparative study with other techniques, are required to further validate these results. The CUH buttress screw technique is a novel technique that can be utilized to effectively reduce and fix the quadrilateral plate component in acetabular fractures. It is a simple, safe, efficient and reproducible technique, with very satisfactory radiological and functional outcomes. The Authors has no conflict of interests related to this study to declare. This study has been approved by the appropriate ethics committee (the Scientific Board of the Department of Trauma & Orthopaedic Surgery, Cairo University Hospitals). Patients gave informed consent to the work done. Details that might disclose the identity of the subjects in the study have been omitted. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.