Background/purpose
                  Distal radius fractures are amongst the most common musculoskeletal bone injuries treated in emergency departments. The objective of this study was to evaluate the functional and radiologic outcomes of treating distal radius fractures with a resorbable volar polymeric implant system.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We applied the volar poly-5D/95L-lactide (PLA95) plate/screw system (Bonamates, BioTech One, New Taipei City, Taiwan) for intraosseous fixation after open reduction of distally displaced radius fracture in four patients (three males and one female, ages range: 7–67 years). Another four patients [three females and one male, ages 68–70 (68.8 ± 1.0)] were treated with 3.5-mm metal volar T locking plates (Synthes, Paoli, PA, USA) as the control group. The minimum follow-up period was longer than 2.5 months for all cases.
               
                  Results
                  At final functional and radiologic assessment, all of the distal radius fracture sites were united and one patient achieved excellent results, two patients had good results, and one had a fair result. All patient outcomes were satisfactory, and no major material-related infections or allergies were found.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Within the limitations of this early clinical experiment, we conclude that the volar PLA95 copolymer plate/screw system can be used to treat distal radial fractures.Biodegradable fixation devices have gained much attention recently due to their advantages, which include radio translucencyto X-ray, low stress-shielding effects, good biocompatibility, and no need for secondary operation, in comparison with metallic implants. Distal radius fracture is one of the most common bone injuries to the musculoskeletal system and represents approximately one-sixth of all fractures treated in emergency departments. Open reduction with internal fixation is one method of surgically repairing a fractured bone. Generally, this involves the use of plates and screws to stabilize the bone. The two most widely used internal fixation methods are dorsal and volar plating. In the majority of distal radius fracture cases, volar plating gives the most satisfactory result. Internal fixation of comminuted, distal radius fractures with metal implants has shown promising clinical outcomes. However, complications resulting from of the metal plates may include infection, tenosynovitis, radiocarpal arthrosis, stiffness of the phalanges, or tendon rupture. Bioresorbable fixation systems have been developed as a reasonable alternative in orthopedic surgery without showing adverse effects on bone healing. We conducted this study to assess outcomes using a resorbable distal radial plate system to treat distal radius fractures as a way of eliminating the need for a second operation. This study used the volar Bonamates PLA95 plate/screw system for this purpose, assessing patients' functional recovery and radiographic changes that occurred at the distal part of the radius at specific time-intervals after fixation. Between December 2009 and January 2011, we treated the experimental group of four patients with distal radius fractures, with or without combination distal ulna fractures, with open reduction and internal fixation using a bioresorbable plate/screw system designed for optimal alignment and stabilization. They were also protected with short arm splint or cast for periods ranging from 6 weeks to 3 months. We used the bioresorbable Bonamates plate/screw system, which is composed of copolymer in the following ratios: PLA95 or expressed as poly-L/DL-lactide (90/10). Plates were adapted to the shape of a volar small T-shaped compression plate by heating in a water bath containing 70° C sterile water for 7–10 seconds. The patients' ages ranged from 7 to 67 years of age. Of these patients, two received 2 cc xenograft Sinbone HT (Purzer Pharmaceutical, Taipei, Taiwan) in the fracture site, which consists of 63% hydroxyapatite and 37% tricalcium phosphate, to enhance healing related to osteoporosis. As a control group, we treated another four patients with 3.5 mm metal volar T locking plates (three females and one male) with a mean age of 68.8 ± 1.0 years (range, 68–70 years). X-ray analysis with interexaminer calibration was performed. All procedures were performed under general anesthesia and from the volar approach by dissection between the flexor carpi radialis tendon and the median nerve. We performed dissection of the pronator quadratus muscle and open reduction with the aid of intrafocal leverage ( The standard posteroanterior, oblique, and lateral views were the basis for the initial radiographic examination. Follow-up radiographs of the wrists were taken to assess reduction and bony union. We measured radiological parameters—including radial inclination, radial length, and volar tilt—before and after surgery, as well as at the final follow-up. We graded subjective and objective functional results using the Gartland and Werley point system. Objective evaluation consisted of grip power, range of wrist joint motion, and complications such as wound infection, finger contracture and median nerve injury. Demographic data and Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthesefragen classification for four patients (two men, one boy, and one woman) with a mean age of 48.5 years (range, 7–67 years) are listed in  Follow-up duration varied from 2.5 to 11 months. Half the patients had a fracture in the dominant limb. Injuries were caused by a fall or slip ( The final mean range of motion was wrist flexion 60.5 degrees (range, 42–80), extension 58.5 degrees (range, 34–70), supination 73.8 degrees (range, 65–80), and pronation 85 degrees (range, 80–90), and the mean grip power was 9.8 kg with a pinch power of 5.5 kg on the injured side. The normal side of mean wrist flexion was 67.5 degrees (range, 55–80), extension 69 degrees (range, 41–75), supination 85 degrees (range, 80–90), and pronation 88.8 degrees (range, 85–90), and the mean grip power was 12.5 kg with a pinch power of 7.3 kg ( The final follow-up radiologic evaluation showed that the mean volar angulation of the distal radius was 21 degrees (range, 8–40), mean radial inclination 14.3 degrees (range, 10–20), and the mean radial shortening 3.5 mm (range, 0–9 mm). One poor mean radial shortening result was from secondary volar displacement and collapse of fracture site at final assessment. The average time to union was 3.5 months (range, 2.5–4.5; We used Gartland and Werley's classification for the functional assessment, No complications such as wound infection or carpal tunnel syndrome were found during follow-up, ( Primary instability of distal radius fractures includes the following radiographic parameters: (a) more than 5 mm of radial shortening, (b) more than 20 degrees of lateral inclination, (c) more than 2 mm of articulator step-off, and (d) comminuting extending beyond the midaxial line. Another disadvantage of the PLA95 copolymer bioabsorbable plate is that it is hard to check the distal screw position by fluoroscopy, so placement of a drill bit or Kirschner wire to identify the direction of the screw is necessary during the surgical procedure. But even if the tip of a screw touches the wrist joint, they do not appear to cause the irritation problem associated with metal screws. Excellent results were obtained with the 7-year-old boy, even with residual volar angulation of distal radius fracture site of about 15 degrees ( The case with fair results was that of a 64-year-old woman with poor bone quality at the fracture site. Even with 2 cc Sinbone HT in the fracture site to support the medial cortex, loss of reduction was noted after scheduled follow-up at 42 days after operation ( These preliminary results of treating distal radius fractures with PLA95 copolymer bioabsorbable plates was encouraging for patients who did not want to receive a second operation to remove hardware after fracture healing. But, it is necessary to discuss protection with a cast for an appropriate period of time and physical therapy with patients before the surgery to achieve better results and functional outcomes. Within the limitations of this early clinical experience, we conclude that the volar PLA95 copolymer plate/screw system can be used for treatment of distal radius fractures. The authors thank BioTech One, Inc. for technical support.