In this study, a novel Pd/native nitride/n-GaAs structure was developed and investigated as hydrogen sensor. Thin layers of native nitride on n-GaAs (100) epitaxial crystals was grown by anodic nitridation, and Pd thin layer as gate electrode was evaporated on the native nitride film in high vacuum. Electrical and hydrogen sensing properties of the structures were obtained from the current–voltage (I–V), capacitance–voltage (C–V) and capacitance–time (C–t) characteristics measured in a computer controlled flow set-up at temperatures of 50, 90 and 130°C, respectively. The samples show a behavior like a Schottky diode. The thicker sample has smaller leakage current and greater breakdown voltage. The sensor responses are totally reversible with response and recovery times, 35 and 40s, respectively. The device with the thickest native nitride film showed better sensitivity, and the detection limit was lower than 20ppm for H2.Due to the energy crisis from petroleum storage, hydrogen has been increasingly developed and considered as a new and clean resource. It is also widely employed in clinical, industrial, and environmental reservation applications. When a relatively high volumetric hydrogen concentration, e.g., 4.65–74.5% H The focus of sensor development nowadays concerns research into new devices and materials that provide increased sensitivity, selectivity and stability. In general, semiconductor devices like Schottky diodes, MOS capacitors or field effect transistors can be made gas sensitive by using catalytically active materials such as platinum (Pt), palladium (Pd) or iridium (Ir) as Schottky or gate contacts. Lundström et al. In this paper, we study the hydrogen sensing performances of Pd/anodically grown native nitride/ The Pd/native nitride/ The hydrogen detection apparatus was composed of a flow-type aluminum chamber, with a heatable sample holder, a temperature controller (Lakeshore.340), a sensitive Before hydrogen exposure, to determine the electrical properties of the devices, the current–voltage ( For determination of the hydrogen sensing properties, a desired concentration of H To determine the electrical properties of the Pd/native nitride/ The C– Hydrogen sensing mechanism of MIS sensors is as follows The net effect of the interfacial hydrogen is to alter the Schottky barrier of the MIS structure and thereby change either Sensitivities of the sensors defined as All the sensitivity values are given in MIS sensors were fabricated with different native nitride layer thickness. The performance of the MIS hydrogen sensor is totally dependent on the insulator layer thickness. Financial support of this study was provided by TUBITAK Marmara Research Center, Materials Institute, Gebze, Kocaeli, Turkey.