Over the past half century there has been consistent interest in the study of rapid penetration into granular media. A wealth of literature has appeared on the subject, as well as on high strain-rate behavior of soils. However, at different times, the problem has been studied by different disciplines within the science and engineering fields, and there is a lack of consistency and generality in addressing the various phenomena associated with the problem. This book provides a comprehensive review of the literature on high strain-rate behavior of sand, as well as on physics of rapid penetration into granular media. Interest in penetration in granular media has been reinvigorated in the past few years with significant research expenditures on visualization of the fundamental physics of rapid penetration. This book gathers important recent findings on rapid penetration into granular materials from prominent research groups in the United States and Europe, which will serve as a reference framework for future research in this area. The large community of physicists, geotechnical and petroleum engineers, ballistic experts, and other researchers from several other disciplines will benefit from the content of the book. In particular, researchers will find the collection of recently developed visualization techniques applied to rapid penetration of earth materials introduced in this book beneficial in future endeavors. Practicing physicists and engineers as well as ballistic and military experts will find the extensive observations and analyses presented in this book useful in developing predictive models.Background Objectives and Scope Organization of This Book Introductory chapters Conventional approaches for visualization of traveling projectiles Noncontact diagnostics for visualization of traveling projectiles Soil surrogates for visualization of traveling projectiles Concluding Remarks Creation of this book has been motivated by the recent surge of publications applying novel experimental techniques to a topic that has been of engineering importance for centuries—rapid penetration of granular materials. Military interests include penetration into the ground as well as design of fortifications. Geotechnical and geophysical interests include the extremes of drilling for resource extraction, pile driving, design of anchors, and probing of The present work attempts to bridge the chasm between engineering and physics in an effort to advance understanding of the granular penetration problem. A wealth of literature on rapid penetration into granular media spans a number of disciplines including geotechnical engineering, soft matter physics, engineering geology, ballistics, petroleum engineering, and aerospace engineering. However, at different times, scientists and engineers working in different fields have approached the problem differently. The engineering approach has been based mainly on empirical and semi-empirical relationships backed by extensive experimentation. Physicists’ perspective of granular penetration is faithful to well-established principles, but is at times highly idealized. Over the past half century, treatment of the problem has evolved from one of empirical nature to semi-empirical models based on experimentally verified phenomenology. More recently, attention has shifted from macroscale observations to exploration of underlying meso- and microscale interactions. This volume documents studies of historical significance in the field and presents results of recent insights gained from advanced visualization techniques. The book is unique in that it combines the physics and engineering perspectives, and uses terminology that is accessible to both disciplines. This book presents the state of the science on the subject of granular penetration, with a particular focus on describing various techniques to visualize the phenomenon. Scientists and engineers from leading institutions including New York University Polytechnic School of Engineering, Duke University, Yale University, California Institute of Technology, Cambridge College, Imperial College, University of Maryland, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Purdue University, Marquette University, and University of California-Los Angeles joined together to present current experimental techniques available to study the problem as well as summaries of their findings. The authors believe that this consolidated compilation will serve as the definitive reference on the state of science for researchers and practitioners interested in penetration into granular materials. This book compiles the findings of recent research endeavors on the interaction of projectiles and granular media. The book outlines the fundamental physics of rapid penetration and assembles a comprehensive collection of experimental and numerical methods to study the problem. An important feature of the book is that it describes the variety of methods developed to visualize rapid penetration into granular media. There is currently no single document that compiles all the concepts relevant to rapid penetration into granular media. Much of the work is accessible through government reports and technical journals; none of which specialize in rapid penetration into granular media and some of which are often difficult to collect. The authors believe that this book bridges the knowledge produced from different disciplines of science and engineering dealing with rapid penetration into granular media by: presenting a comprehensive interdisciplinary review of the available literature; combining the experience of prominent researchers from different disciplines interested in studying the problem; introducing recently developed methods for visualizing the fundamental physics of rapid penetration intro granular media; presenting recent data from experimental, analytical, and numerical studies on rapid penetration into granular media; and employing terminology that is accessible to both engineers and physicists. The scope of the work encompasses intruders penetrating at velocities ranging from 1 to 500 The authors hope that this book will serve as a useful reference for scientists and engineers in the fields of earth and planetary science, ballistics, soft matter physics, physics of granular media, geotechnical engineering, engineering geology, as well as industry professionals in ballistics, petroleum engineering, and aerospace engineering. The work does not attempt, in any way, to investigate agricultural or biological penetration into soils. For this book, the authors have contributed nearly half of the chapters and invited leading scientists and engineers to contribute the remaining chapters. These contributors were selected because they are pioneering advanced visualization techniques and have successfully employed them to reveal granular interactions provoked by dynamic penetration. The behavior of granular materials can be studied on a number of interrelated scales. Although the macro or continuum scale is the scale of primary interest for practical engineering applications, behavior of the continuum is decidedly influenced by physical phenomena that occur at underlying scales. The structural properties of individual soil particles, as well as intergranular kinetics and kinematics are governed at the microscale. Granular interactions such as rotation, translation, and particle damage are significant phenomena at this scale. Collective behavior including rearrangement, dilation, strain localization, and formation and buckling of force chains takes place at an intermediate scale, referred to as the mesoscale. Previously, penetration theories were limited to empirical models or phenomenological models that assume an underlying phenomenology and demanded general, predominantly global scale, observations of penetration events. Visualization of complex interactions was limited to quarter-space tests and limited X-ray radiography, with technological restrictions that resulted in low temporal and spatial resolution. Other means of obtaining data regarding soil-projectile interactions included employment of color-coded granular media, with careful postmortem analysis of the dissected target. These tests, while useful in revealing cavity dimensions and clarifying energy partitioning of the penetration event, could not describe the time evolution of interactions. Despite these limitations, however, a wealth of knowledge has resulted from these early studies. In recent years, the advent of advanced computational resources, coupled with emerging theoretical developments, have necessitated meso- and macroscale observations to justify, and facilitate, theoretical assumptions. As a result, techniques and methods to visualize soil-projectile and granular interactions during rapid penetration into granular media have shifted from quarter-space tests and macroscale penetration time history measurements to the use of emerging noninvasive diagnostic techniques. The methods described in this book begin with conventional approaches described above, followed by nonintrusive diagnostic methods adapted from the medical field, such as radiography and flash X-ray radiography. Finally, soil surrogates are introduced to nonintrusively observe granular motion and infer contact stresses during penetration at time scales relevant to meso- and microscale responses. Examples of visualization techniques employed in this book to study rapid penetration in granular media are shown in To set the stage, the book begins with a review of our understanding of dynamic behavior of natural and synthetic granular media in In order to provide the context for current research, the book also includes a review of the state of knowledge of penetration mechanics of granular materials in Two conventional approaches are employed to probe the behavior of intruders into natural soil. The first is through the use of high-speed imaging of long rods to track their motion by means of surveying markings on the rod, and an attached follower, during penetration. Alternatively, photonic Doppler velocimetry was used to obtain highly resolved velocity time histories. The second method is to employ quarter-space tests coupled with advanced high-speed imaging techniques. The global observations and postmortem analysis of a variety of penetration events described in The recent use of quarter-space ballistic tests combined with high-speed photography has been quite fruitful. The technique is described in DIC has also been used to compute the strain within individual grains. Using the techniques in Natural soils are opaque to visible light, so the only way to visualize internal deformations and flow paths within them is through expensive medical apparatus such as X-rays, computerized tomography (CT Scan or CAT scan), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and neutron imaging. Higher resolution can be obtained regarding the granular assembly as well as the pore space using neutron imaging. Neutron imaging can also be used to differentiate between air and water within the pore space. Further information such as the extent of damage and changes in pore space can be visualized from these tests. Recent developments of neutron imaging applied to postmortem analysis of natural soil samples penetrated at ultrasonic impact velocities are described in Soil surrogates have been employed in In In Photoelastic techniques, applied for many years to plane stress configurations, were employed in Another experimental development that supported progress in study of high-speed penetration is the creation of transparent surrogates for granular materials. These are described in The methods described in this book have produced a wealth of knowledge in penetration dynamics, granular and granular-intruder interactions at a multiscale level, spanning from the global macroscale to the subgrain level. These unique experimental observations are concurrent with progress in numerical and analytical modeling of dynamic granular interactions. The confluence of these new experimental and numerical modeling techniques has set the stage for significant progress in our understanding of granular materials, in general, and their response to penetration, in particular. We hope that the present volume will be a useful catalyst.