AsO4-for-SO4 substitution in alunite (KAl3(SO4)2(OH)6) and hydronium alunite ((H3O)Al3(SO4)2(OH)6) has been investigated by hydrothermal precipitation at 200°C. Arsenical alunite presented a good precipitation yield and a significant AsO4 substitution (up to 15% molar). The degree of arsenate substitution depends on the solution composition. It increased as (AsO4/(AsO4
                     +SO4))alunite
                     ≅0.5 (AsO4/(AsO4
                     +SO4))L. For (AsO4/(AsO4
                     +SO4))L
                     <0.26, arsenical alunite was the unique phase and, above this ratio, mansfieldite (AlAsO4·2H2O) co-precipitated. The a unit cell parameter is practically independent of the AsO4 substitution, but the c unit cell parameter increased consistently with the differences between the AsO1 and SO1 distances in tetrahedral sites of the structure. The maximum stability of arsenical alunite in short-term tests is between pH 5 and 8, with an As-solubilization of 0.01–0.03mg/L in 24h. Long-term tests were performed at some synthesized samples at its natural pH. Arsenical alunite was stabilized at 0.3mg/L released As in 2.5 weeks. These values were similar to those obtained in pure and largely crystalline natural scorodite (0.4mg/L released As), but lower than the obtained for synthetic scorodite (1.3mg/L released As). Thus, arsenical alunite could be effective for arsenic immobilization, especially for effluents or wastes containing large SO4/AsO4 ratio. Hydronium alunite presents a low precipitation yield and a very low arsenate incorporation (up to 1% molar). This may be related by the difficulty of substituting protonated H2O-for-OH− groups, due to the location of the H-bridges of the H3O in the structure. These characteristics make hydronium alunite unsuitable for arsenic immobilization.Arsenic is a common element in non-ferrous metallurgies wastes, particularly copper pyrometallurgy. Lots of studies have searched the way to remove and stabilize it. The most used industrial method is the precipitation with calcium hydroxide, which gives calcium arsenate products. Nevertheless, these products are unstable in contact with water and, the arsenic is released Arsenic precipitation as sulfate-type compounds – with arsenate in diluted solid solution – can be of interest, especially for effluents, which contain moderate to high SO Some studies synthesized and compared the behavior of the incorporation of other elements in alunite structure. Rudolph et al. The As incorporation in the Al-members of the alunite group have been only tested in natroalunite. For this reason, the study of AsO Experiments were performed in similar way than in previous papers All reagents were previously dissolved with deionized water up to 150 All samples have been analyzed using chemical analysis by inductively coupled plasma (ICP-OES), scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDS), and X-ray diffraction (XRD). ICP-OES was used to know the bulk chemical composition of the samples. These were prepared by digestion of 0.1 SEM-EDS study was performed using a JEOL JSM-840 equipped with an INCA 250-analyzer. Samples were coated with carbon and analyzed at a beam current of 0.6 X-ray diffraction was done using PANalytical X’Pert PRO MDP Alpha’1 equipment with Bragg Brentano geometry and 240 Short-term (24 Long-term stability was evaluated for the same arsenical alunite sample (K1), a natural scorodite sample and a synthetic scorodite sample. The natural scorodite was extracted from a museum grade specimen from Ojuela mine (Durango, Mexico), which consisted of intergrown crystals of 10–50 These tests were performed using 2.5  The alunite crystals showed the same size (1–10 The formula coefficients of the alunite phase are shown in Mansfieldite formed at high AsO  The precedent results indicated that the cell dimension in simple alunites (Na, K and H Thus, it is reasonable that the extension of the AsO The arsenic partition during the synthesis of simple alunites is summarized in Cell parameters and the structure refinement details obtained by the Rietveld method are shown in The obtained Otherwise, For hydronium alunite, the variation in The variation of the The leached arsenic (24 Long-term leaching of arsenical alunite was done by duplicate at its natural pH 6.6–5.2. The dissolved arsenic equilibrated in about 2.5 weeks at about 0.3 However, arsenical alunite showed some more arsenic leaching than arsenical natroalunite, which was equilibrated at about 0.1 Alunite presented a good precipitation yield and significant AsO Arsenical alunite presents good stability in a wide range of pHs. The maximum stability in short-term tests is between pH 5 and 8, with an As-solubilization of 0.01–0.03 Hydronium alunite presents a low precipitation yield and very low arsenate incorporation (up to 1% molar). This may be related to the difficulty of substituting protonated H The financial support of the