In the present work, the extraction behavior of lanthanides (except Pm) with calix[4]arene tetraphosphonic acid (H4
                     L) in chloroform was studied from nitrate medium. The stoichiometry of the extracted species of lanthanides was determined based on the slope analysis method. Equilibrium constants and thermodynamic functions ΔH, ΔG and ΔS were evaluated. Furthermore, the separation factors between adjacent rare earths were calculated, which indicated that the present extractant shows some potential in the single rare earth separation. The stripping of Yb was studied.Rare earths are a kind of important elements for the high technology and advanced materials. Due to the increasing demand for the high purity rare earths, the separation and purification of these elements have attracted considerable attentions ( However, the acidic organophosphorus extractants always need being saponified by concentrated ammonia to improve the extractability and separation selectivity, which inevitably leads to the emission of ammonia-containing wastewater. In order to improve the separation efficiency more and reduce the consumption of the mineral acid and base and the pollution in rare earth hydrometallurgy industry, some novel extractants such as ionic liquids ( In our previous work, some calixarene derivatives modified by the neutral phosphonate group on the upper rim ( The All chemical reagents except H The metals were analyzed using an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optimal 8000). FT-IR spectra (KBr pellets) were obtained on a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. NMR spectra were performed on a Bruker AV 400. Mass spectra were recorded on a Bruker Daltonics Flex Analysis instrument. Elemental analyses were carried out on a varioEclube machine. The pH measurement was conducted with a model PHS-3C digital pH meter made by Shanghai REX Instrument Factory. The solvent extraction experiments were carried out in temperature-controlled shaker bath for 30 After extraction, a majority of rare earths were transferred into the organic phase at proper condition. The loaded organic phase was equilibrated with nitric acid of different concentrations. The mixtures were shaken at 298 The effect of acid concentration on rare earth extraction was investigated and the results were shown in In order to study the extraction stoichiometry of rare earths, further experiments were performed at 298 The extraction equilibrium constant The distribution ratio, The logarithmic expression of equilibrium (4) is: Varying concentration of nitric acid and extractant (H The values of log The FT-IR transmittance spectra of Yb-loaded organic phase are given in The influence of temperature on the ytterbium extraction with H According to the In this section, the concentration of nitric acid and extractant (H The value of Δ The free energy change (Δ The change of free energy (Δ Separation factor, The further separation factor Commonly, the higher the extractability of the acidic extractant has, the more difficult the loaded metal can be stripped and the higher acidity the stripping process needs. For this extractant, the stripping of loaded Yb 5,11,17,23-Tetrakis(hydroxyethoxyphosphoryl)-25,26,27,28-tetrapropoxycalix[4]arene has been synthesized and employed for the extraction and separation of trivalent rare earths from nitrate medium. It is found that this extractant exhibits similar extraction behavior and separation factors for single rare earths as the conventional acidic organophosphorus extractant HEHEHP. Meanwhile, the complete stripping of the loaded metals also needs high aqueous acidity. The extracted species of selected rare earths (La, Pr, Gd, Tb, Yb, Lu) were determined as RE·H This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at