The zinc extraction from a low grade sphalerite concentrate using ferric sulphate and sulfuric acid media was studied and optimized as a potentially promising process for zinc production from low grade zinc resources. The zinc and lead content of the sphalerite concentrate were 32% and 7% and of the original ore 2.8% and 1%, respectively. Six control factors, including reaction temperature, reaction time, pulp density, H2SO4 concentration, Fe3+ ion concentration and particle size, each in five levels were considered using Taguchi technique. L25 orthogonal array and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were applied to determine the optimum conditions and most significant factors affecting the overall zinc extraction and zinc concentration of leach liquor. The optimum dissolution condition to maximize zinc extraction and zinc concentration simultaneously were T
                     =95 °C, t
                     =300 min, D
                     =80 g/l, A
                     =0.5 mol/l, F
                     =1 mol/l, and S
                     =−38 μm. In verification leaching experiments, zinc extraction and zinc concentration were 71.7% and 23.4 g/l, respectively. These results were in reasonable agreement with the results predicted by the statistical model. In optimum conditions, zinc extraction of 91.5% was obtained after five hours of leaching (which is relatively short time).The Roast–Leach–Electrowinning (RLE) process has produced metallic zinc since 1916 and is currently responsible for more than 85% of the total zinc production ( In the direct leaching processes, sulfidic sulfur is converted to elemental sulfur and hence no sulfuric acid needs to be produced. For this purpose various leaching studies have been performed by many researchers in basic medium using ammonia solutions ( The generally accepted theory of zinc sulphide leaching chemistry can be presented using a couple of equations. Ferric ion oxidizes sulfidic sulfur to elemental form and sphalerite dissolves to zinc sulphate as follow: Afterwards, ferrous iron is oxidized back to ferric using oxygen according to the following equation: The reactions according to Eqs. (1) and (2) are often presented as a sum reaction: The commercial sphalerite concentrate usually contains approximately 50% Zn. However, in some cases such as Mehdiabad lead and zinc mine, the production of a commercial grade of sphalerite concentrate may not be feasible, due to the low grade and complexity of the ore. Therefore, the production of a low grade sphalerite concentrate containing 32% Zn with about 75% zinc recovery was considered in the flotation process of the Mehdiabad original ore sample. This research is a part of a comprehensive research project, has been carried out with the aim of studying the possibility of economical zinc extraction from such a low grade sphalerite using a relatively novel approach of direct atmospheric leaching. Because of the slow kinetics of the sphalerite dissolution in the atmospheric direct leaching process, determination of the most effective factors and also finding the optimized combination of the control factors will be an important progress to achieve better results, especially in the case of low grade sphalerite concentrates. The role of the effective parameters on the sphalerite dissolution was studied by one factor at a time (OFAT) approach in all existing studies. Meanwhile, all the parameters affecting the sphalerite dissolution have not been investigated in detail, because it requires a very large number of experiments, which enormously increases the experimental cost and time taken. However, a quantitative estimation of the various parameters affecting the performance of the leaching process, and the main factors affecting zinc extraction (%) and zinc concentration (g/l) of the leach liquor can be determined by an optimization approach using the statistical design of experiments. In this case, more information would also be achieved from the process. The technique of defining and investigating all possible conditions in an experiment involving multiple factors is known as the design of experiments. Basically, classical parameter design, which was originally developed by Fisher, is complicated and not easy to use. Especially, a large number of experiments must be conducted when the number of process parameters increases. To solve the problem, the Taguchi method uses a special design of orthogonal arrays to study the entire parameters space with a small number of experiments only ( For the effective recovery of zinc from a low grade sphalerite concentrates, not only maximum extraction of zinc is required, but also the zinc concentration in the leach liquor must be high enough to provide the feed to the electrowinning circuit. The zinc concentration in leach liquor has not been considered in previous studies on the sphalerite leaching. In this research, the zinc concentration was selected to be maximized, due to the subsequent solvent extraction used as the solution purification process. The objective of this research work was to investigate the simultaneous effects of the operating factors including reaction temperature, Fe About 2 tonnes of the original ore sample containing 2.8% Zn and 1% Pb was supplied by Mehdiabad Zinc Company (MZC). For ore characterization, optical mineralogy, using the prepared polished and thin sections, as well as semi-quantitative X-ray diffraction (SQXRD) studies were performed to define the main and the trace ore and gangue minerals and their interlocking. The results of the SQXRD analysis of the primary ore and the low grade sphalerite concentrate are presented in Atmospheric direct leaching experiments were carried out in a 1-liter sealed glass reactor (1) immersed in the electrically heated silicon oil bath (2) equipped with the Heidolph mechanical stirrer (HPS-55 model, Germany) having a digital controller unit and a teflon impeller (3). A magnetic stirrer (Multi stirrer DM-8 Scinics, Japan) was used as the base of the setup (4). The reactor was fitted with a Pyrex glass lid with standard taper ports, for feed entrance (5), temperature measurement (6), and periodic sampling (7). A reflux condenser (8) inserted in one port to keep losses to a minimum. The reactor temperature was monitored and controlled within ± To produce sphalerite concentrate, the representative samples (each 1 kg) was ground in wet laboratory rod mill and subjected to froth flotation. The flotation experiments were performed in a 2-liter Denver laboratory flotation cell. In the leaching experiments, after the desired temperature of the reactor content was reached, the predetermined amount of sphalerite concentrate was added to 500 ml leaching solution based on the required pulp density. Agitation speed was 800 rpm in all of the leaching tests, in which all the solid particles were fully suspended in the solution. The leaching solution was prepared using distilled water and the analytical grade H For the Taguchi design and subsequent analysis, the statistical softwares named Design Expert-7 (DX7) and Minitab-14 were used. The appropriate orthogonal array for the experiments using Taguchi fractional factorial design was selected by DX7 software. Taguchi technique applies orthogonal arrays, to reduce the number of experiments and meanwhile obtaining statistically meaningful results. The selection of suitable orthogonal array depends on the number of control factors and their levels. By inspecting the results of the past sphalerite dissolution studies and preliminary practical observations, six selected control factors in five levels applied in this study, are listed in In the classical experimental design using full factorial experimentation, the number of experiments to study the selected process space would be 5 Statistical analysis of the results obtained from 25 leaching experiments, was performed to see whether the effect of process parameters are statistically significant or not as well as to justify the adequacy of the models. The relative effect of different factors can be obtained by the decomposition of total variation into its appropriate components, which is commonly called analysis of variance (ANOVA). The results of ANOVA analysis for zinc extraction and zinc concentration in the final leach liquor are presented in F value is a criterion for comparing model (or factor) variance with residual (error) variance ( The same procedure was followed for the second response (zinc concentration) and the results are given in Meanwhile, From the statistical results obtained, it was shown that the developed models were adequate to predict the desired responses in the range of variables under study. The degrees of influences of the parameters on the mean responses under study are given in the main effect graphs in According to the main effect plot of zinc concentration in The simultaneous effect of two parameters on each of the responses under study could be evaluated by the contour plots. Summarizing, The optimal levels of the parameters in two cases are presented in The atmospheric direct leaching of a low grade sphalerite concentrate was investigated over a broad range of experimental conditions. The effect of process parameters including reaction temperature (T), sulfuric acid concentration (A), ferric ion concentration (F), reaction time (t), pulp density (D) and particle size of ZnS concentrate (S), each in five levels, was studied with the Taguchi technique using an L The most significant parameters affecting the zinc extraction in the direct atmospheric leaching of the low grade sphalerite concentrate were pulp density, reaction temperature, ferric ion concentration and particle size respectively. Pulp density, particle size and ferric ion concentrations were also the most effective parameters on zinc concentration of the leach liquor. In optimum conditions of operating parameters, reaction time was not a statistically significant factor in the atmospheric leaching of low grade sphalerite concentrates. This means that good dissolution rates could be achieved using optimum combination of other factors. The overall zinc extraction achieved in optimum conditions was 91.5% in relatively short reaction time. The optimum dissolution condition to maximize zinc extraction and zinc concentration of leach liquor simultaneously were It was shown that the atmospheric direct leaching in ferric sulphate and sulfuric acid media is an efficient method to recover zinc from low grade sphalerite concentrates. It was concluded that Taguchi method can successfully be applied to the dissolution properties of the low grade sphalerite concentrates for simultaneous maximizing of the zinc extraction and zinc concentration of the leach liquor. The statistical model developed using the experimental results, was effective to navigate the design space of the process. This research work was supported by Yazd Mineral Research Center (YMRC).