We describe a case of traumatic posterior dislocation of a native hip joint associated with ipsilateral comminuted inter-trochanteric femoral fracture. In our case, closed reduction was attempted but proved unsuccessful. Taking into account the planned subsequent intra-medullary femoral nail, open reduction through a lateral incision was undertaken. Post-operatively, the planned mobility was for a non-weight bearing period of 6weeks followed by a partial-weight bearing period of 6weeks before progressing to full-weight bearing. Post-operatively, the patient completed a comprehensive course of physiotherapy. At five months, he was able to walk for five miles over the course of a weekend. At six months, the patient was looking at phased return to work as a fire fighter. Radiographs taken at the time demonstrated evidence of healing to his inter-trochanteric fracture. At ten months, the patient was back to normal duties at work as a fire fighter.The hip joint is stabilised by a strong soft tissue envelop. The architecture of the ball and socket provides inherit stability. The aforementioned architecture is support by strong ligaments and groups of muscles. Thus, the hip joint is very stable and dislocation of a native hip joint requires high energy trauma. Said high energy trauma can lead to femoral head and/or acetabular fractures. We describe a case of traumatic posterior dislocation of a hip joint associated with ipsilateral comminuted inter-trochanteric femoral fracture. The description includes initial and medium term management of this incredibly rare occurrence. In September of 2015, a 31 Few hours following resuscitation, he was taken to the operating theatre. Intra-operatively, the femoral head was found to have buttonholed posteriorly through the joint capsule, significant comminution to the per-trochanteric fracture with multiple bony fragments penetrating the muscle envelope including the calcar. Initially, closed reduction was attempted, this proved unsuccessful. The decision was taken to proceed to open reduction of the hip joint through a lateral incision. A cork screw was inserted into the femoral head and neck ( The femoral head was successfully reduced into the acetabulum of the hip joint. The inter-trochanteric fracture was reduced and held with sharp reduction forceps ( After reduction of the fracture, the femur was prepared to receive a long T2 gamma intra-medullary (IM) nail. The IM nail was locked distally. On day one post-operatively, radiographs demonstrated a congruent hip joint, satisfactory fracture and metalwork position ( On day six post-operatively, a computed topography (CT) scan of both hips was performed to evaluate the joint space. The scan demonstrated a bony fragment interposed between the femoral head and acetabulum, within the antero-medial aspect of the joint. The bony fragment measured approximately 11 Post-operatively, the patient was mobilised non-weight bearing for six weeks. The patient was discharged on day twelve following completion of satisfactory in patient physiotherapy. The patient then progressed to mobilise partially weight bearing for a further six weeks. Post-operatively, the patient completed a comprehensive course of physiotherapy. Initially, the patient had grade 4/5 power to his hip muscles, mainly hip abductors, and demonstrated an antalgic unaided gate over short distances. During his rehabilitation, the patient received a two weeks residential rehabilitation placement followed by hydrotherapy and land-based physiotherapy input. At four months, the patient was discharged from physiotherapy although he continued to receive privately funded physiotherapy. At five months, he was able to walk for 5 At ten months, the patient was back to normal duties at work. He continued to have discomfort in his thigh on lying down. Radiographs taken at the time demonstrated further healing of his inter-trochanteric fracture and no evidence of avascular necrosis of the femoral head ( Injuries to native hip joints sustained following road traffic accidents range from soft tissue sprain to significant bony/joint destruction resulting in life long disabilities. Traumatic hip joint dislocation is posterior in around 90% of cases In medical literature, combined hip joint dislocation and ipsilateral inter-trochanteric fracture are rarely reported In our case, closed reduction was attempted but proved unsuccessful. Taking into account the planned subsequent intra-medullary femoral nail, open reduction through a lateral incision was undertaken. Post-operatively, the planned mobility was for a non-weight bearing period of 6 No financial or any other form of support was provided to the authors by any external source. Views and statements expressed in this article are the authors own and do not represent the official position of the institution.