The use of potassium persulfate as oxidant in gold cyanidation is proposed at pH values between 10 and 11. The addition of thallium (I) ions enables high cyanidation rates to be maintained at pH values higher than 11, as it acts as a catalyst of the process. When gold cyanidation is performed in the simultaneous presence of 10 mM persulfate and 0.5 mM thallium (I) the dissolution rate is eight times higher than that obtained by conventional cyanidation, and the working pH can achieve values near 13. The kinetics of the process have been studied, and the results compared with those obtained by conventional cyanidation. The process is shown to be diffusion-controlled with an activation energy of 19.2 kJ mol−1. Finally, an equation of the reaction rate that describes the kinetics of the overall process for gold cyanidation with potassium persulfate and thallium (I) is presented, and the [CN−]/[S2O8
                     2−] ratio at which the dissolution rate reaches its limiting value is shown to be 2.5.When gold cyanidation is performed at minimum conditions of temperature and atmospheric pressure, conventional cyanidation gives low reaction rates that make the operating times long compared to those obtained under the best operating conditions of temperature and oxygen pressure. The recovery of gold from new gold sources such as electronic scrap, in which gold is present as thick gold, also needs other gold leaching processes with higher cyanidation rates in order to diminish the operating times. In conventional gold cyanidation, generally performed at high cyanide concentrations (between 0.04 and 0.1 M), cyanidation rate is determined by the dissolved oxygen concentration, slowing down the processes due to its limited solubility. Therefore, the use of alternative oxidants, such as permanganates, peroxides, ozone, dichromates, bromides and hydrogen peroxide, has been studied for many years although gold cyanidation with atmospheric oxygen is still the most-used process. An alternative oxidant must comply with certain requirements: it must not react with cyanide and thus must be stable in solution with respect to cyanide concentration. It must also be active as an oxidant in the potential range of gold anodic dissolution; and as far as possible, it must be compatible with the cyanide products. Furthermore, it must be soluble, stable and must not be adsorbed on gold surfaces in order to prevent possible passivation. An example of an oxidant that complies with all these requirements is the persulfate anion, which has been proved to increase the gold recovery from pyrite concentrates An increase of gold cyanidation rate can be achieved by the addition of thallium (I) ions in the leaching media The simultaneous use of persulfate and thallium (I) has been studied in order to increase the gold cyanidation rate by combining both effects: an alternative oxidant and a catalyst of the reaction. The use of these reagents could be very important in the manufacture of electronic devices for etching electroplated gold. However, the interest in using persulfate and thallium for conventional cyanidation of ores depends on the cost and the benefit of gold extraction and exhaustive studies may be carried out with different gold ores. Gold of electrolytic purity (999.5/1000) was used for all the experiments. It was melted in a magnesite cupel at 1050°C for 30 min and the resulting button was cold-rolled to a thickness of less than 50 μm. Plates were cut with a surface area ca. 1 cm Sodium cyanide, potassium persulfate and thallium nitrate were of analytical grade and distilled water, filtered through a Millipore Milli-Q system prior to the solutions preparation, were used in all the experiments. The pH was corrected by the addition of drops of 0.1 M sodium hydroxide solution. The dissolution rate measurements of the gold plates were carried out in a 500 ml cylindrical reactor, magnetically stirred, with two holes in the cover for inserting a thermo-regulator and a holder for the metal plate, so that it could be removed from the reactor after a given reaction time. These plates were immediately washed with distilled water, dried at 110°C and weighed. During the experiments, samples of 2 ml were also taken at various time intervals and their gold concentration was analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. In all cases, the weight loss of the metallic plate was proved to be equal to the amount of gold found in solution. The plots of gold concentration vs. reaction time were always linear, thus confirming that the metal dissolution took place under steady-state conditions. The influence of pH on the kinetics of gold cyanidation with potassium persulfate at atmospheric pressure was determined under the following conditions: 0.02 M NaCN, 0.005 M K In the presence of persulfate, at pH higher than 11, the gold cyanidation rate decreases, thus indicating the inhibition of the persulfate reduction. In order to improve cyanidation rates at these pH values it is necessary to eliminate this inhibition. This objective can be achieved by adding small amounts of thallium (I) ions to the leaching solution, as it acts as a catalyst both on the gold anodic dissolution and the persulfate reduction The effect of persulfate concentration on the cyanidation rate was determined by measuring the gold dissolution rate at 0.02 M NaCN, 0.5 mM TlNO Previously, the effect of the persulfate on the stability of the cyanide solutions has been studied, under the cyanide concentrations described bellow, and no variation in the cyanide concentration has been observed with persulfate addition. The effect of cyanide concentration on the cyanidation rate was determined by measuring the gold dissolution rate at 0.5 mM TlNO The Arrhenius plot for the gold cyanidation with persulfate and thallium (I) is shown in The effect of the stirring speed on the dissolution rate is plotted in A mechanism and kinetic equation for gold cyanidation in the presence of thallium (I) has been previously reported by Chimenos et al. Considering the following anodic and cathodic reactions: The concentrations at the interface in a diffusion-controlled reaction become nil and, as a consequence, As the experiments have been performed under oxygen at atmospheric pressure, and oxygen is an active oxidant also in this case, When gold cyanidation is performed with thallium (I) in the absence of persulfate, a limiting value of 12 has been found for the [CN The correlation between Potassium persulfate can be used to improve gold cyanidation rates at pH between 10 and 11. The dissolution rates are nearly eight times higher than those obtained by conventional cyanidation. However, at pH higher than 11, cyanidation rates dramatically decrease. This can be avoided by adding a small amount of a thallium (I) salt, which acts as a catalyst. Thus, when gold cyanidation is performed in the simultaneous presence of persulfate and thallium (I), the higher dissolution rates can be maintained until a pH value of 13. Gold cyanidation with persulfate in the presence of thallium (I) is a diffusion-controlled process, with an activation energy of 19.2 kJ mol Gold cyanidation rate depends only on cyanide concentration at low cyanide concentrations and both on persulfate and oxygen concentrations at high cyanide concentrations. If the cyanidation is performed at atmospheric pressure, the gold dissolution rate mainly depends on the persulfate concentration in the range 2–10 mM and then reaches a limiting value. At high persulfate concentrations, Tl (I) can be oxidized to Tl