Surface roughness (SR) is a measure of the technological quality of a product and a factor that greatly influences manufacturing costs. The current study presents an experimental study on the SR of granitic rocks sawn by the diamond sawblades. Effects of the operating variables on the SR are determined and the SR is correlated with the rock properties. Morphologies of the wearing surfaces of rocks and the roughness profiles of the measurements are also investigated. Moreover, models are developed depending on both the operating variables and the rock properties for the estimation of the SR. Results show that the SR increases with the increase of the peripheral speed, the traverse speed, and the cutting depth, while it decreases with the increase of the flow rate of cooling fluid. The peripheral speed and the traverse speed are determined as the significant operating variables affecting the SR. Additionally, rather than the mechanical properties of the rock, the mineralogical properties are determined as mainly responsible for the SR. Among the mineralogical properties, mean grain size of rock is ranked first in governing the SR. The chipping craters, scratching grooves and fractures on the rock surface are determined as the characteristics of the diamond sawblade cutting. Furthermore, the modeling results reveal that the developed models have high potential for the estimation of the SR.The use of granite as a construction and decorative material is continuously increasing worldwide due to its high resistance to the environmental effects and attractive aesthetic properties. As a result of growing demand, processing of granites by circular diamond sawblades has found a wide application in the stone industry The SR is a measure of the technological quality of a product and a factor that greatly influences manufacturing costs. It describes the geometry and surface textures of the machined parts Nine granitic rocks having different percentages of minerals, different grain size distributions and substantial market potential were selected from a stone processing plant, which were then dimensioned according to the requirements of experimental studies (a length of 30 Some physico-mechanical properties of the selected rocks are presented in In the specific weight and porosity tests, suggested method by ISRM The test samples were firstly submitted to vacuum (about 0.7 Puntid Plus model ultrasonic testing equipment was used for measuring ultrasonic velocity. Piezoelectric transducers of natural resonance frequency of 150 The ISRM The microhardnesses of samples were measured by a Vickers Microhardness meter. In the microhardness measurements, it was observed that it was difficult to identify indention diagonal of various hard brittle minerals due to the fractures around the indentation. Thus, a load of 100 For CAI testing, a pointed steel pin having 610±5 Vickers hardness, 200 In order to perform the tests, samples having a diameter of 54 Petrographic studies conducted in the study include the determination of composition and grain size of the minerals. For this purpose, thin sections for each rock were prepared and examined under the polarizing microscope. Polished hand specimens were also examined for the grain size characterization of the coarse-grained rock samples. Petrographic descriptions, mineralogical compositions and grain size ranges of the tested rocks are given in Sawing tests were performed on an experimental cutting machine with a high precision. The machine consists of three major sub-systems: a cutting unit, instrumentation and a personal computer (PC). The diamond sawblade used in the tests was of 40 In order to determine the levels of the operating variables, some preliminary cutting test were conducted considering instructions of sawblade manufacturers and the relevant studies in the literature. The operating variables were selected as in There are several ways to describe the SR, such as the roughness average (Ra), the root-mean-square roughness (Rq) and the maximum peak-to-valley roughness (Rmax), etc. The Ra is defined as the arithmetic value of the profile from centreline along the sampling length The effect of the operating variables on the SR was firstly determined and contribution of each operating variables on the surface roughness was then calculated. Regression analysis was performed for the experimental data derived from 19th test in order to determine the important physico-mechanical and mineralogical properties influencing the SR. In other words, a constant specific removal rate (SRR) of 120 In the statistical analysis, the variables are denoted by following: SR the surface roughness, The experimental results are presented in The increase of the peripheral speed results in a decrease in quantity of the rocks sawn by each segment in unit time. On the other hand, this increase causes the decreasing of the depth of cut for single diamond grain on the segment as the other sawing conditions are the same. Therefore, the SR should be decreased, but the results in the paper show the increasing trends. A possible reason for this unexpected trend is that the amount of chips produced in a unit time may dramatically increase with the increase of the peripheral speed. The chips may not be efficiently removed from the cutting area and this may lead to get higher cutting force increasing the SR. It is recommended that the flow rate of the cooling fluid must be above the critical values for achieving the effective cutting in terms of the SR. As also well documented in the relevant literature, the cutting force increases with the increase of the traverse speed, the cutting depth and the SRR. The presence of chipping craters, scratching grooves and fractures on the minerals may increase with the increase of the cutting force and this may cause to obtain higher SR values. Contribution rate (CR) is used to determine the significant process factors in percentage. It is a tool to see which process factor has a significant effect on the process. Higher CRs indicate that there is a considerable change on the performance characteristic due to the variation of the related operating variables. The CR of each operating variables on the SR was presented in Regression analysis was carried out to determine the relations between the SR and some physico-mechanical properties of rock such as uniaxial compressive strength, specific weight, bending strength, water absorption by volume, porosity, Schmidt hammer hardness, ultrasonic velocity, Cerchar abrasion index, microhardness, Shore hardness and Mohs’ hardness (see Representative roughness profiles for both fine-grained and coarse-grained rocks are presented in Representative SEM pictures were presented in A computing package program (SPSS) was used for the statistical analysis. Multiple linear regression analysis (MLRA) was carried out to estimate the SR. A number of statistical parameters or terms are associated with the MLRA. Some of the most important include the coefficient of multiple determination, the coefficient of correlation, the confidence level, standard error, model error, the significance level, the t-distribution, the F-distribution and the residuals. Detailed explanation of these parameters or terms can be found in the related sources In the statistical analyses concerning the operating variables and the SR, the predictive models for SR of each rock were developed (see In the statistical analyses where physico-mechanical and mineralogical properties were evaluated together (Eq. Although the developed models (10-12) have the highest correlation coefficient, these equations including many independent variables may not be useful due to their complexity and impracticality. Therefore, the MLRA was reapplied to develop simple and practical equations (see Verification of the models was undertaken considering the following criteria: the behavior of R A regression analysis is not completed by fitting a model on the basis of coefficients of determination, by providing confidence intervals or by testing. A better test is to make a more direct comparison of the model and the real data in the form of residuals The models (Eqs. An attempt was made to investigate the SR of the rocks sawn by diamond sawblades in the current study. The results revealed that the SR increased with the increase of the peripheral speed, the traverse speed and the cutting depth while it decreased with the increase of the flow rate of the cooling fluid. A critical level for the flow rate of the cooling fluids in terms of the SR was determined. Therefore, it is recommended that the flow rate of cooling fluid must be above the critical values for achieving the effective cutting in terms of the SR. Additionally, in the study, the peripheral speed and the traverse speed were determined as the significant operating variables, while the rock grain size was determined as the main rock properties governing the SR. Moreover, the chipping craters, scratching grooves and fractures on the rock surface were determined as the main characteristics of the diamond sawblade cutting. The modeling results also revealed that the developed models have high potential for the estimation of the SR. The authors would like to thank to