The thermal decomposition of three synthetic copper sulfides (chalcocite (Cu2S), chalcopyrite (CuFeS2), and enargite (Cu3AsS4)) and two commercial copper concentrates has been studied on a thermobalance (T
                     =1173–1773K) and an imaging furnace (T
                     ≈1914K) in inert atmospheres. It is demonstrated that the absence of oxygen, in combination with high decomposition temperatures furthers the removal of heavy metal impurities by volatilization. Elemental analyses on residues of treated concentrates showed that removal of volatile impurities occurs in three distinct temperature ranges: Already below temperatures of 1173K arsenic and bismuth are removed. Evaporation of cadmium and tin requires temperatures below 1673K, while substantial evaporation of Pb and Zn only occurs at temperatures between 1673 and 1773K. At 1773K the removal of these elements exceeds 95%. Thermal treatment at even higher temperatures in an imaging furnace and repeated grinding of the sample resulted in a removal of between 90% and 99% of the initial amounts of arsenic, zinc, and lead within 90s. The strong effect of grinding indicates that the elimination of volatile elements is hindered by the mass transfer from the interior of the melt to the gas phase. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that even though a slag-like phase is produced, heavy metal impurities are efficiently removed by thermal decomposition at high-temperatures.Copper concentrates contain the main elements copper, sulfur and, iron in addition to substantial amounts of impurities such as arsenic, antimony, bismuth, lead and zinc. Removal of these impurities is an essential task of the extraction process in order to obtain high purity copper. In the future, the ability to efficiently remove impurities will become even more important since copper ores show a decreasing ore grade and thus an increase in impurities. In conventional flash smelting, heavy metal impurities end up either in the slag phase or eventually in blister copper ( Recently, a novel concept was proposed for a clean process to extract copper from copper concentrates in the absence of oxygen ( This article presents results of the thermal decomposition studies on two real copper concentrates under inert atmospheres. Synthetic chalcocite (Cu Thermogravimetric (TG) analyses applying slow heating rates as to minimize the influence of kinetic limitations combined with chemical equilibrium calculations and XRD analysis of the solid residues are applied to establish the decomposition sequence of the copper concentrates. TG experiments combined with an online analysis of the evaporated material by inductively coupled plasma spectrometry (ICP) analyses allow to gain further insight into the conditions which allow for an efficient removal of impurities by volatilization. To quantify the extent of removal of volatile impurities at even high-temperatures and to obtain insight into the rates of volatilization of the individual elements, high-temperature (     Thermal decomposition studies at a temperature range of 1173 High-temperature decomposition experiments ( Samples of pressed concentrate were placed onto the sample support and treated for different periods of time. Two series of experiments were performed on both concentrates. In series 1 samples were exposed to concentrated irradiation once for different times (1–14 times 45 Quantitative XRF analyses were carried out for the elements As, Cd, Pb, Sb and Zn in a standard procedure with an ARL 8410 wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (Thermo ARL, Ecublens/Switzerland) equipped with a Rh X-ray tube. A fully automatized fluxer, Claisse Fluxy 10/M4 (HRT Labortechnik, Engstingen/Germany), was used to cast the glass disks. The fusion program for sulfides was developed by  Not only does the morphology of the concentrates change during the treatment but new minerals are also formed. In Treated samples of C2 exhibit an identical mineral content as their counterparts of concentrate 1. Again, bornite and the stannite-like phase are present between 1273 and 1773 Further insight into the decomposition reactions of the concentrates can be gained from the weight loss (TG) and the rate of weight loss (DTG) curves presented in To assign the various DTG peaks observed in The decomposition of chalcopyrite is more complex and no well resolved steps in the TG curve are found. The decomposition starts after 20 Chalcocite and chalcopyrite obviously exhibit very different decomposition rates as seen from In The interpretation of the TG/ICP data of enargite is supported by thermodynamic equilibrium calculations for 1 Our phase analysis confirms that the solid product of enargite decomposition consists of chalcocite (Cu Based on the interpretation of the TG/DTG curves of the model substances chalcocite, chalcopyrite and enargite the TG/DTG curves of the concentrates reported in Now the effect of the thermal treatment up to 1773  Finally the results of high-temperature treatment in the imaging furnace are presented. The temporal evolution of the remaining concentrations of arsenic, lead, and zinc in concentrates C1 and C2, respectively, is shown in To explain the difference in the efficiency of the removal of zinc and lead from the two concentrates treated under thermodynamic equilibrium conditions two different mechanisms can be imagined. Firstly, the diffusion of zinc and lead from the interior of the melt into the gas phase could be hindered. The higher temperature experiments show that repetitive grinding of the treated concentrates followed by a new thermal treatment leads to a significantly lower concentration of the volatile impurities in the final product. This suggests that mass transport limitations still play a role even at these temperatures. However, the initial contents of lead and zinc in the two concentrates are too similar to explain the differing degrees of depletion due to different concentration gradients. Currently a second mechanism is favored that considers the difference in the chemical properties of the two concentrates. C2 looses nearly two times more weight (i.e. sulfur, see The study of direct decomposition of metal sulfides was initiated by thermal analyses in an inert atmosphere and at maximum temperatures of 1773 Thermal treatment of copper concentrates showed that their decomposition proceeds in a stepwise manner involving several decomposition reactions and the loss of volatile elements. Final products of the decomposition series as found in the cooled residues are bornite, troilite, elemental copper and a small amount of a stannite-like phase [Cu We would like to thank Mr. R. Seal II from the US Geological Survey at Reston (VA) for kindly providing single-phase enargite. The copper concentrates were made available by Outokumpu Oy in Finland. We also would like to thank A. Schuler for elemental analyses, A. Jenny and A. Frei for experimental support, Y. Brunner for assisting with imaging furnace experiments and in the preparation of XRF samples, and H.R. Tschudi for helping with the temperature measurements. Financial support from the Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SFOE) and the Gebert Rüf Foundation as GRS-058/00 is gratefully acknowledged.