We report here the development of ultrafine grained TiB2–TiSi2 composites, adopting multi stage Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) route. As opposed to the commonly used Single Stage SPS (SSS), the samples are held for a desired timescale at intermediate temperatures, before reaching the final sintering temperatures (1400°C, 1450°C and 1500°C). In our innovative sintering schedule, the powder compacts are held for a comparatively lesser period at intermediate stages, in order to maintain a net holding time of 10min altogether at different holding stages during Two Stage Sintering (TSS) and Multi Stage SPS (MSS). TSS and MSS allowed the achievement of relatively higher sinter densities with respect to SSS, when the final sintering temperature remains same. The development of finer microstructural scale, with the presence of tabular TiB2 grains (1–1.5μm) and TiSi2 grains (200–300nm) is exhibited by the ceramics sintered via TSS/MSS, with respect to those developed via SSS. MSS resulted in sintering reactions between the TiB2 and TiSi2 components, leading to the formation of reaction layer of Ti5Si3 of 50–100nm thickness. However, such sintering reactions were relatively suppressed in the case of SSS. Finer scale microstructure allowed much higher hardness (∼27–31GPa) to be achieved on sintering via MSS. Also, more uniform microstructural development in the case of MSS led to an improvement in three-point flexural strength (∼500MPa), compared to composites developed via conventional hot pressing or SSS route using SPS.TiB It is known that one can achieve better mechanical properties by restricting the grain growth during sintering. This can be achieved by employing rapid rate of heating and lowering the holding time at the sintering temperature Venkateswaran et al. In all the above mentioned studies, Single Stage SPS (SSS) has been used, i.e. the powder compact is heated directly to the sintering temperature. With regard to the SPS technique, few authors have raised concern over the possibility of non-homogenous densification, and therefore non-uniformity in material properties due to the extremely high rate of heating In order to prepare TiB Using standard metallographic techniques, the surfaces of the sintered samples were ground and polished. The relative densities of the resulting samples were measured according to the Archimedes’ method. The phase assemblage was characterized using CuKα radiation on the X-ray diffraction unit (Rich-seifert, Germany, 200D), operated at 30 The sinter densities, as % The densification behaviours during the different SPS processing sequences are also assessed by monitoring time-dependent changes in the densification parameter (  One interesting observation is a sudden dip in densification parameter for MSS, as indicated by arrow in X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns recorded with the TiB Back scattered SEM (BSE-SEM) images of polished and chemically etched TiB TEM observations allowed to obtain a clearer and more definitive picture of the phase assemblage in the SPS processed TiB The presence of the additional Ti The thermodynamic calculations revealed an overall negative free energy change (Δ  Correlating the processing sequences and the concomitant phase/microstructure developments with the mechanical properties of the SPS processed TiB The present work explores the effects of spark plasma sintering via the innovative TSS and MSS schemes, as against the commonly used Single Stage Sintering (SSS) scheme, on the phase/microstructural development and concomitantly on the mechanical properties of TiB SPS processing via TSS and MSS schedules led to faster densification and achievement of relatively higher sinter densities as compared to SSS schedule for the same final sintering temperatures (1400–1500 Much finer scale and more uniform microstructural development were observed after SPS processing via the TSS and MSS schedules. Furthermore, in case of TSS and MSS sintering reactions occurred, leading to the formation of nanosized Ti The composites developed following TSS/MSS scheme possessed good combination of superior hardness (∼27–31 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of