Distal humeral hemiarthroplasty (DHH), although first described in 1947, has attracted increasing interest over the last few years as a surgical option for a number of distal humeral disorders. As a result of the improved understanding of the anatomy and biomechanics of the elbow and the availability of anatomical prostheses, it has been recognized that DHH may provide advantages over current treatments for complex fractures of the distal humerus or pathology that destroys large segments of the distal humeral articular joint surface. Early series reported the use of a small number of implants The choice to perform DHH is based on the general advantages of the procedure over ORIF and TEA, as well as patient-specific lifestyle factors and functional status. DHH eliminates the risk of nonunion, malunion, loss of fixation, and stiffness associated with ORIF, as well as the polyethylene wear associated with TEA. In addition, DHH is not subject to the lifetime 3- to 5-kg weight-bearing restriction and has a lower incidence of component loosening compared to TEA, making it a more suitable choice in younger, higher demand patients. The indications for DHH are currently evolving according to what is appropriate and achievable and will continue to evolve as longitudinal studies provide more clinical data. Trauma and its sequelae, often in a middle-aged or elderly female, are the most common causes of an unreconstructable distal humeral articular surface. Occasionally a young patient may sustain this type of injury from high-energy trauma. In addition, DHH is an alternative treatment after distal humeral fracture in those elderly patients with demands deemed excessive for traditional elbow replacement. The interaction of these variables, in the selection process for the appropriate treatment, are summarized in the treatment algorithm ( Current indications for DHH include: Acute trauma Comminuted intraarticular fractures in which ORIF will not result in sufficient stability to allow early range of motion Unreconstructable combined capitellar and lateral trochlear fractures with or without medial trochlear involvement Coronal shear fractures of the capitellum and lateral trochlea combined with low transverse bicondylar extension Salvage of failed internal fixation Chronic malunion or nonunion Avascular necrosis of the trochlea with collapse of the subchondral bone Tumors of the trochlea when resection allows preservation of the epicondyles and collateral ligaments Absolute contraindications include overt local or distant foci of infection, inadequate neurovascular status, insufficient bony support, poor soft tissue coverage, and unstable fracture of the radial head and/or coronoid. Additionally, a nonanatomic sigmoid fossa due to developmental humeral insufficiency (e.g., fishtail deformity) results in poor congruency with a DHH, and TEA may be a more suitable procedure. Relative contraindications include articular cartilage damage of the radial head and sigmoid fossa due to chronic fracture arthrofibrosis or inflammatory arthropathy. Advances in the understanding of elbow anatomy and biomechanics Chondral wear is a characteristic of all joint hemiarthroplasties. Biomechanical studies of the Tornier DHH Nonsurgical treatment (cast immobilization or “bag of bones”) of displaced intraarticular distal humeral fractures may be considered for low-demand patients with significant medical comorbidities; however, this approach often yields limited function and variable pain relief. This approach has no place in young, healthy patients. The goals of surgical reconstruction include rigid anatomical restoration of the joint surface that will allow early range of motion. ORIF remains the gold standard of treatment. Series reporting ORIF of comminuted intraarticular fractures indicate a substantial rate of unsatisfactory outcomes and a high complication rate, indicative of the difficulty of achieving these goals in complex cases. TEA has gained acceptance as a primary treatment for comminuted intraarticular distal humerus fractures in low-demand elderly patients with osteoporotic bone. Its application to young active patients or high-demand older patients is associated with the risk of early prosthesis failure. The longest follow-up of a custom hemiarthroplasty is 20 years, with good pain relief and functional movement. Smith and Hughes  Elbow stability can be maintained by intact or repairable condyles, coronoid process, and radial head Prosthesis stability can be provided by intact or repairable condyles and columns Intact or reparable medical collateral ligament (MCL) and lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) Preoperative imaging should include a good anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiograph. A computed tomography (CT) scan should also be considered to help clarify whether a fracture is reconstructable. If reconstruction is not achievable an x-ray of the contralateral elbow will help with accurate templating ( The procedure should be undertaken within 7 to 10 days of injury. As such, it may be more appropriate that the patient is transferred to a unit that has particular elbow or arthroplasty and fracture expertise. On rare occasions, soft tissue constraints require temporary stabilization with an external fixator with delayed DHH ( The patient is positioned in the lateral decubitus position and the arm secured on an arm support. A high tourniquet is applied. This allows free use of the image intensifier intraoperatively and adequate clearance for the elbow to be flexed to 120 degrees to facilitate insertion of the component. We employ 1 g of cefazolin in 50 mL sterile saline prophylactically. Vancomycin is not appropriate for this technique. Deep flaps are developed via a posterior incision, and the ulnar nerve is released but not necessarily transposed, depending on fracture involvement of the columns. The preferred surgical approach utilizes a chevron osteotomy of the olecranon. This allows adequate exposure for either ORIF or DHH and preserves the collateral ligaments, which permit early mobilization. The “triceps on” approaches provide inadequate exposure and make it difficult to balance the joint and may produce an increased risk of instability. The triceps is reflected and the articular segment wrapped in saline-soaked gauze to protect the articular cartilage. If a DHH is to be undertaken, and the humerus broached, any supracondylar fracture fragments must be stabilized. In such cases, a trial component or broach is left in situ to preserve the intramedullary canal for the prosthesis. If the columns require reconstruction, this must be undertaken anatomically with respect to the collateral ligament insertion and joint axis. However, with each additional column reconstruction, the complexity of the procedure increases significantly. As with comminuted supracondylar humeral fractures, minimal shortening may facilitate fixation stability. Frequently free-hand bone cuts are required to allow appropriate placement of the prosthesis. The depth and correct rotation of insertion of the implant are determined by aligning the axis of the component with the origins of the MCL (anterior-inferior border of the medial epicondyle) and LCL (center of the lateral epicondyle) humeral insertion points. The varus-valgus alignment is determined by placing the prosthetic stem centered in the humeral canal with the above alignments correct. Thus correct depth, rotation, valgus-varus, and rotation orientation can be accurately restored. Sizing of the component estimated by the preoperative templating is confirmed by placing the spool on the anterior sigmoid fossa and radial head and confirming that the center of the radial head matches the center of the capitellum and that the trochlear aligns with the coronoid ( Cementing of the component should be performed with a cement restrictor and antibiotic-impregnated cement. The olecranon osteotomy is fixed with either a strong tension band wire construct or an olecranon plate, which is buried beneath the soft tissues. The medial and lateral aspects of the osteotomy are always bone grafted with cancellous bone from the distal humeral fragments. The fixation and tracking of the arthroplasty are then assessed grossly and radiographically. A full range of motion should be present. Finally, the ulnar nerve must be inspected to confirm that it is not under undue tension and is transposed as appropriate. DHH can be used to salvage malunion ( Rehabilitation is similar to an olecranon fracture fixation. A protocol of elevation, compression, ice, and passive movement from 20 to 100 degrees, utilizing a self-guided program of flexion/extension stretches or a continuous passive motion (CPM) machine is initiated. Nighttime extension static splinting is utilized if there is a tendency for the patient to develop a flexion contracture. At 4 to 6 weeks, when union of the osteotomy is progressing, active exercises can commence. Long-term restrictions are empirical. Patients are advised to moderate the heavy or repetitive loads on the elbow and to avoid impact tools/activities. While there are no data regarding these recommendations, length of time after surgery is associated with increased chondral wear. Functional status of the elbow as well as general quality of life should be assessed using a validated inventory at follow-up. Function and range of motion are included in the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons shoulder scale, and studies demonstrate that 95% of activities of daily living can be achieved with an arc of 30–130 degrees (see Radiological outcome measurement should include alignment, loosening, bone graft appearance, ulnar wear, radial wear, spur formation, chondral wear, and radiolucent lines. Of these features, ulnar wear is the most significant; greater wear is associated with higher pain scores and lower satisfaction and VAS outcome scores. Common complications reported in the literature include hardware irritation, ulnar neuropathy, and laxity. Less common complications include fracture, pain, stiffness, infection, heterotopic ossification, osteoarthritis, loosening, weakness, posterolateral rotatory instability, and wound breakdown. Most repeat operations are to remove ORIF implants because of ulnar neuritis and posttraumatic stiffness. Posttraumatic stiffness and heterotopic ossification, as with any fracture dislocation of the elbow, occurs when treated with a DHH. These can be salvaged with a delayed release 6 months after the DHH. A small number of patients have developed a medial trochlear spur that appears to be due to the edge loading of the anatomical spool on the sigmoid fossa, as demonstrated in contact studies. Treatment of complex distal humeral fractures with loss of the articular columns requires a spectrum of surgical options. Although developments in ORIF and TEA have progressed, there are clinical situations requiring DHH. These include extensive joint comminution or whole articular surface involvement, where ORIF cannot provide good reliable outcomes, or in patients who have physical demands that exceed a TEA. However, the technique is demanding and requires the skills gained from fixation of distal humeral fractures and TEA. Initial experience suggests that better outcomes are achieved with acute fractures than with a delayed reconstruction.