Muscovite mica is an industrial mineral used in many different applications including coatings, construction materials and polymers. This mineral is commonly beneficiated using froth flotation, especially when treating finer particle sizes. A common flotation scheme employs a cationic amine collector for mica, at alkaline pH, with a depressant added to depress some of the common gangue minerals in muscovite deposits such as quartz and feldspars. This work examines the effects of Custamine 8113 (collector) and Norlig-H (depressant) on the flotation of a muscovite ore from a mineralogical perspective using QEMSCAN. In addition to traditional grade-recovery curves for the various mineral components of the ore, the QEMSCAN data are used to look at: size-by-size flotation recoveries, particle size differences between flotation concentrates and tailings, and mineral liberation and association. The lab-scale flotation results are then compared to idealized size-by-size grade-recovery curves calculated from the measured QEMSCAN data.Muscovite mica is an industrial mineral used for many different applications such as coatings, construction materials and polymers. A common beneficiation route for relatively fine-grained muscovite deposits is through froth flotation. One flotation method is to employ cationic amine-based collectors to target the muscovite surface at alkaline pH with the addition of depressants to depress gangue silicates such as quartz and feldspars. The use of advanced mineralogical characterisation has increasingly been used to investigate mineral beneficiation processes including gravity separation ( The output from automated mineralogical techniques typically consists of pixel-by-pixel compositional (both mineralogical and chemical) data. These data are commonly used to produce mineralogical and chemical assays for a given sample as well as determine particle sizes and grain sizes of different minerals. However, this information may be additionally processed to sort particles based on mineral associations (which minerals are found within the same particle) and liberation parameters (defined as the amount of a particle's surface identified as the mineral of interest). The liberation attribute may also be considered as the percentage of the exposed particle surface that is the mineral of interest, and therefore, it may be assumed to be available for surface based separation techniques such as flotation. Finally, the shape factors of individual particles may be calculated as well although work by This work analyses the products of flotation experiments carried out on a muscovite ore containing quartz and feldspar as the major gangue minerals. The products (concentrates and tailings) of different flotation tests were analysed with QEMSCAN (quantitative evaluation of materials by scanning electron microscopy) to determine particle and mineral grain sizes, mineral deportment, mineral associations and degrees of surface exposure. This information is then used, along with previously reported surface chemistry investigations, to develop an improved understanding of the interaction of the studied flotation reagents with the major minerals present in the ore. Lab-scale flotation tests were conducted on a muscovite ore (9.1 Samples analysed with QEMSCAN included the feed, concentrates and tailings from each different flotation condition. All samples were wet screened at 38 The QEMSCAN analysis was carried out at the Advanced Mineralogy Facility at SGS Canada (Lakefield, Canada) using an EVO 430 automated scanning electron microscope instrument equipped with light-element energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers. The resulting data was processed using iDiscover software. The QEMSCAN method used was the Particle Mineral Analysis method in which a two-dimensional mapping analysis is conducted to resolve the liberation characteristics of a set of particles. In this analysis particle mapping was done at a pixel size of 3 In order to positively identify minerals from QEMSCAN measurements and then assign correct chemical compositions to these minerals, a reference mineral list must first be established for the mineral system in question. In this work this mineral list was determined via X-ray diffraction measurements (to define the major minerals), and electron probe micro analysis. The resultant assays calculated from the QEMSCAN data were validated against chemical compositions determined from XRF. The grade and recovery results from the different flotation conditions investigated are illustrated in The particle size (d Mineral particles reporting to the concentrate and containing feldspar and quartz were classified according to their liberation and association into four distinct categories shown visually in The situation when the particles are mixtures of different minerals is a great deal more complicated. Nevertheless it might be expected that particles which are binary mixtures of gangue mineral with muscovite (“binary muscovite”) would be collected into the froth zone as surface chemistry and single mineral flotation results have shown that muscovite has limited interaction with Norlig-H ( In order to assess the possible effect of mineral texture on the flotation of binary particles, the respective particle images for the size fractions of interest (concentrates and tailings) were examined for any textural differences. While there are no significant textural differences observed in this system, the grouping of binary mineral particles into a single subset likely masks the effect of varying degrees of surface exposure of the value mineral (i.e. muscovite) as discussed below. As flotation is a surface-based separation technique, it is important to also class particles based on differences in particle surfaces (i.e. the minerals found at the surface). This is often done by classing minerals based on the percentage of the particle surface that is the mineral of interest (here referred to as mineral surface exposure). This type of classification is illustrated visually in The absolute recovery of muscovite particles sorted by mineral surface exposure and particle size is shown in Building on the sorting of particles based on mineral surface exposure discussed in the previous section it is possible to calculate an idealized grade-recovery curve from QEMSCAN data. The implicit assumption inherent in this calculation is that the first particles recovered in flotation will be the particles with the highest degree of muscovite surface exposure, followed by the next highest degree of muscovite exposure and accumulating in this manner until all particles containing muscovite have been recovered. The grade-recovery results for muscovite that were presented in This work examined the products of muscovite ore flotation experiments from a mineralogical perspective using the output of automated mineralogical analysis (QEMSCAN) to consider flotation recoveries based on mineral associations and the minerals present at particle surfaces. The conclusions are as follows: The flotation of the muscovite ore with the examined flotation reagents is very close to the optimum calculated grade-recovery curve for the coarsest size fraction The addition of the depressant appears to have the most significant impact on rejecting coarse, well-liberated gangue particles The flotation recovery of coarse binary particles of muscovite and feldspar is significantly lower than expected. However, a visual examination of these particles showed no textural difference relative to binary particles of muscovite and quartz The recovery of fine (< The authors would like to acknowledge funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (