Size and shape controlled, in particular, scaling-down synthesis of uniform metal organic frameworks (MOFs) is a challenge. Importantly, MOFs derivatives have received great interest in energy fields owing to their highly porous structure and large surface areas. Here, we demonstrate the controllable large-scale synthesis of highly uniform cuboid-shape MOFs using an eco-friendly method at room temperature. The cuboid-shape ZIF-L is first synthesized until now. We have also explored its derivatives, which are applied in the fields of lithium-ion batteries. As a result, ZnCo2O4 cuboids demonstrate high discharge capacity of 995mAhg−1 at 100mAg−1 for the second cycle, high rate capacity of 482mAhg−1 at 3Ag−1, and long-term cyclic stability up to 250 cycles at 500mAg−1. The porous ZnO cuboids exhibit good photocatalytic activity by degrading dyes (MB, RhB, and MO). The results demonstrate that ZIF-L cuboids and their derivatives have a good application prospect.Owing to the ever-increasing concerns about global pollution and energy crisis, many green and promising technologies, such as photocatalysis, catalysis, adsorption, supercapacitor, battery and so on, have been rapidly exploited and developed In recent years, many efforts have been devoted to the size- and shape-controlled synthesis of nano- and micro-scaled MOFs, which probably introduce new functionalities and widen the choices of templates Zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)-L, a unique MOF with 2D layered structure, exhibits extremely desirable properties. It can be synthesized in deionized water at room temperature, and such synthetic method is considered to be eco-friendly, low cost, and high-yield Recently, we report a facile liquid-phase deposition method to prepare porous metal oxides nanosheets coated 3D substrates by the use of ZIF-L, which demonstrate excellent electrochemical properties for lithium batteries application 2-methylimidazole (Hmim, C In a typical procedure, 1.3 The as-obtained ZIF-L300 cuboids were placed in a muffle furnace and then heated to 450 100 100 For lithium ion battery: The electrochemical properties were carried out via stainless-steel coin cells (CR 2016). A solution of 1 For photocatalytic degradation: A certain amount of porous ZnO cuboids were dispersed into 15 The crystallographic phases of the samples were performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max 2500) and FT-IR spectrometer (Nicolet 6700). The morphologies and sizes were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova NanoSEM230). Transmission electron microscope (TEM) images, and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) image were recorded by using JEOL JEM-2100F transmission electron microscope. Uniform cuboid-shape ZIF-Ls were produced in deionized water at room temperature using 2-methylimidazole, Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and Zinc nitrate hexahydrate as raw materials. PVP as surfactant was used to regulate the size and shape of cuboid-shape ZIF-L in this study. The morphology of the samples in the presence of 300 PVP plays an important role in the synthetic process of cuboid-shape ZIF-Ls. In order to investigate the effect of the concentration of PVP on the morphological evolution, different amounts of PVP from 0 to 1000 In order to further understanding the growth mechanism of cuboid-shape ZIF-Ls, time-control experiments are also conducted. The SEM images of ZIF-L300 crystals synthesized at 10 MOF-derived materials have attracted a wide attention for various applications due to their highly porosity Electrochemical behaviors of porous ZnCo  The corresponding cycling performance at 100 In order to further explore the reasons for good electrochemical performances, the morphology of porous ZnCo As another proof-of-concept application, the photocatalytic properties of porous ZnO cuboids were tested by degrading Methyleneblue (MB), Rhodamine B (RhB), and Methylorange (MO) under UV-light, as shown in In summary, we have firstly demonstrated a controllable large-scale synthesis of highly uniform ZIF-L cuboids by adjusting the amount of PVP. We have also explored their derivatives through different chemical route. As a result, the highly porous metal oxides (e.g. ZnO, ZnCo This work was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 