Low rank/oxidized coals are difficult to float with oily collectors. The presence of polar hydroxyl, carbonyl, phenol groups and some peroxide type oxygenated moieties on the surface of low rank/oxidized coals is the main factor which decreases the coal hydrophobicity. Pretreatments may be used to enhance the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals due to improved hydrophobicity. The primary methods of pretreatments are grinding, premixing/preconditioning, ultrasound, thermal, microwave and direct contact mixing of the reagents with dry coal before wetting. Among these pretreatment methods, grinding, premixing/preconditioning may be considered to remove the oxide layer on the oxidized coal surface, which is also reflected by ultrasound treatment. Thermal and microwave treatments are attributed to the removal of pore water, hydration water and some hydroxy functional groups in low rank/oxidized coals. Direct contact procedure makes the oxidized coal avoid the prevention for the collectors absorbing on the coal surface. The prevention usually comes from hydration shell on wet coal surface while the coal is wetted by water. This review is to highlight the effect of different pretreatment methods on the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals.Flotation of fine low rank/oxidized coals is difficult to achieve a high yield or combustible matter recovery with normal oily collectors, such as kerosene, diesel oil and fuel oil At the same time, low rank coal has a lower hydrophobicity due to its lower degree of coalification. There are many oxygen functional groups on the low rank coal surface. The lignite is difficult to float with common collectors due to these large amounts of oxygen functional groups on its surface Both ionic and non-ionic surfactants can change the surface characteristics of low rank/oxidized coals. The low rank/oxidized coals can be well floated by new collectors or surfactants. Blending of hydrocarbons and non-hydrocarbon collectors, such as copolymers, long chain amines and fatty acid amides, can improve the floatability of low rank/oxidized coals This review is to highlight the effect of different pretreatment methods like grinding, premixing/preconditioning and ultrasound, thermal and microwave and direct contact mixing of the reagents with dry coal before wetting, on the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals. Grinding has been widely applied in the liberation of minerals. Coal can be easily liberated from minerals by a suitable grinding process Atesok and Celik The flotation of oxidized coal can be also well-improved while the oxidized coal is dry-ground with dodecane Pigkin and Akgun Sokolovic et al. Sivamohan and Cases Ultrasonic treatment has been successfully used to improve and enhance the distribution and activity of flotation regents in the pulp, which advances the flotation process Among these preconditioning pretreatments, oil agglomeration has also been used in the beneficiation of low rank/oxidized coals The floatability of coal will be improved if the coal is pretreated by the controlled thermal treatment Where the groups of ( As shown in HI has also been used to indicate the floatability of oxidized Indian high ash sub-bituminous coal Microwave treatment has been applied in the fields of crushing and grinding pretreatments. The grinding resistance of coal could be reduced by microwave pretreatment but without significantly changing the fundamental properties of the coal The hydrophobicity of oxidized coal becomes low due to coal oxidation. Sometimes, the moisture content of oxidized is much higher than that of fresh coal. The microwave pretreatment may improve the floatability of oxidized coal. Xia et al. Ahmed and Drzymala Xia et al. Flotation of low rank/oxidized coals depends on the hydrophobic degree of their surfaces. Grinding pretreatment can reduce the particle size of oxidized coal and produce some fresh unoxidized and hydrophobic surfaces on the surface of oxidized coal particles. On other hand, grinding pretreatment increases the hydrophobicity of oxidized coal surface, which improves the floatability and flotation performance of oxidized coal. Grinding the low rank/oxidized coals with some collectors can promote the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals. Premixing the coal slurry with high intensity conditioning (HIC) and preconditioning the coal slurry with ultrasound treatments are also attributed to the increase in hydrophobicity of oxidized coal surface. Ultrasound treatments create the physical cleaning on the coal surface. Ultrasound and premixing were found to have a great effect on removing the thin clay layer and oxidized layer from the oxidized coal surface. These processes of premixing and preconditioning treatments may be the same to the grinding pretreatment with obeying some same principles like producing some fresh surfaces. Thermal and microwave treatments may be attributed to the removal of water in the low rank/oxidized coals. A short time of microwave treatment can remove water from the coal structure selectively and quickly but without making the coal surface oxidize. Microwave heating may be the potential technology for improve the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals, which might be widely used in industrial flotation of low rank/oxidized coals in the future. The direct contact mixing of the reagents with dry coal before wetting makes the collectors adsorb on the oxidized coal surface directly without the prevention of hydration shell. The hydration shell is produced while the coal is wetted by water. The process of applying the surfactants contacted with dry oxidized coal firstly then contacted with collectors has the most positive effect on improving the floatability of difficult-to-float oxidized coal. Through these pretreatments, the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals can achieve a higher recovery than that without pretreatments. Simultaneously, the flotation of low rank/oxidized coals may be further improved if the researchers combine these pretreatments with surfactants. This work was supported by the