Ignimbrite ‘TL’ on Gran Canaria is a complex, compositionally zoned rheomorphic tuff, that locally exhibits features previously considered to be diagnostic of lavas. It is made up of two locally overlapping lobes of ignimbrite that were emplaced during a single eruptive episode. The eastern lobe is high-grade, with rheomorphic zones and localised patches that are lava-like. The western lobe is extremely high-grade, more extensively lava-like, and welded to its top surface. Both parts are zoned, with a basal comendite-rich zone grading up, through a mixed zone, into an upper trachyte-rich zone. Lithic contents, and the relative proportions of comendite and trachyte pyroclasts vary with height. Each comendite-rich zone is vitroclastic, whereas each trachyte-rich zone is partly lava-like with local gradations into vitroclastic ignimbrite. Mixed zones are intermediate in character, and locally show compositional banding. Gradational zoning in massive ignimbrite, best seen in lower strain zones, and welding fabrics that are pervasively lineated and oblique to bedding, suggest that deposition was sustained, agglutination was rapid, and rheomorphic deformation began during the sustained deposition. The viscosity and porosity of the agglutinate varied with height because successively deposited pyroclast populations varied in grainsize, composition and temperature. The hot agglutinate continued to compact and shear downslope after the density currents had dissipated, causing further rheomorphic folding, thrusting, attenuation and autobrecciation. The western lobe locally overlies the partly welded top of the eastern lobe, in part because it advanced rheomorphically across it for at least 300 m. Hot-state loading and auto-intrusion occurred due to unstable density layering in the chemically zoned agglutinate. Deformation behaviour changed during cooling and degassing, and because of heat transfer between juxtaposed agglutinates, and localised retention of dissolved volatiles where there was an overlying impermeable cap.This paper documents an unusually complex rheomorphic peralkaline ignimbrite sheet, called ‘TL’, on Gran Canaria. This ignimbrite shows marked compositional zonation, spectacular evidence of magma-mingling, and offers new insights into how hot ignimbrites are deposited and deformed. We report field and textural evidence that suggests it progressively aggraded during an explosive eruption in which the composition, eruption style, and intensity of welding varied with time. We also show that in extreme cases, parts of ignimbrites can become lava-like. Ignimbrite TL has some characteristics that have previously been considered diagnostic of lavas, and it is the first documented example of an ignimbrite that travelled like a lava, beyond its original depositional limit. Peralkaline (molar Na Various models have been proposed for the emplacement of high-grade rheomorphic ignimbrites ( In some cases, welding deformation may start whilst the deposit aggrades beneath the overriding pyroclastic density current ( Gran Canaria lies at the centre of the Canarian archipelago, a group of seven volcanic islands built near the passive margin 100 km off the northwestern coast of Africa ( Miocene ignimbrite sheet ‘TL’ overlies ignimbrite ‘P2’ and underlies ignimbrite ‘X’ within the Mogán Group ( Ignimbrite TL is compositionally heterogeneous ( Juvenile pyroclasts have three main compositions: comendite, comenditic trachyte and rare trachybasalt. The comendite is an anorthoclase and amphibole (magnesio-katophorite and ferro-eckermanite) -bearing peralkaline, low silica rhyolite (ca. 69 wt% SiO All bulk-rock compositions of ignimbrite on Both eastern and western lobes exhibit vertical zoning defined by chemical composition, lithic abundance, and fiamme size. The relative proportions of the three main compositional types of pyroclast change with height in the sheet ( The lower ca. 5 m of each ignimbrite lobe comprises a zone containing >70 vol% comendite particles. Each has a basal vitrophyre composed of comendite fiamme in a welded comendite-rich matrix. The basal vitrophyre of ETL is lithic-rich (ca.12 vol%), 15 –30 cm thick, and laterally continuous, whereas the vitrophyre of WTL is ≤25 cm thick, lithic poor (ca. 0.5 vol%), and laterally impersistent due to localised disruption and autobrecciation. The lowermost few centimetres of the vitrophyres are largely degraded to clay. Each vitrophyre passes up into devitrified lapilli-tuff. In ETL this comprises abundant comendite fiamme and rare trachyte fiamme set in a fine-grained comendite tuff matrix ( Mixed-zones, ≤10 m thick, comprise the central part of both ignimbrite lobes. Welding intensity and the proportions of comendite to trachyte within both the matrix and fiamme populations varys widely. In ETL, comendite, trachyte, intermediate composition, and compositionally banded fiamme lie within a fine-grained mixed-tuff matrix ( In WTL, the Mixed-zone shows more pronounced vertical and lateral changes in welding intensity, with sharp as well as gradational changes. Most is cryptocrystalline to microcrystalline, with a marbled appearance due to different coloured streaks (schlieren) and swirls, inferred to represent rheomorphic mingling between comendite-rich and trachyte-rich agglutinate. Isolated pods and lenses, ≤3 m long and 1.6 m thick, of weakly welded, clearly vitroclastic tuff containing small (<4 cm), slightly deformed comendite and trachyte fiamme are irregularly distributed throughout the marbled rock. In the Mixed-zones of both lobes the proportion of trachyte increases upwards into the overlying Trachyte-zone. The welding fabrics, compositional inhomogeneities, banding and schlieren of the Mixed-zones resemble those of the Loch Bá ring dyke on Mull, Scotland, also thought to be a densely welded lapilli-tuff from an eruption of mingled magmas ( A Trachyte-zone comprising >70 vol% trachyte particles tops both ignimbrite lobes (6–10 m thick in ETL and 8 m thick increasing to 17 m distally in WTL). In ETL, the zone ranges from incipiently welded to eutaxitic, with weakly flattened trachyte fiamme in a fine-grained trachytic tuff matrix ( The chemical zoning in ETL is marked by a gradual colour change with height ( Where ignimbrite was deposited on topographic relief, the Mixed-zone commonly overlaps the lower valley-filling Comendite-zone to rest directly upon substrate at palaeotopographic highs, and distally ( Lithic clasts also gradually change in abundance with height in both ignimbrite lobes ( Fiamme sizes also vary with height in both ignimbrites ( TL is generally massive and poorly sorted. Apart from the contact between the two ignimbrite lobes, there are no obvious internal erosional breaks or interstratified fallout layers that indicate temporary cessations of the pyroclastic density currents. Therefore, ETL and WTL are each tentatively interpreted as the deposit of a sustained pyroclastic current. However, because welding and rheomorphism precludes a thorough sedimentological analysis, it is possible that TL was deposited from more than two currents and that the evidence for this has been obscured, particularly in the case of WTL which is most severely disrupted by rheomorphism. The massive, poorly sorted nature of TL is interpreted as recording rapid, quasi-steady deposition from a pyroclastic density current whose lowermost part was of sufficiently high concentration to suppress turbulence and favour hindered settling (see Vertical welding profiles through typical medium-grade ignimbrite sheets, such as calc-alkaline ignimbrites of western USA, are generally attributed to the effects of burial compaction and differential cooling rates with proximity to the upper and lower margins of a thick, initially isothermal hot ignimbrite sheet (e.g. Both ignimbrite lobes of TL are locally welded to within a few centimetres of their top and base. Even the lower-grade ETL is welded to its base where only 4 m thick. Welding profiles ( The welding profile through ETL is generally simple, with the maximum welding intensity about a third of the way up from the base ( The restricted, impersistent nature of the welding reversals are difficult to reconcile with periods of cooling between successive emplacement and cooling events. Evidence for a compound cooling-unit profile, caused by the stacking of variably welded ignimbrites is lacking. With progressive aggradation, sudden changes in welding intensity may be attributable to compositional or thermal changes within a sustained but unsteady, depositing current (see fig. 8 of Eutaxitic fabrics occur in many exposures of WTL and they dominate exposures of ETL. Vitroclastic textures are best preserved in the basal vitrophyres. The morphologies ( Vesicles in most lithofacies of TL are irregularly distributed (e.g. We use the term ‘lava-like’ purely descriptively, for any lithofacies that looks like lava (after In ETL, lava-like lithofacies form elongate lenses in distal parts of the Mixed-zone. They grade outwards into the enclosing eutaxitic ignimbrite, and they contain irregularly distributed black vitric trachyte blebs (<1.5 cm) and rare amoeboid comendite blebs (<1 cm). Lava-like lithofacies are more common in WTL, particularly distally and elsewhere where the ignimbrite is ponded (e.g. locality 9). In the Comendite-zone, they are cryptocrystalline to microcrystalline with flow-aligned, euhedral to subhedral feldspar crystals (5–7 vol%) and rare lithics. Small, flow-banded and massive pods and lenses are surrounded by eutaxitic rheomorphic tuff and/or brecciated tuff ( Possible mechanisms to produce lava-like lithofacies include: (A) coalescence of fluidal pyroclasts to form a coherent liquid, (B) obliteration (transposition) of vitroclastic textures by rheomorphic shear, and (C) destruction of vitroclastic textures by devitrification and alteration. In TL, all three mechanisms may have had a role, but coalescence is thought to have been important because: (1) the distribution of lava-like lithofacies is strongly influenced by pyroclast chemistry, (2) there is no obvious association between particularly intense deformation and the lava-like lithofacies, and (3) spherical trachyte globules (achneliths) are locally preserved around the margins of the lava-like lithofacies. Later stage rheomorphism may have helped to obliterate clast outlines, but this was not the main cause because of (2) above, and because lava-like lithofacies are common to near the top of WTL, where it probably cooled quickest. We infer that as hot-depositing pyroclasts approached the depositional flow boundary ( High magmatic temperature and strongly peralkaline composition contribute to low magma viscosities, and may produce lower eruption columns with reduced cooling of pyroclasts ( Rheomorphic structures are widespread in both east and west ignimbrite lobes. They include various types of lineation, oblique (imbricated) shear fabrics and other kinematic indicators, folds, load structures and structures indicative of downslope extension and compression. Pronounced lineations, including prolate fiamme (e.g. with W:Y:Z axial ratios of 18:4:1 and 13:7:1), prolate vesicles, and elongation lineations in the tuff matrix, are abundant in ETL ( Oblique fabrics in ignimbrites include a preferred, normally sourceward-dipping, alignment of inequant pyroclasts, and/or a welding foliation and/or lineation that is oblique to the orientation of bedding or, where bedding is absent, to the orientation of the inferred incremental aggradation surface. Such fabrics are sometimes referred to loosely as ‘imbrication’ (e.g. An oblique, sourceward-dipping welding fabric is well-developed in both basal vitrophyres ( The oblique fabric is interpreted as a hybrid resulting from sedimentary imbrication coupled with syn-depositional rheomorphic shear, because the fabric is commonly rheomorphically attenuated but not transposed parallel to bedding. Its occurrence locally throughout significant thicknesses of ignimbrite suggests that as deposition proceeded a shear zone of agglutinate at the base of the pyroclastic density current gradually extended upwards as the surface of the aggrading deposit rose (see The intensity of an ignimbrite agglutination fabric reflects (1) the shear stress exerted on the shearing mass (by gravity and by the pyroclastic density current), (2) the duration of residence within the upward-migrating shear zone (this relates to rate of deposition), and (3) the viscosity of the agglutinate at that time (partly a function of temperature, volatile contents and porosity). The highly attenuated fiamme in TL are interpreted as former low-viscosity pyroclasts that were imbricated, compacted and lineated as they passed through the shear zone, whereas the less-attenuated, fractured and boudinaged fiamme were deformed in a more competent (semi-brittle) manner. With increasing shear strain and compaction, the developing welding fabric would tend to rotate progressively towards bedding (i.e. angle of imbrication decreases), and some strongly lineated zones characterised by rodded fiamme and sheath folds ( Other kinematic indicators in TL (some as described from other rheomorphic ignimbrites, e.g. Rheomorphic folds are common in both western and eastern ignimbrite lobes. They vary from medium- (1–10 m) to small-scale (e.g. individual folded fiamme). The small-scale folds are easy to recognise in the Mixed-zone, because of the compositional banding. They vary from open to isoclinal, and are inclined, reclined, recumbent or locally overturned in the direction of flow. A range of deformation behaviour is indicated by fold styles including disharmonic, cylindrical, and chevron folds. The latter indicate the presence, prior to folding, of a well-developed fabric and/or competence layering that permitted flexural flow. In some, the trachyte-rich bands were more competent and maintain constant thicknesses (class 1B folds of Ignimbrite TL outcrops to the coast and, therefore, most of its distal termination is not seen ( The upper surface of the eastern lobe also locally has developed topographic irregularities and ridges due to late-stage rheomorphic deformation (e.g. at locality 1). These are not so widely developed as they are in WTL. Autobreccias occur in both lobes of TL, but are more widespread in the western lobe, which was more intensely rheomorphic. They locally occur at the top, base, the flow front and within the ignimbrite, and are thought to have formed in a similar way to autobreccias in viscous lavas. Autobreccias in lavas form when strain rates during emplacement locally cause cooler and more degassed, brittle parts of a lava to fragment. Upper autobreccia near the distal termination of WTL comprises loose-packed, clast-supported blocks, <2 m in size, of eutaxitic to lava-like Trachyte-zone tuff ( Flow-front autobreccia occurs at the distal margin of WTL ( Basal autobreccia occurs in WTL and increases in abundance towards its distal margin. Between 6 and 200 m behind the distal margin it is heterolithic, and Trachyte-zone blocks of diverse textural types, including eutaxitic, flow banded and vitrophyric ( In situ brecciation also occurred due to competence variations within the Mixed-zone of WTL, where layers of porous, weakly welded tuff graded upward and downward into enclosing lava-like layers via tuff with highly attenuated fiamme. During rheomorphism these weakly welded layers locally brecciated, forming lenses and pockets of blocks surrounded by sheared eutaxitic and lava-like marbled rock ( TL exhibits spectacular deformation structures caused by large-scale extension and loading whilst hot and rheomorphic. At Montaña de las Carboneras ( WTL shows disruption and folding of the compositional zonation medially ( Trachyte-zone lava-like tuff of WTL forms a series of convex-down lobate structures ( The gravitational instability in WTL must have been produced by the compositional zoning, in which more silicic agglutinate was overlain by denser, more basic agglutinate. Absolute density contrasts at the time of loading cannot be inferred because the vesicularities and the interstitial porosities of the agglutinates clearly varied considerably with time as a result of compaction, volatile exsolution, resorption, and heat transfer (see below) during rheomorphism. The lobate nature of many of the load structures indicates that agglutinate both above and below the loaded contacts were sufficiently hot to flow in a fluidal or plastic manner at the time of deformation ( Flames of fluidal Comendite-zone agglutinate locally protruded right through to the top surface of WTL, where they autobrecciated on cooling and degassing ( Mapping and detailed logging has revealed complex field relations between the eastern and western lobes of TL. WTL locally overlies ETL proximally, at the head of the Barranco de Mogán ( ETL fills local topographic depressions, and thins and pinches out over topographic highs, where it is onlapped by WTL. In neighbouring barrancos several exposures show one of the ignimbrites without the other (e.g. ETL in Taurito and WTL in Tauro; Two alternative interpretations could explain the relations: both involve a change in vent position, and possible overlap in time between the emplacement of the two ignimbrite lobes. (1) The western lobe was largely deposited after the eastern lobe, and was locally (around Barranco de Mogán) deposited upon the western feather-edge of the eastern lobe. The nearby locations where only one of the two lobes is present might reflect differing impersistent ignimbrite distributions caused by topography. In support of this, the western feather edge of ETL elsewhere clearly has an impersistent distribution, as have two underlying ignimbrites (VI and P2), caused by topographic irregularities in the top of an underlying thick lava (‘VL’; stratigraphic terms from On balance, we favour the first alternative, and infer that ETL and WTL were erupted successively from different vents. Difficulties with the second interpretation are that: (1) ETL and WTL differ consistently (WTL is thicker, more lava-like, contains trachybasalt globules, less lithics, etc., (1) ETL and WTL erupted from separate vents connected to the same compositionally stratified magma chamber. The eruption began in the east ( (2) The emplacement of WTL from a vent farther west may have started before the emplacement of ETL had finished, or there may have been an intervening hiatus of unknown duration. Either way, the eruption of WTL continued after the emplacement of ETL had ceased, as indicated by its stratigraphic position, its larger proportion of trachyte, and its content of trachybasalt globules, which are absent in ETL. Eruptive withdrawal of ETL may have caused perturbation in the magma chamber that helped to disperse the trachybasalt globules found in Trachyte-zone of WTL. (3) Similarities between ETL and WTL ( (4) Rapid hindered-settling dominated sedimentation ( (5) Localised, sharper changes in texture, welding intensity ( (6) Hot pyroclasts came into close and more sustained contact with each other as they settled through the lower, most concentrated part of the density stratified current, and in the uppermost part of the aggrading deposit, where they agglutinated (welded rapidly) together and were imbricated and deformed during deposition and shear ( (7) With time, the accumulating thickness of the agglutinate itself caused compactional deformation and downslope rheomorphism, while inverse density layering developed and caused irregular loading. This deformation may have started during deposition, but since it affects the entire thickness of ignimbrite it likely continued after the overriding pyroclastic density current had dissipated. (8) The intensity of late-stage rheomorphism increased distally in WTL and was particularly marked on steeper slopes. Distal parts advanced at least 300 m in a similar manner to the flow of a viscous lava. (9) The deformation behaviour of Trachyte zone and Comendite-zone agglutinates changed with time as their viscosities changed. The Trachyte-zones initially were hot and fluidal (as indicated by the widespread coalescence to lava-like lithofacies and the droplet-shaped pyroclasts in WTL) but became more competent as they cooled (by radiation and air convection) and degassed. The Comendite-zones were originally cooler and less fluidal, forming brittle shards and eutaxitic lithofacies, but after aggradation were thermally insulated (buried), locally reheated by the more trachyte-rich agglutinate, and their magmatic volatiles were retained in solution and/or resorbed due to the overlying impermeable and heavy cap of Trachyte-zone tuff. These effects caused Comendite-zones to become, in part, more fluidal than the Mixed-zone and Trachyte-zone agglutinates. Eventually, viscosities would have increased (due to cooling and exsolution) sufficiently to prevent further deformation. (10) To account for the higher grade of the western lobe, changes in the eruption as the vent site shifted westward may have included (1) tapping hotter deeper parts of the magma chamber (trachybasalt erupted for the first time), (2) an increase in eruptive mass flux at a fissure vent, and/or (3) lower pyroclastic fountaining, resulting in less cooling during transport and emplacement. A decrease in fountain height may have been the result of the changing composition of the erupting magma to more mafic compositions, a decrease in volatiles as the quantity of volatile rich comendite in the magma chamber decreased, and/or conduit dilation associated with caldera subsidence. Because large parts of WTL are lava-like, we summarise our reasoning for interpreting it as an ignimbrite. The interpretation does not rest solely upon the abundant local preservation of vitroclastic textures and imbricated fiamme. WTL has many similarities to co-eruptive, unequivocal rheomorphic ignimbrite ETL ( Because they can have closely similar field and textural characteristics, there has been debate about how to distinguish extensive silicic lavas (i.e. that issued effusively from a vent) from extremely high-grade ignimbrites (that initially travelled as a pyroclastic density current from which hot pyroclasts deposited, coalesced and then deformed rheomorphically). Fiamme and eutaxitic fabrics similar to those characteristic of welded ignimbrites have long been known to form locally in lava flows, by comminution and viscous shear of hot pumiceous autobreccia (authors’ observations of autobreccias of andesite lavas at Therasia, Santorini; Roche Rosse obsidian; and phonolite lava at Montaña Blanca, Tenerife; also TL is interesting because it is an ignimbrite sheet that is partly lava-like, and it locally exhibits three features that hitherto have been regarded as diagnostic of true lavas: (1) a blunt, steep-ended, thick distal sheet termination, (2) well-developed basal autobreccia, and (3) heterolithic (‘crumble’) autobreccia ( Of the four emplacement scenarios depicted in Based on their analysis of fabrics in the basal vitrophyre, J.M.S. acknowledges funding from a SERC-NATO grant and a Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grant (Schm 250/47-1). XRF analysis was carried out at the Ruhr Universität in Bochum, and at Geomar by Kerstin Wolff. Microprobe analysis was carried out at the Cristian-Albrecht Universität, with help from Jürgen Freitag. Thanks to Hans-Ulrich Schmincke for initiating the research project and providing help and opinions at various stages, and thanks to Alan Collins and Mike Norry for discussions. Thoughtful comments from Chris Henry, Phil Leat and Steve Anderson led to significant improvements to the paper.