Purpose
                  The aim of this study was to determine whether circular frame external fixation provides better outcome and fewer complications when compared to open reduction internal fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  A systematic search was carried out and studies were critically appraised with narrative data synthesis.
               
                  Results
                  The systematic search yielded 131 titles and following a rigorous review only five articles were found to directly compare the two treatment methods.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Fine wire frame external fixation offers a modest advantage of better soft tissue outcomes. All in all, there is no current high-level evidence to suggest that newer osteosynthesis plates provide better results.Bicondylar tibial plateau fractures present significant challenges both in terms of treatment and outcomes. Treatment principles for these injuries consist of minimising secondary surgical insults while aiming for anatomic reduction and rigid fixation of the skeletal element of the injury. This subject received wide attention in the literature. Mahadeva et al conducted a systematic review comparing open reduction internal fixation with hybrid fixation. A systematic review of the literature was performed according to the methods described in the Eligibility criteria were derived from the research question outlined above and the following research parameters: Participants – skeletally mature patients with displaced bicondylar tibial plateau fracture (Schatzker type V and VI) undergoing primary operative management. Intervention – Periarticular open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Comparison – fine wire circular frame external fixation (ExFix). Outcomes – Primary outcome measure: specific knee function outcome scores. Secondary outcome measure: clinical outcomes, health status questionnaire, and patients satisfaction. Primary inclusion criteria were studies which reported outcomes of surgical treatment of acute traumatic bicondylar tibial plateau fractures with open reduction and internal fixation compared to fine wire circular frame fixation with or without adjuvant percutaneous screw fixation. Therefore, only published studies directly comparing the two methods with reported outcome measures were included. This review focused on specific knee function scores as primary outcome measure such as the validated Western Ontario McMaster University (WOMAC) score. A multidimensional, self-administered health status instrument, which has been shown to fulfill face, content and construct validity as well as reliability and responsiveness. The principal exclusion criteria from this work were: abstract only publications conference proceedings, paediatric cases, pathological fractures, comparison with non-operative management, periprosthetic fractures and treatment of non or malunions. Equally, studies which looked at cadaveric models only, biomechanics or laboratory analyses only, protocol and study design publications were excluded. Similarly, expert opinions, single arm studies, historic comparison of two therapeutic groups were also excluded. References obtained from the search criteria, were transferred into Endnote referencing software (Thomson Reuters™) and duplicates were discarded. Firstly titles and abstracts were reviewed for relevance according to the research question. The remaining studies were analysed in their entirety. Access to full text articles was obtained from Athens (Eduserv A total of 232 articles were generated from the search, limited to 155 human and English publications. This yielded 131 titles for initial screening after removal of 24 duplicates. Following initial screening and application of the inclusion/exclusion criteria 80 titles and 40 abstracts were excluded from the review. A further search including the cited references did not yield additional studies. The numbers and reasons for exclusion following rigorous titles screening, abstracts assessment and review of full texts are detailed in McKee et al. Hall et al. Krupp et al. Pun et al. Ahearn et al. Since the publication of the first study presented above in 2006, the paradigm of bicondylar tibial plateau fracture management has witnessed new developments. The two key elements consist of the widespread use of contoured locking periarticular plates, This work highlighted numerous recurring limitations in the conduct and presentation of the studies and this inadvertently will mitigate the interpretation of their results. Only the first and last articles demonstrated generalisability of their results in relation to the patient population, type of treatment and outcome measures utilised. In terms of their relevance to clinical practice further key issues are raised. In general there was no clear outline of fracture classification assessment especially in relation to the imaging methods utilised. Previous authors have shown a change in fracture treatment plan in 26% of cases after the addition of computerised tomography (CT) scan. The only randomised controlled trial by McKee and colleagues was carried out before the widespread introduction of anatomic locking periarticular plates. The addition of methodological issues raised above, limits the validity and estimation of treatment effects presented in this article. The remaining articles shared recurring limitations, which raise concerns about bias and external validity of their results. It is the authors' conclusion that fine wire circular frame fixators may offer some advantages in terms of soft tissue healing. However, clinical recommendations cannot be made in relation to the utilisation of minimally invasive internal fixation locking plates. Based on the published literature there is currently insufficient evidence to determine whether circular frame external fixation, in the treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fracture, provides better outcome and fewer complications when compared to open reduction and internal fixation. Therefore, longer term results from studies comparing modern implants and soft tissue preserving techniques are required. Given the variation in the level of surgical expertise and the rarity of such injuries, there is an emergent need for pragmatic multicentre trials. These studies will need to address the relevant research question using a robust research protocol as well as validated and reliable outcome measures. All authors have none to declare.