Mineral carbonation is a well-known method for recovering minerals. Recently, the process has been combined with carbon dioxide sequestration. However, mineral carbonation generally requires large amounts of energy and mineral resources to generate carbonates. In this study, the possibility of using waste ash and an intermediate solution to recover minerals is investigated, because waste ashes contain large amounts of calcium ions. Our approach is to prepare calcium carbonate by reacting calcium containing material with carbon dioxide. For this purpose, we used a solution containing 5wt% amine and 15vol% CO2 and ashes collected from an incineration facility. The experimental approach consisted of an extraction step and a carbonate formation step. The CO2 precipitate and waste ashes were analyzed by XRF, XRD, and SEM. Most of the CO2 emitted was precipitated, and the carbonate formed exhibited a cubic structure. Based on the results obtained, we conclude that valuable minerals can be recovered from waste materials.Mineral carbonation, the process of combining carbon dioxide with minerals, has been described by Metal ions (mono- or divalent)  We designed an experimental strategy to verify the potential of recovering useful minerals from waste ashes. To check this approach, we obtained waste ashes from petrochemical industries. Waste ashes are known to have high concentrations of Ca, Al, and Si (  To verify this assumption, we conducted an extraction experiment using waste ashes. Extraction was performed for 3, 6, 18, and 30  We performed qualitative XRD analysis to check for the possible reuse of the precipitate. We selected the 3-h extraction samples for each solution, because extraction time was not important. We expect to be able to control the formation of the carbon dioxide precipitate. However, calcium carbonate formation was very rapid, and we could prepare a metal carbonate selectively by controlling the reaction rate. These aspects have been studied by some researchers ( In this study, a process for the simultaneous recovery of metals from waste ashes and carbon dioxide sequestration was tested. The solution selected showed potential for improving the carbon dioxide conversion rate and reduction when applied to waste ashes. A portion of the calcium ions generated calcium carbonate when water was used as the solvent, because of the presence of CaSO This research was supported by the