5-Nonylsalicylaldoxime, LIX 622N was used to extract and recover Mo(VI) from sulfate leach liquor containing Mo(VI) and U(VI). The extraction parameters were optimized as 10%(v/v) LIX 622N diluted in kerosene at equilibrium pH1.0 and O/A phase ratio=1:1. Under these conditions, complete extraction of Mo(VI) was realized by a two-stage counter current extraction. The formed complex MoO2R2 is assessed by FTIR analysis. The molybdenum content in the organic phase was stripped using a mixture of 2M NH4OH+2M (NH4)2CO3. It was precipitated at pH value 2.0 as ammonium molybdate. After drying, thermal decomposition high purity (>99.9%) of MoO3 was produced. The effect of temperature on the Mo(VI) extraction process showed that, the extraction process is exothermic with enthalpy change −24.514kJmol−1.Molybdenum is a key role element which has several industrial applications such as an alloying element in cast iron, steel, and superalloys to enhance hardenability, strength, toughness, wear- and corrosion-resistance, and oil and gas industry ( New occurrence of metamorphosed sandstone type uranium deposit containing molybdenite was recorded at Wadi Sikait, South Eastern desert, Egypt ( In recent years, solvent extraction techniques have been used extensively for the extraction and recovery of Mo(VI) from various leach liquors. (    The present work aims to study the extraction and recovery of Mo(VI) by LIX 622N from the sulfate leach liquor mainly containing Mo(VI) and U(VI). The parameters studied include equilibrium pH, LIX 622N concentration, temperature, mixture of NH The extractant LIX 622N (5-Nonylsalicylaldoxime with tridecanol) was used as received from Cognis Corporation, USA without any purification. Distilled kerosene was used as the diluent to prepare the extracting solvents, and all the other reagents were of analytical grade. The leach liquor used for the solvent extraction of Mo (VI), was obtained from the leaching of metamorphosed sandstone molybdenum/uranium deposit from Wadi Sikait, South Eastern Desert, Egypt with H Analysis of Mo(VI) performed by means of an atomic absorption (Unicam 969 Model) ( All the extraction experiments of Mo(VI) were carried out by equilibrating desired volumes of aqueous (leach liquor) and organic phases in separating funnel for 10 Stripping of Mo(VI) from the loaded organic phase was achieved by equilibrating the organic phase with stripping agent comprising of 2 A series of experiments were performed to investigate the extraction efficiency of Mo(VI) and U(VI) with 10% LIX 622N in kerosene at an A/O ratio of 1:1 in the equilibrium pH range of 1.0–7.0. The obtained results are shown in The extraction mechanism of Mo(VI) with LIX 622N extractant can be described in Eq. The linear relationship between log D and equilibrium pH as featured in Several experiments were carried out to choose the best diluent for Mo(VI) extraction by 10% LIX 622N from the working leach liquor. Different diluents were used such as benzene, xylene, carbon tetra chloride, toluene and kerosene. The organic and the aqueous phases were mixed at an O/A phase ratio 1:1 for 10 From the obtained results graphed in In order to ascertain the optimum concentration of LIX 622N required for the quantitative extraction of Mo(VI), a series of experiments were conducted by varying the concentration of LIX 622N in the range from 2.5 to 12.5% v/v with a leach liquor of equilibrium pH The relationship between log D and log [LIX 622N] for Mo(VI) was illustrated in The effect of contact time on the extraction of Mo(VI) using 10% LIX 622N at equilibrium pH Construction of McCabe–Thiele diagram was carried out by mixing the aqueous phases having 0.5% Mo(VI) at equilibrium pH The determined extraction efficiencies of the 1st ad 2nd stages were 97.2% and 99.99%, respectively showing complete molybdenum extraction. Fourier Transform-Infrared (FTIR) spectra before and after molybdenum loading on LIX 622N were carried out as shown in In comparison with the spectrum of LIX 622N new characteristic peak for MoO The broad band observed at 3388 The extraction efficiency of Mo(VI) from the working leach liquor was studied at different temperatures (303–333 By plotting log D (distribution coefficient) against 1000/T, K The calculated ΔH of Mo(VI) extraction process is equal to − Molybdenum and uranium in nature are accompanied by several impurities. The alkaline or acidic leaching processes of their ores may lead to partial leaching of associated metals. The separation of these impurities is important with regard to the production of pure products. The extraction efficiency of some metal ions including mainly Fe(III), Cu(II), Al(III), V(IV) and Mn(II) was examined at the optimum conditions established for the separation of Mo(VI) and U(VI). Stripping of Mo(VI) from loaded organic phase was examined with NH By varying the concentration of NH Several Mo(VI) stripping experiments were carried out by contacting the loaded organic phase with 2 To determine the number of theoretical stages required for stripping of molybdenum loaded in organic phase, the stripping studies were conducted with 2 To recover molybdenum trioxide from the stripped solution the pH value of the stripped liquor is adjusted to 2 using concentrated HCl. The chemical reaction can be described as follows: Based on the experimental results of the present investigation a conceptual flow diagram, describing the solvent extraction and stripping of Mo(VI) and the recovery of MoO Extraction and recovery of Mo(VI) from molybdenum/uranium leach liquor containing 0.5 A mixture of 2