Shaped carbon materials with different nanostructures, i.e. carbon nanofibers (CNFs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon micro-coils (CMCs) were prepared by catalytic chemical vapor deposition. Co catalysts supported on CNFs, CNTs and CMCs were prepared by incipient wetness impregnation. The structure and surface properties of these carbon materials were studied. The influence of the different supports on the appearance, size and dispersion of cobalt particles, as well as on their reducibility, was studied by X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, transmission electron microscopy, N2 adsorption desorption measurements, thermogravimetric analysis, temperature-programmed reduction, H2-chemisorption and O2 titration. The different shaped carbon supports were found to affect the Co reducibility and dispersion by modifying the functionalization on the support surface, i.e. by changing the metal–support interactions. The Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) performance of these cobalt catalysts was influenced by the reducibility and dispersion of the catalysts on the different carbon materials. Finally, cobalt catalysts with cobalt particles sited both inside and outside of the CNTs were prepared and revealed the effect of a pore confinement on the reducibility, dispersion and performance of cobalt catalysts in FTS.Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is known as a reaction that produces hydrocarbons from syngas (CO and H It has been found that FTS catalysts supported on these novel carbon materials have shown good catalytic activity and stability However, issues relating to the role of the carbon shape and hybridization state on the metal–support interaction (and eventual catalytic activity) are still to be determined. In particular, factors such as the metal–support interaction, reduction and dispersion, and the comparison between different carbons have rarely been reported. The different carbons could thus impact on the catalytic performance of FTS since the reaction strongly depends on the nature of the support used. For catalysts based on different nanostructured carbons, it can be expected that their reduction behavior and metal dispersion will be related to the orientation of the graphene layers with respect to the central axis. Numerous classes of carbons e.g. carbon nanofibers (CNFs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), have been reported. For CNFs, the graphene layers are at an angle between 0 and 90 degrees to the central axis while the graphene layers of CNTs are aligned with the central axis To further probe the role of carbons on FT activity we have synthesized and studied another member of the nano-structure carbons, the carbon micro-coils (CMCs) Compared to nonporous CNF, CS and CMC supports, CNTs always contain a central pore. The internal diameter of a CNT can be adjusted from 5 to 100 To date, several studies have been reported that show the effect of confinement in catalysis. In the NH In the present study, several shaped carbon nanostructure materials (CNFs, CNTs and CMCs) were prepared by chemical vapor deposition using acetylene as the reactant gas. The obtained carbon materials were purified and functionalized using nitric acid. High resolution TEM, acid–base titrations, TGA and Raman spectroscopy were used to reveal the surface groups on these supports. Cobalt catalysts supported on CNFs, CNTs and CMCs were prepared by impregnation and moreover, Co catalysts with Co particles confined in CNTs (Co/CNT-in) and Co placed outside of CNTs (Co/CNTs-out) were prepared by a sonication technique using reported methods. These catalysts were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), N     Incipient wetness impregnation was employed to prepare cobalt catalysts supported on carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon nanofibers (CNF) and carbon micro-coils (CMCs). The appropriate cobalt nitrate solution (15 A Co/CNT-in catalyst was prepared as described by others in a previous study using a ruthenium salt for the preparation of a Ru/CNT catalyst A Co/CNT-out catalyst was prepared by a modified method that was used to prepare Ru/CNT catalysts X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns for the calcined cobalt catalysts were recorded with a Siemens D2 diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation and a Ni filter. The scan range was 20–90° with 0.02° steps. N Selective neutralization by equilibrium with different bases of increasing strength was used to determine quantitatively the concentration of surface acidic groups. The weaker acidic groups on the support surface were titrated using a strong base (NaOH) and the strongly acidic groups such as carboxyls were titrated using a very weak base (NaHCO X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed in a Physical Electronics Quantum2000 with a monochromatized Al K source (1486 Temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) experiments were carried out with a Micromeritics Auto Chem unit. The catalyst (ca. 0.1 Fischer–Tropsch synthesis was performed in a fixed-bed micro reactor. A gas cylinder containing a H The XRD patterns of various carbon nanostructured materials and the prepared Co catalysts thermally treated in N N The C 1s spectra for the shaped carbon materials are shown in  The weight loss below 100  The Raman spectra for the different carbon materials are shown in The acidic group content on the different carbon surfaces was studied by acid–base titration. The titration of the carbon materials in NaCl electrolyte solution corresponds to the back titration of the hydrogen ions evolved owing to ion exchange between the electrolyte cations and active hydrogen atoms of the functional groups The typical TEM images of CNFs, CNTs and CMCs are shown in Typical TEM images of passivated Co/CNF-IM, Co/CNT-IM, Co/CMC-IM, Co/CNT-in and Co/CNT-out materials after reduction in H Incipient wetness impregnation techniques to fill the CNTs relies on the capillary action of a solution containg a metal salt. It is generally reported that the fraction of metal present in the inner cavity of CNTs is between 15 and 50% The TPR profiles of cobalt catalysts supported on different carbon materials are shown in The TPR profile ( The H The extent of reduction of cobalt catalysts determined from O In summary, the results from H The FTS performance of the cobalt catalysts supported on shaped carbon materials has been investigated at 225 As can be seen, cobalt catalysts supported on different carbon materials showed different CO conversions using the same FTS conditions. When the cobalt catalyst was reduced at 300 On increasing the reduction temperature to 400 The hydrocarbon selectivity for the cobalt catalysts supported on different carbon materials is summarized in Compared to Co/CNT-IM prepared by impregnation, the pore-confined Co/CNT-in shows a higher CO conversion (15.6%) and Co/CNT-out exhibited a lower CO conversion (9.0%, Hydrocarbon selectivity data in Several nanostructured carbon materials (CNFs, CNTs and CMCs) were prepared by catalytic chemical vapor deposition. The cobalt catalysts supported on different carbon materials (Co/CNT-IM, Co/CNF-IM and Co/CMC-IM) and the catalysts (Co/CNT-in and Co/CNT-out) with cobalt particle sited both in and out of CNTs were prepared to investigate the effect of different carbon materials and pore confinement on the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis performance. It was found that the different carbon supports affected the catalyst reducibility and FTS performance. For cobalt supported on different carbon materials, the Co/CNT-IM showed the highest FTS activity. This is ascribed to a higher reducibility and an optimal dispersion for this catalyst, resulting from the interaction between cobalt and surface groups of carbon. The pore-confined Co/CNT-in catalyst was found to reduce easily and showed a higher reducibility in comparison to the Co/CNT-out catalyst. The enhancement in reducibility is ascribed to a pore confinement effect. Simultaneously, Co/CNT-in showed a higher FTS catalytic activity and this is proposed to result from the higher reducibility and dispersion. Finally, the C This work was supported financially by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: