Zinc residue with high gallium, a waste solid product of hydrometallurgical zinc process is dumped continuously, causing the loss of gallium. Reductive leaching of zinc residue was investigated as a process to recover gallium. It was found to be much more effective using sulfur dioxide as a reductant. The effects of SO2, sulfuric acid concentration, temperature, liquid-to-solid ratio and sulfur dioxide partial pressure were examined to optimize the leaching parameters. In the presence of SO2, the extraction of gallium was maximum of 91% while the extraction of zinc and iron were 90% and 96% under the optimal condition which was determined for 80g of zinc residue as sulfuric acid concentration of 56g/L, liquid-to-solid ratio of 7mL/g, sulfur dioxide partial pressure of 200kPa, leaching temperature of 100°C for 120min.Gallium is an important metal. It is used increasingly in the semiconductor industry as a doping element in, for instance, GaP, GaAs and AlGaAs, which are important new materials with better electronic properties than silicon-based semiconductor materials ( In the hydrometallurgical zinc process to treat zinc concentrate, more than 98% of the gallium comes into the leach residue. In the leach residue, a significant part of zinc remains in the form of zinc ferrite (ZnO·Fe In the reductive leaching, the majority of the iron (III) present in the leach process is converted to the iron (II) state. More than 95% of the iron is reduced by sulfur dioxide into the solution. The main reactions are as follows. The aim of this work was to state the reductive leaching process of the zinc residue by sulfuric acid in the presence of sulfur dioxide as reductant. The extraction of gallium from residue was demonstrated. The effects of SO The zinc residue with high gallium content used in the present study was from Guangdong Province of China. Sulfur dioxide (g) used was of 99.98% purity. All other chemicals employed in the study were of analytical grade. X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD) was recorded with a Rigaku D/max-2550VB/PC diffractometer using Cu Ka radiation of wavelength 0.1540 80 The zinc residue was characterized by mineralogical analysis. The effects of SO Chemical analyses of the zinc residue used in this research are presented in Injection of sulfur dioxide into the solution provides a reductant of converting Fe In the reductive acid leaching process, the solubility of sulfur dioxide decreases with increasing in sulfuric acid concentration, which is not conducive to the reduction of leaching. So selecting the appropriate concentration of sulfuric acid is necessary. The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the leaching of zinc residue was studied in the range 36 The extraction of metals is also affected by leaching temperature. High metal extraction may not be achieved in a short time at low temperatures while high temperatures have disadvantages such as higher energy consumption. So in our present study, a medium temperature range from 85 to 120  Under conditions of sulfuric acid concentration: 56 Four tests were carried out at different sulfur dioxide partial pressures ranging from 100  Reductive leach residue, obtained under conditions of 56 A typical XRD pattern of the reductive leach residue is given in  The mineralogical compositions of the zinc residue used in this research were zinc ferrite, gypsum, hemihydrate gypsum, anglesite, sphalerite and quartz. No special gallium bearing minerals were identified. Approximately 69% and 25% gallium occurred in the ferrite and silicate phases, respectively. The silicate phase that reported gallium might be mainly the amorphous silica or zinc silicates which were not identified in XRD of the zinc residue. In the presence of SO Under optimal conditions, the main minerals of the reductive leaching residue were sodium iron sulfate tetrahydrate, gypsum, hemihydrate gypsum, anglesite, sphalerite and quartz. Zinc ferrite was almost entirely leached. This work was supported by the