Copper removal from aqueous solution is necessary from the stances of both environmental protection and copper resource recycling. It is important to develop a new chemical precipitation method suitable for removing copper particularly at low concentration as the case of waste mine water, with regards to the various problems related to the current precipitation methods by using strong alkalis or soluble sulfides. In this research, we studied a possible chemical precipitation of copper ions at concentration around 60 mg/L or lower by cogrinding copper sulfate in water with calcium carbonate (CaCO3) using wet stirred ball milling. With the aid of ball milling, copper precipitation as a basic sulfate (posnjakite: Cu4 (SO4) (OH)6·H2O) occurred at a very high copper removal rate of 99.76%, to reduce the residual copper concentration in the solution less than 0.5 mg/L, reaching the discharge limit, even with the addition amount of CaCO3 as a stoichiometric ratio of CaCO3/Cu2+at 1:1. It is more interesting to notice that, at the same conditions, other heavy metals such as Ni, Mn, Zn and Cd do not precipitate obviously just with CaCO3 addition at CaCO3/M2+at 1:1 so that the precipitate without the impurities can be processed as good source to recover copper. This newly proposed concept can be further developed to treat wastewaters with other metals to serve both purposes of environmental purification and resource recovery in a similar way.Wastewater containing heavy metals from mining, mineral processing and many manufacturing industries is one of the trickiest water pollution to deal with, in which copper is an important constituent of these effluents ( Various techniques have been used to treat these copper contaminated wastewaters, including chemical precipitation ( Neutralization by using strong alkalis of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and calcium hydroxide (Ca (OH) On the other hand, as one of most important and widely used metal in many industries, copper consumption increases rapidly and it is not easy to ensure sufficient supply of copper source to keep the demanding amount ( Calcium carbonate (CaCO In this paper, activating calcium carbonate by means of wet stirred ball milling to remove copper from the solution with low copper concentration as model sample of some copper contaminated or mining related wastewater has been investigated and the fundamental data are reported. The influences of reaction time, dosages of CaCO All reagents (CuSO Milling operation was performed in a lab-scale stirred ball milling equipment (Changsha Tianchuang Powder Technology Corporation, YS7124-JM-1L, China). The cylindrical chamber (total volume 1000 mL) with diameter of 115 mm, height of 120 mm and the inner wall was lined with Al First, 300 mL copper solution, certain volume of milling beads, and CaCO The pH of all the samples were measured by a pH meter (METTLER TOLEDO FE20-FiveEasy™, Switzerland). The concentrations of metal ions in the supernatant were determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS: SHIMADZU AA-6880, Japan). X-ray diffraction (XRD: RU-200B/D/MAX-RB RU-200B, Japan) and thermogravimetric (TG-DSC: STA449F3, NETZSCH, Germany) analysis were performed to identify the phases in the precipitated samples. The removal rates of Cu (II) and other metals were calculated by the following equation: Experiments on the effects of the milling time and molar ratio of CaCO Experiments on the effect of milling operation were done with the ball amount as parameter, where the initial concentration of Cu (II) was 0.001 mol/L, the CaCO There are many kinds of wastewaters containing copper and its concentration inside may vary in a wide range. It is needed to confirm the effectiveness of this process toward various wastewaters. It is known the lower the metal concentration in the solution, the more difficult to remove it at high rate. The initial copper concentration was further decreased from 50 mg/L to 10 mg/L with other parameters fixed. The precipitated samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and the results are shown in  The thermogravimetric (TG) and differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) analyses of the precipitated sample in nitrogen flow were examined to further define the form of the reaction products and the results are shown in Another reaction product would be Ca sulfate, which was not identified from the solid precipitate by XRD analysis. The information of calcium behaviour during the reaction is also important for the understanding of reaction mechanism. The calcium concentrations in the solutions were measured and compared among three different operation conditions: A grinding operation in copper solution; B grinding operation in water without copper; and C agitation in copper solution without grinding balls. All the data together from the XRD analysis, calcium dissolution and Cu removal rate shown in In the actual wastewater treatment, copper ions are always accompanied by other metal ions, so that it is a challenge to separate copper from other metal ions. From the stance of environmental purification, all the metals are usually removed from the solution as the case of alkali neutralization. It is very interesting to note that there exists an obvious difference in the precipitation behaviour between copper and other metals with this wet stirred ball milling process. Experiments were performed with five metals: Cu (II), Ni (II), Mn (II), Zn (II) and Cd (II) together, all the initial concentrations at 0.001 mol/L, the volume ratio of milling balls to the solution volume at 10%, the milling time at 90 min, the milling speed at 200 rpm, and the molar ratio of the added calcium carbonate to all five metal ions at 1: 1. As shown in The copper compounds from the process was mainly posnjakite, which could be used as precursor to produce CuO product through the method studied in the research ( The main results from this work demonstrated the successful chemical precipitation of copper from the sulfate solution with the wet milling operation by using CaCO CaCO