The study presents a novel lead dioxide reduction process which combined with flue-gas desulfurization technology to recover lead from lead-paste in the spent lead-acid batteries. With three different reducing agents, i.e. hydrogen peroxide(H2O2), sodium sulfite(Na2SO3) and sodium bisulfite(NaHSO3), reduction of lead dioxide(PbO2) under the same condition were studied comparatively. Synthesizing each kind of factors, NaHSO3 was selected as the optimum lead dioxide reducing agent, and sodium sulfate(Na2SO4) was generated as by-product in the process. A regeneration process of NaHSO3 combined with flue-gas desulfurization technology was studied by mechanism analysis and simulation study, Na2SO4 reacted with calcium oxide(CaO) and sulfur dioxide(SO2) from the exhausted gas to recycle NaHSO3. The new process presented in this study provides a practicable and clean method to recycle the lead from the used batteries.In 2013, global annual refined lead output reached 11.12 million tons, and over 80% of which were consumed in the manufacture of lead-acid batteries ( In the recycling field of waste lead battery, either pyrometallurgical or hydro-electrometallurgical methods have been used for the treatment of lead paste. Given the serious problems encountered in the smelting route in recent years, commercial methods using hydro-electrometallurgical process to replace the traditional pyrometallurgical process. Although hydro-electrometallurgical methods have been developed wildly, the major challenge still remain. One of the critical problems is the low solubility of lead compounds in solvents ( Lead paste in spent lead-acid batteries comprises lead sulfate (PbSO At present, pyrometallurgical and hydro-metallurgical methods are the two predominant methods to reduce PbO Many reducing agents with good effect were reported, such as oxalic acid (H Therefore, the purposes of the present paper are as follows: To choose the optimal reducing agent through experiment and determine the effect of different factors of PbO To investigate a novel route of PbO The lead paste used in this work was provided by Tian Neng Battery Co., Ltd., a company specializing in production of lead-acid batteries and recycling of lead resources in Zhejiang, China. Considering the different sampling batches, initial PbO  The reduction reaction was carried out in the thermostatic oscillator (100 rpm, 25 °C) with 10 g lead paste, 50 ml water, 10 ml acid (1,1) and appropriate amount of reducing agent for 60 min. PbO According to the Nernst equation, when the acid is used as the reactant in the redox reaction, the oxidant electrode potential increases, equilibrium shift to the right, reaction is more completely. The above reaction is more thorough under the acidic conditions created by sulfuric acid (H The by-product of reduce PbO The specific reaction in this regenerative process is shown below. Ca(HSO  Phase compositions of different lead oxides were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) by using D/MAX 2550 X-ray diffraction analyzer (Cu Kα, 40 kV, 300 mA, calibrated with Si-standard). And specific content was determined by chemical analysis. Both PbSO The SO Reduction degree The Na   Based on the results above, H  As shown in Reduction rate of 97.3% was obtained after 60 min at 60 °C when NaHSO Dissociation equilibrium constant for the reaction of SO Ionization equilibrium for electrolysis of HSO Total concentration of soluble [SO The following conclusions can be obtained:  The change of mole fraction of different sulfur species in the solution correlate with pH. As we can been seen in When the pH value is between 2.5 and 6.5, most of the sulfur forms in the solution are present as HSO The following indicate expressions for various sulfur contain ion concentrations in the solution: According to Henry's law expression, The below formula was then obtained: By consulting the relationship between temperature and concentration of sulfur dioxide, the data obtained reached under 25 °C, and H equals 0.0135 [mol/(m   Theoretical calculations and experimental studies indicated that the combination of proposed PbO This study draws the following conclusions: NaHSO Through theoretical calculating of preparation of Ca(HSO Recycling of NaHSO Results in this work are used to underpin the development of a new process that can be used for recovering lead from lead paste in spent lead–acid batteries by lead dioxide reduction combined with flue-gas desulfurization technology. The current paper was supported by the