Background
                  Recent studies have shown that displaced mid-shaft clavicular fractures do not have assured favourable outcomes with non-operative management and nonunion rates could be as high as 20%. In addition many malunite with significant shortening. Non-union or malunion causes functional deficit and many of them may benefit from primary internal fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  We reviewed the results of twenty cases of displaced/comminuted midclavicular fractures, which were treated with primary open reduction and internal fixation with a reconstruction plate placed over the superior surface of clavicle.
               
                  Result
                  All the fractures clinically united by eight weeks. As per Rowe criterion 12 had excellent, six good and two fair results. On an average patients had full functional recovery in four months.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Primary internal fixation of displaced comminuted mid-shaft clavicular fractures leads to predictable and early return to function thus preventing unacceptably high complication rates of nonoperative management of these fractures.Clavicle fractures account for approximately 4% of all fractures. Fractures occur most commonly in the middle third of the bone (76-82%) and less often in the distal (12-21%) and medial (3-6%) thirds [ It is now well documented that displaced mid-third clavicular fractures in adults do poorly when treated non-operatively [ Twenty patients who were operated for displaced middle third clavicle fracture at our institute from April 2003 to April 2005, were reviewed retrospectively. All were male, 21 to 46 years old (average 31years). Fifteen patients had sustained fracture in an automobile accident and five due to fall from height. Eight patients had multiple injuries with an injury-severity score [ After resuscitation of the patients in the emergency room, radiographic examination was performed which included the three-view trauma series of the shoulder devised by Neer and Rockwood. Radiographs of the chest were done routinely to detect any concomitant fractures of the ribs or a pneumothorax. Four patients who had a haemo-pneumothorax underwent insertion of a chest tube. Delay in surgery ranged from one to seven days (average, five days). The patients were operated in supine beach chair position, with the arm draped free for easy manipulation. A curvilinear anterosuperior subcutaneous approach along the Langers lines was employed in all cases. The skin and soft tissue with strap muscles were elevated as a flap to expose the fracture including middle 3/5 Postoperatively, shoulder immobiliser was used to immobilize the shoulder. Elbow and wrist movements were started in immediate post op period. The initial phase of the rehabilitation program involved passive mobilization of the shoulder, which was started in the third week. The second stage was usually started after the fifth postoperative week, with the aim of restoration of the entire range of motion of the shoulder. Muscle-strengthening exercises were started after motion had been restored. The patients were followed up from eighteen to forty months (average, twenty-five months). The function of the shoulder was assessed with use of the scoring system of Rowe [ The average time for clinico-radiological evidence of fracture healing was eight weeks (range six to nine weeks) ( There were no superficial or deep wound infections. The patient who had a fair shoulder score complained of discomfort on extension and abduction of the shoulder. Five patients reported mild discomfort about the clavicular plate, but the symptoms were too mild to warrant removal of the implant. Only in one case where the lateral end of the plate was palpable the plate was removed six months after surgery on achieving complete union and return to full function of the shoulder. Middle-third fractures are the most common clavicle fractures, accounting for approximately 80% of all fractures. Most (97%) of the fractures in this group are mild to moderately displaced and can be treated non-operatively. However, 3% of middle-third clavicle fractures are completely displaced and shortened. This small group of fractures accounts for 90% of nonunion in middle-third fractures and therefore may warrant early open reduction and internal fixation [ It is also of concern that clavicular malunions are now a distinct clinical entity with characteristic orthopaedic (weakness, easy fatigability, winging of scapula), neurologic (thoracic outlet syndrome) and cosmetic (droopy, asymmetric shoulder, difficulty with backpacks, shoulder straps, etc.) symptoms [ Studies from North America and Europe, show that plate fixation is an extremely effective technique for treatment of clavicular shaft fractures with a low complication and nonunion rate [ Prior studies of outcome following clavicular fractures did not describe any strength deficits following nonoperative care of displaced mid shaft clavicular fractures and concentrated on radiographic and surgeon-based results. Hill et al [ The most predictable method to maintain anatomic reduction of displaced mid shaft clavicular fractures, including length and rotation is in my opinion a plate and screw fixation. Although there is a learning curve with this form of treatment, once one becomes proficient in fixing two part clavicle fractures, displaced comminuted clavicle fractures become far less intimidating. The choice to proceed with operative intervention for a displaced mid-shaft clavicular fracture will be a decision made between the surgeon and the patient. None identified