The ISO 647 standard describes a method for the pyrolysis of coal that quantitatively yields water, gas, tar and char, also known as a Fischer Assay. This method has several limitations i.e. the versatility of the method is limited by the thermal properties of aluminium (the retort material); the result is operator-dependent due to manual manipulation of the retort temperature using a gas generated flame. This study evaluates an alternative method (referred to as the automated Fischer Assay setup), which operates with a pre-programmed heating curve using two stainless steel retorts in an electrical oven. Comparison of the methods indicated a lower tar yield for the automated Fischer Assay method, whilst the water yield increased and the gas and char yields were within the same ranges. The automated Fischer Assay experiments were, however, more repeatable when compared to the standard ISO method. Simulated distillation (simdis) and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC-UV) analyses of the tar fractions found no significant differences between the tars from the two methods. Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) found the tars of the automated Fischer Assay method to contain more alkyl-phenolic groups, with a decrease in the mixed compounds (compounds that exhibited both aromatic and aliphatic mass peaks in the mass spectra). It is concluded that the new method is more versatile with regard to the operating temperature control and the pre-programmed heat curve. Additionally, it provides an alternative means to generate a Fischer Assay that is not limited by the thermal properties of the retort material. It is noted, that the goal of the study was not to propose a replacement to the current ISO 647 Fischer Assay method, but to establish an automated system that can be used in pyrolysis research (qualitative and quantitative studies). Results showed that this method is adequate for qualitative and quantitative pyrolysis research and can be used as an alternative, less-biased method for ISO 647.As the global energy focus is shifting to cleaner technologies, more focus will be extended to pyrolysis which is seen as one of the routes to utilize coal for clean coal technologies The Fischer Assay originates from the low temperature retorting research of Franz Fischer and Hans Shrader in 1920 The Fischer Assay method is still widely used in coal pyrolysis and liquefaction research Tar typically constitutes 50–80% of the volatile matter released during pyrolysis and analysis thereof gives a good account of the thermal breakdown of coal It is the objective of this study to evaluate a newly designed Fischer Assay oven method (referred to as the automated Fischer Assay setup), compared to the standard Fischer Assay method as specified by ISO 647. Comparison will be made based on product yields and chemical analysis of the tar fractions. The goal of the study is not to replace the current ISO 647 Fischer Assay method, but to establish an automated system that can be used in pyrolysis research (qualitative and quantitative studies). The following experimental procedures were used in this study. A washed and air dried South African coal sample from the Greenside no. 5 Witbank coal seam was prepared to a size range of +212 to 1000 The Fischer Assay tars were prepared by the use of two methods: (1) according to the standard ISO 647 method over an open flame using aluminium retorts and temperature measurement via the retort sidewall thermocouple, and (2) the new automated Fischer Assay setup oven method (see Specifications for the automated Fischer Assay method are: a 22 operation according to a pre-programmed heat curve over 90 coal bed temperature as well as side wall temperature measurements; stainless steel retorts manufactured according to the specifications of ISO 647; a duplicate sample method with two retorts in the oven, making it possible to conduct two simultaneous Fischer Assay experiments. The choice of stainless steel as retort material is motivated by the aim to provide a method which is more versatile and which is not limited by the retort material. Aluminium, the retort material for ISO 647, has a melting point of 660 In both Fischer Assay methods, volatiles were condensed in a round-bottom flask immersed in ice and water. Water separation was conducted by Dean and Stark distillation with toluene as a solvent The ISO 647 standard provides statistical requirements with regard to the repeatability and reproducibility of the Fischer Assay experiments All tar samples were analyzed using a GC-FID (quantification) and a GCMS (peak identification) fitted with PONA columns (50 Simulated distillation analysis was conducted according to the ASTM D2887 standard. Simulated distillation was conducted using a high-temperature GC-FID fitted with an ARX 2887 Restek column (10 The simdis results in this study were analyzed based on an average boiling point calculation and evaluation of the mass loss curves, as used previously The SEC-UV samples were prepared by dissolving a small amount of tar in 1 Calibration was done by dissolving SEC polystyrene standards (purchased from Varian) with molecular weights ranging from 162 to 19,640 Due to a lag in heat transfer between the chamber temperature of the automated Fischer oven and the coal bed temperature, there is a significant difference in heating time and heating rate observed when compared to the standard ISO setup. The difference in the heat curves can be observed in The heating rate of the automated Fischer Assay setup coal bed temperature was significantly lower at the start of the experiment than that measured using the standard ISO 647 method. The temperature difference observed between the two methods (ISO versus automated) at the end of the experiment (80   From GCMS results were evaluated by grouping the various compounds present in the tar into specific families as reported in literature GCMS results indicated that the families most common in the tar generated by the Fischer Assay experiments were: mixed compounds, alkyl-phenols, aliphatic compounds and alkyl-naphthalene's ( Comparison of the ISO and automated methods (  The recovered mass percentage (with change in temperature) for both the ISO and automated experiments are shown in A typical area normalized SEC-UV chromatogram for each setup is shown in Due to heat transfer limitations of stainless steel compared to aluminium, the heating rate of the automated method was found to be lower than that of the ISO 647 method. This difference affects the final tar yield as well as the length of the experiment. The final tar yield obtained for the automated setup was lower than that of the ISO 647 experiments. The yields of tar, char and water (between duplicate runs) were found to be more repeatable in the case of the automated setup when compared to duplicate experiments of the ISO 647 setup. This confirms that the automated oven method is more repeatable than the standard ISO manually controlled temperature method. With regard to tar quality produced by both methods, only minor differences can be reported. The simdis and SEC-UV analysis indicated only small changes that cannot be regarded as significant. GCMS analysis indicated a change with regard to the mixed, alkyl-phenolic, poly-aromatic and C The automated Fischer Assay method provides the advantage that it is less operator dependant than for the standard ISO 647 method (proven by smaller differences in product yield and smaller variance in tar quality), due to a pre-programmed heat curve. It is noted, that the goal of the study was not to propose a replacement to the current ISO 647 Fischer Assay method, but to establish an automated system that can be used in pyrolysis research (qualitative and quantitative studies). Results showed that this method is adequate for qualitative and quantitative pyrolysis research and can be used as an alternative, less-biased method for ISO 647. It must always be noted when this method is utilized that the tar yield will be slightly lower when compared to the standard ISO method, whilst an increase in pyrolytic water yield will be observed. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance from Sasol R&D personnel with regard to the analysis of the tar samples, with special reference to Mr. Ben Ashton. Mr. H. Pretorius is acknowledged for his experimental work regarding the ISO 647 experiments. The research was conducted in affiliation with the Coal Research Group, Unit of Energy Systems, of the School for Chemical and Minerals Engineering of the North-West University and is acknowledged for funding and valuable assistance. Mr. N.C. Bean is also acknowledged for the NWU oven design. The work presented in this paper is based on the research supported by the