A commercial finite element program, LS-DYNA, was employed to simulate the unloading process of rocks under three dimensional (3D) stresses. The continuous surface cap model (CSCM), was used to model rock behaviour. Using this model, the unloading failure mechanisms of hard rock in a confined state were investigated during the unloading process. The results indicated that when rocks under 3D stress state experience unloading, the process is dominated by strain energy density (SED) rate. The effects of different unloading paths and different confining stresses can be characterised by the SED rate. A significant finding of this study is that the SED rate can quantify the unloading process. Based on the findings, rock failure can be induced by rapid unload of initial stress. In the practical underground excavation engineering, dynamically controlling the SED rate can increase the excavation potential of rocks, minimising the required external excavation energy by using the energy of the stressed rock.With increasing depths of underground mining and civil engineering tunnelling projects, unloading-induced rock failure is a well-known phenomenon in mines and tunnels The theory of classical rock mechanics was established based on load stress in rock masses In practice, rock in deep excavations is in a state of 3D stresses, and confining pressure is an important unloading parameter. It is generally thought that confining stress decreases rock drill-ability In the laboratory, the failure characteristics of confined rock under pressure when stressed by impact have been studied For simulating performance of brittle materials, such as rock or concrete in confined or unconfined states, numerical modelling has proved both popular and powerful. Modelling the initiation and propagation of stress unload and its consequences is a necessary precursor to any underground excavation. The initial state of the underground rock mass is generally assumed to be in static or quasi-static. For a static or quasi-static initialisation-dynamic unloading problem, the implicit solver is commonly used to perform the static initialisation of an explicit dynamic calculation. Recently the implicit and the explicit finite element methods have been performed in sequence to analyse the unloading characteristics of rocks in an unconfined state This paper reports on an investigation into the failure behaviour of hard rock during the unloading process. The implicit and explicit solvers of the finite element method are sequenced to simulate rock unloading when placed under 3D stress. The effect of the initial SED and SED rate on the behaviour of the rock mass during unloading process is investigated. The numerical results indicate that rock failure can be induced by unload the initial stress, but the potential for rock failure decreases with the reduction of SED in the unloading direction. The dominant factors of the dynamic unloading process are clearly identified. Furthermore, it is also found that the rapid unload of the initial stress can be self-induced rock failure. Based on this finding, the failure criteria of hard rock under stress in a confined 3D state was obtained, and the characteristics of the unloading mechanism identified. Although underground rocks are in a state of 3D stresses, mining excavation and civil tunnelling are generally conducted along a single axis. To simplify the problem, it is assumed that the axial and circumference of the rock sample is stressed, and the dynamic unloading process in only performed along the In Additionally, in absence of the body forces, the associated principal stress in Meanwhile, in the practical engineering, in the initial stress unload process, there are lot of unloading paths and SED is time dependent, i.e., Eq. The LS-DYNA program was used to simulate the unloading process of rock in a state of 3D stress. The continuous surface cap model (CSCM), validated in the previous studies, and has been found to be suitable for use with rock The strength of the material is modelled by a combination of the cap and shear surfaces in the low to high confining pressure regimes. The isotropic hardening cap is a two-part function that is either unity or an ellipse, and is modified For the continuous shear and compaction surface, the functional forms of the shear failure and cap surface are multiplied together as Normally, most deep mines are hard rock or medium-hard rock mine; therefore, hard rock parameters were applied to verify the response in the current paper. Based on the previous experimental data Underground rock or ore is naturally stressed and deformed by their mass and volume. Stress initialization is a necessary precursor to further underground unloading process. Thus, the numerical modelling processes suggested by the current study involve two parts: one is stress initialization; the other is unloading. In general, the stress initialization process is commonly performed as a static or quasi-static process, and the unloading processes are dynamic processes. Thus, the implicit solver and explicit solver of the LS-DYNA were used to perform the stress initialization and dynamic unloading processes, respectively. The previous analysis (Eq. The dynamic unloading process can produce a tensile wave. The velocity of the wave obtained from rock properties, is 3839 To provide the wave a sufficient amount of time to propagate along the rock sample, the simulation time is set to 10  In addition, the unloading processes associated with the initial stress unload process, and the magnitude of the initial stress associated with the magnitude of SED. Therefore, the numerical results indicate that when the confining stress is a constant, the greater magnitude of the initial strain energy density leads to greater possibility of unloading failure. Furthermore, for rock in a state of 3D stress, when one plane is unloaded, the confining stresses remaining in the rock mass influences rock failure. Based on the previously published results Furthermore, if the The calculated results clearly indicate that To verify the relationships between unloading failure and confining stresses, a rock sample under  Therefore, according to Eq. The above section characterises the unloading responses associated with the initial strain energy density. All of the tests of the unloading process were conducted that the initial stress along the Different initial stress release rates were investigated to verify the characteristics of the unloading response. Several numerical rock samples were tested. The samples were placed under 3D stress with 80 The results illustrated in Strain energy density, confining stress, and the initial stress unloading rate, therefore, all affect the unloading failure response. When a single factor is the focus of an investigation, others have to be adjusted in order to prevent them interfering with the analysis. However, in reality, it is the combined effect of multiple factors that determine the unloading process. Analysis of the interaction between the factors shows that the SED in the unloading direction depends on the initial axial stress and the confining stress. The initial stress unloading rate is related to the rate of the SED, and is time-dependent. Therefore, the axial SED with its unloading time is related to the axial stress, confining stress and initial stress unloading rate. Rate dependent critical SED factor and SED rate were investigated in the previous publications Therefore, for one direction ( The different unloading paths (linear and nonlinear, in  Further investigation indicated that when the confining stresses are higher than 30% of the axial stresses, a good match between the equivalent SED rates with unloading responses will not be resulted. This is because the unloading process produces a seismic wave, the magnitude of which depends on the value of the equivalent SED rate, and the confining stress can affect this wave. When the confining stress is too high compared to the axial stress, the disturbance of the confining stress on the seismic wave cannot be ignored, and the equivalent SED rate cannot match the unloading failure responses very well. Furthermore, based on the above finding, the equivalent SED rate can be applied to characterise the unloading disturbance or rock failure. On the other hand, if the initial stress could be manipulated in order to induce rock failure, an appropriate method could be developed to minimise the amount of excavation energy required by using the initial energy already present in the rock mass to induce rock failure. Meanwhile, by decreasing the equivalent SED rate, an appropriate excavation method could be employed to protect the stability of the surrounding rocks. For example, during the blasting excavation process, the optimal equivalent SED rate could be achieved by manipulating the spacing network geometry, the charge configuration and/or the delay time. The rock failure in the current study only occurred during the unloading process. The rock mass did not absorb external energy, and failure was produced only through the unloading of its initial energy. The current study indicates, therefore, that the occurrence of unloading rock failure depends on the initial SED and the initial SED rate. In addition, the examples of rock failure in the current study included both direct failure and reflected superposition failure, while in the practical engineering; most of the unloading failure would be direct, as follows in The above studies indicated that the dominant control factor of the unloading response is equivalent SED rate. Therefore, it is assumed that the minimum SED of the rock failure is When these two precursors are satisfied, the rock mass can produce a direct unloading failure without external energy being applied. After many tests during the current study, the minimum values for the initial SED and SED rate for the current material are given as: When values for this material are higher than the minimums, direct unloading rock failure can occur. Therefore, it may be possible to induce unloading rock failure in deep underground rock masses by employing optimal excavation methods to reach the failure criteria. This study found that failure of rock in an initial state of 3D stress can be induced by releasing its initial stress. Rock failure can be induced by the rapid unload of the initial strain energy even when axial stress is far less than the compression strength. The confining stress restrained the energy accumulated in the axial unloading direction. When the initial stress in the unloading direction of the rock specimens is the same, the higher confining stress corresponds with the lower SED in the axial direction, leading to less serious rock failure. In addition, these results indicate that the rock unloading failure responses not only depend on the magnitude of the SED but also on the SED rate, i.e., unloading failure is time-dependent. The SED and SED rate are the dominant factors in the unloading process. The equivalent SED rate was introduced to characterise the unloading failure response. The results indicate that the equivalent SED rate can approximately quantify the characteristics of the unloading failure response of rock in a 3D stress state. In addition, the necessary precursors of unloading failure were also found in this study, that is, the rock should have enough SED and SED rate in the unloading process. The research presented in this paper was jointly supported by the