The batch self organizing map (SOM) is applied to extracting the feature of process images for the dynamic behavior of an aerated agitation vessel. When time-series images preprocessed by particle image velocimetry are computed by the SOM, the generated map provides visible and intelligible information for periodic behavior of patterns for gas dispersion. It is also shown that the sigmoid transformation of data enhances the efficiency of generating a more comprehensible map. Furthermore, the SOM is demonstrated to be effective in extracting the feature of small displacements of the impeller shaft inside the vessel.The self organizing map (SOM) proposed by Kohonen is a neural network in which the unsupervised learning algorithm is adopted What is “process imaging”? Process imaging is an effective method for pattern recognition and automatic control of a distributed parameter system in the field of chemical engineering In the present article, process images of interest are images of an aerated agitation process that is specified as the process of multiphase flow. In chemical industry, the aerated agitation is applied to enhance the efficiency of gas absorption into liquid by dispersing gas bubbles in the vessel, which is, for example, exploited in bio industrial equipment known as a “jar fermentor”. Feature extraction of the spatial distribution of bubbles is significant for monitoring of the dynamic behavior of gas absorption, although the gas dispersion is generally evaluated as the average amount of “gas hold-up” by measuring the change of the liquid level. Under steady operation of an agitator, the pattern of gas dispersion in the vessel changes with time nonlinearly and periodically. In other words, temporal transition of images of gas dispersion shows diversity and periodicity in high-order dimensional space. Therefore, it is expected that application of the SOM will be effective in extracting the feature of the transition of gas dispersion. The purpose of the present study is to investigate an effective method based on the SOM in extracting the feature of the temporal transition of gas dispersion. In process imaging of gas dispersion in a vessel, a direct imaging system using a CCD video camera is adopted and the acquired frames are preprocessed using a particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) method  In the present article, we adapt the batch SOM, which is a type of SOM, because the transition of process images in an aerated agitation vessel shows diverse and complex behavior in the nature of multiphase flow. In the first step, shown in In process imaging, there are two methods for data acquisition: indirect imaging and direct imaging. For example, process tomography (PT) is a good method of indirectly imaging the flow pattern inside equipment  A light sheet is used to enhance the edges of bubbles, so that the accuracy of data processing can be increased in the following PIV. The light sheet is generated by a diode-pumped solid-state (DPSS) laser called “excel” (Laser Quantum Ltd.) that produces a high-power green beam, the wavelength of which is 532  In image recognition of an object's motion, there are mainly two methods. One method is based on the difference between two freeze-frame pictures, and the other is based on the velocity vector of an object, which is estimated from moving images. PIV technology is considered to be classified as the latter method and is popular for flow pattern visualizations in many application, such as airflow around a vehicle and flow inside a tank. Typically, minute particles are added to flow for the purpose of visualization, assuming that each particle moves at the local velocity of the flow. The distribution of particles on a cross section that can visualized by the above-mentioned light sheet is captured by a CCD video camera. Each of the two exposures of the video camera is recorded onto a separate frame. A frame that is converted into numbers, such as RGB values, is divided into small space domains, referred to as “test areas”. By computing the cross-correlation of the two frames with respect to the test areas, a vector of local displacement of the particle image can be estimated. The vectors of local displacement of the image can be converted into two component vectors of local velocities in a flow, considering the time difference of the two frames and the scaling factor of the frame. In the present article, we used PIVview 2C ver. 2.3 (PIVTEC GmbH) commercial software. In the application of PIV, a wide analytical domain was considered to influence the increase of computational time and the detection of noise, e.g., reflections of the light on the wall of the vessel and on the water surface. Significant noise was detected when the overall vessel is considered as the analytical domain. Thus, we determined the domain as depicted by the box in  In the present article, we used SOMine ver. 4.0 (Viscovery Software GmbH), which is based on the concept and algorithm of the “batch” SOM introduced by Kohonen In contrast to the conventional SOM algorithm, the batch SOM algorithm first processes all data vectors, and then updates the map once. The batch SOM algorithm is faster and more robust than the original Kohonen algorithm. According to user's manual of SOMine, the initial data vectors are decided by the principal component analysis (PCA) of the input data that are prepared for training. That is to say, in the present article, training starts from a map representing linearized space for the multi-dimensional input data. Topological connection between two arbitrary nodes is defined by the Gaussian function. The radius of the Gaussian function is referred to as tension in the SOMine, which is used for determining the degree of smoothing of the map. Then, in the training of the map, the SOMine updates a node vector by setting it to the mean value of all weighted data vectors that match that node and its neighboring nodes, in a manner similar to the K-means method. During the training process, the number of nodes in a map is not fixed but grows from a fairly small number to the desired number of nodes, in order to implement more efficient training. Each map is trained for a certain number of batches using decreasing tension. When the number of nodes is increased, the growth of the map is compensated by a corresponding increase in the tension. A total of 207 velocity vectors are acquired from the two frames by using the PIV, as shown in In the training process, the value of each component was scaled to the range between First, for the case in which the rotational speed of the impeller Moreover, the temporal transition of patterns could be monitored using the map. Next, cluster maps that change with impeller position were analyzed under the condition that the flow rate of the supplied gas is constant. In this analysis, two sets of 30 images for the cases in which values of In the three maps of In the previous subsection (Section 3.1), 30 images were prepared for the mapping for the case in which The magnitudes of the velocities for all 207 cells were then averaged in each cluster, in order to investigate quantitatively the distinction of the three clusters. It was thought that large and small magnitudes of the velocities could be correlated with several and few bubbles, respectively. Therefore, we developed data transformation using a nonlinear function in order to enhance the sensitivity of training to small changes in data vectors. In the present article, the sigmoid-typed transformation was adopted to redefine the internal representation of a component in the map. The sigmoid function can generate a more balanced distribution by stretching the center of the data histogram. The gradient and offset of the sigmoid transformation can be used to reduce the impact of outliers on the training process. In the case in which the gradient was set at 1 and the offset was zero, the generated map could be also separated into three clusters, as shown in Furthermore, we investigated the distribution of 30 initial data in the three clusters by counting the numbered nodes in each cluster. These time-series data were acquired at a time interval of 0.2 When the impeller shaft is displaced from its normal position, the dynamic behavior of gas dispersion changes and process efficiency often decreases. However, there are some difficult cases in which small changes in bubble behavior cannot be diagnosed by watching video frames, due to the minute displacement of the shaft. Therefore, we investigated the applicability of the above-mentioned SOM to fault diagnosis in the case in which the impeller shaft was displaced only slightly from the normal position, as shown in A total of 450 sets of process images were collected under the conditions in which the shaft was set in the normal position and Then, recall of 50 vectors for abnormal data was computed by the generated map. In In order to examine the feature of the distribution of abnormal data on the map from another viewpoint, the abnormal data were analyzed by PCA. In the present article, we used XLSTAT-Pro (Addinsoft), which included a function of PCA. Since, unlike SOM, PCA does not have a function of recall, 450 normal data and 50 abnormal data were analyzed simultaneously. Each observation in the PCA was a process image represented by a data vector, the components of which were the magnitude of velocities for cells in the analytical domain. In this subsection, the analytical domain was reduced from 9×23 cells to 7×15 cells, because the recoding resolution decreased with the increase in frame rate. In addition, the input data for the observations were modified by the sigmoid function in advance. In previous subsections, the applicability of SOM to feature extraction of process images was described. In order to enhance the efficiency of the feature extraction, it is necessary to investigate not only the method of application of SOM, but also process imaging. As shown in In order to investigate the influence of reducing the analytical domain, in the present article, we divided three domains in the longitudinal direction. In addition, three cases were prepared by combining the two gray domains, as shown in Therefore, in this case study on the displacement of the impeller shaft, it was shown that the data in the middle part of the analytical domain had functions that were significant for extracting the feature of the displacement. Finally, the flexibility in recall of the map generated without reducing the analytical domain was investigated using the data of another abnormal condition. In the test of recall, we prepared 50 process images that were acquired under the condition that the impeller shaft was displaced to the rear of the vessel, as shown in The batch SOM was applied to feature extraction of process images for the dynamic behavior of an aerated agitation vessel. Input data to the SOM were acquired directly by CCD video camera and were preprocessed by PIV. When time-series process images were computed by SOM, diverse and periodic behavior of the gas dispersion pattern could be visualized. In addition, clustering of the generate map provided visible and intelligible information for investigating the appropriate position of an impeller in the vessel. Then, it was shown that data transformation based on the sigmoid function could enhance efficiency of distinguishing small changes between the nodes representing “well-dispersed” images. Furthermore, it was demonstrated that a cluster map generated by time-series process images could be applied to feature extraction of the lateral displacement of impeller shaft inside the vessel. The flexibility of the cluster map was also revealed through simulation of recalling other abnormal images, which were acquired under the condition that the impeller shaft was displaced in the rear of the vessel. In the feature extraction of the abnormal conditions, we investigated not only the application method of SOM, but also data acquisition and selection. Through simulations of reducing the analytical domain, clustering of time-series process images based on SOM was clarified to be effective in extracting slight changes in condition of the aerated agitation vessel. The present research was supported in part by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (no. 17206079 and 19656208) from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) and by the Global COE Program “Education and Research Center for Emergence of New Molecular Chemistry” of JSPS.