Alkali treatment of lignocellulosic biomass is conducted to remove hemi-cellulose and lignin, further increasing the reactivity and accessibility of cellulose. Ultrasound-assisted xanthation of alkali cellulose is optimized by response surface methodology (RSM) with a Box-Behnken design. A predicting mathematical model is obtained by fitting experimental data, and it is verified by analysis of variance. Response surface plots and the contour plots obtained from the model are applied to determine the interactions of experimental variables. The optimum conditions are NaOH concentration 1.3mol/L, ultrasonic time 71.6min and CS2 dosage 1.5mL. FTIR, SEM and XPS characterizations confirm the synthesis and sorption mechanism of cellulose xanthate (CX). Biosorption of Pb (II) onto CX obeys pseudo-second order model and Langmuir model. The sorption mechanism is attributed to surface complexation or ion exchange. CX shows good reusability for Pb (II) sorption. The maximum sorption capacity of Pb(II) is 134.41mg/g, higher than that of other biosorbents. CX has great potential as an efficient and low-cost biosorbent for wastewater treatment.Heavy metals (HMs) pose a great threat to human beings ( Biosorption of HMs is investigated using various lignocellulosic biomasses, such as agricultural wastes, wood wastes and aquatic plants ( Conventional method is used to evaluate the effect of experimental factors on xanthation modification ( Lignocellulosic biomass, camphor leaf ( Alkali treatment of LB was conducted to remove lignin and hemi-cellulose with NaOH solution (1.0 Ultrasound-assisted xanthation of the alkali cellulose with NaOH solution and carbon disulfide (CS Box Behnken design (BBD) is an efficient option for fitting response surfaces using three evenly spaced levels based on the construction of a balanced incomplete block design ( The modeling and statistical analysis were conducted using a software of Design Expert 8.6.0 (Stat-Ease Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). Experimental data were fitted to a quadratic polynomial model, which can be shown as Eq. Fourier transform infrared spectrum (FTIR) was determined using a FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet Avatar 360, Thermo Electron Corporation, USA). Surface morphology was achieved using a scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) (Quanta FEG 250, FEI, USA). The specific surface area was measured by N Pb(II) sorption was evaluated by batch experiments in an oven oscillator (SHA-B, Changzhou Aohua Instrument Co. Ltd., China) at fixed stirring speed of 150 The major components of LB are cellulose, lignin and hemi-cellulose. Alkali treatment was carried out to remove hemi-cellulose, lignin and low molecular weight matters in LB, and it also improved the reactivity and accessibility of hydroxyl groups in cellulose molecules ( Optimization of ultrasound-assisted xanthation was conducted by a 3 The predicted values versus experimental values of the response show a straight line with satisfactory correlation (Fig. S2), implying that the model can be effectively applied for optimization of ultrasound-assisted xanthation ( The coefficient ( To determine the effect of independent variables and their mutual interaction on the sorption capacity of Pb(II), the contour plots and response surface plots ( The software predicts that the optimum conditions are NaOH concentration 1.3 FTIR spectra of CX before and after Pb(II) sorption are shown in The SEM morphology of CX is shown in Fig. S3a. A porous and uneven morphology originated from LB is observed, indicating large specific surface area for Pb(II) sorption. The specific surface area of CX is 5.42 The XPS survey spectrum of CX is shown in As shown in Solution pH is key variable for sorption process. Precipitation of Pb(II) occurs in the form of Pb(OH) As shown in Sorption kinetics is studied by pseudo-first order model and pseudo-second order kinetic model (  Langmuir and Freundlich models are used to describe sorption process ( Due to lack of consistency with respect to experimental methods and conditions, direct comparison of sorption capacity is difficult. As listed in Table S4 (in Supplementary Material), compared to raw LB, xanthation modification improves significantly the sorption capacity of Pb(II). The maximum sorption capacity of Pb(II) onto CX is higher than that of previous adsorbents. Due to wide availability, low cost and environmental friendliness, CX has great potential as an efficient and low-cost biosorbent for wastewater treatment. The effect of coexisting ions (K To examine the regeneration and cycle performance, CX were reused in five consecutive runs. Fig. S4 shows that CX can be reused and retains high sorption capacity after five cycles, indicating CX is a promising biosorbent for efficient removal of Pd(II) from aqueous solution. Ultrasound-assisted xanthation of alkali cellulose from lignocellulosic biomass was conducted for heavy metal uptake. Response surface methodology (RSM) with a Box-Behnken design was employed to optimize xanthation process, and a predicting model is obtained by fitting experimental data. The optimum conditions are NaOH concentration 1.3 Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: