The stoichiometric relation for the extraction of zirconium and hafnium from acidic chloride solutions was investigated with Versatic Acid 10. Extraction runs were carried out batchwise at ambient temperature in the pH range from 1.4 to 2.3 for zirconium and from 2.3 to 2.9 for hafnium. The results showed that zirconium was extracted in the form of ZrO2+ rather than Zr4+ and the extracted zirconium was solvated with two molecules of Versatic Acid 10 monomer. In the case of hafnium, it could be concluded that the extracted species of Hf4+ ion with Versatic Acid 10 (HR) was a monomeric compound of HfR4. The equilibrium constant for the extraction of zirconium and hafnium was found to be 4.39×10−4 and 6.92×10−12, respectively, at an ionic strength of 0.1 and at 298 K.Zirconium and hafnium have increased rapidly in commercial importance. Zirconium is used in nuclear reactors as a structural and container material and also finds use in a variety of alloy steels. Hafnium is used as a control material in water-cooled nuclear reactors and rectifiers. As is well known, zirconium and hafnium have very similar chemical properties and are commonly referred to as “chemical isotopes” At the present time, solvent extraction processes are employed on a commercial scale to separate hafnium from zirconium even though some alternative processes such as ion exchange, fractional crystallization and vapor phase dechlorination have been proposed by some researchers In their work on the sorption of Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta and Pa at trace level towards a macroporous anion exchanger in HF–HCl media,  In their work on the extraction and mutual separation of quadrivalent titanium, zirconium and hafnium,  In this work, the solvent extraction of zirconium and hafnium from acidic chloride solutions with Versatic Acid 10, an alkyl monocarboxylic acid, was investigated in order to obtain the stoichiometric equation for the extraction of the metals. Versatic Acid 10 (alkyl monocarboxylic acid), supplied by Shell Chem., was used as the extractant. It was dissolved in kerosene without further purification. The concentration of Versatic Acid 10 in the organic phase was determined by potentiometric titration with an alkaline solution. The properties of Versatic Acid 10 used in the work are presented in The aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving ZrCl The extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at 298 K, the phase ratio of the organic to the aqueous solution was 1. After extraction for 1 h, the equilibrated emulsion was settled sufficiently to allow the phase disengagement and small amounts of liquid sample were taken from the aqueous solution for the determination of zirconium or hafnium. The concentration of zirconium and hafnium in the aqueous solution was determined with ICP spectrometry (Plasmascan 710). The corresponding organic phase concentration was calculated by difference. In the work on stoichiometric relation for the extraction of the gold–thiourea complex with D2EHPA, the authors have proposed an extraction equation associated with the metal complex in the aqueous phase and the extractant in the organic phase On the other hand, if the extracted species in the organic phase are associated with each other, the extraction reaction can be expressed as follows: The equilibrium constant of  It can be seen from As shown in From the plot of log It can be concluded, therefore, that the extracted species of ZrO  From As shown in Finally, it can be concluded that the Hf The stoichiometric relation for the solvent extraction of zirconium and hafnium from acidic chloride solution has been studied using Versatic Acid 10 as extractant. The results showed that zirconium was extracted in the form of ZrO The extraction reaction with Versatic Acid 10 was suggested to be as follows: The equilibrium constant for the extraction of zirconium was found to be 4.39×10 In the case of hafnium extraction with Versatic Acid 10, the stoichiometric equation could be given by distribution coefficient equilibrium constant of equilibrium constant of total number of extractant molecules in the extracted species metal or metal complex ion monomeric form of Versatic Acid 10 dimeric form of Versatic Acid 10 degree of association valency of metal or metal complex ion aqueous phase organic phase