The extraction and separation of heavy rare earths (REs) using newly synthesized α-aminophosphonic acid extractant 2-ethylhexyl-3-(2-ethylhexylamino)pentan-3-yl phosphonic acid (HEHAPP, HA) in n-heptane were investigated from chloride medium. The extraction stoichiometries of lanthanum, gadolinium, yttrium and lutetium are determined to be REA
                     3 by the slope analysis method. The favorable separation factors of adjacent heavy REs(Ⅲ), i.e. β
                     Y/Ho, β
                     Er/Y, β
                     Tm/Er, β
                     Yb/Tm and β
                     Lu/Yb, are determined to be 1.87, 1.36, 3.21, 3.22 and 1.93, respectively, when extracted from a binary system at proper condition. The loading capacities of HA for Ho, Er, Yb and Lu increase in the order Ho < Er < Yb < Lu with the values being 0.201, 0.205, 0.216 and 0.229 mol/L, respectively. So HA would be a potential extractant for the separation of heavy REs(Ⅲ). Among inorganic acids such as H2SO4, HNO3 and HCl, HCl is tested to be the most effective stripping agent.Rare earths (REs) are widely applied to metallurgical industry, glass, ceramics, chemical engineering, nuclear industry, electronics, agriculture and pharmaceuticals due to their unique physicochemical properties in luminescence, electronics, magnetism, energy catalysis and so on. So far solvent extraction has developed into a major technique for RE separation and purification in industry. Recently α-aminophosphonic acids have been studied for the extraction of alkaline-earth metals and rare metals. Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphite was provided by Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co., Ltd. and purified by distilling. 2-ethylhexylamine (98%) and 3-pentanone (G.R.) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Company. Potassium iodide and Stock solutions of the REs were prepared by dissolving the oxides in concentrated hydrochloric acid and diluting to the required volume with distilled water. The concentrations of rare earth ions (RE(Ⅲ)) were analyzed by titration with a standard solution of EDTA at pH 5.5 using xylenol orange as an indicator. The hydrochloric acid concentration was determined by titration with standard NaOH solution using phenolphthalein as an indicator. All aqueous solutions were prepared with deionized water. Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, PerkinElmer Optimal 8000) was used to determine the metal concentrations of mixed REs solutions. NMR spectra were obtained on a Bruker AV 600. Mass spectra were recorded on a Bruker Daltonics Flex mass spectrum analyzer. IR spectra (KBr pellets) were measured on a Bruker Vertex 70 spectrometer. The extractant 2-ethylhexyl-3-(2-ethylhexylamino)pentan-3-yl-phosphonic acid (HEHAPP, H The resulting mixture was distilled to remove solvent and washed with 20 mL water to remove impurities, and then washed with 20 mL 4 wt% NaOH solutions. The organic phase and aqueous solution were separated and both treated with 6 mol/L HCl solutions to pH < 1. The oily liquid thus separated out on the aqueous aliquot was combined with the acidified organic portion and followed by being successively washed with water until no chloride ion could be detected. Upon drying and evaporation, oily compound of H The extraction experiments were carried out as follows: equal volumes (5 mL) of aqueous and organic solutions were mixed and shaken for 15 min to ensure complete equilibrium. All experiments were processed at 298 ± 1 K unless otherwise stated. After phase separation, the concentrations of REs(Ⅲ) in the aqueous phase were analyzed by titration method or ICP-OES. The concentrations in the organic phase were calculated from the mass balance according to Eq. The loaded organic phase was stripped by different inorganic acids of equal volume. The mixtures were shaken at 298 ± 1 K for 15 min, then settled and separated by gravity. After the split of the phases, the RE(Ⅲ) concentration in the aqueous phase was quantified to assess the stripping ratio ( A series of extraction experiments on the individual REs were processed with 0.05 mol/L H This extractant has stronger extraction ability than the typical extractants such as P507 and Cyanex 272. As shown in To further evaluate the separation efficiency of H For the binary Y/Ho system ( Before the study on the extraction mechanism, the effect of temperature on the RE(Ⅲ) extraction by H Generally, it is supposed that the acidic extractants are in the form of dimers in the solvents of low polarity. Thus, the extraction equilibrium constant The distribution ratio By combining Eqs. In order to investigate the extraction stoichiometry of REs, a series of experiments were carried out by varying the concentrations of hydrochloric acid and the extractant (H Similarly, the plots of lg Based on the above results, Eq. The values of lg To further understand the chelating of the extractant and the metal ions, the IR spectra of H The loading capacities of H The stripping of Yb(Ⅲ) from the loaded organic phase was studied using inorganic acids such as HCl, HNO A series of extraction-stripping cycles for Yb(Ⅲ) were carried out to investigate the possible recycling of the used extractant and chemical stability of HEHAPP. The Yb(III)-loaded organic phase was stripped by 6 mol/L HCl of equal volumes three times and washed with distilled water until no the Cl The newly synthesized α-aminophosphonic acid extractant 2-ethylhexyl-3-(2-ethylhexylamino)pentan-3-yl-phosphonic acid (H