The ability to recycle and reuse process water is a major contributing factor toward increased sustainability in the mining industry. However, the presence of toxic compounds has prevented this in most bioleaching operations. The ASTERTM process has been used for the bioremediation of cyanide (CN) and thiocyanate (SCN−) containing effluents at demonstration and commercial scale, increasing the potential for recycling of the treated effluent. The process relies on a complex consortium of microorganisms and laboratory tests have shown that the biomass retention, in suspended flocs or attached biofilm, significantly improved SCN− degradation rates. The current research evaluated the process performance in the presence of suspended solids (up to 5.5%m/v) ahead of implementation at a site where complete tailings removal is not possible. Experiments were performed in four 1l CSTRs (with three primary reactors in parallel at an 8h residence time, feeding one secondary reactor at a 2.7h residence time). Stable operation at the design specifications (5.5% solids, 100mg/l SCN− feed, effluent SCN− <1mg/l) was achieved within 50days, including a period of adaptation. The pH had the most significant effect on performance, with significant inhibition below pH 6. The presence of gypsum and anhydrite phases in the fresh tailings was most likely responsible for the observed decrease in pH. A maximum SCN− degradation rate of >57mg/l/h was achieved, despite no obvious floc formation. Microbial ecology studies (16S rRNA clone library) revealed reduced diversity relative to reactors operated without suspended solids.impeller diameter (m) particle size (m) acceleration of gravity (m critical impeller speed (rpm) solids mass fraction dimensionless geometrical factor density (kg/m liquid density (kg/m kinematic velocity (m Cyanide is extensively used in various industries, including gold extraction, steel works, for drug manufacturing, pesticide and plastics manufacturing, electroplating and photo development. The most recent figures presented by the International Cyanide Management Code for the Gold Mining Industry ( Gold ores can be classified as free milling or refractory. In the case of free milling gold ores, the milled ore is exposed to dilute cyanide solutions, in the presence of oxygen, resulting in the formation of gold-cyanide complexes ( Historically, roasting of the concentrate was used to remove sulphur and arsenic, after which the calcine was leached. The process had relatively low capital and operating costs, but produced significant amounts of sulphur dioxide gas. The adaptation of the technology to meet more stringent environmental regulations has meant that roasting is no longer attractive from a capital and operating cost perspective. Pressure oxidation (POX) has become a more attractive option, resulting in very high gold recovery, while the cost of neutralising the calcrete is low. The capital costs remain high, particularly as POX operations generally require an on-site oxygen plant. Technology based on the biological oxidation of sulphide minerals has emerged as a viable alternative, with the BIOX The sulphide oxidation efficiency of a typical BIOX® operation is greater than 95%, indicating that a certain amount of reduced sulphur passes into the cyanidation reactor. Laboratory tests have shown that sulphide minerals are unlikely to react with cyanide, while the reaction of elemental sulphur and cyanide is slow. However, the two most reactive forms of sulphur are polysulphide and thiosulphate ( Thiocyanate is particularly toxic to bioleaching organisms, with significant inhibition of iron and sulphur oxidation observed at concentrations greater than 1 The treatment of waste from cyanidation processes ranges from natural destruction of simple-cyanide solutions, which is a slow process free of human intervention, to complex processes treating slurries which require specialised infrastructure and technical knowledge. Treatment technologies can be classified into three broad groups: (1) physical processes, (2) chemical processes or (3) biological processes ( Cyanide (HCN and CN A collaborative project between Gold Fields and BHP Billiton was initiated in the mid 1990’s to develop a process to treat CN and SCN Based on the relevance of the ASTER The work described in this paper investigates the potential to operate the ASTER The solid material was provided by Gold Fields in two batches. It was generated by SGS during small scale leaching and gold recovery tests as part of the bankable feasibility process for the development of the Runruno operation in the Philippines. The solids represented the expected size and composition of tailings to be produced during full scale operation. The characteristics of the solids were consistent for both batches, being fine grained, with a D The mixed microbial consortium used to inoculate the reactors was derived from the stock ASTER The work was conducted using four continuously stirred tank reactors, each with an operating volume of 1 The reactors for the experimental work were configured to replicate the proposed design of the Runruno ASTER Each of the primary reactors was inoculated with 200 However, performance under these conditions was poor, with only limited SCN The system was operated under the desired specifications (5.5% solids, 8 From day 102 the pH of the feed was increased from pH 7 to pH 9 and the residence time in the primary reactors was increased from 8 to 12 A dilution series of a 10 To assess the culture-independent microbial community, total genomic DNA was extracted from a 150 A single representative of each 16S and 18S rDNA OTU was sequenced using the universal M13F (5′-GTAAAACGACGGCCAGT-3′) and M13R (5′-GCGGATAACAATTTCACACAGG-3′) primers (Macrogen). Homology and similarity searches of DNA consensus sequences were performed using the nucleotide–nucleotide basic local alignment search tool (BLASTN) program ( The initial attempt to operate the system under conditions similar to those anticipated at the operation (100 The reintroduction of solids, from day 26, was performed gradually. Effective SCN Visual observation of the primary reactors indicated some accumulation of solids at the bottom of the reactors. Prior to setting up the reactors, a mixing study was conducted to determine empirically the critical impeller speed ( The volume in the reactor was maintained by a level control overflow port near the top of the reactor, so only particles that were suspended to that level would exit the reactor. The increase in impeller speed to 500 The solids used in this study were generated during small-scale metallurgical testing, to assess gold recovery, so a limited mass was provided at the start. As a consequence, the solids had to be recycled by centrifuging the accumulated effluent from the secondary reactor and drying the recovered material (70 The combined effect of the increased agitation rate, increased feed SCN The pH of the feed suspension was increased from pH 7 to pH 9 on day 102 and the feed rate was reduced on day 105, resulting in an increase in residence time from 8 to 12 Following stable performance (20 residence times) at a feed SCN The thiocyanate degradation rate data are represented in The pH during the first days of the study was between pH 5.3 and pH 6.1 ( The dominant mineral phases were bytownite, a calcium rich member of the plagioclase solid solution series of feldspar minerals, muscovite, an aluminium and potassium rich phyllosilicate and quartz. These minerals accounted for over 60% of the total composition, but have very low solubility so would not have influenced the solution chemistry. The gypsum and anhydrite (anhydrous CaSO The apparent relationship between pH and performance of the system prompted a parallel investigation to determine the effective operating window, with respect to pH. The study identified an optimum between pH 7 and pH 7.5, with decrease in degradation rate of over 50% below pH 6.5 and above pH 8.5 ( The presence of suspended solids had a significant impact on the habit of the microbial community. The stock reactor, in the absence of solids, became colonised with a thick, gelatinous biofilm. The biofilm was densely packed with microbial cells, with several distinct morphologies visible ( The microbial community was characterised by a combination of culture-dependent and –independent methods. Single PCR amplicons were observed for both 16S and 18S rRNA genes (data not shown), from total DNA extracted from the reactor, indicating the presence of bacteria and eukaryotes, respectively. A total of 16 bacterial and three eukaryotic isolates were cultured. In addition, 48 clones of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene clone library were analysed by Amplified Ribosomal DNA Restriction Analysis (ARDRA) and 30 ARDRA patterns were selected for sequencing. A total of 24 18S rRNA gene library clones were analysed by ARDRA and four were sequenced. The sequenced Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) formed the basis for the 16S and 18S rRNA phylogenetic analyses of the bacterial and eukaryotic communities within the reactor system. The analyses indicated approximately 21 different bacterial genera within the 16S rRNA clone library ( The 18S rRNA gene clone library revealed the presence of four eukaryotes within the solids reactor system ( The data presented in this paper show that efficient thiocyanate degradation is possible in the presence of suspended solids, at solids concentrations of up to 5.5%. A period of adaptation was required prior to stable performance being achieved. The ease with which the community is able to adapt appears dependent on the properties of the solid material. Adaptation to tailings with a greater mean particle size and density has progressed more slowly. Thiocyanate degradation rates of up to 57 The primary constraint on performance of the system was found to be pH, with the efficiency of thiocyanate degradation falling sharply when the pH in the reactors fell below pH 6. The optimal pH window for the community was determined to be between pH 6.5 and pH 8.5 in a parallel study. The tailings provided for this study resulted in the consumption of alkalinity in the medium, coupled with the release of calcium and sulphate. This suggests that pH control will be a critical element of the process operation at Runruno. The presence of suspended solids had a profound effect on the composition of the microbial community, with a significant reduction in diversity relative to reactors operated in the absence of solids. This appears to be related to the absence of biofilm and the anaerobic and microaerobic microenvironments associated with the biofilm. Despite the lower diversity and the lack of biomass retention, high rates of thiocyanate degradation were achieved. The results show that the ASTER The authors thank Dr Nico Fischer and Dr Kirsten Corin for their assistance with the XRD analysis and data interpretation. The authors would like to acknowledge Gold Fields Ltd. and Biomin SA for their financial support, supply of materials and valuable discussions. Sue Harrison and Andries van Zyl acknowledge the financial support from the