Three-body impact abrasive wear behaviors of 20Si2Ni3 steels treated by Quenching–Partitioning–Tempering (Q–P–T) and quenching–tempering (Q–T) processes were investigated under four impact energies from 0.5J to 3.5J. The results indicated that wear mass losses increased and then decreased with the increasing impact energy and the peak value occurred under 2.5J. The Q–P–T steel owned less wear mass loss than the Q–T steel. The wear characteristics of two steels were mainly shown as ploughing‐cutting wear, abrasive-embedded wear and strain fatigue wear. The Q–P–T sample suffered heavier ploughing‐cutting wear than the Q–T sample under a low impact energy, and underwent more strain fatigue wears under a high impact energy. During the wear tests, several hundred microns of hardened layers were formed and their corresponding thicknesses increased with the increasing impact energy. The Q–P–T steel obtained thicker hardened layer because of its high phase transformation strengthening and work hardening during the wears. As a result, the wear resistance of the Q–P–T steel was enhanced effectively, and thereby the excellent impact abrasive wear performance was achieved.Plenty of problems are caused by wear of materials in the industry, such as deterioration of mechanical properties and changes of machine precision. As one of the commonest industrial problems, wear leads to both significant economic and environmental losses due to shortening the working life of equipment In the above-mentioned industries, the transformation induced plasticity (i.e. TRIP) steel has been widely applied due to its combination of high strength and high toughness This paper is focus on the 20Si2Ni3 steels treated by the Q–P–T process and the conventional quenching and tempering (Q–T) process. Their mechanical properties and microstructures are compared. The influences of two processes on three-body impact abrasive wear behaviors of 20Si2Ni3 steels are investigated to reveal the excellent anti-wear performance of the Q–P–T steel. The 20Si2Ni3 steel used in this paper was developed by Central Iron & Steel Research Institute (CISRI). Its chemical composition (wt.%) is shown in The steels are treated by the Q–P–T process and the conventional Q–T process, as presented in Tensile tests and Charpy V reference impact tests are conducted for steels treated by two processes in order to measure mechanical properties before wear tests. Samples are designed as cylinders with 5 Three-body impact abrasive wear tests are conducted on a dynamic load abrasive wear tester MLD-10 manufactured by Jinan Yihua Tribology Testing Technology Co., Ltd, China, as presented in The experimental samples are mechanically polished using standard metallographic techniques, followed by etching in a 2 The measurements of microstructures and mechanical properties for two steels are performed before and after three-body impact abrasive wear tests. The experimental results are presented and compared as follows.  An intercept method is used to measure and analyze the distribution of martensite packet sizes in Moreover, X-Ray profiles of two steels treated by the Q–P–T and the Q–T process are shown in Generally, the martensite volume fraction can be expressed as a function of quenching temperature as Eq. The martensite fraction of 85.6% and untransformed austenite fraction of 14.4% are obtained based on Eq.  Three-body impact abrasive wear tests are conducted on experimental steels. The wear mass losses are measured, including absolute mass loss and relative mass loss.  Furthermore, Cross-sectional studies are performed for two steels treated by the Q–P–T process and the Q–T process under different impact energies.  Different microstructures and mechanical properties have been obtained for the Q–P–T sample and the Q–T sample before and after wear tests. The following discussion is proposed analyzing experimental results. The impact abrasive wear test for high-toughness materials is a plastic deformation procedure including two steps. The first is impact extrusion step. Abrasives destroy the material surface to form deformation lips under the impact extrusion. The second is rolling extrusion step. The deformation lips are ground off under rolling extrusion. In this paper, initial yield strength of Q–P–T samples is lower than that of Q–T samples. The plastic deformation occurs more easily under impact extrusion for the Q–P–T sample, which absorbs some impact energies and delays the formation of deformation lip. Moreover, abrasives are easily impacted and embedded into the Q–P–T sample due to its high toughness, which reduces the stress concentration on sample surface and hinders the crack propagation. Thus, the surface of the Q–P–T sample is not easy to grind off during the following rolling extrusion. Therefore, the low yield strength is helpful to promote the occurrence of plastic deformation, and the high toughness is favorable to embed abrasives into samples during the impact extrusion step. The comprehensive effect of low yield strength and high toughness enhances the wear resistance of the Q–P–T sample. Nearly no retained austenite exists in the subsurface of worn steels based on the XRD diffraction analysis, as shown in Several hundred microns depth of hardening layer was formed during wear tests, as the above presented in The Q–P–T sample has better microstructural uniformity than the Q–T sample, as shown in The effects of two heat treatments on the impact abrasive wear characteristics of an alloy steel were investigated using a special apparatus to provide vertical impacts on a surface covered by flowing quartz sand grains. The following conclusions are presented. The wear characteristics of Q–P–T steels and Q–T steels are mainly shown as ploughing‐cutting wear, abrasive-embedded wear and strain fatigue wear. The Q–P–T steel suffers heavier ploughing‐cutting wear than the Q–T steel under a low impact energy, and undergoes more strain fatigue wears under a high impact energy. The wear mass loss increases and then decreases with the increasing impact energy and the peak value occurs under 2.5 The wear performance of the Q–P–T steel is enhanced due to its microstructure and mechanical properties. More retained austenite helps to obtain thicker hardened layer because of its high phase transformation strengthening and work hardening. The lower yield strength and high toughness promote plastic deformation, reduce the impact wear on the sample surface and hinder the formation of surface cracks. Besides, the uniform microstructure distribution decreases the stress concentration and avoids the nucleation and propagation of cracks inside the samples during wears. This research was supported by