According to the infinite representation of the scaled boundary finite element method (SBFEM), an isogeometric scaled boundary finite element method (IGA-SBFEM) using the non-uniform rational B-splines (NURBS) is presented for the numerical solution of seepage problems in the unbounded domain. Further, the proposed method is extended to the modeling of seepage problems considering the parallel semi-infinite side-faces in the multilayered media. The proposed formulation is based on the SBFEM that only requires boundary discretization of the analyzed domain. And it advances the SBFEM by using the NURBS basis functions to exactly represent the geometry of the boundary and to approximate the solutions fields at the boundary. Thus, the proposed method fits neatly with the Boundary Representations (B-Reps) technique provided completely by CAD. The rigid tensor product structure can be reduced by one, since only the boundary information of the analyzed domain is required in the proposed approach. The method enhances the flexibility for describing complex geometry and offers many key improvements in comparison to the conventional SBFEM. Finally, the results from numerical examples are compared with the analytical solutions or reference solutions, illustrating the superiority of the proposed formulation.The scaled boundary finite element method is an emerging and semi-analytical numerical technique for solving the partial differential equations The SBFEM is natural fit with the modeling of infinite and semi-infinite domains, since the solution can be obtained analytically in the radial direction at infinity. The first attempt to model the unbounded media using the SBFEM was made by Wolf and Song However, in the case of conventional SBFEM, the discretization approach employed on the boundaries is seen to be a limiting factor. For the analysis, the geometry of the boundary is approximated with the standard Lagrange type basis functions within the framework of finite element method (FEM). Such an approximation generally results in a loss of accuracy of deformation results and a waste of time in mesh refinement. Recently, an alternative in which the geometrical and analysis information are incorporated in only one model was proposed by the concept of isogeometric analysis (IGA). This is achieved by using the spline data such as control points and NURBS basis functions obtained from CAD systems directly for numerical analysis. In doing so, the analysis models used in IGA is exactly described without loss of the exactness of geometries. The concept of IGA is based on the non-uniform rational B-splines (NURBS) when it is initially proposed by Hughes Motivated by the superior performance of the SBFEM and NURBS, a boundary-oriented novel solution procedure that combines the boundary scaling technique and the concept of IGA is nature and productive, which we term IGA-SBFEM. In this method, both the geometry and the solution space on the boundary are treated by adopting IGA from a sequence of NURBS basis functions in the context of the SBFEM, leading to a number of advantages over conventional SBFEM. First, the smooth and curved boundaries and surfaces can be exactly described by IGA-SBFEM without intensive mesh refinement to adequately achieve the geometric information. Second, the methodology circumvents the requirement to convert the geometric description of boundary into a boundary mesh and preserves the exactness of geometry throughout the whole analysis process. Third, IGA-SBFEM can obtain better accuracy, computational efficiency and convergence rate than the same order SBFEM In the case of IGA-SBFEM, some inherit mathematical properties of NURBS basis functions is seen to be the limiting factors. First, as the meshfree methods, the NURBS basis functions are the lack of Kronecker delta property, thus special treatment is required to enforce the inhomogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions in a weak manner, while this procedure is straightforward and convenient in SBFEM by using the typical Lagrange interpolation functions. Moreover, refinement of the local part in interest is different in IGA-SBFEM as the knot vector of NURBS has strong globality and rigid tensor-product structure. It means that knot insertion always cases the global propagation of knots through the entire patch, and generates large number of superfluous control points. Meanwhile, the local refinement is easy to implement in SBFEM. But, the NURBS technologies are still the international standard for geometric exchange format, and IGA-SBFEM is perfectly suited for the NURBS-based B-Reps technique commonly used in CAD industry. Therefore, the method can provide a powerful tool for the design and analysis of the complex structures. Application of NURBS basis function to the boundary scaling technique was firstly proposed by Zhang et al. The paper is organized as follows. A brief introduction to NURBS basis functions are given in the next NURBS are the most commonly used basis functions in IGA since it is the standard technology of international product data transfer. In this work, only two-dimensional problems are involved, so we limit the definition to the NURBS curves only due to the reduction of problem dimensionality in the SBFEM. A NURBS curve The first derivative of The higher order derivatives of  The higher order derivatives of B-spline basis function can be obtained in the following form: The basic governing equation related to the steady-state seepage flow in the two-dimensional space are written as: In general, the seepage problems can be classified into two kinds. One of them is the confined seepage problem, formulated with known boundary conditions. Thus, the numerical solution procedure of this problem is straightforward. The other one is unconfined seepage flow, which is a nonlinear problem with unknown boundary conditions. The key issue in the computation of the unconfined seepage problems is the location of the free surface. As illustrated in The boundary conditions for the free surface problems of a rectangular dam in In the proposed approach, the whole computational domain is defined by a scaled boundary coordinate system ( The Cartesian coordinates The variable field By using Inversing The derivatives relative to Substituting By applying the virtual work approach Differentiating Computing the eigenvalue and eigenvector of the matrix [ For the case of unbounded domain, For the unbounded domain, the nodal flows on the boundary { Note that the minus sign in By eliminating { The stiffness matrix After the hydraulic heads on the boundary Then, the hydraulic heads at any location of the unbounded domain can be recovered by substituting For the band-shaped semi-infinite domain with infinitely long parallel side-faces shown in A point within the semi-infinite domain is represented using the modified scaled boundary coordinate as: The Jacobian matrix is derived as follows: The determinant of Inversing The derivatives relative to the coordinates can be expressed as:  The general solution of Also, the finiteness condition For the unbounded domain with parallel side-faces, the nodal flows on the boundary { Eliminating The stiffness matrix The hydraulic heads on the boundary Here, the hydraulic heads at any location is obtained as In this subsection, the formulation for imposing boundary conditions on side-faces is presented. The side-faces are special radial boundaries radiating from the scaling center, as illustrated in Combining The general solutions for By eliminating Once the hydraulic heads vector on the boundary Then, combining the potential head functions In this section, several examples are selected to investigate the applicability of the proposed approach to the seepage problems in complex unbounded domain. In all of the numerical examples, an initially coarse geometry is defined by the IGA-SBFEM, and then the h-refinement algorithm based on knot insertion algorithm is employed to obtain the desired mesh. The first and the second examples are presented to assess the accuracy and efficiency of the IGA-SBFEM over the conventional SBFEM in modeling unbounded domain and parallel side-faces problems. For the purpose of comparison, the quadratic basis functions and h-refinement strategy are used in both IGA-SBFEM and SBFEM. The third example is concerned with the free surface problems in a multi-connected domain that comprises voids with complex geometries. In the fourth example, the unconfined seepage problem through an earth dam constructed on the multilayered soils is addressed. The seepage problem in inhomogeneous soil including inclusion and cavity is considered in the last example. For the stop condition of the iteration in calculating the location of free surface, the following criterion is considered: To study the application of the IGA-SBFEM to modeling the seepage problem through an unbounded domain which is available in the practical engineering, a confined seepage flow under an earth dam built on a semi-infinite base is considered as the first example, as illustrated in The degrees of freedom (DOF) that the IGA-SBFEM and the SBFEM consumes are compared in As the second example, a problem of semi-infinite domain with parallel side-faces is addressed, as shown in The numerical results obtained from the proposed method and the SBFEM are compared in The comparison to the exact solutions in In order to verify the accuracy and effectiveness of IGA-SBFEM for the solution of unconfined seepage problems, two typical free surface problems in rectangular In To further illustrate the capability of the proposed method, the free surface problem of a drainage hole within the trapezoidal dam of To illustrate the versatility of the proposed method in modeling the free surface problems of the unbounded domain with complex geometry and its potentiality in engineering applications, the fourth example of a homogenous rectangular dam including voids with different shapes is considered, as depicted in In order to meet the visible condition, a number of subdomains are used for each case in the computation. The final locations of the free surface computed by the IGA-SBFEM in various cases are compared in The main benefit of the semi-infinite domain with parallel side-faces is that the multilayered media in the unbounded domain can be exactly modeled without singularity problems based on the framework of the modified SBFEM. In order to illustrate this potential of the proposed method in practical engineering, a free surface problem considering the semi-infinite base in the multilayered soil is analyzed in this example. The geometry and boundary conditions of an earth dam constructed on multilayered foundation is illustrated in By using the IGA-SBFEM, the interfaces between different soils are not discretized since they are set to the straight lines passing through the scaling centers. Hence, the singularity problem of multi-material is circumvented. The influence of the number of layers on the final locations of free surfaces is shown in As the last example, to further illustrate the effectiveness and feasibility of the IGA-SBFEM for solving seepage problems having complex geometry, a confined seepage flow through the non-homogeneous soils including inclusion and cavity is investigated. The geometry and boundary conditions used for the solution of this example are illustrated in By using a set of subdomains, the analysis domain of complex geometry can be effectively handled using IGA-SBFEM. Then, the desired mesh refinement can be obtained after refining the mesh using the h-refinement strategy of isogeometric analysis. The comparison of hydraulic head distributions obtained by the IGA-SBFEM and FEM against different cases is shown in In this paper, the isogeometric scaled boundary finite element method is developed for the analysis of complex steady seepage problems in unbounded domain and semi-infinite domain with parallel side-faces. By using the NURBS and the boundary scaling technique of SBFEM in the present method, the computational domain with complicated geometries is exactly described by its boundaries and radial scaling centers. Our study demonstrates that the present method produces better results than the SBFEM using conventional Lagrange basis functions in terms of accuracy, efficiency and convergence rate. By illustrating numerical examples, the effectiveness and feasibility of the present approach for solving seepage problems involving the layered soils, multi-connected domains, and inclusions are demonstrated. Both the confined and unconfined seepage flow can be effectively handled by IGA-SBFEM considering the unbounded domain and multilayered soils that consist of semi-infinite layers with a constant depth. In the future, we plan to further exploit the potential of IGA-SBFEM to others like transient seepage analysis and three-dimensional problems, which will be reported later. This research was supported by Grants