A new concept for the enrichment of lithium minerals is offering higher purity and higher yield by applying new processing technologies addressing the specific properties of the pegmatitic host rock. Additional value is created from high quality by-products which will improve the sustainability of mining activity and the overall cost base. Within the new concept, flotation may even be avoided where wet separation techniques are not applicable.
                  Two innovative processing technologies have been integrated in the new concept: electrodynamic fragmentation and optical sorting. Detailed results of lab-technical tests show that the new process design can achieve highly selective liberation and separation processes. Optical and mineralogical analyses of the test products indicate a high benefit for commercial applications.Due to several new applications, lithium and lithium based chemicals are becoming strategic materials in the new future. Apart from the standard use in the glass and ceramics industries, new lithium based energy storage devices are creating an extra demand for lithium in the near future ( Today, lithium carbonate is produced either from lithium brines or from lithium bearing minerals. Lithium brines are mainly processed in South America (Lake Atacama, Chile) as a byproduct of the mineral fertilizer production. A cost barrier still exists for the transformation of lithium bearing minerals into Li Most lithium minerals currently mined originate from lithium pegmatites. Pegmatites are coarse grained igneous rocks which are formed by the crystallization of magmatic fluids. Spodumene (8.0% Li The new concept presented in this paper opens up new opportunities in lithium minerals processing due to: Highly selective separation of lithium minerals from hard rocks. Improved productivity. New advantages for value added by-products. Overall cost reduction. During standard processing lithium mineral concentration follows the simplified chart of Laboratory and technical tests were carried out with a lithium pegmatite rock from Finland, which was delivered as fist size lumps. The pegmatite rocks as well as the mineral products were analyzed by chemical (ICP-OES and XRF), optical and mineralogical analysis (XRD). The introduction of a electrodynamic fragmentation process allows the selective liberation of pegmatite minerals via high voltage pulses. During electrodynamic fragmentation shock waves travel through a solid submerged in water. The high selectivity of the fragmentation is achieved through high tensile stress in the areas of grain boundaries, inclusions or composite interfaces, causing the material to predominantly break at these boundaries. During the tests, a commercially available lab system by selFrag AG, Switzerland, was used. The pegmatite was fragmented to grain sizes The mineralogical composition of the pegmatite rock used during the tests was determined by combining the information of the chemical composition and the XRD-analysis ( Optical microscopy investigations of polished rock sections ( The main properties of the pegmatite which can be utilized for a more specific separation are: Coarse primary grain size. Differences in colour and morphology. A new concept based on these properties is shown in Within the new concept, selective fragmentation replaces unspecific conventional grinding. Liberation without destruction of the grains is a key factor for efficient optical sorting. Depending on the purity of the spodumene product, flotation may even be avoided reducing the consumption of chemicals and water and improving the overall economical viability of projects where wet separation techniques are not applicable. The new concept has been tested with a natural lithium pegmatite ore. Electrodynamic fragmentation provided selective liberation of spodumene, with only a low amount of fines. The microscopic analysis indicates a high degree of liberation; most of the minerals of the raw material sample were specifically fragmented to their primary grain size. Within the fraction of 2.5–5 New products – based on the chemical purity ( The new concept is producing a highly concentrated spodumene product without fine grinding and flotation. Since fine grinding is avoided, highly valuable by-products, e.g. high purity quartz feedstock and low iron potassium feldspar can be separated during optical sorting in order to be specifically processed and to fulfil commercial market specifications. This will improve the sustainability of the mining activity and the overall cost base.