Calcium phosphate (Ca-P) coatings were deposited on Ti substrates by a biomimetic method from m-SBF and 10× SBF, respectively. Comparative study of microstructures and bond strengths of the Ca-P coatings deposited from those different SBFs was carried out. Effect of the surface roughness of the substrates on the bond strength of the Ca-P coatings was also studied. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffractometry (XRD), Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), inductive coupled plasma spectrometry (ICP) and thermogravimetry (TG) were used to characterize the Ca-P coatings. The bond strengths between the coatings and Ti substrates were measured using an adhesive strength test. Results indicated that the ionic concentrations of the SBFs and the surface roughness of the substrate had a significant influence on the formation, morphology and bond strength of the Ca-P precipitates. The induction period of time to deposit a complete Ca-P layer from the m-SBF is much longer, but the Ca-P coating is denser and has higher bond strength than that formed from the 10× SBF. The Ti with a surface roughness of R
                     a 0.64 µm and R
                     z 2.81 µm favoures the formation of a compact Ca-P coating from the m-SBF with the highest bond strength of approximately 15.5 MPa.Titanium (Ti) and its alloys have been exploited widely as orthopaedic and dental implant materials for their excellent mechanical properties and biocompatibility. The chemical and physical properties of implant surface are playing critical roles in achieving satisfactory bone response and viable implantation. It is well documented that the integration of metallic implant with surrounding bones can be improved by the presence of a biologically active calcium phosphate (Ca-P) layer on metal implant surface in a living body It is well known that the properties of Ca-P coating on metal or ceramic substrates, such as chemical composition, thickness, bond strength, and in vitro and in vivo bioactivity, depend strongly on the nature of the SBFs SBFs are normally buffered with tris-hydroxymethyl-aminomethane (TRIS) or 2-(4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazinyl) ethane sulfonic acid (HEPES) which are not contained in human plasma at all. To eliminate adverse effects of these buffers, provoke faster Ca-P nucleation rate and shorten Ca-P precipitation process, researchers have been energetically developing condensed SBFs The morphological and compositional variance and bioactivity of the Ca-P coatings formed from different SBFs have been extensively reported so far. But few comparative studies have been done on the bond strength of the Ca-P coating formed on substrates from different SBFs, which is crucial to achieve excellent bone integration. The present authors Ti discs with a diameter of 16 mm and a thickness of 2 mm were prepared by powder metallurgy. Elemental Ti (≤ The m-SBF with ionic concentration nearly equal to that of blood plasma was prepared by dissolving reagent grade chemicals of NaCl, NaHCO Eight alkali and heat-treated Ti discs for each group were soaked in the m-SBF, and incubated at 310 K in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO Surface roughness ( Surface morphological changes of the alkali and heat-treated samples before and after soaking in SBFs were examined by SEM (Leica S440, Germany) with associated EDS (ISIS, Link Analytical, Oxford Instruments, UK). SEM cross-sectional images were taken to measure the thickness of the precipitates and EDS profile was collected to determine the distribution of Ca and P from the Ti substrate to the top of the coating. The Ca-P deposits were gently removed from substrates by sharp blade and collected for XRD (Philip 1140, Netherlands), FTIR (Bruker optics, Germany), ICP (Perkin-Elmer Optima 3300 DV, American) and TG analysis (DSC-STA 409 PC, NETZSCH group, Germany). TG analysis of the detached Ca-P powders was performed up to 1473 K in N Bond strengths of the Ca-P coatings were measured by the modified ASTM C-633 method  The representative XRD patterns of the precipitates on the alkali and heat-treated Ti samples soaked in the m-SBF and 10× SBF both exhibited broad diffraction peaks as shown in FTIR spectra of the Ca-P coatings, gathered between 400 and 4000 cm TG study was carried out on the detached Ca-P powders from room temperature to 1473 K (as shown in   Homogeneous and dense Ca-P coatings were deposited on the alkali and heat-treated Ti substrates after soaking in the m-SBF for 21 d. Na The high concentration of 10× SBF with respect to hydroxyapatite or apatite, however, favours the rapid apatitic Ca-P formation The SEM micrographs shown in All the coatings with looser structure formed from the 10× SBF failed within themselves under tensile tests, suggesting that the cohesive strength within the coating (8–9 MPa) was lower than the adhesive strength at the interface between the coating and Ti substrate. In contrast, most of the coatings with denser though thinner structure formed from the m-SBF failed at the interface between the coating and Ti substrate, indicating that the cohesive strength within the coating was stronger than the interfacial bond strength (11–15 MPa). So it is concluded that the adhesive strength of Ca-P coating could be significantly improved by forming a dense coating. Surface roughness showed little effect on the bond strength of the Ca-P coatings produced from the 10× SBF. During nucleation process, apatitic Ca-P seeds precipitated both in the solution and on the metal surface. After expanding to reach their critical size, seeds started growing to become crystals. As previously reported However, surface morphology demonstrated a very significant effect on the bond strength of the Ca-P coating formed from the m-SBF. Lu et al. proposed that the increased surface roughness of the Ti specimen by etching with mixed acids led to good adherence between Ca-P coatings and substrates Ca-P coatings were deposited on the Ti substrates with different surface roughness from two different SBF solutions, i.e. m-SBF and 10× SBF, by a biomimetic method. Rough, loose but thick Ca-P coatings with porous structure were formed from the 10× SBF in a short period of time (2 h), but their bond strengths to the substrates were low (8.44 to 8.60 MPa) and independent of the surface roughness of the substrate. However, dense, uniform though thin Ca-P coatings were deposited from the m-SBF with relatively higher bond strength (10.62 to 15.44 MPa). The bond strength of this type of coating strongly depended upon the substrate surface roughness. The Ti with surface roughness of The authors acknowledge the financial support for this research through the ARC Discovery Project DP0770021 (Australian Research Council). PH is also supported through the ARC through a Federation Fellowship.