Refractory castables can contain Cr2O3, either as a specific addition or as a impurity element in the raw materials. When calcium aluminate cement is used as a binder in such castables, Cr(III) can transform to Cr(VI) during use, which can cause subsequent problems with the disposal of the used refractory lining. The formation of Cr(VI) in Al2O3–CaO–Fe2O3–4wt% Cr2O3 mixtures, representing a simplified refractory castable system, was investigated as well as its leachability. Samples were prepared from reagent grade chemicals, equilibrated at 1300°C in air and quenched in liquid nitrogen. A Cr(VI)-containing phase Ca4Al6CrO16 (hauyne) formed in all the examined samples. During the ASTM D3987-85 leach test the co-existing C3A, C12A7, Ca2(Al,Fe)2O5 and CA phases encapsulated the Cr(VI) by forming Cr(VI) analogue phases 3CaO·Al2O3·CaCO4·nH2O. These phases decreased the leachability of Cr(VI) to below the EPA limit of 5mg/l. Decreasing the pH and increasing the temperature can however remobilise the Cr(VI).In nature chromium mainly exists as chromite, which is a complex spinel (Fe From the stability diagram for the formation of Cr(VI)-containing phases from Cr Bray reported that Cr In refractory monolithic castables, Cr This study investigated the transformation of Cr(III) to Cr(VI) in a mixture of Al The US Environmental Protection Agency (US-EPA) established that all chrome-containing solid waste should be treated as potentially hazardous materials Four samples of typical low alumina-based castable compositions, with a fixed Al These pellets were subsequently reacted in a MoSi The quenched samples were analysed by XRD using a PANalytical X’Pert Pro powder diffractometer with X’Celerator detector and with Co Kα X-radiation. Phase identification was done using PANalytical X’Pert Highscore plus software. SEM–EDS analysis was carried out using a Jeol IT-300 Scanning Electron Microscope, with an Oxford Advanced Aztec Energy X-max 50 detector. As the Cr(VI) is water soluble, the samples prepared for SEM analysis were polished with water-free lubricant and water-free diamond solution. The leachability of Cr(VI) was determined according to the ASTM D3987-85 standard method. Samples of 1.5000 Sample S1, which contained no Fe The relative phase amounts in samples S1–S4 were determined using the Rietveld method (Autoquan Program) ( The BSE image of sample S1 (without Fe The leach solutions that resulted from different leaching times of samples S1–S4 are shown in The amount of Cr(VI) in the leach solutions, as well as the pH of these solutions, is shown in The amount of Cr(VI) in the leach solution of sample S4 therefore decreased significantly with an increase in leaching time. Cr(VI) concentrations below the EPA limit of 5 The solid residues after filtration were also analysed using XRD. The XRD patterns of sample S1 before and after leaching for 0.25, 18 and 72 The XRD patterns for sample S4 after leaching for 0.25, 18 and 72 The leachability of Cr(VI) from sample S4 was significantly different from samples S1–S3. According to the XRD and SEM–EDS results, Ca It has been reported in the literature that when C The hydration reaction of CA is slower than the hydration reactions of C Brownmillerite hydrate to C The chromate hydrocalumite (monophase) 3CaO·Al The solubility products of these chromate phases were found to be low at 25 The Cr(VI) concentration in solid wastes can therefore be underestimated, as standard Cr(VI) evaluation tests only analyse for water soluble Cr(VI). A change in pH or temperature can affect the stability of the Cr(VI) analogue phases, which could release Cr(VI) back into solution. In order to investigate the stability of Cr(VI) in the produced hydrated residues, the leach residues from the 72 The leach solutions that resulted from the re-leach experiments are shown in  A Cr(VI)-containing phase Ca The presence of hydratable C Special attention should be given to the phase chemistry of Cr-containing solid waste during standard leach tests, especially when these wastes contain hydratable calcium aluminate phases. Some of the Cr(VI) in the waste can be encapsulated by these hydrated phases, thereby giving the impression that the waste is low in Cr(VI), which is not necessarily the case. The stability of these Cr(VI) encapsulated phases is however highly dependent on pH and to a lesser extent on temperature. To get a true reflection of the Cr(VI) content in castable wastes, information on the relation between pH and the leaching behaviour of Cr(VI) should therefore also be determined. The authors wish to thank Dr. Robert Cromarty for his assistance with the laboratory experiments, Prof. Johan de Villiers for his support with the XRD analysis and