Halloysite (Hal) hybridized Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 solid solutions (CZ and CZHal) were prepared using the evaporation induced self-assembly (EISA) method. X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electronic spectroscopy (SEM), transmission electronic spectroscopy (TEM), energy dispersion spectrum (EDS) and elements mapping techniques were used to characterize the thermal, morphological and structural status of the obtained samples. Three way catalytic (TWC) performances of the samples were tested after being loaded onto dichroite ceramics. Pd was used as the catalysis centers by impregnation method (Pd/CZ and Pd/CZHal). The results revealed that, Hal hybridized with Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 very well, according to the TEM figures. The hybridizing of CZ with halloysite enhanced the TWC performances in forms of decreased light-off temperature and increased catalytic efficiency to CO, C3H8 and NOx. Even, the TWC performances of CZHal displayed higher efficiency than the reference commercial sample at working temperature (450°C). After catalysis tests, halloysite in the CZHal sample remained their tubular morphology. The obtained CZ and CZHal sustained their phase stability at thermal treatment up to 1100°C, continual calcinations will cause phase segregation and solid reaction to yield ZrSiO4 in the contacting area between the halloysite and CZ matters. The mineral probably acted as the channels for gases go into and out of the inner part of the CZ matrix, which will facilitate the redox reactions in the inner areas, and finally enhanced the TWC performances.Up to now, three-way catalysts (TWC) has been proved to be the most efficient material for reducing automotive exhaust ( However, pure CeO The other important aspect of TWC is the noble metal usage. The combination of Pt and Rh ensured a quasi-complete removal of CO, HC, and NO Halloysite (abbreviated as Hal) is one of the naturally generated tubular minerals, which is widely distributed in many places around the world ( In addition, some recent researches have proved that the selective loading inside the lumen or outside the mineral surface can be realized based on the selective (inner or outer) surface modifications. ( In this study, halloysite was adapted into TWC catalysts through surface modification and then hybridization with Ce Halloysite raw mineral was obtained from Chenxi, Hunan, PRChina, tube diameter of the raw mineral is between 30 and 60 The crystal structure was characterized by a RIGAKU D/max-2550VB The three-way Catalysts were prepared by conventional impregnation method ( The TWC performances of pure CZ and that hybridized with 30% Hal (in volume fraction) were firstly tested for comparison. Compared with the Pd/CZ sample, Pd/CZHal exhibited higher catalytic ability in the conversions of C For further proving the TWC performance of Pd/CZHal, a commercial catalyst (No. 39–012 in the manufactory's system, which is used for commercial application for light weight automobile exhausts cleaning) was adapted as the reference. The static comparison of TWC performances between the two samples under the same gas circumstances at working temperature (450 The XRD patterns of CZHal and CZ are shown in Thermal stability characterization to the as-obtained CZ and CZHal samples were conducted to evaluate the sustainability of the samples in high temperature circumstances. The XRD patterns of the CZ and CZHal calcined at different temperatures ( SEM technique was used to observe the surface morphology of the CZHal sample and that mixed with the pseudo-boehmite, which was used to enhance the adhesion between CZHal and cordierite substrate. The morphology of the raw CZHal sample where particles' size were about 3–5 SEM images displayed the surface morphology of the raw and tested samples, while the halloysite was not found. So, TEM was introduced to observe the detailed combination of the phases. The TEM images of CZHal sample ( The TEM micrograph of the thermally treated and Pd/CZHal after TWC tests ( Based on the above catalytic measurement and the characterization results, a schematic mechanism involved in the hybridization between Hal nano-tubes and Ce In this study, Ce This work was supported by the