Mineral flotation processes are controlled by monitoring the grade of the present minerals. The performance of flotation can be greatly optimized by online assaying of the minerals in the slurry flows. However, online and quantitative mineral identification of the slurries is challenging. The major focus of this research is about measuring mineral contents from the elemental concentrations acquired by an on-stream slurry analyzer operating based on laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). A multivariate statistical method called partial least squares regression is employed to perform the elemental to mineral conversion. In this work, the samples under study come from an iron concentrator where knowledge about the grade of silicates and iron-oxides are important for controlling the flotation plant. In total, the concentrations of six out of ten minerals were successfully estimated. This accomplishment provides quantitative knowledge about mineral contents from the nearly real-time assay data without any modification on the measurement setup or further instrumentation. This can lead to many benefits such as rapid control of concentrate quality, enhanced recovery and savings in money, time, energy and manpower. The proposed technique is applicable to all types of slurry samples.Identification of mineral composites and quantitative measure of mineral contents provide valuable information for mining. Information about mineral contents not only gives broad knowledge about source, history and type of the rock bodies, but also today is necessary for better process control and more efficient use of energy and raw materials. The rapid and on-line scanning of rock and slurry samples gives fast results that can be used to ease the decision-making process, however the majority of the online and on-stream analytical techniques are based on elemental analysis or performed off-line when applied to mineral identification. Many flotation processes contain minerals that can affect the flotation performance but cannot be quantified using elemental analysis methods. On-line mineral assaying provides useful information for process control and e.g. chemical consumption optimization. Therefore, the importance of rapid and quantitative mineral analysis is intuitive. On the other hand, developing new measurement setups only for the purpose of mineral identification is costly, needs proper space for installation in the plant and requires advanced data analyzing to extract mineralogical knowledge quantitatively. Given the needs of the mineral-processing plants for rapidly measuring of the mineral contents, it is advantageous to identify the mineral quantities from the ordinary elemental assays collected from the streams of the process circuit. The concept of mineral estimation from the chemical assays is usually expressed by the term elemental-to-mineral conversion. A few studies have been published on this topic as elemental analysis is simpler, cheaper and more available in comparison with the process of quantitative mineral analysis.  There are direct mineralogical measurement techniques available like Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and hyperspectral imaging, but with substantial limitations for online usage. Raman spectroscopy ( LIBS ( The interest in LIBS application for geological analysis has been recently increased due to multiple advantages over other analytical methods, e.g. simplicity, economic, no sample preparation, simultaneous multi-elemental analysis, and broad range elemental detection. As there is plenty of chemical information in LIBS spectra, numerous analytical techniques have been proposed. Due to the affluence of complex information in each LIBS spectrum, processing all the data online and in a reliable manner is challenging. Majority of the proposed analytical techniques are performed offline on a database of the collected spectra and efforts have been made to reduce the time of computation. In LIBS technique has become popular for on-stream elemental analysis of the slurry samples. It gives real-time on-line assays for monitoring and control of the mineral processing plant. In addition to the elemental contents, it would be very beneficial to measure the mineralogical contents of the slurries from the LIBS spectra with no modification of the measurement setup. Given the large amount of information in each LIBS spectrum, a data-base approach for interpreting the measured data is a natural choice. This work presents application of a multi-variable statistical technique called Partial Least Squares (PLS) along with Non-Linear Iterative Partial Least Squares (NIPALS) algorithm ( Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) is an analytical laser-based technique operating based on detection and analysis of atomic emissions. It was first introduced by The measurement setup used in this work is a LIBS system (measurement head of Courier 8 SL) from LIBS laboratory of Outotec, Finland. Theoretically, the technology is able to detect all elements but the actual elemental range depends on the characteristics of the laser and spectrograph, ambient conditions and sample composition (e.g. particle size, chemical composition and solid percentages). The product consists of a pulsed laser, a focusing lens, a spectrometer and a desktop PC to perform the data collection and control the system. The laser-induced plasma was created using a 120  The samples set under study were 14 slurry samples from tailings stream of a flotation plant. The plant belongs to an iron ore concentrator, where the process is magnetic and gravity separation followed by a reverse cationic flotation of quartz. In the reverse flotation process the valuable mineral (magnetite) is concentrated in the underflow of the cells, and the gangue mineral (quartz) is lifted to the froth ( Fluids have intrinsic motions of molecules and ions. Molecular motions, shaking and splashing of the liquid affects the LIBS plasma and causes inconsistency of the collected spectra. Moreover, part of the light energy is absorbed by water and thus the detected signal is weaker than the solid samples ( Given the fact that the noise produced by most of the natural processes and measurement setups have the characteristics of the white noise, accumulation of the spectra will majorly reveal the elemental peaks and diminishes the noisy magnitudes. As the slurry is circulating and the laser beam hits different particles each time, it is likely that the accumulated spectrum consists of the combination of all the elements and minerals. The slurry samples were mixed by dry sample with about 6 The quantitative mineralogical information of the samples was provided by Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) method. The concentration of Magnetite was measured by SATuration MAGnetization ANalayzer (SATMAGAN). SATMAGAN has been developed particularly for the accurate measure of magnetite especially in iron ore concentrators (  Data analyzing of LIBS spectra is preceded by data preprocessing. First a baseline correction is performed on each spectrum. In this work, baseline correction has been performed using an asymmetric least squares smoothing algorithm ( Considering the LIBS spectra as a matrix of independent variables ( PLS technique is explained using the eigenvector-based procedure ( The PLS model makes a linear mapping, In practice, PLS is implemented using NIPALS algorithm. It improves the time of computation since it computes only the first few required latent variable dimensions rather than computing the whole components of a high-dimensional structure. Furthermore, the dimension of the latent basis found by eigenvector-based PLS approach is restricted to the number of either input or output variables while iterative PLS approach dispels these constraints ( Initialize     Repeat steps 2.–5. until convergence. Deflate As a result, NIPALS-based PLS algorithm generates the model In order to train the model using PLS, first the three accumulated and averaged spectra produced per slurry samples were averaged to have one so-called training spectrum for each sample. For 14 slurry samples and 10 minerals to be predicted, the output matrix is    After performing the model selection, it turned out that three models are required to predict six out of ten minerals. Biotite, glauconite, ferrorichterite require four latent variables. The concentration of quartz and Fe-oxides are estimated using two latent variables and stilpnomelane needs seven. As explained in the previous section, the model is trained using the average of three spectra per sample and validated by leave-one-out cross validation technique. Now the concentrations of the minerals are estimated through every single spectrum while the model has been produced through the averaged spectra. There are three spectra per slurry sample and overall 14 samples. The concentration of biotite and glauconite minerals were estimated with the R-squared values of 73.9% and 80.6% respectively and these values are moderately good for mineral quantification. Ferrorichterite mineral was estimated with R-squared value of 69.5% (   In Section The correlation between quartz and Fe-oxides is expected to be strong and negative as more quartz implies less being of Fe-oxides. This conjecture is validated in For clarity, only variables from 235  This study focused on the quantitative mineral identification from the data produced by a LIBS measurement technique designed for on-stream slurry analysis in flotation. The goal was to provide knowledge about mineral contents of the slurries in addition to the elemental contents to improve the process control and have better recovery. PLS technique as a multivariate statistical technique along with NIPALS algorithm was presented to be suitable for predicting the concentration of the minerals in the iron ore flotation slurry. Three models were trained to estimate the grade of six minerals with acceptable R-squared values. Quartz and Fe-oxides were the most essential minerals to be predicted from the slurry and the proposed method turned out to be quite consistent for them. However, the relative errors of biotite, glauconite and ferrorichterite were large because of their low concentrations and high variations within the sampled slurries. Increasing the number of samples will enhance the trained models and accuracy of the predictions. The main achievement of this work was extracting mineralogical information by automatically utilizing the information on all the important spectral lines in the LIBS measurements. This technique is rapid and gives the possibility of online mineralogical analysis without any modification of the conventional LIBS setup. Moreover, the presented method could overcome the restrictions come from the slurry and aqueous samples. The future work will concentrate on online and quantitative analysis of iron-oxide minerals such as hematite and magnetite.