Recognition of different mineralized zones in an ore deposit is important for mine planning. This study aims to separate the different mineralized zones and the wall rock in the Zaghia iron ore deposit situated in central Iran using the number–size (N–S) and concentration–volume (C–V) fractal methods. The N–S model reveals three geochemical zones defined by Fe thresholds of 24% and 40%, with zones <24% Fe representing weakly mineralized zones and wall rocks. The C–V model reveals four geochemical zones defined by Fe thresholds of 18%, 30% and 35%, with zones <18% Fe representing non-mineralized wall rocks. Both the N–S and C–V models indicate that high grade mineralization is situated in the northern part of the ore deposit. The results of validation of the fractal models with the geological model show that the N–S fractal model of highly mineralized zones is better than the C–V fractal model of highly mineralized zones. However, results obtained by means of the C–V fractal model for weakly and moderately mineralized zones are more accurate than the zones obtained by means of the N–S fractal model.Definition and delineation of mineralized zones from barren wall rocks are essential in mineral exploration, resource evaluation and mine planning. Conventional methods for identification and mapping of variously enriched zones in iron ore deposits, for example, are based on geological and mineralogical studies considering variations in the proportions of magnetite, hematite, and apatite, such as in Kiruna-type iron deposits ( Fractal geometry ( Fractal analysis assists in describing relationships of geological, geochemical, and mineralogical settings with spatial information derived from analysis of mineral deposit occurrence data ( The application of fractal methods for analysis of mineralized zones was based on relationships between metal grades and volumes or tonnages ( The N–S model, which was originally proposed by The C–V fractal model, which was proposed by The Zaghia iron deposit is situated in the Bafq district and is located 120 Most parts of this studied area have been covered by alluvium and therefore there are just small mineralized outcrops on the surface based on field geology observations and mineralogical data from four trenches, especially in the SE part of the deposit ( Low grade ores (hematite) are situated in the northern parts of the deposit. High grade ores (magnetite) occur in the northern, eastern and central parts of the deposit. Metasomatic rocks are located and occur extensively in many parts of the deposit ( From 19 drillcores in the deposit, 177 lithogeochemical samples have been collected at 2 The N–S method was applied to the Fe data ( The various mineralized zones were distinguished by a mathematical filter called “Boolean data type” in RockWorks software. As a result, the studied mineralized zones in the 3D model are allocated with binary codes (zero or one) such that zones with the code number of zero are removed and zones with the code number of one are retained in the 3D model. Based on classification of the 3D model of the Fe data and based on the thresholds obtained from the N–S fractal model, highly mineralized zones are situated in the northern part of the deposit ( Based on the 3D model of the deposit, volumes corresponding to different Fe grades were calculated to derive a C–V fractal model. Threshold values of Fe were recognized in the C–V log–log plot ( Based on the C–V fractal model of Fe, highly mineralized zones are situated in the northern part of the deposit ( Results of N–S and C–V modeling of the deposit are compared and correlated to the 3D geological model of the deposit constructed by using RockWorks™ v. 15 software and drillcore data ( Highly mineralized zones defined by means of N–S and C–V modeling are apparently well-correlated with zones of high grade ore defined by 3D modeling of geological drillcore data (  Comparison between high grade zones obtained from 3D geological modeling and highly mineralized zones from fractal modeling shows that the C–V fractal model is better than the N–S model because the fact that the number of overlapped voxels (A) in the C–V model (1453 A comparison between moderately mineralized zones based on the fractal models and the metasomatic zone in the 3D geological model shows that there is a similarity between the two fractal models. Overall accuracies for the C–V and N–S models are 0.791 and 0.737, respectively ( In the many cases, drillcore logging in the field is dealing with the lack of proper diagnosis of geological phenomenon can undermine delineation of mineralized zones because it depends on interpretation of individual loggers, which is subjective and no two loggers usually have the same interpretations. However, conventional geological modeling based on drillcore data is fundamentally important for ore body spatial structure understanding and mathematical applications. Grades of the ore elements are not observed in conventional methods of geological ore modeling while the variations in ore grades in a mineral deposit is an obvious and salient feature. Given the problems as mentioned above, using a series of newly established methods based on mathematical analyses such as fractal modeling seems to be inevitable. In this paper, the number–size (N–S) and concentration–volume (C–V) fractal models were used to investigate and delineate various Fe‐mineralized zones in the Zaghia iron ore deposit in the Bafq district (Iran). Both the N–S and C–V fractal models reveal high grade Fe-mineralized zones in the northern part of the deposit. The threshold Fe values for highly mineralized zone are 40% and 35% based on the N–S and C–V fractal models, respectively. Models of moderately mineralized zones in the central and SE parts of the deposit contain 24–40% Fe according to the N–S model, and 30–35% Fe according to the C–V model. The N–S model reveals weakly mineralized zones and wall rocks containing < According to the correlation between results driven by fractal modeling and geological logging from drillcores in Zaghia iron ore deposit, Highly mineralized zones generated by fractal models, especially the N–S model, have a strong correlation with high grade iron ores according to the 3D geological model, and moderately mineralized zones correlate with low grade iron ores in the northern and eastern parts of the Zaghia deposit. There is a strong relationship between moderately mineralized zones derived by the C–V model and the metasomatic zone with low grade iron ore according to the 3D geological model. In addition, parts of the moderately mineralized zones obtained from the fractal models correlate with metasomatic units in the SE and central parts of the Zaghia deposit. The authors would like to thank Mr. Gholamreza Hashemi as manager of Iranian iron exploration project in Iran Minerals Production & Supply Co. (IMPASCO) and Dr. M. R. Mahvi as Executive manager of International minerals engineering consultant Co. (IMECO) for authorizing the use of Zaghia exploration data. The authors would like to thank the editors and reviewers of this paper for their comments and valuable remarks. The following is the Supplementary data to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at