US and international regulations pertaining to the control of bilge water discharges from ships have concentrated their attention to the levels of oil and grease rather than to the heavy metal concentrations. The consensus is that any discharge of bilge water (and oily water emulsion within 12 nautical miles from the nearest land cannot exceed 15 parts per million (ppm). Since there is no specific regulation for metal pollutants under the bilge water section, reference standards regulating heavy metal concentrations are taken from the ambient water quality criteria to protect aquatic life.
                  The research herein presented discusses electro-coagulation (EC) as a method to treat bilge water, with a focus on oily emulsions and heavy metals (copper, nickel and zinc) removal efficiency. Experiments were run using a continuous flow reactor, manufactured by Ecolotron, Inc., and a synthetic emulsion as artificial bilge water. The synthetic emulsion contained 5000 mg/L of oil and grease, 5 mg/L of copper, 1.5 mg/L of nickel, and 2.5 mg/l of zinc. The experimental results demonstrate that EC is very efficient in removing oil and grease. For oil and grease removal, the best treatment and cost efficiency was obtained when using a combination of carbon steel and aluminum electrodes, at a detention time less than one minute, a flow rate of 1 L/min and 0.6 A/cm2 of current density. The final effluent oil and grease concentration, before filtration, was always less than 10 mg/L.
                  For heavy metal removal, the combination of aluminum and carbon steel electrodes, flow rate of 1 L/min, effluent recycling, and 7.5 amps produced 99% zinc removal efficiency. Copper and nickel are harder to remove, and a removal efficiency of 70% was achieved.Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships American Standard Test Method initial concentration direct current dissolved metal concentration dissolved oxygen Department of Defense energy consumption (kWh) electrocoagulation Environmental Protection Agency hexane extractable materials current intensity (Amps) infrared ion selective electrode mass of contaminant (g) International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ship National Marine Sanctuaries Nephelometric Turbidity Unit Oil Pollution Act Office of the Chief of Naval Operations Instruction Oxidation–Reduction Potential plug-flow reactor revolutions per minute Society of Automotive Engineers Synthetic Bilge Water Specific Energy Consumption total dissolved solids total organic carbon total petroleum hydrocarbons total suspended solids Voltage (V) Uniform National Discharge Standards power (kW) In the United States, bilge water production is estimated in the millions of cubic meters per year (there is not a national report on the actual amounts of bilge water produced in the US). As a reference, cruise ships operating in Southeast Alaska produce around 5–20 m The Environmental Protection Agency, (EPA) in conjunction with the Department of Defense (DoD), the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Commerce and several Federal Agencies, is developing the Uniform National Discharge Standards (UNDS), organized in three phases, for incidental liquid discharges from vessels of the US Armed Forces. From the Nature of Discharge Report for Surface Vessels Bilge Water, the annual mass loading of heavy metals in bilge water produced by US aircraft carriers is about 116 kg of copper, 57 kg of nickel, 299 kg of zinc, and 160 kg of iron ( Even though the discharge of bilge water is strongly regulated, both inside and outside the country, the regulations have been focused more on controlling the discharge of oil and oily mixture than on the discharge of heavy metals. All vessels generate bilge water and most commissioned Armed Forces vessels are fitted with oil water separator (OWS) systems designed to prevent the discharge of oil in excess of 15 mg/L within 22.2 km (12 nautical miles), in accordance with OPNAVINST 5090.1B. In London, in 1973, the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships ( The Unites States accepted the MARPOL Protocol and passed laws to enforce it, such as: the Clear Water Act (CWA, 1972; 33 U.S.C. § 1301), which establishes the basic structure for regulating discharges of pollutants into the waters of the United States and regulating quality standards for surface waters; the National Marine Sanctuaries Act (NMSA, 1988; 16 U.S.C. § 1431 et seq.), a law that protects marine resources and ecosystems, such as coral reefs, sunken historical vessels, or unique habitats, from degradation while facilitating public or private uses compatible with resource protection; the Oil Pollution Act (OPA, 1990; 33 U.S.C. § 2702 et seq.), that streamlined and strengthened EPA's ability to prevent and respond to catastrophic oil spills; and the Act to Prevent Pollution from Ships (APPS, 2000; 33 U.S.C. § 1901 et seq.), federal law that implements those provisions of MARPOL in United States. In addition, the Coast Guard has the primary responsibility to prescribe and enforce the regulation necessary to implement APPS 2000 in the United States and has regulations pertain to management of the discharge of oil or oily mixtures into the sea from ships. In summary, bilge water discharges are well controlled with regard to oil concentrations but are lacking in specific heavy metal concentration limits. Since there is no specific regulation for metal pollutants under the bilge water section, reference standards regulating heavy metal concentrations are taken from the ambient water quality criteria to protect aquatic life (65 FR 31682 ( With impending future stringent regulations concerning the levels of heavy metal and oil and grease that can be discharged in continental waters, enhanced treatment methods with high removal efficiency, low operation costs, short operation times and reduced use of additional chemical products are required. In the present article, electro-coagulation (EC) is discussed as a method to treat bilge water, with a focus on oily emulsions and heavy metals (copper, nickel and zinc) removal efficiency. The objectives of this research include conducting experiments with a continuous flow EC reactor to determine the factors affecting the oil and metals (copper, nickel and zinc) removal efficiency using a synthetic bilge water. These factors included flow rate, electrode material, flotation unit configuration and current intensity. Operational costs of this type of treatment are also discussed. The EC process involves many chemicals and physical factors, where electrical current is applied to consumable electrodes that generate, in the primary stage, coagulants due to electrolytic oxidation of the electrode. Immediately, in the secondary stage, contaminant destabilization, particulate suspension, and breaking of emulsions occur; after that, the ultimate stage, the formation of flocs, takes place due to the aggregation of destabilized particles ( The generation of metal ions in the EC process takes place as follows: At the carbon steel anode: At the aluminum anode: Metal ions are hydrolyzed forming hydroxides like Due to salinity in the water stream, chlorine is released according to Eq. At the anode: At the cathode: Many authors include the evolution of oxygen at the anode (Eq. The next step is wastewater destabilization and aggregation. In this stage, the destabilization of contaminants, breaking of emulsion, particulate suspension and formation of flocs take place; also, the diffuse double layer is compressed, and ionic species are neutralized. Small flocs trap contaminants and are carried to the surface by hydrogen bubbles when the bubbles emerge from the reactor; hence, the sludge layer is formed at the surface. The smaller the hydrogen bubble size, the more surface area provided to trap flocs and the more effective separation of contaminants from water (  The electrochemical destabilization of the oil-in-water emulsion, such as those typically found in bilge water, involves the in-situ generation of coagulants by electrolytic oxidation of an appropriate anode material (iron or aluminum). These coagulants promote the break-up of the emulsion due to the reduction of the superficial charge of the droplets, causing the coalescence of the oil droplets, and the subsequent separation of the aqueous and oily phases by means of conventional settling or dissolved air flotation. Oil removal by EC has been determined to be strongly affected by initial concentration, current density and salinity. The increase in these parameters improved the EC efficiency, which ranged from 79% to 99% ( Removing arsenic (III) and chromium (VI) from aqueous solution was investigated by In industrial wastewater treatment, removal of copper, nickel, zinc, cadmium, lead and iron using EC has significant efficiency. In a polymetallic solution (100 mh/L of each metal), more than 98% of removal efficiency was obtained in the first 5 min of operation time using aluminum electrodes, applying 11.5 mA/cm EC technology is already used with success in removing heavy metal pollutants like Cu, Cr, Ni, Zn, Ag, As ( The reactor used in this research was purchased from Ecolotron, Inc., of Seabrook, TX. Its design is property of For the purposes of this research, an electrocoagulation cell or reactor cell is defined as the chamber formed between two metal plates and one spacer, as shown in The experimental phase was developed using aluminum electrodes to which direct electric current was applied from a regulated power supply. The unit was operated as a monopolar reactor, thus, it has alternating anodes and cathodes, and both sides of each flat sheet electrode have the same polarity. The fluid being treated was pumped from a 45-L plastic reservoir to the reactor with a Baldor Reliance gear pump (Cat. No. IDNME3538) with adjustable speed drive at a fixed flow rate of 1.0 L min Tracer tests were conducted in order to determine the actual detention time in the EC reactor. The EC reactor, as provided by the supplier Ecolotron, has a nominal empty volume of 1000 ml, when assembled with 9 electrodes of either carbon steel of aluminum. Therefore, a 1-min detention time inside the reactor would be expected when running 1 L/min of fluid through it, or 2-min detention time when the flow rate is 0.5 L/min. For the tracer tests, a sodium chloride solution was used so that its conductivity could be measured and tracked along the test. To conduct a step-input test, a solution of known and constant conductivity (Co) was pumped through the reactor at a constant rate, allowing it to enter the deionized water-filled reactor at time zero. From this moment on, the reactor effluent was sampled every 5 s, for up to 10 min, time enough to displace the deionized water initially inside the reactor. Then, conductivity was measured in every sample until reading a conductivity value equal to Co. Two tests were conducted, one at a rate of 1 L/min and the other at 0.5 L/min. The results showed that when the flow rate was 1.0 L/min, the mean detention time was 46.8 s, and the effective reactor volume was 780 mL. When the flow rate was decreased to 0.5 L/min, the mean detention time was 105.0 s, and the effective volume was 870 mL. These results demonstrate the development of dead spaces inside the reactor as a consequence of the fluid velocity and internal reactor configuration. For a 1 L/min flow rate, this dead volume represents 22% of the nominal reactor volume and the actual detention time is only 78% of the expected nominal value of 60 s, while for 0.5 L/min, the dead volume represents 13% of the nominal volume and the actual detention time is only 87.5% of the theoretical value. Research conducted by the author using the same bench-scale reactor and presented somewhere else ( A synthetic bilge water (SBW) was prepared in order to ensure a constant composition. This SBW consisted of a highly stable and homogeneous oil-in-water emulsion obtained by preparing a mixture of deionized water, polysorbate (Tween 40 By keeping the SBW mixture under quiescent conditions in the lab for 24 h, the free-oil fraction was allowed to separate to the surface. Then, the resulting stable oil-in-water emulsion could be extracted from the bottom of the sample container and analyzed for HEM to determine the emulsified-oil fraction. A maximum of 1280 mg/l out of 5000 mg/l of oil remained emulsified in the SBW when adding 2500 mg/l of Tween 40 to this mixture, representing an emulsified-oil fraction equal to 0.26. The SBW composition included this amount of motor and emulsifying agent, plus acrylic paint to add colored colloidal particles, and metallic salts for conductivity, thus simulating actual bilge water. The resulting SBW composition is shown in The electrodes were weighed before and after the treatment. Due to the high rate of oxidation of the carbon steel electrodes, their surface had to be sanded before each experiment, and their weight taken no more than two days before and after the experiment date. The EC bench scale unit is shown in The effluent was conveyed to the clarifier where, once the pressure was released, the hydrogen bubbles raised toward the surface, dragging along the coagulated contaminants. After 10 min, the effluent in the conic clarifier was extracted, either through the bottom or top of the cone and then taken to the lab to be analyzed or put back through the reactor (effluent recycling), depending on the type of experiment; the 10-min period was considered to be sufficient for solid–liquid separation. Samples were analyzed for heavy metal concentration before and after treatment using a 340–900 nm spectrophotometer (Hach DR 2800). Copper was determined with the bicinchoninate method (Hach Method 8506/8526). The heptoxime method (Hach Method 8037) was used for nickel quantification, and zinc was measured using the zincon method (Hach Method 8009). The oil and grease concentration was determined by the hexane extractable gravimetric method (Hach Method 10056) using a solid phase extraction apparatus (Xenosep). A turbidimeter (Hach Model 2100 P) was used for turbidity determination. Several experiments were performed in order to obtain the best contaminant removal efficiency at the lowest energy consumption and operation costs. Heavy metals and oil and grease removal efficiencies were determined for each individual experiment, so the different operational variables could be compared. Results are shown in The concentration of dissolved metal from the electrodes was calculated as the difference in mass of the electrodes, before and after the experiment, divided by the total treated volume. Experiments S1 and S2 were developed using aluminum electrodes, and experiment S3 was developed using carbon steel electrodes. Experiments with combined electrodes were arranged with 7 electrodes of carbon steel and 2 final electrodes of aluminum. Operating costs were estimated as the cost by kWh for the electrical public network, given by the power provider, times the total power consumed and the cost of the electrode dissolved in each treatment. The power consumed by treatment is the sum of the power used by the pump and the DC power supply. The power consumed by the DC power supply was calculated using a manufacturer efficiency of 70%, and average electrical public network voltage of 115 V; current intensity ( The electrode cost was calculated using the volume of dissolved electrode by treatment. The data given was the cost of each electrode per cubic meter, the electrode density and the mass of consumed electrode.  The mass of contaminant removed was related to the total cost per experiment, and this relationship is presented in During the course of this research a jar test was conducted in order to compare the efficiency of a conventional coagulation-flocculation process, using aluminum sulfate, with the EC process. 2000 mL of SBW were added to four B-Ker 2 2-L square jars. Using the prepared alum stock solution, increasing amounts were added to each jar, so that the following final doses were obtained: 50, 100, 150 and 300 mg of alum/L. After dosing each beaker, the stirrer was operated at high rpm for approximately 1 min to simulate rapid mixing. Then, the stirrers were slowed down to 1 rpm and allowed to stir for 30 min. At the end of the 30 min, the stirrer was turned off and settling was allowed to take place. After 2 h of settling time, no evidence of coagulation-flocculation was observed in any of the jars, thus demonstrating that conventional coagulation-flocculation would not be effective to treat the synthetic bilge water. As shown in  The analysis of cost per gram of removed contaminant shown on As shown in Once the optimal electrode combination was selected, the next EC experiments were performed as a two-stage or two-pass process. This process configuration consisted of passing the SBW through the reactor, separating the effluent in the conical clarifier, and extracting an intermediate effluent. This effluent was analyzed as the first pass effluent. Then, this intermediate effluent was passed for a second time through the reactor and the final effluent collected and analyzed in the same way. The experiments performed with the EC reactor demonstrated that flotation by hydrogen bubbles is an important component of this technology. Therefore, flotation optimization is needed to achieve better metal removal efficiency. On the other hand,  For HEM (oil and grease), the best removal and cost efficiency was obtained when using a combination of carbon steel and aluminum electrodes, at a rate of 1 L/min and 0.6 A/cm For heavy metal removal, the configuration of the EC treatment using combined electrodes (aluminum and carbon steel), flow rate of 1 L/min, effluent recycling, and 7.5 amp, was the best for zinc removal, with 99% efficiency. Copper and nickel are hard to remove; the maximum observed removal efficiency was 70%; thus, they would require enhanced methods, like the addition of a base to raise the pH after the EC reactor. Current intensity does not have significant incidence on the removal efficiency using this type of reactor. The combination of electrode materials resulted in higher efficiency and lower costs. The optimal configuration for EC treatment has low operation costs compared with the rest of EC treatments. Power supply and electrode cost represent 60% of the total cost for the optimal configuration; therefore, a special control of these parameters is needed in order to decrease the costs. Nickel has the highest cost in this EC treatment; it requires $1.95 per gram to be removed. It was observed that the use of a conical clarifier, when compared with a rectangular one, improved the effluent quality. This fact suggests that the EC treatment must be complemented with flotation in order to promote flocculation and separation of the coagulated contaminants. The hydrogen gas bubbles generated during EC process are very efficient in dragging these flocs to the surface. The EC/Flotation treatment is highly efficient in breaking up oil-in-water emulsions and separating the oil from them. The SBW prepared in this research was easily broken up by the EC-flotation treatment, while it was not affected at all by conventional coagulation/flocculation using aluminum sulfate. The EC reactor used in this research has some design flaws that reduce the effective volume and detention time, thus affecting the overall efficiency of the EC process. As demonstrated by This research was partially funded by