The present work considers the neutralisation of bauxite residue (red mud) with CO2 as a potential technology for reducing the acid consumption in the acidic leaching step for metal recovery. The pH of bauxite residue was reduced during neutralisation by the transformation of hydroxide ions to (hydrogen) carbonate ions. Neutralisation at high CO2 partial pressures and high temperatures reduces the alkalinity of the bauxite residue, but it leads to the stabilisation of silicate compounds such as cancrinite and grossular. After acidic leaching of the neutralised product with sulfuric acid, a decrease by 20% in the dissolution yield of Al, Fe, and Ti was observed, due to an insufficient amount of acid devoted to leaching as the transformation of calcite into bassanite and the high concentration of silicate compounds consumed part of the acid. Sc recovery by leaching of the highly neutralised bauxite residue was about 35wt%, which depends on Fe and Ti recovery. A positive correlation between La/Nd with Sc indicates that the recovery of La/Nd indirectly depends on the extraction of Fe/Ti, as Sc is chemically associated to these major metals.Bauxite residue (red mud) is the waste product generated during alumina production by the Bayer process, and it is composed essentially of non-soluble elements such as iron and titanium minerals, un-digested alumina minerals, sodium aluminium hydrosilicates, calcium minerals and significant amounts of minor and trace elements such as scandium, yttrium and lanthanides, i.e. the so-called rare earth elements (REEs) ( Several methods for recovering valuable elements from bauxite residue have been reported ( The alkalinity of bauxite residue is an important issue for metal recovery by acidic leaching, because part of the acid must be used for the neutralisation of the alkaline products left behind after the Bayer process. This leads to a large acid consumption and makes the recovery of metals from bauxite residue often not economical. In order to reduce the amount of acid needed for neutralisation of bauxite residue and, consequently, to develop a more sustainable process for metal recovery, alternative neutralisation routes must be considered. The use of carbonic acid (H The objective of this paper is to evaluate the recovery of valuable metals after the reduction of bauxite residue’s alkalinity by transformation of hydroxides into soluble carbonate compounds during the neutralisation by CO The bauxite residue studied in this paper was kindly provided by Aluminium of Greece (Agios Nikolaos, Greece). It originates from a mixture of karst and lateritic bauxites. It was received from the alumina refinery after dewatering by filter presses and room temperature drying. Upon arrival in the lab, the sample was further dried at 105 Neutralisation at ambient conditions of bauxite residue with CO High-pressure neutralisation experiments were carried out in a titanium autoclave (Parr Company, series 4560) varying the partial pressure of CO Neutralisation of bauxite residue with HCl (37%, Fisher Scientific) and H All the experiments, i.e. neutralisation and leaching, were carried out in triplicate to ensure reproducibility of the results. The errors were determined as the standard deviations on the results. The concentrations of major elements in the form of oxides in our Greek bauxite residue sample are given in Mineralogical analysis allowed the identification of several mineral phases, based on iron (hematite, goethite), aluminium (gibbsite, diaspore, bayerite), calcium (calcite, calcium silicates and calcium alumino-silicates), sodium (sodalite, cancrinite) and titanium (rutile). Perovskite (CaTiO Neutralisation of bauxite residue by the early removal of hydroxide compounds may help to decrease the amount of acid during the further recovery of metals via acidic leaching. The effect of neutralisation of bauxite residue with water and CO Bauxite residue was washed with water to study the potential change in pH of bauxite residue with the removal of sodium hydroxide in absence of CO Water leaching of bauxite residue was performed with ultra-pure water (i.e. Milli-Q, 18.2 The studies were carried out in a reactor of 400 mL with gas flow rates of 0.008, 0.02, 0.1 and 0.25 A threshold gas flow rate between 0.1 and 0.25 The neutralisation by CO The pH of the neutralised sample was measured for 2 In bauxite residue, alkalinity is mainly stored in compounds such as hydrogrossular and sodalite, which have a buffer capacity between pH 11 and 8 ( The effect of CO The identification of phase transformation and thermal decomposition in the non-neutralised and neutralised bauxite residue was confirmed by thermo-gravimetric analysis (   The effect of acid concentration on the leaching of Al, Fe and Ti is shown in   A chemical correlation between the dissolution of Sc and Y with the extraction of major metals after leaching of the highly neutralised sample is shown in Up to 40 The extraction behaviour of La and Nd from the highly neutralised sample is shown in The two-step processing of bauxite residue via neutralisation and subsequent leaching establishes the effect of CO The research leading to these results has received funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 