There are numerous countries that have a variety of mineral products and commodities which are the source of government revenue and foreign exchange. Mineral revenues are essential for the development of mineral rich countries. Generally, the minerals market has many risks; therefore the revenue gained from minerals is accompanied with a level of risk. In order to plan for mineral revenue by governments, the risk of mineral revenue should be decreased. In this paper, minerals are considered as risky assets to apply the Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT). This method is able to decrease the risk of minerals׳ revenue by optimum diversification. As a case study, mineral production of Iran׳s mining sector is studied. The non-linear model is solved by quadratic programming. To achieve the country׳s expected revenue the model determines the type and quantity of minerals to be produced. The findings show that the MPT model has an adequate potential to reduce the risk of the government׳s mineral revenue compared with the current situation.Some of the world׳s countries are rich in mineral resources. Mineral and energy commodities play an important role in national economic development ( Minerals are essential in a large number of industries such as constructions, electronics, glasses, and metals. Mining is economically critical for millions of the world׳s poorest people with some 50 countries being significantly dependent on mining ( Mineral price has volatility ( In the stock market, the total risk of any portfolio can be broken down into systematic and unsystematic components ( In this paper, the mineral market is considered similar to a stock market. This paper demonstrates how governments can use portfolio-optimization methods to determine a set of mineral productions that provide the minimum risk for a given level of revenue. The aim of this paper is providing a method for achieving sustainable revenue for these mineral countries. The proposed method is based on Markowitz׳s modern portfolio theory. The mean–variance framework, pioneered by When assets are combined in a portfolio, the expected return is a weighted average of the individual asset׳s expected return. The weights are the proportions of these assets held in the portfolio. The portfolio risk is however more complex. The portfolio risk depends not only on the weights and the individual risks but also on the correlation between assets. The correlation coefficient,  The standard Markowitz mean-variance model for the portfolio selection problem is as follows ( Eq. According to The portfolio׳s variance is given by Due to fluctuations of the price, minerals can be considered as risky assets. The use of modern portfolio theory is efficient in reducing the risk of minerals revenue when the return correlation coefficient is different. As mentioned earlier, the effective diversification is finding risky assets with as low correlation as possible. To address this issue, the correlation coefficient of copper return with three other mineral returns is investigated as an example. Yearly prices of several minerals and metals from 2000 to 2012 were collected as samples ( Based on Eq. The copper price return is plotted against three other minerals separately ( As mentioned in the earlier sections, minerals are risky assets. A risky asset generally refers to assets that have a significant degree of price volatility. In this paper, a method is proposed to deal with the volatility of natural resource revenue. It offers a risk diversification based on Modern Portfolio Theory (MPT). The aim is calculation of a portfolio including some mineral resource products, so that the risk of government (or national) revenue is minimized. The proposed method includes a number of steps as follows: Identify the mineral resources of the country, Identify the mineral production constraints (model׳s lower and upper bounds), Calculate the mineral returns and their variance-covariance matrix and mean, Model of the problem as a portfolio optimization problem and Solve the model and find the optimized portfolio. To evaluate the performance of the MPT model in the mineral market, Iran׳s mineral sector is selected as a case study. Iran produces a wide variety of minerals; therefore its mineral sector has enough potential for using the proposed model. Hundreds of primordial mining sites of gold, copper, iron, lead–zinc, and silver have been discovered, which indicate centuries of mineral excavation in the country. Numerous mining localities, tools, smelters, and miners׳ residence have existed since the fourth millennium B.C. ( With accordance to Iran׳s Statistics Center data that was collected from 1988 to 2013 ( According to The MPT has been applied to the Iran׳s mineral market for reducing mineral revenue risk at the national level. The country׳s mineral sector historical data (related to production and revenue) is collected from 1992 to 2012. This information was gathered from the country׳s Statistical yearbooks. Then the minerals unit price is calculated from its annual income divided by the production tonnage. Based on unit prices and using Eq. The base case is the traditional portfolio mean variance (Eqs. In this case, we implement the general MPT method (Eqs. Based on the following formulas, one can find lower and upper bounds of the mineral production: Detailed information of the country׳s mineral products between 2012 and 2013 and the lower and upper bounds of produced minerals are presented in The efficient frontier of the general MPT model for the country׳s mineral production and mineral proportion in the optimal portfolio corresponding to each return are shown in Based on the efficient frontier of the standard Model of MPT ( To achieve the higher return in the mineral market, investors need to borne more risk. In low return (for example 19% in As mentioned earlier, If the investor (government) decides to select the optimum portfolio in a return of 27%, the mineral production in the future year will be increased from 340,461,317 There is not enough capacity in the country for Multiplier production of some minerals. For example, the chromium׳s production should be extended from 411,566 Additional production of the mineral may not be used in the country or for the export market. Production of some minerals is stopped, which leads to the closure of mines and related factories. In this case, production of zinc and lead, copper and coal should be stopped. For solving the issue, the minimum and maximum limits of production are added to the model and the general model of MPT is generated. The model considers all the constraints of the problem. The general model of MPT is more restrictive than the standard model ( To evaluate the performance of the MPT model in the country׳s mineral market, it needs to evaluate that how much MPT models reduce the mineral׳s portfolio risk. Based on latest information (2013–2014), the expected return of the country׳s mineral market portfolio is as follow: On the other hand, the variance of the current year׳s portfolio is calculated based on given data and Eqs. Its value is var( Based on There is a portfolio of minerals production in the mineral rich countries with a variety of minerals that is sometimes necessary for the governments׳ revenue. Due to some changes in the mineral market, achieving to certain revenue may not be feasible. The main objective of this paper is reduction of such a risk by using diversification via the MPT model. In this regard, two models were investigated: standard MPT model and general MPT model. They are different in the lower and upper bounds. The general model of MPT is very restricted. These models were applied in the country׳s mineral market as a case study. Nine important minerals with a total share of 95% of the country׳s mineral market were selected. The remaining minerals are considered as “Other minerals” in the assets list. The results of two MPT models were plotted in two efficient frontiers. In a certain return, the risk value of the optimal portfolio was obtained from two models and compared with the country׳s current mineral market portfolio. The result showed that using the two MPT models might lead to a decrease of the government׳s return risk at around 28% and 9%, respectively for standard MPT and general MPT models than the current situation. Due to limitations in the mineral production capacity in each country, the result of MPT is acceptable when the decision maker considers the mineral׳s minimum production level. Using the MPT model, governments would be able to select an optimal portfolio of minerals to meet their requested revenue while complying with production restrictions. At the same time, governments seek to control the overall risk of the portfolio. The application of the portfolio optimization problem is attractive because it is able to show the results of the mineral production strategy. The proposed method can provide an efficient and convenient tool for investors (governments or international mineral companies). With different risks, investors are able to find efficient portfolios based on a fixed amount of assets.