Objective
                  The S.I.G.N (Surgical Implant Generation Network Inc.) solid intramedullary nail is originally designed for tibial shaft fractures and is currently being used for femoral shaft fractures as an extended use. The nail is used in developing nations such as the Philippines, as an alternative for those who could not afford the commercially available nails. The main objective of the study is to determine whether there is a difference in clinical outcomes of patients with isolated femoral shaft fractures in Philippine General Hospital, treated with S.I.G.N intramedullary nails versus Cannulated intramedullary nails, from year 2007 to 2012.
               
                  Population
                  A total of 175 patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria based from reviews of censuses, in-patient and OPD charts of the trauma section of the Department of Orthopedics, Philippine General Hospital. The Surgical Implant Generation Network (S.I.G.N) Fracture Care On-line Database was also screened for patients to be included in the study. A total of 68 patients were able to follow-up, with 48 patients in the S.I.G.N group and 20 patients for the Cannulated group.
               
                  Main outcome measures
                  The dependent variables of the study are radiographic and clinical union, knee range of motion, weight bearing status, and complications.
               
                  Results
                  The subjects were divided into patients operated with S.I.G.N nails and with Cannulated Interlock Intramedullary nails. For the S.I.G.N group, the mean age is 32.1 years and mean follow-up is 40.75 weeks post-op. The Cannulated group has a mean age of 27.9 years and mean follow-up of 35.85 weeks post-op. Radiographic union rate for the S.I.G.N group is 68.8% while for the Cannulated group is 80%. Clinical union and full weight bearing status of patients are 100% in both groups. There is no significant difference with the number of patients with full range of motion in both groups: (S.I.G.N: 85%; Cannulated: 90%). Complication rates are also non-significant (S.I.G.N: 12.5%; Cannulated: 5%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  There is no significant difference between patients with isolated femoral shaft fractures treated with S.I.G.N. Interlock Intramedullary nail versus Cannulated Interlock Intramedullary nail in terms of Clinical and radiographic union, weight bearing, knee range of motion and complication rate.Fractures of the femoral shaft are among the top causes of orthopedic consults and mostly are caused by high-energy trauma. The study design is a 50-year retrospective cohort and was conducted at a university-based tertiary hospital. A total of 175 patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria based from reviews of censuses, in-patient and out-patient charts. The Surgical Implant Generation Network (S.I.G.N) Fracture Care On-line Database was also screened for patients to be included in the study. The patients were selected with the following inclusion criteria: Isolated diaphyseal femoral shaft fracture, located between 5 cm distal to the lesser trochanter and 5 cm proximal to the adductor tubercle. Gustilo classification closed or open type I. Fractures fixed with either S.I.G.N Interlock nails or any of the commercially available Cannulated Interlock Intramedullary nail (Stryker, Smith and Nephew, Zimmer, Orthopedic International). Fractures fixed in ≤30 days from time of injury. Follow-up of ≥4 weeks. Bilateral fractures. Gustilo open fracture type II and III. With other associated long bone fractures. Conversion Intramedullary nailing from external fixator. Pathologic fractures. The dependent variables measured in the study are the clinical and radiographic union, knee range of motion, weight bearing status, and complications post-operatively. Blinding and randomization of subjects according to treatment arms were not done since the study is retrospective. Radiographic union – presence of bridging callus formation in four cortices on anterior and lateral radiographs. Union – callus in four cortices. Abundant callus but with fracture line at least in one cortex. No callus formation. Clinical union – absence of pain at fracture site on range of motion and full weight bearing of the lower extremity. Knee range of motion – measurement of active knee flexion using a standard goniometer starting from an extended knee position (baseline zero degrees). The range of motion was divided in the following range: Full range of motion (0–140°). Intermediate (≥90 < 140°). Limited range (≤90°). Weight bearing status Full weight bearing – 100% of body weight Partial – up to 50% of body weight Non-weight bearing Post-operative complications Non-union Mal-union Infection Nail breakage Screw breakage Screw loosening Repeat surgery Peri-implant fracture The population is grouped according to the type of intramedullary nails used, namely the S.I.G.N nail and the commercially available Cannulated nails (Zimmer, Orthopedic International, Smith & Nephew). For the S.I.G.N group, only 48 out of 88 (54.5%) and 20 out of 87 (22.9%) patients for the Cannulated group have follow-up of ≥4 weeks post-op. There is no significant difference in the mean of both times to surgery and latest follow-up for both groups. The fractures classification system of Winquist and AO/OTA were used to tabulate fracture configuration and shows no significant difference in frequency. The Gustilo classification system was also used to determine the number of patients with closed or open I fractures. There is no significant difference in the distribution of subjects with this regard The subjects were also classified according to the orientation of nail insertion, being antegrade or retrograde approach. There is a significant difference between the frequency distribution of the two groups; with the S.I.G.N group having the larger number of patients inserted using the retrograde approach. The method of fracture reduction is either by open, or closed by using a fracture table for reduction. A significant difference was shown regarding this parameter, as the Cannulated group has a higher number of patients done by using closed reduction. The number of screws inserted at the proximal and distal site of the femur was also noted The subjects in the Antegrade S.I.G.N group were also described with regards to the entry point of nail insertion namely the Piriformis fossa or the greater trochanter. There is higher number of patients with entry point at the greater trochanter (65.7%) as compared to patients inserted with nails via the Piriformis fossa (34.3%) The results of the radiographic union showed that there is no significant difference in the radiographic union of patients between the two groups on latest follow-up. Union rate for the S.I.G.N group is 68.8% while for the Cannulated group is 80%. Majority of the patients in both groups have complete union while 31% of the patients in the S.I.G.N group and 20% in the Cannulated group show a fracture line in at least one cortex. No patient in either group has non-union in the fracture site. All patients in both groups achieved clinical union at follow-up. There was no finding of pain on fracture site on range of motion and weight bearing on the affected extremity. There is no significant difference with regards to the knee range of motion of both groups at the latest follow-up. Majority of patients in both groups (S.I.G.N: 85%; Cannulated: 90%) have full range of motion of the knee. However, there are still a number of subjects with intermediate range of motion ≥90 < 140 (S.I.G.N: 8.33%; Cannulated: 10%) and limited range of motion (S.I.G.N: 6.25%). All patients were able to stand on 100% of their body weight without eliciting pain. There is no significant difference with regards to the complication rates between the two groups on latest follow- up. The complication rate in the S.I.G.N group is 12.5% while it is 5% in the Cannulated group. From the patients with complication in the S.I.G.N group, 4 out of 6 needed additional surgeries. In the other hand, the only patient with complication in the Cannulated group also required an additional surgery. For the types of complications, majority is Superficial Surgical Site Infection (S.I.G.N: 4pxs, Cannulated: 1) for which all required an additional surgery. The other complication requiring surgery in the S.I.G.N group is the correction of a malrotation deformity of the distal femur Interlock Intramedullary fixation of diaphyseal fractures of the femur has proven to be the gold standard of treatment. They provide angular and rotational stability despite fracture comminution, and results to high union rate and low complication rate. Unfortunately in a third world country such as the Philippines, not everyone has the finances to procure funds for the ideal implant. The introduction of the S.I.G.N nail as an alternative free of charge, has been very appealing to the surgeons hoping to give service to the less fortunate. However, this implant was not specifically designed for the femur. It was originally made for tibial fractures, hence the design of an apex posterior bend on the proximal (9°) and distal ends (1.5°). The study population for this paper was divided into patients treated with S.I.G.N nails and Cannulated Interlock Intramedullary nail. The mean age of both groups are comparable as well as the mean time to surgery, which is almost 2 weeks post injury. The main reasons for the delay in the surgery could primarily be attributed to 1) conflict in elective O.R. Scheduling, 2.) lack of blood donors 3.) delay due to pre-op conferences. The percent of patients with follow-up was also small for both groups. However, there is a large number of follow-up (54.5%) in the S.I.G.N group since there is better record keeping and there is an on-line database available. For the nail orientation, the surgeons did not state the reason for choosing either antegrade or the retrograde approach. The peculiarity of the S.I.G.N system, rests on its external jig, which can be used for either retrograde and antegrade approach. Based from the results, there is still a larger population, which chose to use the antegrade group. The group of subjects with antegrade S.I.G.N nails was further classified regarding their choice of entry point at the proximal femur. The recommended entry point for antegrade nailing is the Piriformis since it points straight to the axis of the femoral canal. In the contrary, the S.I.G.N surgical technique manual recommends insertion of the nail via a greater trochanteric entry to permit allowance for the proximal bend of the nail. Theoretically, the reason behind this is to avoid the risk of developing a proximal peri-implant fracture while inserting a S.I.G.N nail via a straight axis through the Piriformis. In the results of this study, there are 34.3% of S.I.G.N patients inserted via the Piriformis fossa, and none had a peri-implant fracture. The main goal of treatment for femoral shaft fractures is to provide stability for painless ambulation and range of motion of the lower extremities. For this study, both the radiologic and clinical union was obtained on latest follow-up. The investigators were unable to identify the time to radiographic union since the subjects do not follow a uniform timetable of follow-up check up. Some patients were lost to follow-up for several weeks and then show up at the out-patient clinic already with radiographic union. The radiographic union however, does not correlate clinically. Thirty one percent (31%) form the S.I.G.N group and twenty (20%) from the Cannulated group have patients showing abundant callus in both groups but with a fracture line in one cortex. Interestingly, all patients from this study show clinical union and are capable of full weight bearing on follow-up. For the knee range of motion, majority of the subjects in either treatment arm have full range of motion (S.I.G.N: 85%; Cannulated nails: 90%). Patients that belong to the intermediate and limited range of motion in either group have their latest follow-up ranging from 4 to 6 weeks. All except two patients belong to the antegrade group. From chart reviews, these patients have not yet completed the protocol of ambulation therapy and range of motion exercises from the Department of Rehabilitation. Complication rate between the two groups statistically have shown to be non-significant. Majority of the complications that were recorded are superficial surgical site infections. These patients were diagnosed using the criteria of the C.D.C guidelines for Surgical Site Infection by Mangram et al. There is no significant difference between patients with isolated femoral shaft fractures treated with S.I.G.N Interlock Intramedullary nail versus Cannulated Interlock Intramedullary nail in terms of clinical and radiographic union, weight bearing, knee range of motion and complication rate. The S.I.G.N Interlock Intramedullary nails is comparable to the gold standard of treatment of femoral shaft fractures in terms of clinical outcomes and be used as a cheaper alternative for less fortunate patients. The limitations of the study are as follows: Poor patient follow-up and lack in uniformity of follow-up periods. A lack of randomization and blinding. Retrospective study. The surgeries were performed by different surgeons hence the variability of surgeon skills. No clear indication regarding reason by the surgeon for doing an antegrade or retrograde approach. No patient-rated outcome assessment tool was used to determine functional outcomes. A multi-center approach will be most beneficial in local data gathering. In local setting, it is quite difficult to recall patients due to poor data keeping, and poor follow-up and regional difficulties. This will decrease the disadvantages that were pointed. Strict compliance to follow-up should also be implemented to patients, and surgeons should be aggressive in contacting and locating patients. A prospective randomized trial might be difficult since the S.I.G.N nails are free of charge while the commercially available nails are purchased by the patients. An ambi-spective study might be more appropriate to increase the number of subjects. All authors have none to declare.