Air classifier mill (ACM) is widely used in powder coating and mineral comminution process. One of the problems typically presenting in ACM is over-grinding, which leads to high energy consumption and broad particle size distribution (PSD). To decrease the excessive amount of fine particles in the products, 6 configurations of grinding pins with ditches in the impact surface were used in the experiments. The width and depth of ditches varied from 1.35 mm and 1 mm to 4.75 mm and 3 mm, respectively, while the interior angles in the ditches are the same. The particle size and PSD show that the ditches on the grinding pins have significant effect on the D10 values and the particle size span. The deepest and widest ditches (P4) result in largest D10 and smallest span in this study. The D10s of products ground by P4 increase by 24.1% for fine powder (D50 = 25 μm) and 16.0% for coarse powder (D50 = 33 μm), while the span decreases by 6.9% (D50 = 25 μm) and 6.4% (D50 = 33 μm) compared to regular cylindrical pins (PC), respectively. Meanwhile, it is found that the P4 configuration improves the energy utilization efficiency by 7.6% (D50 = 25 μm) and 3.4% (D50 = 33 μm), compared to that of the original PC pins.The manufacturing process of powder coatings is a typical top-down approach [ The powder coatings' PSD and the resulting median particle size can have a significant effect on the coating powders' application and the appearance of the cured coating films. It is beneficial to fine powder applications since fewer small particles improve the powder flow behavior and fewer coarse particles lead to better coating quality [ According to the structure of ACM, the generation of undesired, excessive amount of fine particles is mainly due to two reasons: the first is the excessive impact to particles under the required size in the grinding chamber; the second is the imperfect classification between particles over the required size and under the required size in the classifying chamber. Generally, an ordinary ACM grinds particles with cylindrical or rectangular prismatic pins regardless the particle sizes and therefore all size particles are impacted with the rotating grinding pins. During the grinding process, the classifier constantly removes fine particles from ground particles that re-enter the grinding chamber. If the particles finer than required haven't been removed by the classifier immediately, they will be re-crushed by the grinding pins. The excessive impact and imperfect classification will therefore broaden the PSD of produced powders. This paper focuses on the decrease of the excessive impact between particles and grinding pins through the modification of grinding pins configuration. The effects of shapes and dimensions of the ditches on the particle size and PSD of the products were investigated to characterize the performance of the modification. The modification to classifier for efficient removal of fine particles will be discussed in another study. In this study, grey polyurethane (PU) chips (Product #: 9984046) provided by Seibert Powder Coatings (Cleveland, USA) are roughly 8-13 mm in diameter and 2–2.5 mm in thickness. The chips were ground by a lab scale ACM (Model: ACM-02, Donghui Powder Coating Processing Equipment Co., Ltd., China). The ACM consists of a feed hopper, a screw feeder, a grinding and classifying chamber, a cyclone and a sifter, which performs the process of grinding, classifying and collecting of coating powders, as shown in For each run, the PU chips were first put into the feed hopper and then fed into the grinding and classifying chamber via a screw feeder. When first enter the grinding chamber, chips are carried by the air flowing from the bottom of ACM, then contact with the fast running grinding pins and undergo particle size reduction. The ground particles are entrained up through the turbine by the main air and subject to a size “screening” when going through the classifier. The coarse particles are rejected by the classifier and transferred back to the grinding chamber. While the particles fine enough leave the grinding chamber through the classifier with the main air flowing through the cyclone, and the particles collected at the bottom of the cyclone are the final products. Particles escaping from the cyclone top are too fine and are collected in the bag house. 6 sets of grinding pins (stainless steel) with the same surface treatment were prepared for experiments. Each set consists of 9 identical grinding pins with the same impact surface configuration. As shown in The span is a common parameter to present the particle size distribution of a powder sample. It gives an indication of how far the characteristic particle sizes, D When the PU chips enter the grinding chamber from the hopper and feeding screw, they are transported to the grinding disk and are quickly accelerated to a high speed about 84–86% of the cylindrical pins' velocity [ During the grinding process, the comminution energy is mainly transferred from kinetic energy due to the relative velocity between the grinding components and the powder. The smaller the relative velocity, the less the cracking is generated and therefore less over-grinding will happen. The inertia of fine particles is smaller than coarse particles and it is easier to decelerate the fine particles in contrast to coarse particles when they move through a stagnant air. If the velocity of fine particles can be decreased, the over-grinding of fine particles can be avoided to some extent. A modified grinder design is proposed to decrease the excessive impact of grinding pins and therefore reduce the over-grinding of the powder coatings (  Comparing with the regular grinding pins, the “P1” pins produce powders with slightly smaller D In contrast to cylindrical “PC” ones, with the use of prismatic “P1” pins with invalid ditches, particles undergo more normal impacts due to the prismatic geometry which leads to an undesired widening of PSD of the product. On the contrary, the “P4” pins can produce powders with larger D To better illustrate the improvement of the modification, the changing rate R  The focus of this study is the decrease of over-grinding and the increase of D The increased D Besides, another phenomenon can be seen from the results. It is obvious that the increase of the rotor speed and classifier speed leads to the decrease of particle size and the increase of energy consumption. Under the same grinding operating condition, particles with the smaller size indicate a higher energy utilization efficiency. Two typical operation conditions with the input energy of 2.14 kW and 1.82 kW are selected with the produced powders in fine and coarse particle range, respectively, regarding to exp.no. 1, 9, 12, 15, 17, 20, 22, 25, 29, 32, 34 and 40 in As P4 configuration presents the optimal performance in narrowing down the size distribution and reducing the overgrinding, a throughout evaluation on its energy consumption was conducted in contrast to the most widely used “PC” pins. For a quantitative comparison, the increasing rate of energy utilization efficiency ∆η Where E The relationship of energy input and size reduction is demonstrated in In this study, the modification on the grinding pins of ACM is proposed and evaluated to reduce over-grinding of particles in the powder grinding duration. With the use of ditches in the impact surface, the “cushioning” effect significantly increases the D  The coefficient of determination, telling how well the regression line predicts the actual data points [−] Particle diameter (10, 50 or 90 vol% of the powder smaller than the diameter) [μm] A volume-based size distribution. Span gives an indication of how far the 10% and 90% points are apart, normalized with the midpoint [−] D D D D The changing rate of D The changing rate of D The increasing rate of energy utilization efficiency of pins “Pn”[−] The authors acknowledge the support of the