Integrated iron and steel plants generate large amounts of metallurgical slag, which usually contains some quantity of metals or mixtures of oxides that could be treated to be recycled in various applications. The conventional method for disposal of slags is dumping. However, it is possible to process the slags to be used in the production of metallic iron, or as an additive in cement making. In this study, a basic oxygen furnace (BOF) steelwork slag obtained from the Kardemir integrated iron and steel works, Karabuk, Turkey is used. A drum magnetic separator system with pre-engineered crucial processing parameters of drum revolution speed, drum radius, drum flesh thickness, and magnitude of the magnetic field applied is utilized, as these parameters have a competing influence on the results. Subsequently, the effects of slag grain size and the drum-blade gap are investigated in the separation efficiency of magnetic grains. It is found that collection of magnetic grains is improved by decreasing the grain size of slags and moreover, the collection of magnetic grains fraction is increased with an increase in the gap between the blades and drum.With the rapid growth of industrialization, there is pressure all over the world on available land, not only for housing and industrial complexes, but for landfilling as a means of disposing huge quantities of waste generated from industrial and mining-mineral processing operations. The problem of waste disposal has reached a stage where it occupies large tracts of land for storage of wastes, which can be much larger than that of industry. These waste materials are a significant source of pollution of air, water and streams ( A speciality steel slag cement, which is composed mainly of steel slag, blast furnace slag and Portland cement, has been commercially marketed in China for more than 20 years and uses approximately 40% of the total steel slag production. This type of cement has the advantages of lower energy cost, higher abrasion resistance, lower hydration heat evolution and higher later strength development, but the disadvantage of longer setting time and lower early strength when compared with Portland cement ( Steel making slag is produced from basic oxygen furnace (BOF steel slag) and electric arc furnace (EAF steel slag) in the steel making process. They comprise about 10–15% by weight of the steel output ( Chemical compositions of various steel making slags are summarized in The steelmaking slags are referred to by the steel production techniques used, such as BOF, EAF, and ladle furnace etc. These steel making slags typically contain 20–25% iron ( Fe in the steelmaking slags is normally in the form of iron oxide and iron bearing minerals such as magnetite (Fe Steel making slags are currently processed by standard methods common to the sand and gravel industry, such as crushing and screening. Typically, the slag material that is larger than 2.54 The magnetic separation method is used for separating metallic iron and iron minerals from steel slag. Commonly used magnetic machines are the cross-belt magnetic separator, drum magnetic separator and magnetic pulley separator. No one system or type of magnet can be used for all ferrous waste recovery. Above all, the system must initially be engineered into the process to provide recovery of a product that is required ( The basic oxygen furnace (BOF) steelwork slags used in this study are obtained from the Kardemir slag collection and processing plant comprising of various crushing and particle size screening units. This plant is constructed to evaluate BOF slags, which are disposed of as a waste material due to environmental concerns over the past 50 years, to be used as a high value added product. Slags taken from various production dates are examined in terms of their chemical compositions, and as a result, the slag compositions are found to be very similar with a slight divergence. Six samples (Analiz 12, A preliminary test is conducted by using a series of hand held magnets with various magnetic field force values (600–1500 In order to eliminate the competing and influencing parameters on the results, drum revolution speed (36 The slags in magnetic separation tests are divided into two groups: magnetic (M) and non-magnetic (NM). The quantitative phase analyses on the samples selected from the industrial magnetic separation samples, whose grain size being between +1.18 and −9.50 The samples that are subjected to industrial scale magnetic separation using 25 It could be seen from these diffraction patterns that NM and M samples are highly crystalline. The diffraction patterns also contain a slight halo due some glassy phase present. Having indexed these patterns, five different mineral phases are found in NM sample; they are namely Ca An area integral of a peak from any mineral phase could be considered as an indication of relative volumetric ratio of that particular mineral relative to the other phases. However, the effect of mass absorption coefficients from each phase should also be considered for more sensitive quantitative results. A rough approach would show that Fe In the light of the results presented above, it could be concluded that if a drum magnetic separator system with the crucial processing parameters of drum revolution speed, drum radius, drum flesh thickness, and magnitude of the magnetic field applied is vigorously pre-engineered on a trial and error basis, separation of magnetic grains in ferrous slags could be achieved by selecting an appropriate slag grain size and the gap between the drum and blades depending upon the required recovery of a product and the field of the area of the usage of a product. In the present study, it is found that magnetic grains are better collected by decreasing the grain size of slags. It is also observed that with an increase in the gap between the blades and drum, the collection of M grains group is also increased. This study was performed within the framework of TÜBITAK-TIDEB Project No: 980245-2. between Kocaeli University and Kardemir integrated iron and steel works, Karabuk, Turkey. The authors also extend their sincere thanks to Prof. Dr. Şadi Karagöz, Kocaeli University, Aksa Magnet AS, Adapazari, Turkey, TÜBYTAK-MAM, Gebze, Kocaeli, Turkey, and Sise Cam AS, Topkapi Research Centre, Istanbul, Turkey, for their help to complete this study.