Present work has been carried out to observe the effect of process variables (gas flow rate, feed flow rate, solid concentration and frother concentration) on gas holdup and pressure characteristics in flotation column using coal. Gas holdup has been estimated using phase separation method while piezometers have been used to obtain column’s axial pressure profile. It was observed that gas holdup in collection zone was affected by both air as well as feed flow rates. Up to 6% change in gas holdup may occur when the feed flow rate changes from 1–2cm/s. It was also observed that addition of coal decreased the gas holdup while addition of methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) had opposite effect. Almost linear variation in columns axial pressure characteristics has been observed with gas flow rate. An empirical relationship between gas holdup in the flotation column with column’s axial pressure difference was developed.distance between pressure probes (cm) gauge pressure difference (cm of H frictional pressure drop (cm of H static pressure difference (cm of H correlation coefficient frother concentration (ppm) feed slurry concentration (kg of coal/m bubble diameter (m) particle size (m) gravitational acceleration (m/s methyl isobutyl carbinol normal temperature and pressure Reynolds number bubble surface area flux (s standard deviation superficial gas velocity (m/s) superficial slurry/feed velocity (m/s) gas density (kg/m liquid density (kg/m solid density (kg/m slurry density in collection zone of flotation column (kg/m feed slurry density (kg/m gas holdup in collection zone (–) liquid holdup in collection zone (–) solid holdup in collection zone (–) slurry viscosity (kg/m Flotation columns are simple and relatively inexpensive means of achieving gas–liquid–solid contact. Since their inception flotation columns have proven their importance in various industrial as well as environmental problems. These include de-inking of paper pulp (   Coal slurry of known concentration ( A typical variation of gas holdup with superficial gas velocity in flotation zone of column has been presented in  An increasing trend in gas holdup with increase in frother concentration can be seen in  The gas holdup in flotation column depends on several process variables viz.; gas and slurry superficial velocity, slurry concentration, frother concentration, particle size, bubble size and slurry viscosity. Therefore; Using multiple linear regression method, the following correlation has been obtained from 286 experimental data points: In the above correlation bubble size has been estimated using the method proposed by The ranges of different dimensionless groups are as follows: To study the axial pressure characteristics inside the collection zone, the column was divided in four zones using piezometers (see The pressure difference between two column locations, Δ  Effect of frother concentration and slurry density on column’s axial pressure profile is shown in Knowledge of axial pressure profile becomes crucial in industrial scale columns as it helps in regulating the mean bubble size. Therefore it is necessary to develop a model/correlation to predict column’s axial pressure characteristics which can be used as a tool during scale up and design. The axial pressure characteristics of the column is strongly affected by the variation in holdup and density of various phases i.e. air, water and solid. Theoretically, this relationship can be expressed as: Therefore column’s axial pressure profile requires the knowledge of holdup of both (solid and liquid) phases which in turn depends on complex kinetics of the flotation process. In order to avoid the complexity of three phase one can consider the flotation process as two phase system (i.e. gas and slurry phases). Hence Eq. The above equation has been tested with experimental values as shown in Investigations on gas holdup in flotation column with coal particles reveal that there was a reduction in gas holdup due to solid loading and this reduction is more towards higher slurry concentration. The increase in feed flow rate increased the gas holdup. However the effect of feed flow rate on gas holdup was negligible as compared with gas flow rate. Study on pressure characteristics showed negligible frictional pressure drop inside the flotation column. The column was having a linear pressure profile. However one should take care in selection of frother dosage and air flow rate while maximizing the yield as the presence of coal particles increases the bubble size while reducing the gas holdup due to bubble coalescence. This research work is supported by Chemical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India.