Whereas much literature on traditional leaders and mining centres on land alienation and displacement, less has focused explicitly on the interface between traditional leaders, articulations of belonging and local labour recruitment dynamics. Using the case of Zimbabwe Platinum Mines Holdings Limited (Zimplats)’s platinum mining operations in Mhondoro-Ngezi district in Zimbabwe, this article analyses the centrality of the politics of belonging in the platinum mining industry’s local labour recruitment regimes. The article examines how traditional leaders use autochthonous claims to land to negotiate access to jobs for job-seekers under their jurisdiction and also explores the flaws and contradictions within the local labour recruitment regimes set up by mining companies to appease local communities. The relationship between mining capital and traditional leaders resulted in the emergence of a local labour recruitment regime in which traditional leaders played a significant role. Traditional leaders’ demands for jobs from mining companies whose activities led to their displacement can be viewed as a form of ‘insurgent citizenship’ which led to greater access to mining jobs by local communities. As demonstrated in this study, local communities’ access to mining jobs should not be viewed as a result of the corporate paternalism of mining companies, but coordinated efforts by traditional leaders and local communities who lost their land to mining operations. The article also highlights the fraught nature of a local labour recruitment regime that is centred on traditional leaders. Apart from instances of corruption in how traditional leaders manage the local labour recruitment system, the article also highlights the contentious nature of the psychomotor tests used by the mining company in recruiting labour.The fact that mining in Sub-Saharan Africa largely occurs in rural areas or areas used for different livelihoods by indigenous people has often engendered conflicts between large-scale mining companies and indigenous people (see There is a growing body of literature on the platinum mining industry and the role of traditional leaders in mining development in both Zimbabwe and South Africa ( The article examines the salience of graves and discourses of belonging deployed by traditional leaders and local communities in their everyday engagements with the mining company. At the centre of these engagements is the entanglement of land claims, displacement and recruitment of local labour by the mining company. The article argues that although the labour recruitment regime that emerged out of the encounters between Zimplats and local communities was seemingly beneficial to job-seekers from these communities, a closer examination of the system reveals that it had a number of contradictions. For instance, chiefs could manipulate job-seekers’ waiting lists by accepting bribes. In addition, Zimplats’s use of the Dover computer-based psychomotor and skills test in its labour recruitment generates a lot of consternation among job-seekers who find it difficult to pass the test. The article is mainly based on fieldwork conducted in the Mhondoro-Ngezi area. The article is based on eighty-six interviews conducted with people belonging to different social strata. The interviews were conducted between March and June 2018. Research participants were selected using both random and purposive sampling methods. Oral in-depth interviews and group interviews were conducted with traditional leaders, village heads, job-seekers, and Zimplats officials. The interviews were conducted at five locations: Turf Growth Point, Turf Compound, Bandahwa Growth Point, Wanganui High School and villages 11 and 12. Apart from public officials such as Chief and Ward Councillors, names of research participants have been anonymized to protect their identity. There is growing literature on traditional leaders and their role in the extractive industries ( The role of traditional leaders in Zimbabwe should be understood within the context of the transformation of the powers of chiefs since the country’s attainment of independence in 1980. While the 1980s saw the ZANU PF government’s ‘modernist vision’ make it lean more towards working with village development committees (vidcos) and ward development committees (wadcos) which were democratic institutions at the expense of traditional leaders (village heads, headmen and chiefs) who were perceived to be traditional and backward, the late 1990s saw the ‘return’ of chiefs ( In spite of their increased involvement in articulating community grievances against mining companies, traditional leaders have also been accused of working in cahoots with mining companies for their personal benefit. Writing on traditional leaders and their participation in mining development in South Africa, In 1996 Broken Hill Proprietary (BHP) which had merged with Delta acquired a Special Mining Lease from the Zimbabwean government to begin platinum mining in Selous, a town 30 km from Chegutu town. BHP’s operations were, however, halted in 1998 as the company decided to move out of Zimbabwe. This paved the way for Zimplats to purchase a stake from BHP, which enabled it to conduct feasibility studies in the Mhondoro-Ngezi area and later commence its mining operations. Since the claims which Zimplats sought to exploit were located within an area under the control of traditional leaders, the company had to work closely with the traditional leaders who claimed autochthony in the area to avoid any conflicts. It is against this background that in 1999 ‘Chief Ngezi conducted a traditional ceremony at Mulota Hills to appease the spirits of his ancestors and grant his consent for the commencement of mining operations in his area ( The three traditional leaders used their claims to autochthony to establish close ties with Zimplats and to draw benefits such as having houses built for them. Apart from this, traditional leaders also used autochthony to demand access to jobs for job-seekers in their areas of jurisdiction. This was based on the fact that they lost their ancestral lands to mining operations. The chiefs argued that if local job-seekers were not given access to jobs at the mining company, their ancestors would be angry and cause accidents and other mishaps which would affect the mining operations. In essence, chiefs were using autochthony to claim not only material resources but also jobs for the local job-seekers. It was against this background that, Zimplats tacitly agreed to give locals preferential treatment in their recruitment for casual labour and established a labour recruitment regime organized around the main traditional leaders in the area. As part of its community engagement and after considering the contentious politics of belonging and the desire by locals to have access to jobs, Zimplats made a commitment to involve local chiefs in the recruitment of labour. In order to forestall any community protest against its mining operations, Zimplats sought to closely work with traditional leaders from the area and funded a number of projects. This is against the background of mining operations having displaced local communities from their land and livelihoods. The establishment of alliances between mining companies and traditional leaders is increasingly becoming a common practice among large-scale mining companies extracting resources in rural areas, especially given the potential of community protests against mining companies ( One of the ways in which mining companies forged alliances with traditional leaders is through granting local communities privileged access to mining jobs. Traditional leaders saw Zimplats’ local labour recruitment regime as a recognition of their authority as custodians of the land and mineral resources in the area and a form of compensation for their displacement and loss of livelihoods. The placement of chiefs as overseers of this recruitment regime served as what Zimplats’ local labour recruitment regime, therefore, accentuated the power and influence of traditional leaders in the area. The move by Zimplats to build a labour recruitment regime around the chiefly office restored power and control of chiefs over resources and their subjects. Following the establishment of the labour recruitment system, traditional leaders in Mhondoro-Ngezi began to enter names of job-seekers from their community into a community job-seekers’ waiting lists and would occasionally submit the names to the mining company for recruitment ( Most of the research participants interviewed indicated that in the early 2000s when the company was establishing itself locals found it easy to get employment opportunities at the company. This was because both Zimplats and its contractors were establishing plants and building accommodation facilities for its workers which meant that they could employ a large number of people on short-term contracts. One of the research participants described the early phase of the establishment of Zimplats’ mining operations in the following terms: Thus, the initial phases of the establishment of the mine were characterized by a high percentage of job vacancies which meant that local job-seekers did not wait for long before securing jobs. This also gave them the false impression that jobs would always be available for locals. The development of Zimplats’ Mhondoro-Ngezi platinum mining operations also coincided with the collapse of Zimbabwe’s economy following the contentious land redistribution exercise in 2000. Consequently, mining companies such as Zimplats were among the few remaining private companies which were still employing high numbers of workers. This resulted in the decline of job opportunities for locals as people from many areas flocked to Zimplats in search of jobs. The high unemployment engendered by the economic meltdown in Zimbabwe, especially between 2000 and 2009, put a great impetus on the demand for mining jobs. As migrant workers from several areas flocked into Mhondoro-Ngezi in search of jobs, chiefs began to take an even more important role in labour recruitment ( Although Zimplats’ labour recruitment regime seemed to benefit the local communities affected by the mining operations, the system had a number of challenges. For instance, some chiefs took bribes to facilitate the employment of people from other areas. In addition, some elderly chiefs were also tricked by their aides as well as their children who manipulated the system to enrich themselves through taking bribes from job-seekers from other areas. Mr. Zvikwete who is a former councilor for Ward 1-in which several villages in Mhondoro-Ngezi fall under and were most of the mining operations are taking place-highlighted that chiefs were receiving bribes in the form of chickens and goats from job-seekers coming from far away areas whom they passed off as locals (Interview with Mr. Zvikwete, Turf Growth Point, 4 April 2018). The chronic problem of traditional leaders abusing their authority and colluding with mining companies has been also been observed in South Africa’s platinum mining industry ( The case of Chief Nyika, one of the three main traditional leaders in the Mhondoro-Ngezi area, encapsulates the fraught nature of the community labour recruitment regime managed by traditional leaders. During the time fieldwork was being conducted the incumbent Chief Nyika was visually impaired. As a result of this impairment, he relied on the assistance of his aide and grandchildren who also managed the job-seekers’ waiting lists from his area. However, it is alleged that the chief’s grandchildren would receive bribes from job-seekers from areas beyond Mhondoro-Ngezi and add their names to the list they would submit to Zimplats. Some job-seekers allegedly offered cash and livestock to have their names registered on the community job-seekers waiting list (Interview with Sandra Sithole, Turf Growth Point, 4 April 2018). The manipulation of this labour recruitment regime by chiefs and their aides causes a lot of disquiet among locals who complain that outsiders are getting jobs ahead of them. Gradually the mining company began to notice that some of the people who were getting jobs reserved for locals were not coming from the local communities (Interview with Mr. Zvikwete, 4 April 2018). One of the Zimplats officials highlighted how it soon became apparent that the facilities meant to benefit locals were being abused especially in Chief Nyika’s area: As job-seekers from Chief Nyika’s area began to notice that a number of job-seekers from other areas were being employed by Zimplats they concluded that Chief Nyika and his aides were registering outsiders on the community job-seekers waiting list after soliciting for bribes (Interview with John Banda, Bandahwa Growth Point, 1 June 2018). However, traditional leaders caught in the controversy of inserting names of job-seekers from other areas on the community job-seekers waiting list defended their actions by claiming that they were helping people in need regardless of where they come from. For instance, Chief Nyika argued that he was not soliciting for any bribes from job-seekers from outside his area of jurisdiction but was using his own discretion to register outsiders who were in desperate need of jobs (Interview with Chief Nyika, Turf Growth Point, 2 June 2018). However, it soon became common practice for job-seekers from areas beyond Mhondoro-Ngezi to ‘buy their belonging’ by offering traditional leaders bribes so that they could be registered in the local communities job-seekers waiting lists. Although traditional leaders’ manipulation of the local labour recruitment regime generated tensions, it is also important to highlight that the high rate of unemployment played a critical role in engendering the conflicts. Zimbabwe’s economic crisis and the high unemployment rates it created made it difficult for unskilled locals to get access to jobs. A corollary to this was the increasing tensions between local job-seekers and traditional leaders. Rumour about how outsiders were working in cahoots with local traditional leaders and Zimplats recruitment officers to beat the system also further accentuated the tensions (Interview with Fortune Chimedza, Turf Growth point, 3 June 2018). However, it should be highlighted that what was critical was neither the authenticity of allegations which were being made against traditional leaders nor the veracity of the rumours that circulated, but how job-seekers responded and acted upon the rumour. In addition, the ruling ZANU PF party politicians also submitted their own lists of job-seekers who were usually members of the party’s youth wing. This meant that one could use their affiliation to the political party to get access to employment. On their part, Zimplats accepted the lists from the politicians to avoid tensions ( In an interview with The above narrative shows that traditional leaders in Mhondoro-Ngezi felt that the labour recruitment regime established by Zimplats was providing a piecemeal solution to the community’ unemployment challenges. In addition, although Chief Ngezi tacitly acknowledged the fact that youths from his community lacked skills, he believed that if the mining company genuinely wanted to provide locals with jobs it could train the youths and equip them with the required skills. On its part, Zimplats admitted that it was only able to employ a limited number of people in spite of the expansion of its operations ( Some job-seekers accused some officials of soliciting for bribes, especially from desperate job-seekers who came from other areas. Outsiders had two methods of paying to these company officials. One was an initial once of payment that was made to the syndicate’s point man. The job seeker would, therefore, be shortlisted for employment, taken for medical examinations and eventually be employed as a general hand (Interview with Tatenda Mtandwa, Turf Growth Point, 29 April, 2018). The second method which is more common is where the job-seeker would agree to surrender six months’ wages to the person who would have recruited him/her. This is the most preferred option for both the job aspirants and the corrupt officials. In most instances, job-seekers cannot afford the once of payment and opt to surrender six months’ wages. This option guarantees a constant inflow of money for six months to the corrupt officials. It is such corrupt practices which contribute to the increasing number of out-siders being employed by the mine at the expense of the locals. In spite of the importance of community job-seekers waiting lists managed by traditional leaders the local labour recruitment, the recruitment process did not end with one’s name being registered and a shortlist being submitted to the mining company’s Human Resources Office. This is just but part of a rather convoluted recruitment process which also includes waiting at the mining company’s gates to have one’s name called, passing a computer-based psychomotor test called Dover, and going through medical examinations. The latter process generated a further layer of uncertainty among job-seekers who found it difficult to pass the psychomotor test. Whilst waiting for the mining company’s recruiting officers to call out their names job-seekers would gather around at Zimplats offices gates in small groups. The gatherings provide the platform for job-seekers to share experiences and to also establish networks. These groups are also sites of struggle as locals can identify outsiders among them who are accused of ‘taking jobs meant for the locals’ (Interview with Nigel Gudza, Turf Growth point, 8 June 2018). In Mhondoro-Ngezi, people perceived to be outsiders are derogatorily called “MaGokwe” which means immigrants from Gokwe district. The use of the term is rooted in the history of colonial displacements that saw people from the area evicted and resettled in Gokwe district to pave way for the establishment of the Rhodesdale Estate; from the 1950s up to the 1970s (see The bureaucratic and cumbersome processes of waiting for one’s name to be called by the company’s recruitment officers further exacerbated anxiety amongst job-seekers. For instance, people would gather as early as 6 a.m. and the recruitment office would open at 8 a.m.. Usually, names of those selected would be called in batches of fifty people (Interview with Lameck Ndlovu, Turf Growth Point, 8 June 2018). One of the research participants narrated his experience of waiting at the mining company’s gates thus: The intervening period between the callings out of batches of names was characterized by anxiety and uncertainty. However, the process of waiting for one to have their name called by the recruitment officers should be characterized as passive because job-seekers took the opportunity to chat, share experiences and establish networks. After a few days of waiting, one could establish networks that they could use to manipulate the system and get access to jobs (Interview with Lameck Ndlovu, Turf Growth Point, 8 June 2018). Although job-seekers placed so much importance on having their names registered in a community job-seekers’ waiting list and eventually being called out at the company gates, the process of recruitment would only end after one would have passed an aptitude test and medical examination. The job-seeker has to pass a computer-based test called Dover which tests one's aptitude and psychomotor skills. The test essentially measures judgment, reaction times and other related human reflexes. One could only be considered for a permanent position after scoring above 65 percent. Those with scores between 50 and 64 percent are only considered for six months contract jobs after which they have to perform the test again (Interview with Gift Makina, Turf, 8 March 2018). Those who score below 50 percent are turned away and asked to return after six months and start the process all over again (Interview with Gift Makina, Turf, Thursday 8 March 2018). This effectively means that those who would have failed the test have to go back home and wait for at least six months before getting another chance of getting recruited. A large number of job-seekers fail the Dover psychomotor test due to reasons that include low literacy and numeracy skills as well as poor computer literacy. Consequently, job-seekers generally feel that the psychomotor test is meant to reduce the number of locals who get employed. The company’s recruitment officials argue that the majority of local job-seekers usually lack the necessary skills to record high scores when they play the game (Interview with Helen Mubaiwa, Turf Residential Area, 4 July 2018). Although the company’s recruitment officers see the Dover as an effective and objective way of testing job-seekers’ employability, locals believe that the system is manipulated to make sure that a certain section of the job-seekers, especially locals, fail it. This, they argue, is meant to keep the number of locals who can get employed by the company low (Group Interview, Turf Growth Point, 8 March 2018). In a way, the Dover test allows the company to exercise greater control over whom they can employ and scores in the test are used to justify the choice of people recruited. Since job-seekers who score between 50 and 64 percent can be employed on short contracts, the test also helps the company manage the number of people it can employ on permanent contracts. One job-seeker who had failed the Dover test several times had this to say: Uncertainties around the aptitude tests further accentuate locals’ disquiet against the negative effects of mining and the local labour recruitment regime. Rumours about how it is possible for a job-seekers to be recruited using the Dover test scores of another person abound (Group Interview with Job-seekers, Turf Growth Point, 8 March 2018). Although all these rumours are unconfirmed, what is arguably important is the traction the rumours gain among job-seekers and how they influence their actions against the mining company. Zimplats' policy of recruiting locals especially for casual labour went with another practice in which during the rainy season the company allowed locals, who stayed at their homes in the villages, to absent themselves from work if the rivers were flooded. Whilst this practice may have been influenced by the need to stem the risk associated with crossing flooded rivers, it has an impact on the number of locals who turned up for work during the rainy season. Some workers took advantage of this policy to take time to engage in their agricultural activities (Interview with Robert Ruzivo, Turf Growth Point, 6 April 2018). This presented the company with a dilemma as it began to notice that during the rainy season few locals, especially those employed as casual labourers, turned up for work (Interview with Helen Mubaiwa, Turf residential area, 3 April 2018.) Consequently, the company silently increased its recruitment of outsiders who could provide stable labour. It also began to turn a blind eye on the illicit recruitment of outsiders by traditional leaders on the pretext that they were locals (Interview with Helen Mubaiwa, Turf residential area, 3 April 2018). Locals also complain about the high number of people who fail the medical examinations that they are required to do before they get employed. Former counsellor Mr. Zvikwete further speculates that the company’s reluctance to employ locals in the recent past could be a direct result of the suspected increase in HIV prevalence rate amongst the locals (Interview with Zvikwete, Turf Growth Point, 5 April 2018). The growth of Zimplats’ mining operations in Mhondoro-Ngezi has also witnessed the emergence of an informal settlements called Kumahuswa. Locals believe that prostitution in the informal settlement is contributing to the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other diseases among the youths which affect their employability (Interview with Zvikwete, Turf Growth Point, 5 April 2018). It should, however, be highlighted that HIV tests are not part of the medical examinations. Rather the medical examination include chest x-rays, eye tests, urine tests for diabetes and hearing tests, among other formal tests. Faced with the challenges of getting access to jobs generated by the fraught labour recruitment regime, local communities often resort to community protests to get more concessions from the mining company. These community protests are usually organized by traditional leaders and elected ward councilors. In a way, such community protests can be viewed as a form of ‘insurgent citizenship’ (Holston, 2007) whose objective is to force mining companies into providing local communities with services and preferential access to jobs. The May 2005 community job-seekers protest organized by Morgan Mupamombe, a member of the Ngezi chiefly family, is worth discussing. Morgan Mupamombe had failed to get employment at Zimplats because he was considered to be close to the age of retirement. This irked him and he decided to organize a community protest against the company. He met with village heads from the area under chief Ngezi and convinced them that they needed to mobilize to protest against Zimplats’ failure to provide adequate jobs to locals (Interview with Crispen Shumba (not real name), Wanganui High School, 3 May 2018). The protestors chanted the slogan ‘this is our land, give us jobs’ (Interview with village 6 Headman Mabhengo, Village 6, 4 May 2018). The protestors led by Morgan Mupamombe also received support from villagers from village 5 and village 6 who were being threatened with eviction to pave way for the expansion of the Zimplats Turf workers’ residential area. Thus, although Morgan Mupamombe had his own personal grievances against Zimplats, his campaign appealed to both job-seekers and villagers who were being threatened by the expansion of Zimplats’ mining operations (Interview with Bernard Makomheke, 17 May 2018). Zimplats responded to the community protests by sending personnel from its Human Resources department escorted by the police to engage the protestors. The representatives of the company informed the protesters that the company was working on a new recruitment strategy that was centralized in order to curb the alleged corruption that was taking place in the three chieftaincies which formed the local community. However, the company deliberately focused more in reassuring those that had been displaced from the villages to pave way for the expansion of Zimplats workers’ residences that they would get monetary compensation, have houses built for them and also be assisted in starting a goat rearing project that would benefit all individual households (Interview with Mr. Mabhengo, Village Head Village 6, 4 May 2018).When Morgan Mupamombe was given the platform to speak on behalf of the protesters he reminded the company that its mining operations were taking place on their ancestral lands which initially provided pasture for their livestock. If they did not address their grievances they would invoke their ancestors to punish the mining company through accidents and other mishaps (Interview with Mr. Chinyani, Wangui High School, 3 May 2018).The protests only ended after the mining company had promised to compensate the people who had been displaced to pave way for the construction of the company’ housing units and also to look into the allegations of corruption in the labour recruitment system (Interview with Chinyanhi, Wanganui High School, 3 May 2018). However the commitment made by the company towards construction of housing units whilst negating the specific demand to invest in goat rearing projects underpins Adam et al’s argument that companies are more inclined to bring about infrastructural development as opposed to promotion of livelihoods and household development ( However, what is apparent is that autochthony is one of the most important tools deployed by local communities in their struggles to access jobs and other resources from the mining company. Traditional leaders and village elders would threaten to invoke their ancestral spirits to punish the mining company if it continued to ignore local job-seekers’ demand for jobs. Traditional leaders interpreted any accident at the mining company as being a direct result of the anger of their ancestors against the mining company. This is even more significant given that the Mulota hill, one of Zimplats’ mining sites, caves where the ancestors of Chief Ngezi were buried (Interview with Zvikwete, 4 May 2018). For instance, when it was reported in 2012 that Zimplats’ Bimha Mine was experiencing some structural challenges which rendered it unsafe, local traditional leaders interpreted it as a sign that their ancestors were not happy with how Zimplats was treating the owners of the land (Interview with Mr. Zvikwete, 4 May 2018). Consequently, when the mine collapsed in June 2014, leading to its closure, the local traditional leaders felt vindicated and they linked the collapse to the anger of their ancestors against mining operations ( Although Zimplats proffered a scientific explanation for the collapse of Bimha mine and refused to consider the spiritual explanations which they locals were circulating, the fact that locals believed that there were connections between mine accidents and the anger of their ancestral spirits concerned them. Consequently, the company acceded to the demands of the community to conduct another traditional ceremony to appease the ancestral spirits of the area (Interview with Mr. Zvikwete, Turf growth point, 4 April 2018). An eye witness of the ceremony narrated the event thus: Although the mining company did not publicly admit to having initiated this traditional ceremony, what is evident is that it was keen to ensure that their mining operations would not be disturbed by community protests or rumour about mine accidents being caused by angry ancestral spirits. After the engagements between Zimplats and local traditional leaders and the traditional ceremony, there were high expectations among locals that the mining company would employ more people from the local communities. However, Zimplats could not keep with the pace of demands for jobs in spite of the fact that it committed to do its best to recruit local labour. Meanwhile, the company was also facing pressure from the government which had enacted the controversial Indigenisation and Economic Empowerment Act (Chapter 14: 33) of 2007. Among the Act’s contentious clauses include the stipulation that at least 51 percent of shares of public companies be owned by indigenous Zimbabwe. The Act’s 2011 amendment stipulated that mining companies had to submit empowerment plans for the indigenous communities. In order to comply with the Act, Zimplats committed US10 million dollars towards Chegutu Mhondoro-Ngezi Zvimba Community Share Ownership Trust ( Drawing on the broad literature on traditional leaders and the mining industry, this article has examined the role played by traditional leaders in articulating grievances of communities affected by platinum mining operations in Zimbabwe. It has argued that the location of platinum mining operations in rural areas has led to the entanglement of discourses of belonging anchored in autochthony and traditional authorities’ demands for services and jobs from mining companies. This has led to a resurgence in the importance of traditional leaders, who are the custodians of the land in these areas and, by extension, the mineral resources that lie underneath. It is against this background that discourses of autochthony are becoming closely entangled with the politics of resource extraction and local communities’ access to material resources and employment opportunities. The case of Zimplats’ operations in the Mhondoro-Ngezi area in Zimbabwe illustrates how traditional leaders deploy discourses of belonging not only to access resources from mining capital but more importantly to gain access to employment opportunities for job-seekers from areas of their jurisdiction. However, contestations over who is the real autochthon and who is a latecomer also continue to have a bearing on who can legitimately demand jobs from the mining company. In addition, the fact that traditional leaders and their aides can solicit for bribes and register outsiders in their community job-seekers waiting lists demonstrates the fault lines in a labour recruitment regime that is based on loose parameters of belonging to a local community. While traditional leaders were able to use autochthony affirmed through their connection to ancestral graves in the area to demand access to jobs, the fact that one had to pass a computer-based psychomotor test created a layer of uncertainty among local job-seekers. Out of frustration from failing to get access to more job opportunities from the mining company, local job-seekers, and their leaders turn to insurgent practices such as barricading roads to force Zimplats to increase the number of locals it was employing. In addition, traditional leaders interpret mine accidents as a sign that their ancestral spirits are angry with the mining company's failure to address locals' grievances. While mining companies are increasingly investing in CSR programs to promote local development in areas affected by their mining operations, such investments are usually not adequate. One of the critical areas of conflict between mining companies and local communities is locals' access to mining jobs. The article has demonstrated the central role played by traditional leaders in demanding preferential access to jobs for local job-seekers and how they draw on their experiences of displacement and deploy discourses of belonging to justify their claims. What emerges here is that traditional leaders are using their strong connections to land materialized through the emotive presence of their ancestral graves in the area with platinum mining operations to claim access to both material resources and employment opportunities. Although their claims and demands are not always successful, they encapsulate the local communities' encounters with the extractive industry and the strategies they deploy to assuage the impact of displacement from their ancestral lands. This resonates with This work was supported by funding from the