Photocatalytic degradation of 3-chloropyridine in the homogeneous (photo-Fenton) and heterogeneous (TiO2) phase was studied using both UV and sun light. Complete mineralization was achieved in both cases though times required in photo-Fenton process were ca. 5 times shorter under our experimental conditions. Results found at lab scale (solar simulator) were successfully extrapolated to a larger scale (30L) thus evidencing the validity of the method for treatment of waters polluted with this kind of chemical. Toxicity tests (Vibrio fischeri) showed that some intermediates more toxic than 3-chloropyridine were formed as reaction proceeded.Pesticides are considered important surface and ground water contaminants Consequently, the development of new eco-friendly methods for destroying these pollutants has become an imperative task, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) being an interesting choice Among the AOPs, solar photocatalysis Fenton process involves the use of Fe In the case of TiO Hydroxyl radicals can be formed through: Some previous studies have focused on TiO The present study represents a step forward comparing homogeneous (photo-Fenton) and heterogeneous (TiO This work must be seen in the context of a project on sustainability of olive oil production carried out in our department and supported by Junta de Andalucía. This project involves the development of a solar-driven photocatalytic method to destroy pesticide residues present in waters coming from olives washing during olive oil production. 3-Chloropyridine was chosen as a model compound of some pyridine pesticides typically used in olive trees (e.g. fluroxypyr). Photocatalytic experiments were carried out using 40 For heterogeneous photocatalysis experiments, Degussa P25 titanium dioxide (surface area 55 Prior to analyses, samples from photo-Fenton studies were neutralized (pH 7) with 0.5 Mineralization was monitored by measuring the total organic carbon (TOC) with a Shimadzu TOC-V Hydrogen peroxide was analyzed by iodometric titration. Therefore, it involved the reaction of hydrogen peroxide with iodide in acid solution followed by titration of liberated iodine with a standard solution of sodium thiosulfate (using a starch indicator). A commercial bioassay marketed as Biofix Lab-scale experiments were performed on a 20 Large-scale solar photochemical experiments were performed in a pilot plant purchased from Ecosystem SA (Barcelona, Spain), Under standard conditions, 20 Preliminary results found at lab scale (20 Since this reaction requires energy below 310  In a previous study using the same experimental setup as in the present manuscript Finally, differences in mineralization rates of UV photo-Fenton and solar photo-Fenton could be partly ascribed to the higher intensity of this lamp as compared to the solar simulator (618 and 360 Given the faster degradation rates found for photo-Fenton process as compared to TiO The presence of certain inorganic ions in the reaction medium has a significant inhibitory effect on the kinetics of degradation of pollutants by photo-Fenton process. These ions (phosphate, sulfate, fluoride, bromide, chloride…) can be part of the waters or be generated during the degradation of organic compounds (in our case, chloride during 3-chloropyridine degradation). The negative influence of these species may be due to the formation of certain less-active iron complexes, the reaction with hydroxyl radicals present to give rise to other less reactive radicals or the precipitation of iron ions. However, the negative effect on the kinetics of the reaction depends on the concentration of these ions in solution. Different authors have studied the influence of these species on the rate of degradation of organic pollutants at different concentration intervals In the present study, the influence of chloride, sulfate and phosphate ions is considered. The presence of chloride and/or sulfate ions may affect the mechanism of photo-Fenton in two different ways: (i) formation of ferric chloride and sulfate complexes that alter the distribution and reactivity of iron species (FeCl The radicals formed from Cl As regards the influence of the presence of phosphates on ferric ions, very insoluble complexes can be formed at neutral or acidic pH (FePO In order to study the effect of chloride and sulfate species, two different iron (II) precursors (ferrous sulfate and chloride) were compared ( As commented above, the presence of chloride and sulfate ions can adversely affect the photo-Fenton process in two different ways: (1) by altering the distribution and reactivity of iron species through formation of diverse iron complexes and (2) through neutralization of hydroxyl radicals and formation of some other less oxidant inorganic radicals. Furthermore, radicals formed from chloride ions can also react with H A study on the influence of phosphate ions at two different concentrations (2 All the above-mentioned experiments were performed in Milli-Q water. At this point it was decided to use tap water in order to operate under “more real” conditions and check the possible influence of dissolved ions in 3-chloropyridine mineralization. Water management in Cordoba (Spain) corresponds to a public limited company called EMACSA. According to their own analyses, tap water supplied had a conductivity of ca. 280 The next step was to verify if results obtained at lab scale could be extrapolated to the pilot plant. As explained above, under our experimental conditions, an experiment from a 40 As commented in the introduction, photocatalysis can be used to degrade toxic pollutants as a previous step, coupled to a subsequent biological treatment. Liu et al. Nevertheless, it is possible that as photocatalytic degradation proceeds, some intermediates more toxic than 3-chloropyridine are formed. In order to cast further light on that, toxicity ( A comparative study of photocatalytic degradation of 3-chloropyridine as a model compound of pyridine pesticides has been carried out both in the homogeneous (photo-Fenton) and heterogeneous (TiO Iron (II) sulfate is preferable to iron (II) chloride as the metal precursor in photo-Fenton process and the presence of phosphate in wastewaters is quite critical and should be avoided since it results in iron (III) precipitation and affects the mineralization process even at low concentrations (2 Results found at lab scale (20 The authors are thankful to