In order to study the mutual effect of deformation and mineral reactions, we have conducted shear experiments on fine-grained plagioclase-pyroxene assemblages in a Griggs-type solid-medium deformation apparatus. Experiments were performed at a constant shear strain rate of 10−5 s−1, a confining pressure of 1 GPa and temperatures of 800, 850 and 900 °C. While the peak stress of plagioclase + orthopyroxene assemblages reaches values between those of the end-member phases, the strength of polymineralic materials strongly decreases after peak stress and reaches flow stresses that stabilize far below those of the weaker phase (plagioclase). This weakening correlates with the coeval development of high-strain shear zones where new phases are preferentially produced, including new pyroxene, plagioclase and amphibole. The reaction products mostly occur as intimately mixed phases within fine-grained and interconnected shear bands, together with different compositions with respect to the starting material. This indicates that deformation significantly enhances the kinetics of mineral reactions, which in turn strongly weaken the deforming sample, here attributed to a switch to grain-size-sensitive diffusion creep through phase nucleation and grain size reduction. Such an interplay between deformation and mineral reactions may have strong implications for the initiation, development, and durability of shear zones in the lower crust.Strain localization and resulting shear zones are considered to be fundamental features of plate tectonics on Earth (e.g. As a starting point, laboratory-derived flow laws have been determined for the deformation of monophase materials to understand the rheology of important rock-forming minerals in the viscous regime of the lithosphere, including olivine (e.g., Except for rare cases, the lithosphere consists of polyphase rocks. Thus, a growing body of literature has also addressed the rheology of polyphase material, given the fact that such a rheology is likely to be different from that of monophase ones (e.g. In this context, the rheology of polyphase aggregates for gabbroic composition has a fundamental importance for understanding the mechanical behaviour of the oceanic and lower crusts; mafics are the most abundant rock types in these crustal layers (e.g. Strain localization and weakening in viscous shear zones as a result of mineral reactions are mostly achieved through changes in P-T conditions (e.g. In this contribution, rock deformation experiments on H The shear deformation experiments were carried out in two Tullis-modified Griggs-type deformation apparatus at the University of Tromsø (Norway) and in a new generation Griggs rig at the University of Orléans (France). The following sections briefly describe the preparation of the sample assembly and experimental procedure. Experiments were performed on two-phase plagioclase-orthopyroxene assemblages and, for comparison, pure plagioclase and pure orthopyroxene (Opx) material. The starting material was prepared from gem-quality Sonora labradorite (An The mixed powder was placed between 45° pre-cut alumina forcing blocks ( Samples were deformed at constant shear strain rate of ~10 When deformation was stopped, samples were quenched to 200 °C within minutes (temperature drop of ~150–300 °C/min) to preserve the deformation microstructures. Subsequently, the force and confining pressure were decreased simultaneously to room pressure and room temperature conditions. During initial stages of the decompression, the differential stress is kept above the confining pressure (~100–200 MPa) to prevent the formation of unloading cracks. After the experiment, the samples were impregnated with epoxy resin and sectioned along the piston axis and parallel to the shear direction to produce thin sections. Experimental data were digitally recorded using the Catman Easy data acquisition system and processed using a MATLAB-based program inspired from the “rig” program of Matej Pec ( After the experiment, samples were cut along the piston axis in the plane of maximum displacement and vacuum-impregnated with low viscosity epoxy to prepare thin sections for microstructural analysis. The samples were mainly analysed using light and scanning electron microscopy (SEM – TESCAN MIRA 3 XMU) at the ISTO-BRGM (Orléans, France). Starting mineral compositions were determined using electron microprobe CAMECA SX Five (EPMA) at the ISTO-BRGM (Orléans, France) on carbon-coated (20 nm thickness) thin sections at 12 or 15 kV and a beam size of ca. 1 μm. We have analysed the core and rim composition of plagioclase and pyroxene grains in deformed assemblages by EDS. In the mixed zones, the plagioclase-pyroxene compositions were also analysed if the grain size was sufficiently large. The amphibole composition is based on composition of large grains in low-strain zones, because in high-strain zones, individual grains are typically too small to be analysed. Representative analyses of these chemical compositions are given in Different mineral grains were identified in backscatter electron (BSE) images. Grain shape preferred orientations (SPO) were analysed from manually produced bitmap images using the autocorrelation function (ACF; Scanning electron microscope/backscattered electron (SEM/BSE) images were used to produce manually digitized phase maps, which allowed the analysis of grain size. The grain size was defined as the equivalent circular area diameter (d The terminology used to describe stress-strain curves is explained in The pure plagioclase experiments at 800 °C and 900 °C show similar types of stress-strain curves. At 800 °C the sample shows more than 200 MPa higher flow stress than the sample deformed at 900 °C ( The experiments on phase mixtures can be divided into two different series depending on the time spent at P-T conditions before the contact between the σ After a longer “run-in” period at 800 °C ( These sets of experiments ( The pure Plag samples deformed at 800 °C and 900 °C are microstructurally similar to one another and show homogeneous deformation. Although it is difficult to distinguish all individual plagioclase grains in BSE images, there is a clear plagioclase grain size refinement locally ( The pure Opx sample with larger initial grain size (≤40 μm compared to 10–20 μm of all other samples) deformed at 900 °C shows extensive fracturing, indicative of brittle deformation ( At 850 °C, the high-strain sample is characterized by a single high-strain zone that traverses the sample through the centre from one interface of the forcing block to the other ( Reactions in high-strain zones result in intense grain size reduction and in coalescence of foliation-forming aggregates of fine grains into mixed phase shear bands, usually laterally connected ( The modal proportion of the reaction products reaches locally 80% in the high-strain zones, as these products replace most of the pre-existing large grains, including the original Plag The strain is semi-quantitatively estimated from the aspect ratio of the bulk fabric determined by the ACF and angle of the long axis of the bulk ACF with respect to the shear plane ( Overall, major compositional changes in plagioclase and opx occur together with grain size reduction in the shear zones ( The chemical composition of clasts (Opx For comparisons with deformed samples, some samples have been hot-pressed (without deformation) as long as the experiment duration of the high shear strain samples. At 900 °C, hot-pressing samples of Opx + Plag show the development of reaction products ( In samples where the deformation was stopped at peak stress (OR47NM and OR51NM), the microstructures differ slightly in the amount of reaction products and their arrangement with respect to the microstructures of the hot-pressing experiments ( One sample was taken to a lower strain and is considered as a sample of intermediate strain between peak stress and high shear strain ( The overall grain size for both plagioclase and opx grains is strongly reduced with increasing strain. Most of the opx grain size reduction occurs after the peak stress, and hence, during the weakening and development of fine-grained mixed phase zones ( The set of experiments performed at different durations and 900 °C is used to illustrate the relation between the volume fraction of reaction products with time and the effect of deformation on reaction ( The mechanical data of our experiments show a systematic difference in the rheological evolution between monomineralic samples (Opx or Plag) and phase mixtures ( The mixed Opx + Plag samples deform under continuous weakening after attaining a peak stress, the value of which is intermediate between the end-member strengths of Opx and Plag, in agreement with a Reuss-Voigt- or Taylor-Sachs model of phase mixture (e.g., From There is no flow law for Plag + Opx mixtures, and composite flow laws only exist for Cpx + Plag ( Several processes are generally invoked to account for phase transformations that may reduce grain size and promote phase mixing, influencing the rock strength. Some workers proposed that melt reactions may strongly influence the mechanical behaviour of rocks of the lower crust by inducing phase mixing and introducing a low viscosity melt in the system (e.g. While the development of reaction coronas induces limited grain size reduction and no phase mixing in low-strain zones ( In our experiments, no grain growth is observed in fine-grained shear zones, even for longer experiments. This indicates that the occurrence of phase mixing has probably caused pinning of grain boundaries, impeding grain growth and preserving a fine grain size (e.g. Previous works have shown that the rheological behaviour of rocks and strain localization can be highly dependent on strength contrast between phases, spatial geometry and amount of mineral reactions (e.g., To summarize, our results support the idea that the sample weakening is dependent on two processes: (1) the introduction of fine-grained reaction products, and (2) their connectivity, which increases with an increasing amount of reaction products. The connectivity is nevertheless a complex variable which results from the interrelationship of strain partitioning and reaction progress. In our case, the proportion and arrangement of weak material with increasing strain first evolve into thin and polyphase shear bands, and then into connected broader high-strain zones ( One effect of deformation to solid-state chemical reactions is that deformation may enhance the kinetics of mineral reactions (e.g. Evidence of mineral reactions enhanced by deformation also arises from comparison between our hot-pressing, peak stress, and high-strain samples ( Similar results have been documented in experimentally deformed fine-grained gneiss ( Several workers have pointed out that strain localization may control the degree of weakening in polyphase rocks (e.g. Mineral reaction and its interplay with deformation is of great importance for strain localization (e.g. In agreement with previous experiments (e.g. In this study, we have performed rock deformation experiments on plagioclase + pyroxene and pure end-member assemblages using the solid-medium Griggs-type apparatus at a pressure of 1 GPa and temperatures of 800, 850 and 900 °C. The analysis of pure end-member assemblages reveals that 1) pure Opx deforms only by brittle mechanisms and 2) pure Plag deforms plastically at steady-state stress following a limited weakening after peak stress. In contrast, plagioclase + pyroxene assemblages show extensive strain-related weakening caused by mineral reactions. At the onset of deformation, new phases nucleate in aggregates as mixed phase tails and shear bands at the expense of original opx and plagioclase. The change of phase composition together with phase mixing indicates that grain size reduction originates from the consumption of reactants and nucleation of new phases. As deformation and reaction progress, the thin shear bands then coalesce to form highly connected material in the high-strain zones. Together with the occurrence of a significant weakening coeval with grain size reduction and phase mixing, our predictions suggest that shear bands deformed by grain-size-sensitive creep. The degree of connectivity, i.e. the formation of connected reacted material to a large extent, also played a major role in controlling the bulk sample strength. This highlights the importance of strain partitioning and shear bands connection to weaken shear zones. Providing analogue documentation of natural shear zones, our findings therefore emphasize the interactions between deformation and reaction to localize strain in ductile shear zones, particularly in mafic rocks. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has received funding from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at