Thermal state of iron ore sintering in iron and steel production cannot be revealed straightforward, which is unfavorable for field operations. In this paper, the soft-measuring models were established to extract the feature points through curve fitting method and evaluate the whole state via random forest algorithm. All the models proposed were validated by the industrial data, and the results show that feature extraction model can identify the variation of reaction zones, and evaluation model possesses a classification accuracy over 95%. The soft-measuring models were integrated into the automatic control system developed for sintering plant. Running results illustrate that the system can enhance the stable control and reduce the power consumption of sintering process.In iron and steel production enterprises, sintering is the most widely used agglomeration method for preparing blast furnace materials. In sintering process, the temperature variation is the main driving force of physical and chemical reaction. Reasonable thermal state is beneficial to improve the sinter quality Sintering is a high-temperature reaction process, and it belongs to a semi-closed system. To obtain the thermal parameters inside sintering bed, numerical simulation For the characterization of sintering thermal state, burn through point (BTP) is a most frequently used parameter, which indicates the completion position of sintering reaction. To estimate BTP, the exhaust gas temperature method is widely adopted In addition to the above modelling method based on sintering mechanism, artificial neural network (ANN) is a familiar approach for soft-measuring and predicting of thermal sate parameters. Because of the strong nonlinear mapping ability of ANN, it is usually used to establish the relational model between observed data and state parameters In the present work, the thermal state is proposed to be jointly characterized by Temperature Rising Point (TRP), BRP and BTP according to the reaction rule of sintering bed, and the feature extraction model was established based on time series method. The thermal state parameter (TS) is put forward to describe the stability of sintering state, and the evaluation model based on random forest algorithm was built. The novel soft-measuring models realizes the transparency of sintering bed and they have great significance for improving the optimal control of sintering. The typical sintering process is portrayed in The reaction zones in sintering pallet and the curve of exhaust gas temperature in wind-boxes are depicted in As shown in As illustrated in Reasonable thermal state means that the reaction zone in sintering bed, especially the drying and preheating zone and the combustion zone, have appropriate thickness and downward moving speed. Therefore, the leading or lagging state of a single feature point can not reflect the fluctuation of thermal state completely. In this research, the evaluation model is established to classify the thermal state (TS) into normal and fluctuating, which using TRP, BRP, BTP and the corresponding exhaust gas temperature as inputs. According to the definition of TRP, BRP and BTP, their variation trend should be in sequence. It means that the state of TRP, BRP and BTP should be leaded ahead or lagged behind in turn with certain operation parameters. Therefore, the dynamic characteristics that materials bed moving with sintering pallet should be considered, and the corresponding exhaust gas temperature is selected based on time series method. When assembling the data series of exhaust gas temperature, the detection data of adjacent wind-boxes at corresponding time interval are selected, which base on the certain wind-box located in the setting value of characteristic points. The data series is shown in Eq. Apply secondary curve fitting to the data series combined with wind-box distance, the resulting curve equation is expressed in Eq. The solution of each characteristic point shows in Eqs. In some case, the burning through state cannot be described exactly via initial value of BTP. As shown in The evaluation model of sintering thermal state is a typical supervised classification model. The traditional classification algorithms include logistic regression, naïve Bayes algorithm, decision tree classifier, artificial neural network and so on Assume that the original data sample is There are three main steps of the construction process of random forest: random sampling, decision tree constructing and random forest assembling.   Nodes splitting usually select the attribute with best classification ability from whole attribute set. In this study, the node splitting rule used in this research is minimum Gini coefficient, and the generation process of decision tree is based on the classification and regression tree algorithm (CART). Gini coefficient is calculated by Eq. If sample set The CART algorithm calculates the Gini coefficient of each variable based on Eq. The random characteristic variable refers to several attributes that randomly selected to participate in the Gini coefficient comparison during nodes splitting. In this study, the input variables are randomly selected and grouped, the number of variables in each group is  The soft-measuring model of thermal process established is applied in a sintering field of Chinese iron and steel plant. The setting value of TRP, BRP and BTP of the sintering machine was 28 m, 33 m and 39 m respectively, according to the data analysis of exhaust gas temperature in stable sintering state. The soft-measuring can be divided into three steps: Firstly, the production data are pre-processed by limiting filter and sliding time average method. Secondly, the temperature data list is established respectively based on the setting value of each feature point, and the current value of each feature point is obtained by feature extracting. Finally, the sintering state is evaluated according to the extracted feature points and its corresponding wind-box temperature. During actual sintering process, there is time lag between the feature points since the certain mixture bed is moving along with sintering pallet. It means that when the sintering state is stable, the TRP value of partial mixture bed is leading ahead of setting position, the BRP value will lead after a certain time later, and vice versa. The results of feature extraction model in a stable production period are shown in As illustrated in The data samples for modeling are collected from sintering field. The 400 groups of data samples are randomly selected as training set and 100 groups are used as testing set. The number of decision trees in random forest is set to 500. The evaluation results for the testing set are listed in Since the final output of random forest classifier is determined through voting, the performance of evaluation model can be analyzed according to the output distribution of decision trees in the random forest, as shown in In Based on the soft-measuring models established above, an automatic control system for iron ore sintering production was developed in Visual C# and applied in a domestic sintering plant. The major function of this system is to realize the visualization of thermal state and stabilize the production automatically via intelligent control models. The intelligent control models are based on the combination of expert system and fuzzy logic control, and its control strategy are the expert controller is activated while the sintering state is fluctuating and the fuzzy controller is activated while process state is steady. The Graphical User Interface (GUI) of this system is shown in Since this system was put into closed-loop running in a domestic sintering plant, BTP stability and sinter quality indices were improved, and the power consumption of per ton sinter was reduced by 2 kWh. Suppose an annual production of 2.5 million tons and power price of 0.7 RMB per kWh, the system directly reduces energy costs by 3,500,000 RMB per year for the sintering plant. Iron ore sintering is a complicated system that interior thermal state cannot be revealed straightforward. In accordance with the reaction rules of sintering process, the soft-measuring models coupled with feature extraction and comprehensive evaluation were established. Feature extraction model was established via piecewise fitting method and time series-based method. Evaluation model of thermal state was established based on random forest algorithm. Validation by production data shows that the feature extraction model can identify the variations of reaction zones very well, and the classification accuracy of evaluation model is about 95%. Application results show that the automatic control system based on the novel soft-measuring models can enhance the stable control and reduce the power consumption of sintering. Work continues to further improve the generality of the proposed model, considering that some model parameters of feature extraction model and the data samples of state evaluation model were collected from sintering experts and field operators. This work was supported by the