The mineralization of a synthetic wastewater containing apple juice using a homogeneous photo-Fenton oxidation process was evaluated as an alternative to or a rapid pretreatment step for conventional anaerobic digestion with the aim of considerably reducing the total treatment time. The mineralization process was found to follow pseudo-first-order kinetics. Experimental kinetic constants were fitted using neural networks (NNs) with a 90% confidence level. At the selected operation conditions ([H2O2]=5800ppm, [Fe(II)]=40ppm, pH=4.2 and temperature=26°C), 91% mineralization was achieved in 40min when treating a synthetic wastewater with 700ppm of the total organic carbon (TOC). This process can be performed without modifying the natural pH of the wastewater with consequent savings for reagents and a technical simplification of the process. In total, 6.7mol of H2O2 was consumed per each mol of total organic carbon removed from solution. Finally, the mineralization mechanism was also studied.Food processing industries produce large amounts of untreated wastewater effluents containing high concentrations of organic materials, which are occasionally discharged into the municipal wastewater collection system Traditionally, the anaerobic digestion technology has been applied for the treatment of industrial wastewater with a high organic matter content Currently, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have emerged as an important class of technologies for the remediation of pollutants in aqueous suspensions. An AOP generates a powerful oxidizing agent, hydroxyl radical, which completely mineralizes the pollutants in wastewater. The photo-Fenton process, which combines Fenton oxidation and UV–visible light, offers a cost-effective source of hydroxyl radicals and is easy to operate and maintain The experimental results were fitted using neural networks (NNs), which allowed the value of the mineralization constant to be estimated within the studied range as a function of the operating variables (initial concentrations of H A simulated industrial wastewater, resulting from the processing of apples for juice, was used in these experiments. For this purpose, appropriate dilutions of industrial apple juice were made. An initial concentration of 700 All experiments were carried out in a 400-mL stirred photoreactor with an external jacket connected to a thermostatic bath to maintain a constant temperature (±0.5 For the experimental runs focused on the evaluation of the kinetic mechanism, two different radical scavengers were added to the system; KI was used as quencher of hydroxyl radical ( Total organic carbon concentration was determined using a TOC analyzer (Shimadzu TOC-5000A). Monitoring of the H A central-composite experimental design was applied to investigate the effects of four variables, initial concentrations of H a factorial design with 2 selection of the axial distance of the star points (codified values replicates of the central point (three experiments). However, after evaluating the results of the preliminary trials, it was observed that an increase in H In all the experiments, the disappearance of TOCs followed pseudo-first-order kinetics, as follows: The neural network (NN) applied in this work was solved with two neurons, using a simple exponential activation function and a solution strategy based on a back-propagation algorithm. Parameters were fitted using the Solver tool in a custom spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel using a nonlinear fitting method. This iterative method is solved with an objective and a constrained cell. The objective cell contains the sum of each absolute difference between the experimental and calculated values of Finally, a measure of the saliency of the input variables was made based on the connection weights of the neural networks The experimental results obtained for the mineralization constant were fitted with NNs, resulting in an average error of less than 10%. The equation and fitting parameters are shown in The results of a saliency analysis on the input variables for each neural network (%) are also shown in The equation shown in The results showed that On the other hand, as expected, an increase in [Fe] produced the same effect on the mineralization constant, due to its photocatalytic effect. As reported previously in the literature, wastewater treatment with Fenton or photo-Fenton processes is usually highly dependent on pH the formation of Fe(III) complexes or hydroxides a decrease in the oxidation potential of To better understand the effect of the initial concentration of pH, a study of the H Although it depended on the remaining experimental conditions (temperature and concentration of Fe and H Regardless, as the The following operation conditions were selected based on the preliminary study of the effects of the variables: [H It was also found that Fe(II) disappeared almost completely from solution within 20 The peroxide consumed was estimated as previously described at 6.7 This process can be used as an alternative to anaerobic digestion or considered as a rapid pretreatment stage for biological treatment, in which case the reaction can be stopped earlier (for example, 15 To determine the main active species responsible for the apple-juice wastewater mineralization, comparison experiments in scavenger-loaded conditions were performed ( It was observed that the addition of NaN To determine the relative importance of each process (i.e., the molecular, radical and photolytic pathways) in the mineralization of the wastewater, two additional tests were performed. The first studied was the photolytic degradation of water (using only the UV lamp but without adding H  Usually, organic compounds present in wastewater are mineralized mainly through a radical mechanism, which is a faster process. In this case, the high importance of the molecular mechanism probably retards the overall mineralization process. However, it has a positive aspect, since the excess of H  The use of a homogeneous process with UV light offers a practical alternative for the mineralization of wastewater containing apple juice. Simulation from NN equations proved that initial concentrations of H Under the selected operation conditions ([H Both radical and molecular pathways are equally significant in the mineralization process. The relative importance of the molecular pathway could be due to the presence of the ascorbic acid found in fruit juice, which may destroy hydroxyl radicals, thus inhibiting the radical reaction. Financial support from the