The purpose of this study was to evaluate whether there was any significant difference in the rates of infection and of secondary surgical procedures to promote bone union, between early(6h or less after arrival to hospital) and delayed(more than 6h) surgical treatment of open tibial fractures. Three hundred and eighty-three open tibial fractures were evaluated. 184 fractures had early and 199 had delayed surgical treatment. The rates of infection and secondary surgical procedures to promote bone union of the two groups were compared with univariate and multivariate statistical methods. There was no statistically significant difference between early and delayed treatment groups with respect to overall infection (53/184 versus 51/199 infection rates, P
                     =0.96), deep infection (8/184 versus 8/199 infection rates, P
                     =1.0), and rates of secondary surgical procedures to promote bone union (24/184 versus 20/198, P
                     =0.77). We were unable to demonstrate any significant difference in infection rates or need of secondary procedures to promote bone union, between early and delayed surgical treatment of open tibial fractures.It is generally recommended that wound debridement and stabilisation of open fractures should be performed as early as possible, preferably within 6 There does not seem to be any strong evidence in the literature supporting the recommendation for immediate surgical treatment, in particular the 6 This study was performed in a framework whereby early primary surgical debridement and stabilisation of open tibial fractures was considered desirable. However, because of random factors such as the availability of theatre space or the presentation of fractures out of normal working hours, some open tibial fractures were treated soon after the injury and some later, making it possible to examine the effect of the timing of primary surgical treatment. We retrospectively reviewed 383 cases of open tibial fractures presenting to seven hospitals in the North West of England, identified from the hospitals’ information system via a computer search. They were all managed during the time interval January 1992–January 2001, although the exact number of years examined varied amongst hospitals (the period looked at varied from 4 years in one hospital to 9 years in another, with the remaining in between). The patients were managed in a framework where the intention was to operate as early as possible, and where antibiotic prophylaxis was considered essential. The exact management of each case relied upon the discretion of the surgeon in charge of their care. However, the principle of thorough wound cleansing and debridement was applied in all patients. The patients’ records and where necessary radiographs, were reviewed by the first two authors using a pre-designed form. Patients managed initially in one of the seven hospitals included in this study and who were transferred for further treatment to a different hospital had their further notes requested and reviewed. As this was a retrospective study, for the period examined in each hospital, follow up of all index patients was achieved. Gustilo grading All cases were followed up at least until there was clinical and radiological evidence of complete bony union or to the time of secondary surgical procedure to promote union. Superficial infection was defined as the presence of cellulitis or pus involving the soft tissue area of the traumatic wound in the absence of clinical or radiological features of osteomyelitis, that required antibiotic treatment or surgical intervention. Deep infection was defined as the development of osteomyelitis diagnosed clinically (development of chronic discharging sinus) or radiologically, that required surgical bone debridement. A positive microbiological culture was not considered essential for the diagnosis of superficial or deep infection. Both superficial and deep pin site infections were excluded as these are a recognized complication of external fixator devices. Secondary surgical procedures were defined as those that were performed for inadequate radiological and clinical bony union and included bone grafting with or without change in the means of fracture stabilization or fibula osteotomy, or exchange intra-medullary nailing with reaming. Secondary procedures involving dynamisation of internal or external fixation devices (such as removal of locking screws) were excluded. Grade 3C injuries were excluded for analysis because in the presence of vascular injury, emergency treatment would be an essential requirement. Patients who had limb amputation were excluded for analysis because our primary outcome measures were infection and secondary procedure to promote bone union. Patients with isolated medial malleolar fractures were excluded. In one patient who clearly reached hospital more than 24 The fractures included in the study were divided into two groups, those undergoing surgery within 6 Three hundred and eighty-three open tibial fractures were reviewed. One hundred and eighty-four fractures had primary surgery within 6 After wound exploration and debridement, the primary surgical procedure in 120 fractures was manipulation and cast immobilisation with or without traction, external fixation in 116 fractures and internal fixation in 147 (75 reamed nails, 53 un-reamed nails, 15 screws There were 104 (27%) cases of superficial or deep infection, 53 operated within 6 The rates of infection and secondary procedures to promote bone union in the early and delayed groups are shown in Friedrich in 1898 used experimental tissue contamination in guinea pigs to suggest that debridement of traumatic wounds is only effective if carried out within 6 In contrast, several small studies, have previously suggested that delays in primary surgical treatment may not confer an increased risk of infection. Two hundred and forty open fractures of long bones were examined prospectively with an incidence of 13/240 (5%) superficial and 29/240 (12%) deep infections. Gustilo and Anderson In summary, we could not demonstrate any significant difference in infection rates and need for secondary procedures to promote bone union in open tibial fractures undergoing initial surgery within 6