The continued use of cyanide in the recovery of gold is being questioned due to environmental and public concerns. The present paper describes research into the gold thiosulfate leaching system, which is considered to be the most promising alternative to cyanide. The thiosulfate system is complicated by the homogeneous reaction between two of the reactants, copper(II) and thiosulfate. This reaction produces copper(I) and polythionates. It is generally accepted that oxygen addition is thus required in order to regenerate copper(II) from copper(I). Despite this, no one has previously studied the effect of oxygen addition on the kinetics of gold leaching in thiosulfate solutions. This paper presents a study on gold leaching in thiosulfate solutions containing oxygen. It will be shown that the leaching reaction is severely hindered as the reaction between thiosulfate and copper(II) occurs in the presence of oxygen. It is postulated that an intermediate product of the oxidation of thiosulfate by copper(II) in the presence of oxygen is responsible for the slow leaching kinetics. This effect was not observed when oxygen is excluded from the solution. Disulfite (S2O5
                     2−) was identified as a possible cause of this effect, as experiments performed with the addition of disulfite also resulted in very low gold oxidation rates.Currently the majority of gold is recovered from ores by cyanidation. However, with many new mines unable to open using cyanide and the growing public and environmental concerns over the continued use of cyanide, there has been increased interest and research into alternative lixiviants. Of the alternative lixiviants, thiosulfate appears to be the most promising. It is well established that in order to obtain appreciable gold leach rates in thiosulfate solutions, the presence of copper(II) and ammonia are also required ( The leaching of gold in thiosulfate solutions containing copper and ammonia is an electrochemical reaction, with the constituent half reactions being the oxidation of gold to gold thiosulfate, and the reduction of copper(II) ammine to copper(I) thiosulfate. These half cell reactions are shown in Eqs. Although many leaching studies have been conducted using ore samples, few fundamental kinetic or electrochemical studies of gold leaching in thiosulfate solutions have been attempted. It has only been in recent times due to the advent of the rotating electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (REQCM) ( All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and Millipore Elix water. Trithionate was prepared by the equimolar addition of sulfite to tetrathionate; the formation of trithionate and thiosulfate as reaction products is known to be fast and quantitative ( A PAR 273 potentiostat was used to perform the experiments. The data was recorded, processed and saved onto an IBM-PC computer. The reaction cell was a conventional three electrode system in which the platinum counter electrode was housed in a separate cell separated from the test solution by a sintered glass frit. All potential measurements were made with respect to a saturated calomel reference but are reported here with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). The effect of oxygen on the leaching of gold in thiosulfate solutions was studied by monitoring the mass of the gold electrode with the REQCM. Initially the gold electrode was placed into a thiosulfate solution containing copper and ammonia in the absence of oxygen. As shown in It should be apparent that the decrease in the leach rate upon the addition of oxygen could be attributed to (a) the decrease in mixed potential, (b) the decrease in thiosulfate concentration and/or (c) some other effect of the presence of oxygen on the gold leaching process. To assess which of these factors are the most important, a number of additional experiments were performed, as outlined below. The first effect of oxygen that was studied was the change in the thiosulfate concentration, since it is known that oxygen catalyses the oxidation of thiosulfate in copper containing solutions ( The electrode potential, and hence gold leach rate, is dependant on the copper(II)/copper(I) redox couple of Eq.  The copper catalysed oxidation of thiosulfate by oxygen is a complex process, and discussion of the reaction sequence is beyond the scope of the present paper. However, it has been shown previously that tetrathionate, trithionate, and sulfate are the major reaction products formed during thiosulfate oxidation ( Thiosulfate oxidation does occur in the absence of oxygen, although at a much lower rate. In addition, it has been shown that tetrathionate and trithionate are also oxidised by copper(II) ( The next set of experiments were performed to assess the effect of disulfite concentration on the oxidation of gold in copper–ammonia–thiosulfate solutions. Since the results shown in If disulfite is the polythionate which is responsible for the slow leaching kinetics observed in the presence of oxygen, then the results presented thus far can readily account for the data shown in The rate of thiosulfate oxidation can be simply varied by changing the flowrate of oxygen used to sparge the solution. Based on the results shown in It has been shown that the gold thiosulfate leaching reaction is hindered when oxygen is present in solution. Although the decrease in thiosulfate concentration due to its oxidation by oxygen does affect the leaching process, this alone could not account for the slow leaching kinetics observed in the presence of oxygen. It was suggested that these slow kinetics are caused by the presence of a product of the oxidation of thiosulfate by oxygen. It was shown that this species is an intermediate product, and the results obtained using disulfite addition to the solutions were very similar to those obtained in the presence of oxygen. It was however shown that disulfite is oxidised by copper(II), and once it disappears from solution, the gold oxidation rate increases dramatically. By lowering the partial pressure and flowrate of oxygen, the rate of thiosulfate oxidation was lowered, resulting in a lower rate of polythionate formation. Under these conditions, the gold oxidation rate is substantially higher. From an industrial point of view, the findings presented in the present paper are extremely important. If oxygen addition to the thiosulfate leach solutions is practiced, then proper control over the oxygen addition rate is required in order to maintain high gold oxidation rates.