Thermal recovery methods are designed to reduce the viscosity of the remaining oil in place by increasing its temperature. During thermal oil recovery the elevated reservoir temperature and pressure in combination with the possible catalytic effect of rock matrixes could lead to significant changes in the composition of the phases and their physical and chemical properties. This can modify the capillary forces in the oil/rock matrix and the oil displacement mobility and the sweep efficiency. The objective of this study was to improve the understanding of the basic mechanisms responsible for the geochemical alteration of crude oils during thermal recovery processes and to use that understanding to identify the conditions under which the thermal process can be applied to improve the recovery of medium and heavy oils. Using reservoir rocks of varying mineralogical composition and crude oils with different geochemical composition, pyrolysis (PY), thermocatalytic conversion and oxidation tests were performed to examine the influence of thermocatalytic reactions on the geochemical conversion of crude oil compounds. From the results of this study, it appears that the controlling mechanism of alteration of crude oil compounds is their radical polymerization. The rate of conversion is influenced by many factors such as rock lithology, metal compounds and clay minerals in reservoir rock and process conditions. The thermal cracking of heavy- and heterocompounds of crude oils leads to significant changes in the oil composition. The labile compounds crack from resins and asphaltene and produce saturate and aromatic hydrocarbons. This induces important modifications in the oil composition. The amount and properties of hydrocarbons formed during the thermal reactions is influenced by the nature of the initial oil. Significant differences in geochemical composition of crude oils may lead to differences in their reactivity. The results of this study provide a new insight on the mechanisms of the reactions involved in thermal recovery processes and also a basis for a better material characterization of various crude oils in numerical models describing PY and oxidation behavior.The last few years have seen rapid technological advances in oil exploration and production. Conventional proven oil reserves have risen since the mid-1970s and presently amount to about 175 billion m The goal of any enhanced recovery process is to recover a major part of the remaining oil in place. In the case of medium and heavy oils, this can be a high percentage of the original oil in place. Experience indicated that the thermal methods are the only effective technologies for the enhanced recovery of heavy oil resources. These methods may be divided into four groups, viz. hot-water injection, steam injection, in-situ combustion and magnetic heating. It has been confirmed During this study, experiments were conducted to describe how mineralogical composition of the reservoir rock affects the geochemical alteration of crude oil compounds. The thermocatalytic conversion of crude oil compounds and the influence of clay minerals and heavy metal derivatives on the crude oil alteration will be discussed. The main characteristics of rock samples used in this study are given in Three heavy oils namely IHO 101, IHO 126 and HO 172 were used for the study. Prior to each experiment, the fractions distilling below 210°C were eliminated. Selected physical parameters and elemental composition of the oils are listed in The experimental system consisted of four interrelated parts: fluid injection system; oxidation and PY reactors; product separation and analysis; control and data processing and evaluation system. The gas injection system consisted of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, steam and air tanks. Gas feed rates were controlled by variable-area choke nozzles. The reactors were designed and constructed from high-grade steel for a total pressure up to 15 MPa and for temperatures up to 900°C. The reactors were heated using an electric system. Pressure in the reactors was adjusted by an automatic backpressure regulator. Two thermocouples were used to measure the temperature in each reactor. The produced fluids were let down to atmospheric pressure and fed to a glass gas–liquid separator, which was cooled. The non-condensable products were fed through a wet test meter to obtain measurement of the cumulative gas volume and to continuous gas analyzers to determine the composition of produced gases. The investigations include the following two types of tests: (a) LTO tests and (b) PY of heavier crude oil fractions. The LTO tests were performed at 210°C, using air as oxidizing agent. The PY tests were carried out under isothermal conditions at 370°C and 510°C using either nitrogen or carbon dioxide or steam as PY medium. After each test the distribution of the products between gas, liquid and the insoluble organic phase (pyrobitumen) was determined. The analytical procedure used to fractionate LTO and PY products is described in The following section describes the results of tests carried out to identify how LTO reactions affect the composition of crude oils during thermal oil recovery. The experimental procedure consisted of preheating the system to the test temperature, establishing the gas flow rate and rapid placing of sample into the system. The reactors were maintained at the desired temperature for a predetermined time and then quenched in the cold-water bath and the composition of the oxidized oil was determined. Preliminary tests were carried out, using hydrocarbons (saturates and aromatics), separated from IHO 101. The tests were conducted at 210°C and at reaction times up to 150 h. Typical sets of curves of concentration of different components vs. time obtained from these tests are given in The influence of rock composition on the low temperature oxidative conversion of resins into asphaltene and asphaltene into coke and light hydrocarbons is illustrated in The objective of the second part of this study was to investigate the PY behavior of heavier crude oil compounds and to find out how rock composition, PY medium, temperature and time influence the distribution of the products between 3 phases (gas, liquid and pyrobitumen). The relationship between rock composition and the distribution of PY products as a function of PY temperature was investigated by using nitrogen as an inert PY medium. A quantitative comparison of the results in rock 1 with that in rock 2 and 3 shows ( The distribution of PY products is also influenced by PY medium. Compared to the nitrogen as an inert PY gas, the light and medium components of oil can be extracted by the carbon dioxide, this leads to lower pyrobitumen concentration ( From the results of produced gas analyses, it can be pointed out that the amount of methane, ethane, propane, H The alteration of different crude oils is influenced by many factors such as chemical composition of oils, process conditions and rock lithology. The kinetics of the crude oil alteration is an extremely important parameter to be considered in the design of a thermal recovery project. The total mineralogy of the reservoir rock has a great influence on the process variable. Clay minerals and derivatives of heavy metals catalyze the LTO of crude oil compounds. The existence of heavy metal derivatives and/or clay minerals in the reservoir accelerates the formation of resins from the lighter hydrocarbons and their polymerization into asphaltene and pyrobitumen. In general, clay fractions of the reservoir matrix are very fine and, therefore, possess the highest specific surface area. This leads to formation of heavier crude oil compounds and pyrobitumen when clays or metallic components exist in reservoir rock matrix. The PY medium has also a significant influence on the distribution of PY products. Compared to the nitrogen as PY gas, the amount of heavier crude oil compounds and pyrobitumen is decreasing when carbon dioxide or steam is used as PY medium. The results of this study provide a new insight on the mechanisms of the reactions involved in thermal recovery processes and also a basis for a better material characterization of various crude oils in numerical models describing PY and oxidation behavior.