 Above elbow thumb spica cast for proximal pole, short arm thumb spica for mid and distal poles Active shoulder ROM Active second through fifth MCP/PIP/DIP joint ROM  Short arm thumb spica cast Continue shoulder and finger exercises. Begin active elbow flexion/extension/supination/ pronation.  CT scan to confirm union if radiographs in doubt. If not united, continue short arm thumb spica cast. If cysts are forming intramedullary, reverting to screw fixation and possible bone grafting should be considered.  Assuming union at 12 weeks, removable thumb spica splint Begin home exercise program. Active/gentle-assisted wrist flexion/extension ROM Active/gentle-assisted wrist radial/ulnar flexion ROM Active/gentle-assisted thumb MCP/IP joint ROM Active/gentle-assisted thenar cone exercise  Discontinue all splinting. Formalized physical/occupational therapy Active/aggressive-assisted wrist flexion/extension ROM Active/aggressive-assisted wrist radial/ulnar flexion ROM Active/aggressive-assisted thumb MCP/IP joint ROM Active/aggressive-assisted thenar cone exercise  Grip strengthening, aggressive ROM Unrestricted activities  Elevate sugar-tong thumb spica splint, ice Shoulder ROM MCP/PIP/DIP joint active ROM exercises  Suture removal Exos forearm-based thumb spica rigid splint to allow washing and scar modification, or casting for a total of 3 to 4 weeks after surgery Continue hand/elbow/shoulder ROM.  Removeable short arm thumb spica splint system Elbow active/assisted extension, flexion/supination/pronation; continue fingers 2 through 5 active ROM and shoulder active ROM Wrist motion is initiated active only, not passive.  Emphasis on home exercise program Active/gentle-assisted wrist flexion and extension ROM Active/gentle-assisted wrist radial/ulnar flexion ROM Active/gentle-assisted thumb MCP/IP joint ROM Active/gentle-assisted thenar cone exercise Once fracture union present, progressive strengthening can be instituted  Discontinue all splinting. Formalized physical/occupational therapy can be discontinued with patient understanding of his or her responsibility and good early recovery. Continue formal office program if poor progress Active/aggressive-assisted wrist flexion/extension ROM Active/aggressive-assisted wrist radial/ulnar flexion ROM Active/aggressive-assisted thumb MCP/IP joint ROM Active/aggressive-assisted thenar cone exercise  Aggressive ROM if still needed Unrestricted activities The scaphoid (carpal navicular) is the most commonly fractured of the carpal bones, and carpal fractures often are difficult to diagnose and treat. Complications include nonunion and malunion, which alter wrist kinematics. This can lead to pain, decreased ROM, decrease in strength, and early radiocarpal arthrosis. The Scaphoid fractures usually are Scaphoid fractures usually occur with hyperextension and radial flexion of the wrist, most often in young active male patients. Patients usually have tenderness in the anatomic snuffbox (between the first and the second dorsal compartments), less commonly on the distal scaphoid tuberosity volarly, and may have increased pain with axial compression of the thumb metacarpal and decreased grip strength. Nondisplaced scaphoid fractures are often difficult to evaluate radiographically because of the bone’s oblique orientation in the wrist and the minimal calcific disruption seen.  If an MRI is unavailable, patients with snuffbox tenderness should be immobilized for 10 to 14 days and then return for repeat radiographs out of the splint. If follow-up radiographs are positive the diagnosis is certain; however if negative, clinical exam should dictate further imaging ( Assessment of Most clinically diagnosed scaphoid fractures turn out to be nonfactual fractures. The question of long arm cast versus short arm cast and thumb spica or not hasn’t been completely answered. Two meta-analysis studies with different inclusion criteria recently were published. Truly nondisplaced fractures can be treated closed and nearly always heal with well molded cast immobilization. Above- or below-elbow casting is still a subject of controversy. In proximal fractures we prefer 6 weeks of long arm thumb spica casting, followed by a minimum of 3 weeks of short arm thumb spica casting. If radiographs do not demonstrate healing we immobilize for another 3 weeks. Scaphoid union can be verified with thin section CT scan if needed at this time. The expense would only be warranted for very few. Most are continued with immobilization until radiographic union. Waist and distal fractures are treated with a short arm system. If on follow-up radiographs the fracture displaces or fracture line significantly widens we revert to screw fixation. Surgical treatment is indicated for the following: Nondisplaced fractures in which the complications of prolonged immobilization (wrist stiffness, thenar atrophy, and delayed return to heavy labor or sports) would be intolerable Scaphoid fractures previously unrecognized or untreated Displaced scaphoid fractures (see previous for criteria for displacement) Scaphoid nonunions For nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures, percutaneous fixation with cannulated screws has become accepted treatment. A recent meta-analysis reported that percutaneous fixation may result in union 5 weeks earlier than cast treatment and return to sport or work about 7 weeks earlier than with cast treatment ( Once released from the cast, a standard mobilization protocol such as with a distal radius fracture is undertaken. Active-assisted range of motion and progressive strengthening are the therapy mainstays. Heat as an adjunct for joint mobilization or cold for new rounds of swelling can be employed at home in addition to massage and tendon and nerve glides. The overall emphasis is on patient accountability. The therapist needs to ensure that clients understand their home program responsibilities completely. Most personal activities can be resumed once protective range of motion is restored. Safety issues may dictate a graduated return to previous level of function due to workplace safety concerns. A complete reference list is available at