In the following respects, tooth enamel is a unique tissue in the mammalian body: (a) it is the most mineralized and hardest tissue in it comprising up to 95wt% of apatite; (b) its microstructure is dominated by parallel rods composed of bundles of 40–60nm wide apatite crystals with aspect ratios reaching up to 1:10,000 and (c) not only does the protein matrix that gives rise to enamel guides the crystal growth, but it also conducts its own degradation and removal in parallel. Hence, when mimicking the process of amelogenesis in vitro, crystal growth has to be coupled to proteolytic digestion of the amelogenin assemblies that are known to play a pivotal role in conducting the proper crystal growth. Experimental settings based on controlled and programmable titration of amelogenin sols digested by means of MMP-20 with buffered calcium and phosphate solutions were employed to imitate the formation of elongated, plate-shaped crystals. Whilst amelogenin can act as a promoter of nucleation and crystal growth alone, in this study we show that proteolysis exerts an additional nucleation- and growth-promoting effect. Hydrolysis of full-length amelogenin by MMP-20 decreases the critical time needed for the protein and peptides to adhere and to cover the substrate. The formation and immobilization of a protein layer subsequently reduces the time for calcium phosphate crystallization. Coupling the proteolytic reaction to titration in the presence of 0.4mg/ml rH174 has been shown to have the same effect on the crystal growth promotion as quadrupling the concentration of rH174 to 1.6mg/ml. Controlling the rate and the extent of the proteolytic cleavage can thus be used to control the nucleation and growth rates in a protein-guided crystallization system.The biological formation of enamel tissue is known as amelogenesis and gives rise to the hardest tissue in the vertebrate body. Besides specialized cells, the ameloblasts, it involves macromolecular species that can be divided into families of proteins, proteases and protease inhibitors. Ninety percent of proteins that make up the enamel matrix are derived from the amelogenin gene, with the full-length protein being expressed predominantly (90%). The remaining 10% is comprised of other proteins: ameloblastin, enamelin, and proteolytic enzymes. Together, they assemble into a scaffold that serves as a template for the nucleation and uniaxial growth of apatite crystals in a highly organized structure. One of the most intriguing features of amelogenesis derives from the fact that its high mineral content coupled with an ultrafine architecture implies the extracellular matrix in this process directs not only the crystal growth, but its own constructive degradation too. This makes amelogenesis a significantly more intricate mineralization process compared to dentinogenesis during which the collagenous protein matrix remains in place. The action of proteases, such as matrix metalloproteinase-20 (MMP-20, also known as enamelysin) and kallikrein 4 (KLK-4, also known as enamel matrix serine protease 1) in hydrolysis of amelogenins and other proteins thus presents a crucial aspect of amelogenesis. An increasing amount of evidence suggests that the cleavage products carry out different secondary self-assembly-related functions in the developing enamel matrix. Our approach to gaining insight into the mechanism of amelogenesis at the molecular scale involved the design of a biomimetic programmable titration system. Recombinant full-length human amelogenin (rH174) and MMP-20 were previously synthesized via their expression in BL21(DE3) plysS Dynamic light scattering (DLS) analysis of colloidal suspensions of proteolytically cleaved rH174 was carried out on  Mass spectra (0.8–42  The effect of proteolysis on the crystal growth promoting capacities of rH174 sols can be also seen from AFM images and curves depicting apatite crystal height as a function of the titration volume for different rH174/MMP-20 weight ratios, displayed in The effect of proteolysis on the rH174 particle size increase at pH 7.4, as indicated by dynamic light scattering measurements, is shown in Despite the fact that all the experimental systems were buffered, in most cases a mild drop in pH, most likely associated with the precipitation of apatite, was noticed. Gradual increase of the calcium levels in the solution typically results in a plateau in [Ca SEM micrographs ( In our previous report, we have offered evidence in favour of the nucleation and growth promoting role of rH174 under the experimental conditions applied in our biomimetic study. The more MMP-20 is initially present in the system, the earlier in the course of the titration time the precipitation of mineral begins and the more intensive the crystal growth becomes ( The extent of the pH drop associated with the formation of apatite was higher for the protease-containing system compared to its solely rH174-comprising counterpart ( When MMP-20-induced digestion of rH174 is coupled to precipitation of calcium phosphate lower concentrations of calcium ions in the supernatants through the entire course of the experiment ( Coupling the proteolytic reaction to titration in the presence of 0.4 These observations strongly indicate that the proteolytic digestion plays an additional nucleation promoting role when compared to the control, protein-free experiment and the one containing rH174 as the only polypeptide compound. By lowering the energy of activation required for heterogeneous nucleation, proteolysis influences the thermodynamics of apatite growth. The first proteolytic product of the reaction between rH174 and MMP-20 is the 13–26 residues long C-terminal sequence of a pronounced hydrophilicity ( The rate of the proteolytic cleavage reaction has been shown to be directly proportional to the concentration of MMP-20. In 24 The results obtained in this study are in agreement with the previous findings of nucleation-promoting effect that amelogenin from species other than human can exert on metastable calcium phosphate solutions. The experimental setting applied in this work has been demonstrated as valuable in terms of enabling us to gain insights into the fundamental nature of amelogenesis. Still, it may be subject to numerous improvements, which will be the topics of the future studies. As noted, diversifying the polypeptide content would help in designing an even more faithful biomimetic setting. Here we have introduced MMP-20 only in the initial stage of the process which may mimic the biological conditions of enamel development, since MMP-20 is expressed at the early secretory stage of amelogenesis when crystallites are growing predominatly in length. Since enamel starts growing from a protein-rich ionic gel, a.k.a. the developing enamel matrix, the process of protein-guided crystal growth has to be synchronized with the proteolytic degradation and controlled disappearance of the very protein matrix that guides the uniaxial growth of the apatite crystals. In order to understand the complex process of amelogenesis the three elementary aspects of the process – crystal growth, protein self-assembly and selective and time-dependent proteolysis – need to be studied in parallel.    Presented are the results of a study supported by