Yield decline or stagnation and its relationship with soil organic matter fractions in soybean (Glycine max L.)–wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cropping system under long-term fertilizer use are not well understood. To understand this phenomenon, soil organic matter fractions and soil aggregate size distribution were studied in an Alfisol (Typic Haplustalf) at a long-term experiment at Birsa Agricultural University, Ranchi, India. For 30 years, the following fertilizer treatments were compared with undisturbed fallow plots (without crop and fertilizer management): unfertilized (control), 100% recommended rate of N, NP, NPK, NPK+ farmyard manure (FYM) and NPK+lime. Yield declined with time for soybean in control (30kgha−1
                     yr−1) and NP (21kgha−1
                     yr−1) treatments and for wheat in control (46kgha−1
                     yr−1) and N (25kgha−1
                     yr−1) treatments. However, yield increased with time for NPK+FYM and NPK+lime treatments in wheat. At a depth of 0–15cm, small macroaggregates (0.25–2mm) dominated soil (43–61%) followed by microaggregates (0.053–0.25mm) with 13–28%. Soil microbial biomass carbon (SMBC), nitrogen (SMBN) and acid hydrolysable carbohydrates (HCH) were greater in NPK+FYM and NPK+lime as compared to other treatments. With three decades of cultivation, C and N mineralization were greater in microaggregates than in small macroaggregates and relatively resistant mineral associated organic matter (silt+clay fraction). Particulate organic carbon (POC) and nitrogen (PON) decreased significantly in control, N and NP application over fallow. Results suggest that continuous use of NPK+FYM or NPK+lime would sustain yield in a soybean–wheat system without deteriorating soil quality.Deterioration in soil quality, especially soil organic matter and its associated nutrient supply to soil, has been cited as one of the major factors for yield decline or stagnation under intensive rice ( Soil degradation occurs due to nutrient depletion, soil structure degradation, acidification and sub-optimal addition of organic and inorganic fertilizer to soil. Acidification of soil results in loss of exchangeable Ca Soil organic matter is an essential component with key multifunctional roles in soil quality and related to many physical and biological properties of soil ( The objectives of this study were (i) to evaluate the impact of fertilizer, manure and lime applications on yield and SOC with time and (ii) to assess soil C and N fractions and soil structure in an acid soil with 30 years of continuous cropping under soybean–wheat system. A long-term fertilizer experiment was initiated at Ranchi (1971–1972 to 2001–2002) under the All India Coordinated Research Project on Long-Term Fertilizer Experiments at the Birsa Agricultural University, India (23°30′N, 85°1′E, at 120 The soils were red Typic Haplustalf with sandy clay loam texture containing 662 At maturity the crops were harvested manually at ground level using sickles, and the harvested above ground biomass was removed from the plots. Grain was separated from straw using a plot thresher, air dried and the grain yield was recorded from the net area of 8.8 Grain yield of soybean and wheat was recorded every year (1971–2001) from replicated treatments (control, N, NP, NPK, NPK Soil samples were processed and analyzed for different biochemical properties. A 40 Acid hydrolysable carbohydrates (HCH) were determined in dilute H A sub-sample (4 To determine POC and PON, sub-samples of whole soil (2 Carbon and N mineralization were determined from three aggregate size fractions (i.e. 0.25–2, 0.053–0.25 and <0.053 Data were subjected to analysis of variance procedures as given by Yield declined with time for soybean in control and NP treatments and for wheat in control and N treatments ( Soil organic C followed a negative linear Soil organic C and total N concentration of topsoil (0–15 Rewetted aggregate size distributions were dominated by small macroaggregates (0.25–2 Carbon and N concentrations were greater in small macroaggregates than in microaggregates and larger macroaggregates at all depths, irrespective of treatments. However, irrespective of aggregates size class, the concentration of C and N was higher in the NPK Soil with continuous addition of NPK fertilizer either with FYM or lime amendments had greater POC (10–31% of SOC) and PON (6–24% of TN) than other treatments ( Irrespective of fertilizer and manure treatments, C decay rate constants ( A major component of sustainable land use is to sustain and improve the quality of the soil resource base. Monitoring is important to correct deficiencies or improve the quality of the soil resource. Various studies have attempted to identify sets of attributes or properties that can characterize a soil processes in regard to a specific soil function. More recently, measurement of soil organic matter is relatively straightforward, so there is need for an indicator to assess its status in soil at any time ( In this experiment, imbalanced fertilizer use (N or NP) resulted in considerable decrease in CEC (6.5–6.9 With 30 years of continuous cultivation under conventional tillage, the active fractions of C and N were lower under imbalanced than balanced fertilizer application ( As cultivation continued with unbalanced fertilization, there was an extensive depletion of POC and PON ( Variations in aggregate size distribution due to treatments reflected the importance of organic matter in stabilizing soil aggregates. Continuous, intensive conventional tillage and removal of aboveground residues depleted aggregates in N, NP and unfertilized control plots compared to fallow ( The C and N decay rates were relatively lower in N and NP treatment than NPK One cause of yield decline could be related to declining SOC and its associate fractions in acid soils. Three decades of continuous soybean–wheat cultivation revealed a significant loss of active fractions of C and N with control, N and NP fertilization. The POC and PON were also lower with concomitant decrease of C and N decay rate of aggregates, which led to lower nutrient supplying capacity. Organic matter in the clay This project was funded by Agriculture Ecosystem Directorate, RRPS-19, the National Agriculture Technology Project of Indian Council of Agricultural Research. The authors are grateful to Mrs. Asha Nair, St. Joseph's Co-Ed school for the constructive criticism in overall improvement of this manuscript.