The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of limestone rocks was estimated by indentation testing on small rock fragments. The effects of rock fragment dimensions (particularly area and thickness) on indentation indices were studied. The investigation shows a size dependency of the conventional indentation parameters. The results indicate the fragment area normal to loading direction has little effect on the indentation indices, while the sample thickness has major influence on the results. To reduce size dependency, the results of indentation test were normalized by a thickness function.
                  The proposed empirical equations were verified against independent data pertaining to other limestone rocks not used in developing the correlations, which showed agreement between the estimated and measured UCS. Statistical analysis was used to determine the minimum number of required indentation tests in relation to the project importance. This study shows that the uniaxial compressive strength of rocks can be estimated reasonably well from indentation testing of small rock fragments.Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rocks is widely used as a strength index parameter for rock mass classification Several indirect and unconventional techniques and procedures have been established to obtain formation mechanical properties. These include correlations between the desired properties and easily and reliably measured parameters Using indentation testing, Zausa and Santarelli Ringstad et al. In majority of these studies, indentation test has been performed on samples with random dimensions of 2–5 Rock samples used in this study include nine limestone blocks (S1–S9) with strengths ranging from 30 The rock samples were cut into rectangular cuboids with the dimensions of 3×3, 4×4 and 5×5 In this study, a cylindrical flat-end indenter stylus with the diameter of 1 Indentation testing includes measurement of force and displacement of an indenter, which penetrates into a rock fragment until it breaks apart. Test data are presented in the form of load (N) versus penetration (mm), as shown in Indentation stiffness is defined as the slope of the linear part of the curve and is a measure of the rock resistance against the indenter penetration. In the literature, different terms were used to introduce the slope of the linear part of the curve; e.g. Indentation Index The critical transition force is the magnitude of load at the onset of softening. The required number of fragments for testing was determined based on the small-sampling theory recommended by In this study, a A total of 540 indentation tests were carried out on rock fragments of limestone embedded in disk shaped epoxy-resin (90 fragments for each block S1,…,S6). Macroscopic and microscopic residual imprints of the indenter and post failure fractures are presented in Average value of the conventional indentation stiffness (IS) and critical transition force (CTF) were determined from the load–penetration curves recorded during the test ( The coefficient of variation of the indentation stiffness (7.35%) was less than that of the critical transition force (9.13%). Thus, using Eq. The area of the samples had no meaningful effect on the indentation indices, but the sample thickness affects the results significantly (see The value of the indentation indices increases for thicker samples and varies with rock strength (see Experimental indentation test results were used to investigate the effect of fragment dimensions (thickness and area) on the indentation indices (   This study showed that the thickness of rock fragments affects results of indentation testing. To reduce this dependency, we propose normalizing the indentation indices by a parameter that is function of the sample thickness and strength. To demonstrate the degree of thickness effect on the indentation indices, IS and CTF of fragments were plotted versus the corresponding thickness ( We propose the following formulas to relate the indentation indices to the sample thickness, In Eqs. Next, the normalized indentation indices were plotted against the core UCS and correlation curves were drawn for same-size samples, which resulted in correlation coefficients of greater than 0.60 for CTF A linear relationship was tried between the normalized critical transition force and the normalized indentation stiffness which showed a correlation coefficient of 0.64. Substitution of Eqs. To estimate UCS from Eqs. To verify the correlations Eqs. From the load–penetration curves, average IS and CTF values were determined. Average value of the coefficients of variation for IS and CTF were generally less than 10% for each of these sample groups. The UCS of limestone blocks was predicted using the normalized indentation indices (IS  Laboratory indentation testing on rock fragments in the size range of drill cuttings (less than 5 The indentation test results are affected by sample thickness but are not sensitive to cross sectional area of fragments normal to loading direction. Thicker samples showed higher indentation indices. The indentation indices were normalized using a parameter which was a function of thickness and rock strength. Average values of the normalized critical transition force (CTF The proposed correlations were verified using the normalized indentation indices of independent limestone blocks. Results show that the estimated UCS values are reasonably close to the measured ones in the laboratory. The reasonable correlation between indentation indices and the UCS of rock cores, verification results and the simplicity of the indentation testing indicate the potential of this technique in estimating UCS from drill cuttings at low operational cost. We would recommend using IS It should be noted that the proposed correlations are valid for the limestone rocks with rock fragment sizes between 3 and 5