This work describes the extraction and separation of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the leach liquor of mixed lithium ion batteries using 0.04 M Na-CYANEX272. Before the extraction step, elimination of some impurities such as Fe(III), Cu(II) and Al (III) was carried out by 20% Acorga M5640 in kerosene with agitation for 5 min at 30 °C at equal phase ratio of unity. The effects of the different parameters affecting the extraction rate, such as mixing time, pH, extractant concentration and temperature, were separately investigated. The obtained results indicate that the extraction behavior of the investigated metal ions depends on the pH value, where 91.2% Mn(II), 89.3% Co(II) and 95.6% Ni(II) were extracted at pH 3.5, 5.0 and 8.0, respectively, while the extraction of Li(I) was almost constant regardless of the pH value. Mn(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) were extracted in the organic phase as (MA2•3HA)(org) while Li(I) was extracted as (MA•2HA)(org). The thermodynamic parameters were calculated by applying Van't Hoff equations. A complete stripping and precipitation from the organic and aqueous phases could be achieved with different stripping and precipitating agents. Precipitates of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) with purity > 99% could be obtained under the investigated conditions.In the last few years, production of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), which is regarded as a type of rechargeable battery, is increasing due to its demand for use in different types of portable electronic devices such as cellular phones, laptop computer Recently, many investigations have been reported for treatment and recycling of the spent LIBs waste following pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy or bio-hydrometallurgy processes Several studies have been reported to develop hydrometallurgical processes to leach and recover the metals from spent LIBs materials by H Literature review reveals that the solvent extraction technique has received more attention and seems to be the most effective one used for the extraction and separation of various metals from their aqueous media and from different types of wastes ( The extraction behavior of some metals such as Fe(II,III), Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II), Cd(II), and Zn(II) from sulfate solution was carried out using CYANEX 272, CYANEX 302 and CYANEX 301 Recently, due to the high selectivity of CYANEX 272, various studies on the extraction and separation of different metals ions from both synthetic solutions and leach liquor of cathodic waste material using this extractant have been reported As reported in the literature, Acorga M5640 is a combination of 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime (active substance) and a fatty ester, 2,4,4-trimethyl-1,3-pentanediol diisobutyrate (modifier). The key advantage of Acorga M5640 is that it is a very selective extractant for some cations and contaminants such as Cu(II), Fe(II, III) and Al(III) from acidic sulfate solutions which contain (Co(II) Ni(II), Zn(II), Mn(II), Cd(II), Mg(II)) at specific low pH values In the present work, the main objective is directed to extract and separate Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the leach liquor of spent LIBs. In this context, liquid–liquid extraction using Acorga M5640 (to remove some impurities) and CYANEX 272 in kerosene is carried out. The effects of the different parameters affecting the extraction efficiency of these metals such as mixing time, pH, extractant concentration, and temperature are separately investigated. Thermodynamic parameters depending on the behavior of the investigated metal ions are calculated. Scrubbing and stripping processes are studied to separate the metal ions in a pure form. Precipitation of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from both stripping and leach liquor was also carried out to obtain these metal ions in a pure form. All chemicals and reagents used in this work were of analytical reagents (AR) grade. Double distilled water was used throughout the experiments. H Acorga M5640 (5-nonylsalicylaldoxime modified with TXIB /2,2,4-trimethyl-1,3 pentanediol di-isobutyrate) was manufactured by Cytec Canada Inc., and CYANEX 272 ( The commercial extractant (CYANEX 272) has the following structure The sodium salt of CYANEX 272 was prepared by adding a stoichiometric amount (at organic/aqueous ratio equals unity) of concentrated and standard NaOH solution to change CYANEX 272 into its sodium salt (Na-CYANEX 272). The phases were stirred to form a single phase, followed by careful washing several times by distilled water and ethyl alcohol. The neutralization degree of the extractant was calculated from the mass balance of OH As reported by Sarangi et al Then, these organic solutions were diluted with kerosene as required. The mechanism by which a divalent metal ion is extracted from an aqueous phase by using the sodium salt of CYANEX 272 (which is regarded as cation exchange extractant) is as follows [8]: The equilibrium constant, Then, by taking logarithms on both sides and re-arranging While in case of monovalent metal ions, the mechanism of the extraction process from an aqueous phase by using Na-CYANEX 272 can be proposed as; The equilibrium constant, Then, by taking logarithms on both sides and re-arranging As reported by Nayl et al. The extraction processes investigated in this work were carried out in two stages. The initial pH of the leach liquor solution was controlled to a desired value by adding concentrated solutions of NaOH/H The distribution ratio ( The extraction percent (%E) was calculated using the following equation (with O/A volume ratio of unity): Preliminary treatment and removal of Fe(III), Cu(II) and Al(III) from the leach liquor solution of LIBs was carried out firstly using 20.0% Acorga M5640 in kerosene in order to avoid the co-extraction of these impurities with Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I). After the removal of Fe(III), Cu(II) and Al(III), the extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the raffinate leach liquor was carried out by Na-CYANEX 272 in kerosene. The distribution ratio, All the extraction and stripping processes in this work were carried out at ambient temperature 25 ± 1 °C and the phase ratio was kept at unity, unless otherwise stated. Before extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the leach liquor of LIBs by Na-CYANEX 272, elimination of some impurities such as iron, copper and aluminum was done by 20.0% Acorga M5640 in kerosene with agitation for 5 min at 30 °C and with equal phase ratio of unity. Initial extraction tests on the actual leach sulfate solution at different pH values (0.0–2.2) by 20.0% Acorga M5640 in kerosene at O/A ratio of unity was carried out. At a pH close to 1.0, about 99.2% Cu could be extracted while at pH 2.0–2.2 about 94.0% Fe (III) and 95.6% Al (III) was respectively extracted. On the other hand, the extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) was negligible. The equilibrium data are presented in The chemical compositions of resulting solution are found to contain (in g/L) ≤ 1 × 10 After the removal of Fe(III), Cu(II) and Al(III) which are found as impurities, the extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the raffinate leach liquor was carried out by Na-CYANEX 272 in kerosene. The parameters affecting this extraction process were studied. The effect of mixing time on the extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the leach liquor of spent LIBs was studied using 0.04 M Na-CYANEX 272 at a 1:1 phase ratio with pH ≈ 5.0 for various mixing time in the range 0.0–20.0 min at 25 °C, Therefore, 10.0 min was selected as mixing time to ensure the extraction equilibrium and was used throughout the investigations. The extraction and separation of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the leach liquor of spent LIBs were studied using 0.04 M Na-CYANEX 272 in the pH range 0.0–9.0 at 25 °C for 10.0 min, As shown in The extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from the leach liquor of spent LIBs was studied with 0.001–0.040 M Na-CYANEX 272 at pH ≈ 5.0 for 10.0 min shaking time and at 25 °C,  The effect of temperature on the extraction percentage of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) from leach liquor of spent LIBs was studied with 0.04 M Na-CYANEX 272 at pH ≈ 5.0 at shaking time 10.0 min with O/A ratio of unity and at different temperatures in the range 20–50 °C. It can be seen from The thermodynamic parameters for this extraction process can be calculated by plotting the relation between log On the basis of From the calculated values in Small amounts of Ni(II) and Li(I) were co-extracted with Mn(II) and Co(II) into the organic phase and it is necessary to scrub these ions as much as possible before the stripping step. Therefore, diluted Na  In this step, the separation of Mn(II) and Co(II) from the stripping solution (0.1 M H As reported by Nayl et al. The pH of the leach liquor was then adjusted to 11–12 by concentrated solution of NaOH and by adding a saturated solution of Na  Acorga M5640 can be effectively used as extractant for the extraction and separation of some ions such as Fe(III), Cu(II) and Al (III) which are found as impurities in the leach liquor of mixed types of spent LIBs. At a pH close to 1.0, 99.2% Cu was extracted; at pH 2.0–2.2 about 94% Fe(III) and 95.6% Al(III) were also extracted. The extraction of Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Li(I) was negligible. The highest extraction value of 92.5% Mn(II) and 81% Co(II) was obtained with a minimum extraction of 5.94% Ni(II) and 10% Li(I) which are co-extracted when using 0.04 M Na-CYANEX 272 at pH of 5.0 with 10.0 min shaking time at O/A ratio of unity and at 25 °C. Each mol of Mn(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) can be extracted from the leach liquor as (MA2•3HA) Na By using 0.1 M H Mn(II) (purity about 99.7%) and Co(II) (purity >99%) were obtained by precipitation from the stripping solution when adjusting the pH with 2.0 M NaOH to 7.5 and about 11.0, respectively. Mn (II) was precipitated with saturated solution of Na When adjusting the pH of the mother leach liquor to 9.0 with 2.0 M NaOH and by adding a saturated solution of Na