The radioactive tracer technique was used to evaluate the liquid and solid (fine and coarse) transport in two industrial semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mills. The residence time distribution (RTD), along with the mean residence times, was obtained. The residence times for the liquid and fine solid were equivalent, approximately 2min, which implies non-significant segregation in this size class. The residence time for coarse solids was approximately 4min. The RTD was modelled by N perfectly mixed tanks in series, in which the number of equivalent mixers was approximately 2 for liquid and fine solids and approximately 3 for the coarse solids. The coarse particles required additional time to pass the grate discharge restriction, which also favoured the mixing.The most cost-intensive stage in a mineral processing plant is comminution, especially grinding, in which the ore particles are reduced in size by a combination of impact and abrasion, most commonly as a slurry ( One of the key variables in grinding performance is the residence time distribution (RTD) of the different phases inside the mill (e.g. liquid, ore, media). RTD is important because it explains the mixing regime as well as the effective residence time of the related components. Several RTD in grinding machines have been reported in literature at different scales, where the typical approach consists of modelling the RTD by several perfectly mixed reactors in series, either of equal or different sizes. The radioactive tracer technique allows for non-invasive RTD measurements, using a very small amount of tracer that has similar physical and chemical properties to the actual component to be traced. In this technical note, the mixing regime data of liquid and solids (fine and coarse) of two industrial SAG mills are presented, which were recorded in real-time by using the radioactive tracer methodology. The measurements were carried out in the grinding circuit of Minera Los Pelambres (MLP), Chile. Based on the results, the mixing regimes along with the effective residence times were identified. The experiments were conducted in the SAG mill section of the comminution circuit of MLP. The circuit consists of three parallel lines, each one with SAG mills of 36′ Tracers with similar properties to the actual components were injected in the inlet streams of SAG Mills 1 and 2. This methodology is based on the tracer injection at the inlet stream and simultaneous measurement of tracer concentration at the outlet stream. Irradiated solids including the hydrocyclone underflow (P80 Three consecutive RTD tests were carried out in SAG Mill 1, two with liquid and one with a fine solid tracer ( The RTD data were fitted by non-linear regression to the N-perfectly-mixed-tanks-in-series model of Eq. RTD tests with liquid and solid tracer were performed in SAG Mills 1 and 2 of MLP. In each test, the model fitting was carried out to reconstruct the normalized outlet tracer activity. The model parameters were obtained by the least-squared error minimization.  The RTD for SAG Mill 2 (liquid and the coarse solids) are shown in Based on these results, and considering the operating conditions, non-significant segregation was observed for the fine solids. As fine particles were not restricted by the grate discharge, residence times were close to the transport time for the liquid phase. The transport phenomena inside the mill along with the selection and breakage functions caused the residence time for the coarse tracer to be double that of the liquid tracer. In addition, as coarse particles required more time to obtain the particle size to cross the grate discharge restriction, additional mixing was also obtained. Radioactive tracer tests were conducted in two industrial semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) mills, which allowed the mixing regime as well as mean residence times of liquid and solids (fine and coarse) to be determined. The mean residence times were approximately 2 The authors are grateful to Minera Los Pelambres (Antofagasta Minerals S.A.) for providing access to their plant and sharing survey information to develop this study.