Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with low aBMD as measured by DXA and altered microstructure as assessed by bone histomorphometry and microcomputed tomography. Knowledge of bone matrix mineralization is lacking in COPD. Using quantitative backscatter electron imaging (qBEI), we assessed cancellous (Cn.) and cortical (Ct.) bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD) in 19 postmenopausal women (62.1±7.3years of age) with COPD. Eight had sustained fragility fractures, and 13 had received treatment with inhaled glucocorticoids. The BMDD outcomes from the patients were compared with healthy reference data and were correlated with previous clinical and histomorphometric findings.
                  In general, the BMDD outcomes for the patients were not significantly different from the reference data. Neither the subgroups of with or without fragility fractures or of who did or did not receive inhaled glucocorticoid treatment, showed differences in BMDD. However, subgroup comparison according to severity revealed 10% decreased cancellous mineralization heterogeneity (Cn.CaWidth) for the most severely affected compared with less affected patients (p=0.042) and compared with healthy premenopausal controls (p=0.021). BMDD parameters were highly correlated with histomorphometric cancellous bone volume (BV/TV) and formation indices: mean degree of mineralization (Cn.CaMean) versus BV/TV (r=0.58, p=0.009), and Cn.CaMean and Ct.CaMean versus bone formation rate (BFR/BS) (r=-0.71, p<0.001). In particular, those with lower BV/TV (<50th percentile) had significantly lower Cn.CaMean (p=0.037) and higher Cn.CaLow (p=0.020) compared with those with higher (>50th percentile) BV/TV.
                  The normality in most of the BMDD parameters and bone formation rates as well as the significant correlations between them suggests unaffected mineralization processes in COPD. Our findings also indicate no significant negative effect of treatment with inhaled glucocorticoids on the bone mineralization pattern. However, the observed concomitant occurrence of relatively lower bone volumes with lower bone matrix mineralization will both contribute to the reduced aBMD in some patients with COPD.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with skeletal abnormalities and these were observed in patients without chronic oral glucocorticoid treatment COPD is a multisystemic disease; among other comorbidities osteopenia and osteoporosis have been described Despite the high prevalence of this disease, studies of bone biopsy samples in COPD are rare. In one transiliac bone biopsy study, histomorphometric analysis revealed that structural properties were linked to smoking and hypoxemia in COPD patients In the present work, we aimed to study the bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD) using quantitative backscatter electron imaging (qBEI) in transiliac bone biopsy samples from patients with COPD and to compare them with BMDD outcomes of published healthy reference cohorts Description of the most important abbreviations is given in Entire transiliac bone biopsy samples (including cancellous and both cortical compartments) from 19 postmenopausal women with COPD were assessed for BMDD. Clinical and biochemical characteristics of the patients are given in Histomorphometric and microcomputed tomography methods have been described previously Additionally, the BMDD outcomes were compared with a more general reference data base of cancellous BMDD Calibrated digital images with a 4 For statistical analysis we used Sigma Stat for Windows Version 2.03 (SPSS Inc.). Data are presented as mean (SD) or median (25th; 75th percentiles) as indicated. The comparison with healthy premenopausal cohort as well as the comparisons among the subgroups (according to fracture status, treatment with inhaled glucocorticoids, or GOLD classification) was analyzed using non-parametric Mann–Whitney rank sum tests. Correlation analysis is based on non-parametric Spearman rank order correlation. p An example of a BE-overview image and images used for qBEI analyses and corresponding BMDD curves for cancellous and cortical bone compartments (from the entire available cross-sectional area of the biopsy sample) are shown in   Comparison of COPD patients with fragility fractures to those without fragility fractures revealed no significant differences in Cn. or Ct.BMDD between these subgroups. Additionally, these subgroups were not significantly different from healthy premenopausal controls (p Similarly, there were no significant differences in Cn. or Ct.BMDD outcomes among the COPD patients who were treated with inhaled glucocorticoids compared with those with no glucocorticoid treatment, and none of these subgroups were significantly different from healthy premenopausal controls (p Comparison of subgroups according to GOLD (GOLD I and II versus GOLD III and IV) revealed no significant differences in Cn. or Ct.BMDD parameters with the exception of Cn.CaWidth for GOLD III and IV (the most severely affected patients) which was decreased by about 10% versus GOLD I and II (p  There were no significant relationships between Cn. or Ct.BMDD outcomes and clinical characteristics including age, time since menopause, duration of COPD, duration of smoking, bone mineral density (BMD by DXA) at any site, or body mass index (BMI) of the patients (Spearman rank order correlations p Additionally, there were no significant correlations between Cn. or Ct.BMDD and serum parameters including serum calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone, vitamin D, or alkaline phosphatase (Spearman rank order correlations p Correlation analyses with histomorphometric outcomes revealed significant relationships between both Cn. and Ct.BMDD parameters and endocortical dynamic indices of bone formation including mineralizing surface (MS/BS), mineral apposition rate (MAR), and bone formation rate (BFR/BS) ( Correlation of md.BV/TV obtained from the qBEI images of the cross-sectional areas of the biopsy samples with Cn-BV/TV from 3D microCT measurements revealed a nearly one-to-one relationship (Spearman rank order correlation coefficient R This is the first study of bone matrix mineralization pattern in cancellous and cortical iliac crest bone from a cohort of COPD patients. We observed no significant difference of the bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD) from the patients compared with that of a healthy premenopausal cohort In general, the BMDD of the entire cross-sectional area (as measured in the present work) is dependent on two processes: (i) the time course of mineral accumulation within the bone matrix of each newly formed bone structural unit (BSU), and (ii) bone turnover rates, which determine the age distribution of these BSUs, and thus the average tissue age. Provided that the mineral accumulation follows a normal time course (with a primary mineralization up to about 70% of the full mineralization within a few days, followed by the slower secondary mineralization), an increased bone turnover rate will shift the matrix mineralization to lower calcium concentrations. Higher bone turnover increases the percentage of younger BSUs which are undergoing formation and therefore having lower calcium concentrations The normality in average (CaMean) and typical degree (CaPeak) of calcium concentrations in our patient cohort are consistent with their normal bone turnover rates measured by bone histomorphometry Our subgroup analyses revealed that the occurrence of fragility fractures in this cohort was not associated with alterations in the mineralization pattern. However, the severity of the disease influenced significantly the heterogeneity of cancellous bone mineralization which was significantly lower in the most severely affected COPD patients (those classified to GOLD III or IV) compared with GOLD I and II (mild or moderate forms) and also compared with normal reference ranges. The heterogeneity of mineralization (width of the mineralization peak) has previously been shown to be a sensitive indicator for bone turnover and changes thereof Noteworthy, when comparing bone matrix mineralization parameters for patients with inhaled glucocorticoid treatment to those without treatment, no significant effect of glucocorticoid inhalation on bone matrix mineralization could be observed. Notably, none of our study patients had systemic treatment with glucocorticoids. This would have been expected to have an impact on bone quality No significant association of the BMDD parameters with serum 25-OHD levels could be detected. Vitamin D levels in our patients were generally relatively low (7 had 25-OHD levels below 20 Consistent with the aforementioned relationship between the BMDD and bone turnover rates, we observed significant correlations between cancellous and cortical BMDD parameters with dynamic and/or static bone formation indices. The higher the bone formation/turnover indices (including mineralizing surface, bone formation rate, osteoid surface), the lower the mean (CaMean) and typical (CaPeak) mineralization densities, and the lower the portion of highly mineralized bone areas (CaHigh). Interestingly, these correlations were significant only for cortical bone formation indices. This behavior is likely due to the greater inter-individual variation in the histomorphometric indices of bone turnover as found in the cortex compared with those of cancellous bone Interestingly, the average degree of mineralization (CaMean) and the portion of low mineralized areas (CaLow) in cancellous bone were significantly correlated with the cancellous bone volume (BV/TV) present in the biopsy samples. The higher the Cn-BV/TV, the higher the matrix mineralization and the lower the percentage of low mineralized areas and vice versa. This indicates that those patients with relatively lower bone volume have also lower (relative to the remaining study cohort) matrix mineralization. The low Cn-BV/TV and low matrix mineralization will both contribute to the low areal BMD observed in COPD. The correlation between bone volume and mineralization can be explained by the fact that bone turnover is a surface-based process. The higher the bone volume (and in particular trabecular thickness), the relatively lower the percentage of areas undergoing bone formation at the bone surface. In other words, the higher the bone volume, the larger the proportion of bone that is not turned over. However, it has to be mentioned that bone volume in general is relatively low for our COPD cohort. This suggests a negative bone balance (smaller amounts of bone matrix are formed by the osteoblasts than previously resorbed by the osteoclasts) in COPD, as we have previously hypothesized A noteworthy result of our correlation analyses was a nearly one-to-one correlation of Cn-BV/TV obtained from our BE-images to that from 3D-μCT measurements A limitation of our study is the relatively low number of samples, in particular for the subgroup analysis. The observed differences in BMDD parameters in our cohort are subtle and their clinical importance and their contribution to skeletal fragility are unclear. The decreased heterogeneity in matrix mineralization in the most severely affected patients might be unfavorable as generally heterogeneity in bone material properties/matrix mineralization is thought to be essential for instance to hinder potential microcracks from propagation. However, it is unknown if the observed amount of reduction in heterogeneity has a significant consequence for the mechanical properties of the bone material in these patients. We have observed subtle differences in BMDD parameters in severely affected patients with COPD who were not treated with oral glucocorticoids. Furthermore, the correlations of the bone matrix mineralization with bone turnover indices suggest that the mineralization kinetics are unaffected by COPD. However, the concomitant occurrence of lower bone volume and relatively lower matrix mineralization in individual patients will both contribute to the reduction of the aBMD in these individual COPD patients. VJ received lecture fees and is consultant to Sanofi, Abbott do Brasil, and Amgen. Research in the laboratory of VJ is supported by The authors thank D. Gabriel, P. Keplinger, S. Lueger and P. Messmer for technical assistance (sample preparation and qBEI measurements) at the Bone Material Laboratory of the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, Vienna, Austria. This work was supported by the