Microfluidic reactors have gained considerable interest for photocatalytic degradation of contaminants in water. These systems have advantages such as large surface-area-to-volume ratio and high control of fluid flow, yet still suffer from drawbacks due to limited mass transport associated with laminar flow. The use of titania nanotubes synthesized on a mesh substrate shows improved photocatalytic performance in comparison to nanotubes synthesized on a foil substrate in a microreactor. At the lowest flow rate (25μL/min), the area normalized fractional conversion of methylene blue increased from 20% for foil to 46% in the case of nanotubes on mesh. The enhanced photocatalytic performance of the mesh is due to shorter diffusion distance and induction of flow perturbation. Also, the radially outward oriented nanotubes formed over the circumference of the titanium wire leads to the efficient capture of both reflected and refracted light. The device was also applied for inactivation of Escherichia coli O157:H7. At a flow rate of 50μL/min, the titania nanotubes on a mesh microreactor were able to achieve >99% inactivation of E. coli under AM 1.5 (≈100mW/cm2) simulated solar light.According to estimates, 1.2 billion people lack access to safe drinking water, which contributes to the death of 3900 children daily Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOP) could solve some of the issues associated with conventional water treatment methods. These processes work by the generation of transitory highly reactive oxygen species (ROS) for mineralization of chemical and biological pollutants present in water Microfluidic reactors (microreactors) have been increasingly applied to water remediation over conventional macroscale reactors Titanium dioxide (TiO TiO Although TNA We report the use of TNA grown on a Ti mesh (TNA Titania nanotube arrays grown on a titanium mesh were synthesized by electrochemical anodization similar to an earlier reported protocol The microfluidic device was fabricated by soft lithography The photocatalytic degradation of the device was evaluated using MB as a model pollutant. MB is a non-biodegradable dye and is used for characterizing photocatalytic performance  The photocatalytic inactivation of The morphology of the TNA The results of the degradation at different flow rates over TNA The TNA The results of the inactivation of For a 1000 Due to the complex nature of photocatalytic inactivation of microbes, often times empirical expressions are used to describe the overall kinetics. One of the most commonly used models for photocatalytic inactivation of microbes is the Chick–Watson model  With a decrease in light intensity, there is commensurate drop in The mechanism of photocatalytic MB degradation is well reported in literature Titania nanotubes formed on titanium wires have been reported to demonstrate higher dye degradation performance in comparison to TNA The application of TiO The photocatalytic degradation performance using TNA The work presented here was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: 