Introduction
                  Vascular injuries (VI) presenting during internal fixation (IF) of proximal femoral fractures (PFF) are potentially limb- and life-threatening. The purpose of this systematic review of the literature is to report on their incidence, associated complications and to give special emphasis in their prevention.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A comprehensive review of the literature was undertaken using the PRISMA guidelines with no language restriction. Case reports of VIPFF-IF and series of PFF-IF with cases of VI published between inception of journals to March 2015 were eligible for inclusion. Relevant information was divided in two parts. Part I included the analysis of cases of VIPFF-IF, with the objective of establishing the frequency of injury of each vessel, the types and mechanisms of injury, the diagnostic and therapeutic modalities, and the outcomes. Part II analysed series of PFF-IF, which included case(s) of VI for assessing the incidence of VIPFF-IF.
               
                  Results
                  Overall 160 articles with 182 cases of VIPFF-IF met the inclusion criteria. The injuries to extrapelvic vessels prevailed over those of intrapelvic vessels. There was a higher frequency of injury to the deep femoral artery and its branches in extrapelvic vessels and of external iliac artery and vein in intrapelvic vessels. The types of injury were: compression, intimal flap tear, disruption of the intimal layer with thrombosis, laceration with haemorrhage, and puncture or progressive erosion leading to a pseudoaneurysm (PSA) or arteriovenous fistula (AVF), with high prevalence for PSA, followed by lacerations. PSAs were more frequent in extrapelvic lesions and lacerations in the intrapelvic vessels. There were 7 non-iatrogenic injuries, produced by a displaced lesser trochanter fragment or other bone fragments, and 175 iatrogenic injuries (96.15%). The intrapelvic intraoperative protrusion of instruments or implants, or the post-operative migration of implants produced the injuries of intrapelvic vessels. For iatrogenic injuries of extrapelvic vessels the prevalent mechanism was a displaced lesser trochanter fragment, either intra- or postoperatively, followed by injuries by an overshot drill bit or a protruding screw; several other mechanisms completed the list.
                  The clinical and radiological investigations were similar to those of VI elsewhere. VI occurred either at the time of fracture, during surgery or after it, early or late, weeks, months or even years after IF. The diagnostic and therapeutic modalities were most diverse, and the incidence of morbidity and mortality was 18.06%. The overall incidence of VIPFF-IF was 0.49%.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The incidence of VIPFF-IF is low, though it will probably rise because of the increasing frequency of PFF. With few exceptions, these injuries, which are potentially limb and life-threatening, are iatrogenic, resulting of errors in IF, with different types of lesions to intra- and extrapelvic vessels running in close proximity to the bone. Although the surgeon should bear in mind this possibility and achieve early diagnosis and prompt accurate treatment, there is no consensus as to what is the best diagnostic or therapeutic modality. A precise diagnosis of the preoperative vascular status of the limb, monitoring of the displacement of the lesser trochanter fragment, careful and gentle reduction of the fracture, and precise handling of instruments and implant selection and placement during IF, are factors to consider in order to prevent this complication, which should never be underestimated.Proximal femoral fractures (PFF) and their management continue to be a subject of great attention to the clinicians. The underlying poor bone stock, the increased incidence of fracture comminution, and the high incidence of comorbidities in the elderly patient population may lead to a higher risk of complications and mortality Vascular injuries (VI) during the course of internal fixation (IF) in PFF could be potentially limb and life-threatening The purpose of this systematic review of the literature therefore is to investigate the distinct frequency of each of the injured vessels, the mechanisms and types of injury, the diagnostic and therapeutic modalities, the outcomes, and to recommend several tips for its prevention. This review was conducted in accordance to the PRISMA guidelines Searches were conducted using the following databases: Cochrane Library, Pubmed, Embase, Springer, OvidSP, ScienceDirect, Dialnet, J-Stage, Scielo, and KoreaMed, and also the Google Scholar searcher. The following keywords were used: “artery”, “vein”, “injury”, “pseudoaneurysm”, “thrombosis”, “compression”, “arteriovenous aneurysm”, “arteriovenous fistula”, “femoral neck fracture”, “trochanteric fracture”, and “subtrochanteric fracture”. Two reviewers selected potentially relevant abstracts and obtained full copies of the articles. Additionally all references of the retrieved articles were also appraised. Studies selected were original clinical articles that addressed VIPFF-IF in adult patients 18 year-old and older, with no language restriction. Cases with fractures in pathological bone, resulting of penetrating trauma or undergoing treatment with hip replacement were excluded. Date limits were set from inception of journals to 31 March 2015. Relevant information obtained was divided in two parts. Part I of the study included detailed case reports or cases of VIPFF-IF containing useful information for extraction of such data as type of study, age, gender, type of fracture, fracture treatment (implant used), injured vessel, mechanism of injury, type of vessel lesion, clinical presentation, time to onset of symptoms and signs, diagnostic and treatment modalities, and outcome. Part II of the study included series of PFF with cases of VI, with such data extracted as type of study, time period of study, number of patients, time to follow-up, and number of cases of VI, for assessing the incidence of this complication. As the majority of the data collected were from case reports and few case series statistical analysis was not possible. However, descriptive statistics were employed where possible. After omitting studies that did not fulfil the inclusion criteria or were repeated in the databases search, 161 studies were primarily selected for review. Of these, one case included in one study For the completion of part II of the study we analysed the information of 4 series with 12 cases of VI already considered in part I of the study – after 2.604 PFF             The distinct frequency of injury to each vessel in PFFIF is related to the anatomy of these vessels in relation to the femur ( The intrapelvic projection of the tip of the instruments and implants placed in the femoral head, especially if the hip is adducted and rotated internally, is in the path of the external iliac (Ei) vessels which run near to the bony surface of the iliac bone The anatomy of the thigh shows the close relationship of the CF, SF and DF vessels with the medial aspect of the femur throughout its length. The DFA and its branches run posterior and lateral to the SFA, separated from the posteromedial aspect of the shaft in the subtrochanteric area only by the vastus medialis muscle, and relatively fixed by muscle septa Although protrusion of guide wires, drills, reamers, taps, cervical pins and screws, or hip screws of SHS or CMN, into the pelvis, occur because of failure to monitor their insertion with an image intensifier, guide wire penetration is more frequent because of friction between the wire and the overriding instruments or implants which become jammed or stuck over these wires Migration of pins or screws into the pelvis is the other mechanism of injury to vessels, and it may occur acutely An oversized perineal pole In general terms elderly patients are more prone to these injuries, with their atherosclerotic, fragile and more rigid low-flow arteries With regard to the fracture type and vessel injury, although the usual incidence of femoral neck and trochanteric fractures in the older population is much alike, the higher frequency of trochanteric fractures in this review is because the criteria for eligibility excluded cases undergoing hip replacement, which is the usual treatment of femoral neck fractures in elderly patients. Subtrochanteric fractures are of low frequency and this is reflected in the low incidence of such cases in the review series. In this context, the high incidence of unstable trochanteric fractures (AO A2) is related to the fact that the most frequent injuring agent to the vessels was a medially displaced lesser trochanter fragment. Overall, the incidence of VI in non-operated or IF PFF has been considered rare The principal prognostic factor of VIPFF-IF is early diagnosis leading to prompt treatment, which however is not always accomplished. Although precocious intraoperative or immediate postoperative severe bleeding in VIPFF-IF is usually evident, diagnosis of this surgical complication may be difficult in case of moderate vessel injury. This can be attributed to the fact that other symptoms and signs such as thigh swelling, pain, moderate anaemia, and even deep vein thrombosis, are usual present in the postoperative period of PFF and may mask the diagnosis. Signs of limb ischaemia may be unclear if the arterial injury is minor There is no consensus in the literature as to what is the best diagnostic or therapeutic modality for VIPFF-IF, because there are several types of injuries, each requiring a specific diagnosis and treatment, and also because different modalities have been and are used for the same type of lesion. Nevertheless, in case of a vessel laceration with severe haemorrhage there is agreement in providing immediate surgical solution, and for the other types of injury less or minimal invasive diagnostic and therapeutic tools should be used. Removal or reduction and IF of the displaced lesser trochanter and removal of the over penetrated screw seems mandatory. In this study the incidence of morbidity and mortality following VIPFF-IF was found to be 11.44% and 6.62% respectively. Prevention of these injuries therefore is of paramount importance. VIPFF-IF are iatrogenic in most cases, with medico-legal consequences. Some tips about prevention are provided below, including: diagnosis of the vascular status of the limb should precede fracture fixation; perioperative monitoring of medial and proximal displacement of the lesser trochanter fragment is mandatory, and reduction, fixation or removal of this fragment may be necessary the perineal pole on the fracture table should not be oversized the surgical approach should be kept lateral not posterior; bone retractors and clamps should be kept close to the bone, not deeply posteromedially, and with no strong retraction the passage for the blunt end version wire should be carefully cleared insertion of powered instruments into the femoral head should be done under image intensifier monitoring while inserting the hip screw of a SHS or a CMN, there should be no residual distraction at the fracture site, gliding of the screw into the SHS or CMN should be smooth, and it should be secured with a compression or set screw; cerclage wiring should be applied with devices that protect soft tissues in the medial and posterior aspects of the femur; drilling, measuring, tapping and screwing the side plate or nail should be performed with the limb in neutral position In conclusion fixation of proximal femoral fractures and their associated complications continue to be a subject of great interest to clinicians A comprehensive search and analysis of the world literature with no year or language limitation is one of the strengths of this study. The limitations are mainly the usual publication of these cases as retrospective case reports, and the incomplete information-documentation in some cases, which however, did not prevent us to achieve definitive conclusion in most issues. The authors report no conflict of interest with regard to the content of this manuscript. The authors would like to thank AO members from Japan, Russia, and Taiwan, for their help in providing us with full text articles from their countries and their translation.