The current research study focuses to formulate the biosynthesized silver nanoparticles for the first time from silver acetate using methanolic root extracts of Diospyros sylvatica, a member of family Ebenaceae. TEM analysis revealed the average diameter of Ag NPs around 8nm which is in good agreement with the average crystallite size (10nm) calculated from X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analysis. Further the study has been extended to the antimicrobial activity against test pathogenic Gram (+) ve, Gram (−) ve bacterial and fungal strains. The bioinspired Ag-NP showed promising activity against all the tested bacterial strains and the activity was enhanced with increased dosage levels.There is a vast scope in material research in interdisciplinary fields drawing new inspirations from biological systems. The environmental aspects have made the researchers to focus on methods to synthesize nanomaterials using green chemistry approaches Green synthesized silver nanoparticles are known to have diverse advantages in applications in medicine and biological fields, and are known to be potent antimicrobial agents against various human and phytopathogenic microorganisms ( The plant material In the present study, the metal ion concentration was standardized to 0.01 The biosynthesized Ag NPs were characterized by various instrumental analyses. The formation and optimization of Ag NPs synthesis were monitored by UV–Vis (Shimadzu UV–Vis 2450) spectroscopy. Crystalline metallic silver was examined by (PANalytical: XPERT-PRO) X-ray diffractometer, using Cu The biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles of average size around 8 The nutrient medium (LB Agar-Hi-media) prepared was inoculated with 18 The Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) was determined by macrodilution broth method ( The nutrient PDA medium (Hi-media) was prepared and inoculated with 0.5 The formation and optimization of Ag NPs was monitored using UV–Vis spectroscopy by measuring the absorbance in the range of 200–800 The present study has accomplished nanoparticle synthesis by using plant (methanolic) extracts of In the present study the mechanism for the formation of Ag NPs using root exctract of The morphology and crystallite structure of Ag NPs using The resultant in the mean crystallite size of Ag NPs according to Scherrer equation is about 10 The bioinspired Ag-NPs showed excellent antibacterial activity against all the tested bacterial strains. They exhibited maximum activity against Further the work has been extended to determine the MIC for the two bacterial strains which displayed maximum susceptibility. MIC of biosynthesized Ag NPs including standard antibiotic using macro dilution method against Silver has a greater affinity to sulfur and phosphorus containing bio-molecules in the cell. The high bactericidal activity is certainly due to the silver cations released from Ag NPs that act as reservoirs for the Ag The values of Zone of Inhibition against various tested fungal strains with different concentrations of Ag NPs are given in The present study demonstrates the use of unreported methanolic root extracts of We are thankful to the BK 21 PLUS programme for Post Doctoral Fellowship and DST-PURSE Programme No. SR/S9/2-23-2015 for the financial assistance and Advanced Analytical Laboratory, Andhra University. Authors are thankful to SAIF, IIT Bombay for TEM characterization.