Physiological concentrations of thyroid hormones are crucial for skeletal growth and development, physiological bone turnover and bone homeostasis maintenance. Methimazole (1-methyl-2-mercaptoimidazole) is an antithyroid drug used for the treatment of the hyperthyroidism in humans and animals. The aim of the study was to determine effects of long-term oral methimazole treatment in male Wistar rats on biochemical bone metabolism markers, as well as morphological, geometric, densitometric and mechanical properties of femur and tibia. Experimental rats were subjected to 90-day-long oral treatment with 0.05% water solution of methimazole and were kept under identical environmental conditions and received the same diet ad libitum as the control group. Serum concentration of osteocalcin (OC) and C-terminal telopeptides of type I collagen (CTX-I) was determined. Femur and tibia were evaluated using quantitative computed tomography (QCT), peripheral QCT (pQCT) and three-point bending test. Final body weight of the experimental group was significantly decreased by 30% (P=0.01). Methimazole treatment significantly decreased serum OC concentration by 21% (P=0.02) and increased CTX-I concentration by 17% (P=0.06). Methimazole decreased morphological, geometric and densitometric parameters of femur and tibia in rats. Mechanical evaluation of bones has shown significantly decreased maximum elastic strength and ultimate strength of femur in rats treated with methimazole by 36% and 40% when compared to the control group (P<0.05). In conclusion, this study has shown that long-term treatment with methimazole inhibits bone formation and accelerates bone resorption processes. The observed negative effects of methimazole treatment on body weight gain and skeletal properties may be considered as additional possible side effects in living organisms to those reported in the previous studies. It may be suggested that long-term antithyroid treatment should be combined with prevention of the negative effects of methimazole on bone tissue and whole body metabolism.Thyroid gland releases thyroid hormones under control of the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus through thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) and anterior lobe of pituitary through thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) secretion. Thyroid follicular cells are stimulated via TSH receptors for cell proliferation as well as synthesis and secretion of thyroxine (T Methimazole (1-methyl-2-mercaptoimidazole) is an antithyroid drug used for the treatment of the hyperthyroidism in humans The experimental procedures used in this study were approved by The II Local Ethics Committee on Animal Experimentation of the University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland - permission number 44/2011. The study was performed on Wistar male rats (initial body weight 220–260 Serum osteocalcin (OC) concentration was measured using Micro-Vue Osteocalcin EIA Kit (Quidel Corp, San Diego, CA, USA). The determination of the bone collagen degradation products − C-terminal telopeptides of type I collagen (CTX-I) in serum was performed using Serum CrossLaps ELISA (Immunodiagnostic Systems Ltd, Boldon, Tyne & Wear, UK). Results of biochemical evaluation of bone tissue metabolism markers were obtained using Benchmark Plus microplate spectrophotometer supplied with MicroplateManager Software Version 5.2.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc, Hercules, CA, USA). Quantitative computed tomography (QCT) method and Somatom Emotion Siemens apparatus (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), equipped with Somaris/5 VB10B software (version B10/2004A) were used to determine total bone volume (Bvol) and mean volumetric bone mineral density (MvBMD) of femur and tibia. The values of MvBMD and Bvol of femur and tibia were determined using volume-of-interest (VOI) limited by minimum and maximum density of the investigated samples at 0 and 3071 Hounsfield units, respectively. The measurements of MvBMD and Bvol were performed for the whole bones and the results obtained reflect the parameters for all the anatomical structures of femur and tibia, including trabecular and cortical bone compartments. Using cross-sectional computed tomography scans positioned at 50% of femur length and at 60% of tibia length (measuring from the proximal bone extremity), the geometrical parameters such as cross-sectional area (A), second moment of inertia (Ix), mean relative wall thickness (MRWT) and cortical index (CI) were determined. The values of these parameters were derived on the basis of the measurements of horizontal and vertical diameters (both external and internal) of the bone shafts. Peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT) and XCT Research SA Plus apparatus (Stratec Medizintechnik GmbH, Pforzheim, Germany) were used to determine densitometric and geometrical properties of femur and tibia in terms of volumetric bone mineral density of the trabecular bone of femur (TRAB_DEN), bone mineral content in the trabecular bone of femur (TRAB_CNT), trabecular bone area (TRAB_A), volumetric bone mineral density of proximal metaphysis of tibia (TOT_DEN), bone mineral content of proximal metaphysis of tibia (TOT_CNT), volumetric bone mineral density of the cortical bone (CRT_DEN), bone mineral content in the cortical bone (CTR_CNT), cortical bone area (CRT_A), periosteal circumference at the midshaft (PERI_C), endosteal circumference at the midshaft (ENDO_C), axial moment of inertia of the cortical bone (IX_CRT_A), polar moment of inertia of the cortical bone (IP_CRT_A), polar moment of resistance of the cortical bone (RP_CRT_A) and strength-strain index (SSI or RP_CM_W). The measuring scans were 0.070 Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) method and Norland Excell Plus Densitometer (Norland, Fort Atkinson, WI, USA) were used for bone mineral density (BMD) and bone mineral content (BMC) determination of whole femur and tibia. The bone samples were evaluated using the Small Subject Scan software allowing densitometric analysis of the isolated bones (Norland, Fort Atkinson, WI, USA). Using an INSTRON 3367 apparatus and Bluehill 2 software (Instron Corp., Canton, USA) the relationship between the loading force and bone displacement in the three-point bending test was recorded. Femur and tibia were placed on bone supports on the anterior surface and the measuring head loaded bone samples on the posterior surface at 50% of its length with the constant speed of 50 Statistical analysis of data collected was performed using Statistica software (version 6.0). Data are presented as means Final body weight of the rats from the experimental group (418.8 In this study, it was shown that 90-day-long oral administration with methimazole influences metabolic processes of whole body and skeletal system. Final body weight of rats receiving the experimental treatment with methimazole was decreased by 30% in comparison to the control males receiving identical diet Considering the effects of methimazole administration in male rats on body weight gain, bone tissue metabolism indices and bone properties in the current study, it can be suggested that the observed negative consequences of the treatment may be considered as an additional side effects to those reported in previous reports. Earlier observations in humans revealed acute toxic hepatitis and liver injury as a consequence of antithyroid treatment with methimazole In conclusion, this study has shown negative effect of long-term treatment of male rats with methimazole on body weight gain, bone tissue metabolism indices, as well as morphological, geometric, densitometric and mechanical properties of long bones. Methimazole overdosing or inappropriate monitoring of the antithyroid treatment may result in hypothyreosis in patients and similar metabolic effects to those observed in this study. The observed effects of the treatment with methimazole may be considered as additional possible side effects in living organisms to those reported in the previous studies. It may be suggested that long-term antithyroid treatment should be combined with prevention of the negative effects of methimazole on bone tissue and whole body metabolism. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. None.