Although both phases of the Si–TaSi2 eutectic have high entropy of fusion, the Si–TaSi2 eutectic structure exhibits a regular morphology (rod-like). This is not consistent with the classical Jackson–Hunt (J–H) theory based on the entropy of fusion. In the present paper, the growth mechanism of the Si–TaSi2 eutectic is discussed. Jackson factor and the critical kinetic undercooling for the transition from faceted to non-faceted growth of the two phases are calculated. The transition from faceted to non-faceted growth is also observed at the different crystal growth stages in the experiment.Si–TaSi In terms of Jackson–Hunt theory based on entropy of fusion For the undercooled state, the solid–liquid interface energy of a perfectly smooth interface can be expressed as For a molar area of interface, the total variation of energy due to adding solid atoms on a smooth solid–liquid interface Δ Eq. Because the liquid phase is binary alloy, the effect of the mixing entropy of Si and Ta atoms in the liquid cannot be ignored, Δ For Si phase For TaSi Δ At the eutectic temperature Substituting the values of entropy for Si and Ta into Eq. The non-dimensional solid–liquid interface energy is approximately regarded to be that of pure silicon Substituting the values of the Δ The fractions of solid atoms in the interface for silicon and tantalum are obtained after numerical calculation, Jackson factor of silicon and TaSi Both Si phase and TaSi At the stage of crystal growth, the driving force is undercooling. Therefore, the temperature of the solid at the interface is approximately equal to the melting point and the temperature of the liquid at the interface is lower than the melting point. Kinetic undercooling should exist at the solid–liquid interface, which can make the energy transform from liquid to solid phase. It can be written as The total variation of energy due to adding solid atoms on a smooth solid–liquid interface for 1 Substituting Eqs. As shown in It is shown from It is obvious that for the materials whose Jackson factor is greater than 2, if the critical free energy Substituting Eqs. Then the critical kinetic undercooling of transition from faceted growth to non-faceted growth for the silicon phase and the TaSi When the crystal grow in a faceted mode, the relationship between kinetic undercooling and the growth rate is always expressed as Li From Eq. Jackson factor of the Si phase and TaSi Thanks are given to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (50102004), National Natural Science Foundation of China (50772090), NPU Foundation for Fundamental Research (NPU-FFR-W018101) and the Aeronautical Science Foundation of China (04G53048) and the Developing Program for Outstanding Persons in NPU for the financial support. The work is Supported by State Key Lab of Advanced Metals and Materials (2007AMM004) as well. Prof. Zengyun Jian is given special thanks for helpful discussion of the manuscript.