Background
                  Dynamic hip screw (DHS) is a common device for treating intertrochanteric fracture (ITF). Various risk factors have been reported to be associated with the operative treatment outcome. However, an integrated risk scoring prediction model is lacking. In this study, we aimed to develop a prediction model for treatment outcome of intertrochanteric fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  We analyzed 442 AO/OTA 31-A1 and A2 fractures which were treated with DHS during the period January 2000 to June 2014 in a level I trauma center. Risk factors including age, gender, injured side, lag screw position, AO/OTA classification, tip-apex distance, postoperative lateral wall fracture, reduction patterns were analyzed to determine their influence on treatment outcome. Integrated risk scores of significant predictors were used to construct a prediction model.
               
                  Results
                  AO/OTA 31-A2 classification, postoperative lateral wall fracture, posteriorly inserted lag screw and varus reduction pattern were significant risk predictors for DHS failure. The failure risk for low- and high-risk groups were significantly different (P<0.001)
               
                  Conclusion
                  AO/OTA 31-A2 classification, postoperative lateral wall fracture, posteriorly inserted lag screw and varus reduction pattern were significant risk predictors for DHS failure. We developed a model that integrates these factors to predict the treatment outcome, which had excellent prediction accuracy and discriminatory ability. The models may provide useful information for orthopedic doctors to identify patients who need early intervention as well as ITF patients who require more frequent follow-up in the postoperative period.As the elderly population grows, the total number of hip fractures is expected to surpass 6 million by the year 2050, which may cost more than 16 billion dollars annually. Dynamic hip screw (DHS) is a very common internal fixation device for intertrochanteric fracture. The screw telescoping mechanism allows controlled fracture compression which improves fracture healing. Though DHS was reported to have a high failure rate in treating fractures with lateral wall involvement (AO/OTA 31-A3 fractures) AO/OTA classification, postoperative lateral wall fracture, tip-apex distance and reduction quality have been well documented as risk predictors of DHS failure, which are useful references for appropriate intervention in the operative and postoperative period All patients were part of a cohort who had been admitted to a regional level-I trauma center between January 2000 and January 2014 with AO/OTA 31-A1 or A2 intertrochanteric fractures and treated with DHS. The exclusion criteria were pathologic fracture, infections, concurrent other fractures, periprosthetic fractures, obvious postoperative trauma-induced failure, age below 60, follow-up duration less than 3 months. Patients treated with intramedullary nail (n All patients were operated under spinal or general anesthesia, according to patients' preference, in the supine position on a fracture table. The standard lateral approach was applied to the proximal femur for the DHS (Synthes, Bochum, Switzerland) implantation. Lag screw was inserted into the femoral head under C-arm fluoroscopy. After the insertion of lag screw, the standard side plate was mounted and fixed. Radiographs were taken immediately after the operation. With the assistance of well-trained physiotherapists, all patients were mobilized 1–3 days after operation with a walker or crutches. Unrestricted weight-bearing was allowed as tolerated. Clinical and radiological follow-up was mandatory at the 1st month, 2nd month, 3rd month, 6th month, and yearly. Preoperative anteroposterior(AP) radiographs of all enrolled patients were used to classify the fracture according to the OA/OTA classification Treatment failure was defined as patients who had non-traumatic fixation failure during the 3-month postoperative follow-up. The postoperative lateral wall fracture was defined as a new fracture line or fracture fragment appearing around the lag screw insertion site during the postoperative follow-up. Radiographic and clinical records were used to identify postoperative lateral wall fracture and DHS fixation failure, which was defined as lag screw penetration or loosening (screw migration >2 The measurement of the tip-apex distance (TAD) was performed on the radiographs taken immediately after the operation. TAD was counted as the sum of the distance from the tip of the screw to the apex of the femoral head on the anteroposterior and lateral radiographs The fracture reduction pattern was classified into three types according to the trabecular angle (angle formed by axis of femoral shaft and medial compressive trabecular of femoral head) on postoperative antero-posterior (AP) radiographies ( The clinical records, including age at operation, gender, injured side, screw position in femoral head, tip-apex distance (TAD), postoperative lateral wall fractures, and reduction patterns were collected and analyzed. Data analysis was performed using SPSS software (Version 19.0; Chicago, Illinois). Univariate analysis was performed using frequencies for descriptive statistics. Chi-square test was used in the analysis of categorical variables. Logistic regression was performed to evaluate the risk predictors of fixation failure. Odds ratio (OR) was used to calculate the relative contribution of the each risk predictor. Correlations were considered significant if p values were less than 0.05 (two-sided). Among the 442 A1 and A2 intertrochanteric fractures included in the analysis, there were 31 cases with treatment failure in the 3-month postoperative period, and thus the failure rate was 7%. The risk predictors based on demographic data and failure rates are summarized in In the regression analysis, AO/OTA 31-A2 fracture type, postoperative lateral wall fracture, posteriorly positioned screw, and varus reduction pattern were associated with an increased risk of treatment failure. All these risk predictors remained statistically significant after multivariate adjustment. The regression coefficients of these significant predictors were converted into integer risk scores as shown in In the evaluation of the discriminatory ability of the risk model, patients were categorized into low-risk (risk score 0–10) and high-risk (risk score 11–22) groups by the threshold sum risk score from the ROC curve. The failure rates of the two groups were significantly different, as shown in Our findings revealed that The DHS failure rate was generally considered higher for treating A2 fractures than for A1 fractures For an intertrochanteric fracture treated by DHS, the medial bone continuity was traditionally considered a main support for fracture stability Many reports emphasized that the DHS screw should be inserted centrally or inferiorly on the anteroposterior(AP) radiograph and centrally on the lateral radiograph to reduce cutting-out rate Postoperative lateral wall fracture has been also found to be an important risk factor for DHS failure. Parker was the first to report that femoral medialization and lateral femoral wall fracture were strongly associated with DHS treatment failure In this study, we developed a prediction model for DHS treatment outcome of intertrochanteric fracture by using integer risk scores from regression coefficients of significant predictors. This is the first model to integrate multiple risk factors for predicting DHS treatment outcome. This prediction model may provide valuable information for clinical decisions in patients with intertrochanteric fractures). The main limitation of our study was that we collected postoperative outcome relatively early. We set a 3-month period for postoperative outcome evaluation for the following reasons: Fracture classification, postoperative lateral wall fracture, and pattern of anterior cortex reduction are key elements in DHS treatment outcome. We developed a model that integrates these factors to predict the treatment outcome. The model showed excellent prediction accuracy and discriminatory ability. The model may provide useful information that orthopedic doctors can use to identify patients who need early intervention as well as ITF patients who need more frequent follow-up in the postoperative period. For the manuscript: Integrated Risk Scoring Model for Predicting Dynamic Hip Screw Treatment Outcome of Intertrochanteric Fracture. All the six authors disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people, or organisations, that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work, all within 3 years of the beginning the work submitted. The authors would like to thank the Biostatistics Task Force of Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, for assisting with the statistical analyses, and Dr. C-T. Hsu for performing the radiological measurements.