This study presents the approach used to develop a model for a continuous bioleaching system in stirred tank reactors. In bioleaching of metallic sulfides, precipitation concurrently occurs with dissolution of sulfides. Therefore, the model incorporates both the leaching and the precipitation kinetics. It is based on a shrinking particle model for the leaching part and a Mixed Suspension Mixed Product Removal (MSMPR) crystallizer model with germination and growing kinetics for the precipitation part.
                  To establish the model, it was necessary to have access to the size distribution of both sulfide and precipitated particles. A procedure for the bioleached residue characterization was developed in the BRGM laboratory to be able to dissociate sulfide and precipitated particles in the solid phase.
                  The current paper presents the analytical procedure, the mathematical model in detail and its application to a continuous pilot plant test.The precipitation of secondary minerals has significant implications in process design and equipment sizing. The modelling of the precipitation in conjunction with sulfide oxidation is able to calculate the material balance of solids which plays an important role in the engineering of stirred-tank reactors and down-stream processing. In the case of bio-leaching of sulfides in stirred tank reactors, precipitation of hydroxides and sulfates occurs concurrently with dissolution of sulfides. The measurement of the dissolved metals concentration in the solution is the simplest way to have an estimate of the leaching rate. Nevertheless, if these metals precipitate or co-precipitate, the leaching rate is underestimated. The measurement of the size distribution of the non-dissolved sulfides is another way to approach the leaching rate. Indeed, a previous laboratory study ( However, at pilot and full plant scales, concurrent precipitation is observed and cannot be neglected in the material balance ( In order to estimate the leaching and precipitation rates, the proportions of non-dissolved sulfides and precipitates per size class have to be measured. With this aim, a specific analytical procedure to selectively dissolve the precipitates was developed at BRGM laboratory. In the case of a stirred tank reactor, material balance, leaching and precipitation kinetics, residence time distribution and comparison between feed and product size distributions are necessary to back-calculate the operating leaching and precipitation rates. A new mathematical model is developed with this objective. Still based on a “shrinking particle” model for the leaching part, it also takes into account the germination and growing particle kinetics for the precipitation part. Within the frame of the BioMinE project (European project of the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development), such investigations were conducted on a concentrate of cobalt bearing pyrite coming from the KCCL (Kasese Cobalt Company Ltd, Uganda) plant. After a brief presentation of the process circuit, the first part of the current paper presents the specific analytical procedure and its validation study. In the second part, the mathematical model is detailed. The last part is devoted to the model validation on a continuous pilot plant test with a focus on its calibration using the specific analytical procedure results. The flowsheet of the pilot plant test conducted during the BioMinE project is given in It consists of a series of four stages of bioleaching in agitated reactors, in which the bacteria oxidizes the pyrite and thus liberate metals (mainly Co and Fe). The slurry of pyrite concentrate is conditioned in a feed tank and is regularly pumped to the reactor R1 in such a way to have a quasi continuous feeding. At the same time, solution of nutrients is added. The reactors R2, R3 and R4 are filled by overflow from the previous reactor. The pH inside the four reactors is maintained by addition of lime solution. CO Series of routine measurements, as well as collection and preparation of slurry samples, are carried out during a pilot plant campaign when the operating conditions are stable. The first step in the data treatment consists of compiling detailed mass balances around the main pieces of equipment of the circuit, in order to obtain coherent data for the flowrates, the percent solids and the metal contents in solids and solutions ( A specific analytical procedure for precipitates determination was developed. The main feed and products of the four reactors were sampled and analyzed. As the main objective of this procedure was to measure a size distribution, particular attention was paid to the sampling technique. It was shown in Obtaining the sample inside the reactor has many disadvantages. The location and level of sampling inside the reactor are difficult to control. The use of a syringe can create segregation between coarse and fine particles. The slurry density can be affected, and the sample will only be representative of the slurry at the sampling location. The disadvantage of collecting sample at the overflow resides in the discontinuity of overflow; its main advantage is to take the entire material without segregation. As the quantity of sample can be important, it is necessary to avoid perturbing the process. Therefore, the samples were taken upstream, starting with the last reactor product and concluding with the main feed. Finally, even if lower variability and error magnitude are observed using a syringe, the overflow sampling was favorable for the purpose of calibration of the mathematical model that attempts to predict the overflow of the reactor. The following operations were carried out: Size distribution analysis using both wet sieving and laser diffraction on each sample; Chemical analysis per size class for feed, R1 and R4 products; Selective chemical dissolution of precipitates for R1 and R4 products; Size distribution analyses by laser diffraction for the solid residues of the chemical dissolution. The samples of slurry for wet sieving were weighed, washed, filtered and dried. The dry solids were weighed to determine the percent solids, then suspended in water and stirred for 30 The accuracy of the measurements for the reactors R2, R3 and R4 is of the same magnitude than the one obtained with the samples taken at the overflow of the first reactor presented in The quantities of particles larger than 20 The measurements using laser diffraction gave finer size distributions. Several reasons can explain this difference: the use of ultrasound during measurement breaks the agglomerates; the shape of particles (leached sulfides or precipitates) offers a smaller surface equivalent than the sieving measurement. Each size class of the wet sieving analysis was sampled for chemical analysis. Due to the small amount of material greater than 63 The experimental protocol for chemical dissolution of precipitates is as follows: boil for 15 The size distribution of the residue after chemical dissolution is measured using laser diffraction. To be coherent, this size distribution is compared with the size distribution of the initial sample obtained by laser diffraction. The objective of this characterization is to identify the amount of precipitates formed and of dissolved pyrite, during the bioleaching operation. The size distribution before and after chemical dissolution for the R1 and R4 products is shown in In order to simulate the pilot plant process, a bioleaching reactor model was developed. It takes into account the dissolution of some minerals by bioleaching and the precipitation of other minerals. As these two reactions are mainly conducted by the specific surface of the solid particles, a population balance approach is used to take into account the size distribution and the mineral composition variations. No thermodynamics approach is taken into account in this model. Here are the main assumptions used in the model: Dissolution and precipitation kinetics are independent. In our model, dissolution is calculated first. Precipitation is then computed from the obtained conditions. This method is valid if dissolution kinetics is very high compared to the precipitation, or if precipitation is not limited by the quantity of dissolved elements, as is the case here. The dissolved and precipitated particles are assumed to be spherical and made of one mineral. If this assumption can be considered as valid for pyrite, it is not the case for precipitates. Indeed, a non-negligible part of the precipitates appears at the surface of the other particles (pyrite and gangue). Besides, a large part of the coarser particles is made of small cemented pyrite particles and then not totally liberated. During leaching, they are rapidly crumbled, as it was observed during batch tests ( The reactor is assumed to be perfectly mixed. Even though it is not strictly valid, the by-pass and the segregation of the particles in the tank are considered as negligible. The population balance approach is applied on the size classes and the minerals per size class. The model manages a large number of pseudo size classes that are obtained by interpolation of the measured ones. The model is simplified concerning the minerals. Only three components are defined: “Pyrite” grouping, in fact, all iron sulfides mainly cobalt-bearing pyrite but also chalcopyrite; this component is leached; “Gangue” grouping non-dissolved minerals; “Precipitates” grouping all precipitated minerals (sulfates and hydroxides…). The chemical composition of these components is adjusted to reflect the chemical analysis. It is limited to Fe and Co. An element “others” groups all other elements. The same elements are considered for the chemical composition of the solution. The implementation of the model in the USIM PAC simulation tool ( The population composition is calculated by interpolation of the experimental size distribution to obtain a smoother size distribution. The shrinking particle model is used to calculate the new size distribution of the remaining solids and the quantity and composition of the dissolved material. The dissolved material reports to the solution using a simple chemical reaction model based on the stoichiometry. The MSMPR crystallizer model is used to calculate the maximum quantity and the size distribution of the precipitates. The actual quantity of precipitates and the new composition of the solution are determined by a simple chemical reaction model. The size distributions of the non-dissolved minerals and the precipitates are interpolated to return to the experimental size classes. The well-known shrinking particle model was used in the modelling of leach reactors for example by The population balance-based model of the precipitation uses the standard continuous Mixed Suspension Mixed Product Removal (MSMPR) crystallizer model ( The solution feeds the tank. Super-saturation is generated by leaching reaction, contributing to the formation of nuclei that subsequently grow into crystals. Crystals leave their size range population either by growing to the upper size range or by flowing out as product. Crystals arrive in a size range population either by growing from lower size range or by flowing in from the feed. The pulp in both the tank and outflow thus contains the whole size distribution from nuclei to the largest crystals. The precipitation phenomenon is governed by the nucleation rate MSMPR analysis proceeds with steady-state performance assumptions, and therefore all the time derivates become zero (including those for mass balance), reducing the population balance to: In this study, the MSMPR crystallizer model is adapted to the bioleaching operating parameters. The size distribution analysis of the precipitates is obtained by precipitates dissolution, as described in the above section. If Eq. Integration over residence times gives the product size distribution function. It can be easily calculated if all particles have the same size An actual particle size distribution can be represented as a finite set of discrete mono-size populations. The particle size range is divided into a great number of equal finite elements [ The product The first term corresponds to the particles coming from nucleation in the smallest class: The second term takes into account the mass increase by growth inside the same class: The last term corresponds to the particles coming from lower classes by growth: The function The translation from the experimental size distribution to the discrete mono-size classes, as defined above, is made using a log-linear interpolation of the cumulative distribution and a Gaudin–Schumann fit for sizes below the finest sieve. To minimize numerical deviation due to discretization, the choice of The quantity of precipitated material is given by the difference between product and feed flowrates. The quantities of liquid components that precipitate are calculated using material balance equations of the chemical reactions where two or more components react to give precipitates. The unit operation model is validated using data coming from the pilot plant campaign. For each reactor, three constants need to be calibrated: leaching kinetic constant for pyrite (m precipitation kinetic constant for precipitates (m nucleation constant for precipitates (number of nuclei.m The available data concerning the feed and the output of each reactor are the mass flowrate, the size distribution, and the Co and Fe contents in the solid and liquid phases. The pyrite content per size class is known for the feed and the output of R1 and R4. To calibrate the models and back-calculate the constants, the following steps are performed: From the routine sampling campaign, a set of measurements are processed by data reconciliation to obtain a set of coherent and balanced data for flowrates and metal contents for solids and liquids (the Co and Fe contents in the pyrite are assumed to be identical for the four reactors, similarly for the Fe content in gangue) using the BILCO software ( The Fe and Co contents in the “pyrite” and “gangue” components are determined to fit the pyrite content per size class (based on the sulfide analysis) and the Co and Fe contents in solids for the R1 feed. Assuming there is no precipitate in the feed of R1 and the quantity of gangue remains constant in the four reactors (gangue is not dissolved), the quantity of gangue per size class is determined. For R1, the three constants ( For R2 and R3, the kinetic constant For R4, the three constants ( A final adjustment is performed to obtain a good compromise between the overall simulation and all the experimental results. The leaching kinetic constants for pyrite, given in The precipitation kinetic constants and nucleation constants for precipitates are in the same range as the ones determined experimentally (see hereinafter), except the precipitates' nucleation constant in the first tank R1, which is significantly higher. It can be due to the presence of precipitates in the R1feed. It can also be due to the other solid particles which have the role of nuclei. The precipitation kinetic constants decrease progressively between the first and the third bioleaching reactors. It seems that kinetic constants of leaching and of precipitation progressively decrease. For an infinite time small remaining quantities of iron from pyrite will be dissolved and iron will become a limiting reagent for precipitation. In order to validate the back calculated values of the nucleation and growing rates, they are compared to those calculated using the standard graphical method. The knowledge of the amount of precipitates formed in each size class during the period The linear regression of the form  The MSMPR model is added to the “shrinking particle” model to build a bioleaching model able to reproduce, as well as possible, the current behavior of the precipitation during the bioleaching process. It is implemented in the modelling and simulation software USIM™ PAC (  The gangue seems to undergo dissolution and precipitation in the same time frame. It is very difficult to evaluate the respective parts of these phenomena, as the partial flowrate of gangue varies only slightly between input and output, as shown in It is assumed that no dissolution of precipitates occurs. Therefore, the leaching kinetic constant associated with the precipitates is zero. As no size distribution information on pyrite and precipitates for R2 and R3 outputs is available, the simulator is calibrated with the Co and Fe contents in the liquid phase. The precipitation of secondary minerals has significant implications in process design and equipment sizing. The modelling of the precipitation in conjunction with sulfide oxidation is able to calculate the material balance of solids, which plays an important role in the engineering of stirred-tank reactors and down-stream processing. New investigations were conducted to measure and model the precipitation occurring during the bioleaching. It was applied to the processing of a cobalt-bearing pyrite concentrate in continuous stirred-tank reactors. A specific analytical procedure was proposed to evaluate the precipitation production. Some improvements in the analytical procedure remain to be investigated to deal with agglomeration phenomena or partial dissolution of precipitates. However, this procedure is sufficient to obtain a reasonably accurate estimation of the precipitation kinetics and material balance. The MSMPR precipitation model has been combined with the existing shrinking particle model to simulate, at the same time, the leaching of pyrite and the precipitation of sulfates and hydroxides. The mathematical model has been implemented in the USIM PAC software. Model adjustments were based on the data collected during a pilot plant test. Given the accuracy of the measurements, the model satisfactorily reproduces the bioleaching process. The model is flexible and is adaptable to all type of materials (minerals, waste, chemical products) following the same behavior during leaching (shrinking particle model) and precipitation (crystallization model). By the choice of the parameter values, it can be used to simulate the precipitation only, the leaching only, or the combination of the two phenomena. It is also possible to simulate the selective precipitation of metals, but, as there is no model of the thermodynamic equilibrium, the selectivity has to be managed through kinetics. The kinetic parameters can be directly determined by laboratory tests. They can also be back-calculated from the pilot or industrial plant data using the model in reverse simulation. For a given reactor, the process performance can be calculated knowing the kinetic parameters. Conversely, the size of the equipment can be calculated to achieve desired performances. The performance can be expressed in terms of size distribution of leached minerals or produced precipitates, or in terms of chemical contents remaining in solution after reactions. This work was carried out within the frame of the BioMinE project (European project contract NMP2-CT-2004 500-329). The authors acknowledge the financial support given to this project by the