Introduction
                  In locked plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures, the calcar is an important anchor point for screws providing much-needed medial column support. Most locking plate implants utilize a fixed-trajectory locking screw to achieve this goal. Consequently, adjustments of plate location to account for patient-specific anatomy may result in a screw position outside of the calcar. To date, little is known about the consequences of “missing” the calcar during plate positioning. This study sought to characterize the biomechanics associated with proximal and distal placement of locking plates in a two-part fracture model.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This experiment was performed twice, first with elderly cadaveric specimens and again with osteoporotic sawbones. Two-part fractures were simulated and specimens were divided to represent proximal, neutral, and distal plate placements. Non-destructive torsional and axial compression tests were performed prior to an axial fatigue test and a ramp to failure. Torsional stiffness, axial stiffness, humeral head displacement and stiffness during fatigue testing, and ultimate load were compared between groups.
               
                  Results
                  Cadavers: Proximal implant placement led to trends of decreased mechanical properties, but there were no significant differences found between groups. Sawbones: Distal placement increased torsional stiffness in both directions (p = 0.003, p = 0.034) and axial stiffness (p = 0.018) when compared to proximal placement. Distal placement also increased torsional stiffness in external rotation (p = 0.020), increased axial stiffness (p = 0.024), decreased humeral head displacement during fatigue testing, and increased stiffness during fatigue testing when compared to neutral placement.
               
                  Discussion
                  The distal and neutral groups had similar mechanical properties in many cadaveric comparisons while the proximal group trended towards decreased construct stiffness.
               
                  Results
                  from the Sawbones model were more definitive and provided further evidence that proximal calcar screw placements are undesirable and distal implant placement may provide improved construct stability.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Successful proximal humerus fracture reconstruction is inherent upon anatomic fracture reduction coupled with medial column support. Results from this experiment suggest that missing the calcar proximally is deleterious to fixation strength, while it is safe, and perhaps even desirable, to aim slightly distal to the intended target.Proximal humerus fractures, accounting for over 5% of the fractures in adults [ Optimization of proximal humerus locking plate design is an avidly researched topic. Previous studies have sought to improve fixation by introducing extra screws or blades into the humeral head [ Several studies have focused on the use of the calcar as an anchor point for screws that are intended to provide medial column support, a technique that has been shown to provide resistance to humeral head collapse [ The purpose of this study was to characterize the biomechanics of a locked plate construct when the implant is aligned neutrally, distally, and proximally. The goal was to provide surgeons with guidelines for implant placement if optimal calcar screw position is not readily achieved. We hypothesized that missing the calcar by 8 mm in either direction would lead to undesirable changes in fixation strength of the repaired construct. Similarly, we also hypothesized that missing the calcar would lead to increased migration of the humeral head during cyclic testing and decreased failure strength. This study was first performed with cadaveric specimens and repeated with Sawbones models. Twelve matched pairs of fresh-frozen cadaveric arm specimens from 8 females and 4 males (average age 78.6 years, range 66 to 96 years) were assigned to the following groups: cadaveric neutral (CN, n = 8); cadaveric proximal (CP, n = 8); and cadaveric distal (CD, n = 8) ( The number of cadaveric samples used was based on results from a previous study that quantified the biomechanics of proximal humeri with and without calcar screws [ Cadaveric specimens were stored at −20 °C and thawed overnight prior to implantation. The humerus was disarticulated from the shoulder joint and transected at the midshaft. In order to simulate an unstable two-part fracture, a defined 30 ° transverse wedge osteotomy was created with an oscillating saw for all specimens ( All implantation procedures were performed with a single locking plate design (LCP Proximal Humerus, DePuy Synthes, West Chester, PA). Neutrally aligned plates were positioned according to manufacturer guidelines and care was taken to ensure that pilot holes were drilled directly into the calcar, approximately 3 mm superior to the outer cortex. Drills were left in the specimens and fluoroscopy was used to ensure proper implant placement prior to insertion of screws. The same procedure was used to create proximally and distally placed implants with 8 mm offsets. Final implantation was achieved with a predefined set of 3.5 mm screws (two 36 mm cortex, two 36 mm locking, two 44 mm locking, and two 48 mm locking). For the cadaveric specimens, screws sizes were selected in a manner to optimize length without violating the articular surface. For the Sawbones models, the screw pattern was kept constant across all specimens. Distal humeri were potted into polycarbonate cylinders filled with rigid epoxy resin (Bondo, 3 M, Maplewood, MN). Cadaveric specimens were refrigerated for no more than 48 h prior to biomechanical testing. The methods used in this experiment were based on previously published protocols that also sought to characterize the biomechanics of proximal humerus implants [ First, a non-destructive torsional stiffness test was performed ( Next, a battery of nondestructive quasi-static compression tests were performed. The specimens were mounted to a rotating vice and tested at 0°, 20° abduction, and 20° adduction positions ( Finally, cyclic loading and ramp to failure tests were performed. Specimens were aligned at 0° ( Relative displacements of the humeral head and shaft were recorded with three-dimensional motion tracking techniques during compressive testing. An Optitrack motion capture system (NaturalPoint, Inc., Corvallis, OR) was used and calibrated such that 0.2 mm accuracy of marker tracking was achieved. Individual marker clusters were securely attached to the head and shaft of the humerus ( Statistical analyses were conducted using SigmaStat version 4.0 (Systat Software, Inc., Germany). One-way ANOVAs were initially run to determine the presence of significant differences between groups. If significant differences existed, either Mann-Whitney Rank Sum tests or Holm-Sidak tests were performed to make pairwise comparisons. CP specimens exhibited non-significant trends of decreased mechanical properties in internal torsional stiffness ( When compared to the SP group, the SD cohort exhibited increased torsional stiffness in both internal and external rotation (p = 0.003 and p = 0.034, respectively) ( When compared to the SN group, SD had increased torsional stiffness in external rotation (p = 0.020) ( The objective of this study was to characterize the biomechanical effects of “missing” the calcar when implanting a proximal humerus locking plate. The findings, especially from the Sawbones study, indicate that missing the calcar proximally results in significant reductions in axial and torsional stiffness. These results are, in part, consistent with our initial hypothesis. Interestingly, it was also determined that screws positioned just distal the calcar may be beneficial to initial construct stiffness. The current findings add to the narrative that adequate medial column support is imperative to the success of locked plate fixation in proximal humerus fractures. Results suggest that locking screws inserted proximal to the calcar will result in reduced fixation strength. This conclusion is strengthened by a recent clinical study, where missing the calcar proximally by 12 mm led to statistically higher failure rates [ The findings from the initial cadaveric study were obfuscated by differences in human anatomy, which resulted in high amounts of variability between measures. Although the Sawbones models were considerably more compliant than human bones, they eliminated differences between specimens which resulted in tightly bundled data sets. It is notable that the cortical wall of the Sawbones calcar is less than the outer diameter of the screws. Neutral alignment caused the screws to split this wall, eliminating its utility as a medial column support. Alternatively, screws placed inferior to the calcar left the cortical bone intact and instead served as a buttress. This technique may be especially useful if the cortical wall thickness of the calcar is less than the diameter of the screw. The assays performed in this experiment were the same as those performed by Katthagen et al. on a similar cohort of elderly specimens [ This study has several limitations, most of which are inherent to the cadaveric nature of the study. First, the model represents fracture fixation at “time zero” after operative intervention. It does not take into account the effects of in vivo healing, nor does make an attempt to simulate the small loads experienced when a patient is wearing a sling. When considering elderly populations, however, “time zero” may be of the utmost importance because healing in osteoporotic bone can be slow or incomplete [ Three clinical approaches can be used to optimize calcar screw positioning. First, if the screws are too proximal through the fixed angle implant, the screws can be re-positioned by moving the plate distal on the bone. Second, vectors of the screws can be altered by cross-threading screw heads into the plate. While this workaround may solve the immediate problem of optimizing calcar screw position, this technique greatly reduces the screw’s ability to resist shear loads [ Successful proximal humerus fracture reconstruction can be performed with a variety of approaches. As has been previously demonstrated, the most important steps in achieving optimal proximal humeral fracture fixation with locking plates include both anatomic fracture reduction and placement of a screw positioned within the calcar [ This study was sponsored by DePuy Synthes Grant SR 1005. The study sponsor did not have any involvement in the study design, data collection, data analysis, or interpretation of data. The sponsors were not involved in the writing the manuscript or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. This study did not involve the use of human subjects or animal models and was therefore exempt from institutional approval for such work. There are no conflicts of interest that are relevant to this manuscript. for the study was provided Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: