In conventional steam plants, the efficiency mainly depends on the outlet steam temperature of boiler. The outlet steam temperature is maintained by subjecting different sections of boiler to high temperatures. In these harsh conditions boiler tubes undergo different degradation processes viz creep, fatigue, steamside oxidation, fireside corrosion and erosion. Therefore, life evaluation of boiler components is required at regular intervals of time for better functionality of power plant. Various life assessment techniques like microstructural evaluation, hardness measurements, Oxide scale measurements, Accelerated temperature tests are used for assessing the residual life of boiler tubes. In this paper, the creep life is estimated using destructive accelerated temperature tests on several T22 tubes from various sections of Platen Superheater, Final Superheater and Reheater of boiler. Accelerated temperature tests are carried out at higher temperatures under the nominal steam load and remaining life is estimated by extrapolating the results for the constant service temperature. But, the service temperature of tube never remains constant during a regular plant operation due to insulation effect of steamside oxidation and fireside corrosion. Further, during start up and shut down of plant, tubes undergo low cycle fatigue damage. Though, the life consumption of boiler tube due to fatigue is infinitesimal compared to creep because of thinner section of tubes. Therefore, the effect of cyclic operation is not considered, but the effect of steamside oxidation, fireside corrosion and erosion are incorporated in the accelerated temperature test results in estimating the residual life of boiler tubes. Further, these results are compared with the life obtained from Oxide scale thickness measurements carried out by Non-destructive Ultrasonic technique. In both the methods, metal temperature calculation using steady state conductive heat transfer equations play a crucial role in estimating the residual life. Mainly, these methods are based on thermal properties of oxide scale and short term stress rupture tests. Therefore, these methods can be applied for different grades of boiler materials such as T23, T24, T91 and T92 etc for residual life estimation.Failure of boiler tubes of coal fired power plants causes a huge economic loss in most of the countries. Therefore, life evaluation of boiler tubes in view of extending their life offers a huge economic gain for power plant operators. For residual life evaluation of the boiler tubes, the possible damage mechanisms should be understood thoroughly. The possible damage mechanisms in a boiler tube are Stress/Creep rupture, fatigue, fireside corrosion, erosion and steamside oxidation. Creep is main degradation process in the boiler tube components. The possible mechanisms in creep failure are short-term overheating or high-temperature creep Most common residual life evaluation techniques existing in literature are microstructural observation, hardness measurement, Oxide scale thickness measurements, accelerated stress rupture tests and accelerated temperature tests The paper is organized as follows: §2 consist of experimental procedure required for the estimation of residual life of boiler tubes. §3 is comparison of residual life obtained from both the methods. §3.4 incorporate the effect of steamside oxidation and fireside corrosion on accelerated temperature tests of service exposed tube. §4 consist of conclusions of the residual life studies. 2.25Cr-1Mo (T22) Platen Super Heater boiler tube is taken as a case study for the residual life estimation. A section of boiler tube is obtained from the power plant to carry out the necessary studies for residual life estimation. The dimensions and operating conditions of the boiler tube are given in The main degradation phenomenon is creep. The creep damage is quantified using a destructive method and a Non-destructive method. The destructive method is accelerated temperature rupture tests on service exposed tubes, wherein the rupture life is extrapolated at service temperature. In this method, effect of fireside corrosion and steamside oxidation is not taken into account. Therefore, a modified method is developed by incorporating the effect of the other degradation processes like steamside oxidation and fireside corrosion. The remaining life obtained from accelerated stress rupture tests and modified new method is compared with the life estimated from internal oxide-scale thickness values. A common set of heat transfer equations are used for both the internal oxide-scale method and modified accelerated temperature rupture method. The methods are discussed below. The residual life calculation using internal oxide scale thickness measurement, heat transfer equations and creep master cure is established in our previous work The logarithmic scale of rupture time is plotted against the testing temperature at constant operating stress as shown in The extrapolated value from accelerated temperature rupture data is one order more than the value obtained from the internal oxide thickness measurement. Therefore, the effect of steamside oxidation and fireside corrosion result in increase in metal temperature bolstering the creep damage. These damages were not considered in the accelerated temperature rupture test results. A different model is used as shown in As shown in The above discussed method can be applied to all varieties of boiler tubes, because the method is dependent on damage mechanisms like creep master curves, thermal properties of materials and heat transfer laws. This method can be applied to advanced boiler materials like T23, T24, T91 and T92. The limitations of the above methods are: Exfoliation rate of the oxide layer need to be practically considered, though in ferritic steels the exfoliation rate is less because of identical thermal expansion co-efficient of metal and oxide layer. Steam temperature is not constant throughout the operation (in this case study maximum steam temperature is taken). For, different steam temperatures of various time intervals, damage fraction need to be obtained using Robinson’s rule. Slope of Temperature Vs log t  Other degradation processes viz. steamside oxidation and fireside corrosion effect the residual life of boiler tubes. Residual life of service exposed boiler tube is calculated using non destructive oxide scale thickness, thermal properties of oxide and metal. Residual life from conventional accelerated temperature rupture studies is compared with internal oxidescale measurement. The values from conventional method are one order more which is due to the effect of steam oxidation and fireside corrosion. The effects of oxidation and fireside corrosion are incorporated and a new method is introduced. The values obtained from the new method correlates well with the values obtained by internal oxide scale method. In all the methods, insulating effect of oxide scale plays an important role in life estimation. The above method is applicable to different grades of boiler tubes, as the method is based on creep master curves, thermal properties of oxide and metal. Authors express their gratitude to the management of Corporate R&D, Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) for permitting to publish this work. They thank BHEL, Trichy officials for providing service exposed tubes for accelerated stress rupture tests. They are also thankful to Mr. M VenkataRao and Mr.Narasimha who have been helpful in experimental work.