We present a new general model for the prediction of the drag coefficient of non-spherical solid particles of regular and irregular shapes falling in gas or liquid valid for sub-critical particle Reynolds numbers (i.e. Re
                     <3×105). Results are obtained from experimental measurements on 300 regular and irregular particles in the air and analytical solutions for ellipsoids. Depending on their size, irregular particles are accurately characterized with a 3D laser scanner or SEM micro-CT method. The experiments are carried out in settling columns with height of 0.45 to 3.60m and in a 4m-high vertical wind tunnel. In addition, 881 additional experimental data points are also considered that are compiled from the literature for particles of regular shapes falling in liquids. New correlation is based on the particle Reynolds number and two new shape descriptors defined as a function of particle flatness, elongation and diameter. New shape descriptors are easy-to-measure and can be more easily characterized than sphericity. The new correlation has an average error of ~10%, which is significantly lower than errors associated with existing correlations. Additional aspects of particle sedimentation are also investigated. First, it is found that particles falling in dense liquids, in particular at Re
                     >1000, tend to fall with their maximum projection area perpendicular to their falling direction, whereas in gases their orientation is random. Second, effects of small-scale surface vesicularity and roughness on the drag coefficient of non-spherical particles found to be <10%. Finally, the effect of particle orientation on the drag coefficient is discussed and additional correlations are presented to predict the end members of drag coefficient due to change in the particle orientation.reference area of the particle, π projected area of the particle normal to the falling (or flow) direction, [m semi-axes lengths of ellipsoid, drag coefficient, see Eq. empirical expressions used in Eq. the drag coefficient of a sphere with same volume and Reynolds number as the particle diameter and height of cylinder or disk, [m] diameter of a sphere with the same volume as the particle, [m] elongation, relative error (see Eq. drag force, see Eq. fatness, intermediate length of the particle, [m] Newton's drag correction, Stokes' drag correction, longest length of the particle, [m] particle Reynolds number, particle surface area, [m shortest length of the particle, [m] extrapolated fluid velocity at the particle centroid, [m particle velocity, [m s particle terminal velocity, [m analytical expression defined in Eq. empirical variable used in Eq. empirical expression defined in Eq. empirical variable used in Eq. empirical expression defined in Eq. analytical expression defined in Eq. analytical expression defined in Eq. fluid dynamic viscosity, [Pa.s] sphericity, π lengthwise sphericity (see Eq. crosswise sphericity (see Eq. average of particle Stokes form factor, particle-to-fluid density ratio, surrounding fluid density, [kg m particle density, [kg m fluid value obtained from empirical models maximum value minimum value particle Projected (area) reference value Newton's regime: 1000 irregular particles without Parafilm ®- wrap Stokes' regime: sphere irregular particles wrapped in Parafilm® terminal (velocity) Cartesian coordinates Non-spherical particles are encountered in numerous fields of science and engineering, such as chemical engineering, civil engineering, mining engineering, physical sciences, biology and earth sciences Particles of arbitrary shapes when transported in a fluid experience forces and momentum on all three coordinate axes where where In the absence of a general solution, a large number of empirical correlations for predicting the drag coefficient of spherical and non-spherical particles are introduced that are associated with different ranges of validity and accuracy Second, most formulations are based on sphericity, a function of particle surface area, which, in the case of irregular particles, is one of the most challenging parameters to be determined and requires sophisticated instruments In the present study, a comprehensive analytical and experimental investigation on the drag coefficient of non-spherical particles including regular and irregular shapes with The main objective of this study is to find the simplest and the best correlated shape descriptors that could be used to estimate the drag coefficient of both regular and irregular particles moving in liquids (based on published data) or gases (based on new results). In addition, types of particle secondary motion, the effect of particle orientation, the effect of particle-to-fluid density ratio In the following sections, first we present a introduction on the aerodynamics of particles and associated parameters followed by a thorough review of the existing models for predicting the drag coefficient of spherical and non-spherical particles. Then methods and materials used in this study are described. Finally, results are presented and the impact of important parameters on the drag coefficient of non-spherical particles is discussed in detail. Drag of non-spherical particles can be framed if first we analyze aerodynamics of spherical particles. Several analytical, numerical and experimental studies can be found that are focused on the aerodynamics and, in particular, on the drag of spheres As it is shown in The variation of the sphere drag coefficient at subcritical Two thirds of this drag is due to viscous stresses (i.e. In the intermediate regime (0.1 Eq. The dependency of the drag coefficient of non-spherical particles on the particle Reynolds number is very similar to that of spheres. In fact, for non-spherical particles, parameters other than the particle Reynolds number, such as particle shape, surface roughness, orientation and particle-to-fluid density ratio are the source of complexities in the determination of the drag coefficient. The impact of these parameters on the drag coefficient is dependent on the particle Reynolds number. To provide a clear background, the effect of these parameters on the drag coefficient is presented separately in the following sections. In general, at a given particle Reynolds number, the average of the drag coefficient of a falling non-spherical particle is higher than that of a sphere as a consequence of its non-spherical shape. As a result, the main challenge is to quantify the shape of particles through a shape descriptor that is well correlated with the drag coefficient. Shape descriptors are mathematical functions that require previous determination of dimensional variables of the particle, such as lengths, diameter, projection perimeter, surface area or volume Sphericity is equal to 1 for spheres and decreases as particles become less spherical. As a result, for a fixed particle volume, the drag coefficient has an inverse correlation with the sphericity. The main disadvantage of sphericity is its dependency on the particle surface area. Although the surface area of a regular particle with smooth surface can be measured analytically, for irregular particles surface area can only be measured with sophisticated instruments, such as 3D scanners or gas adsorption. In addition, the measured surface area is a function of measurement accuracy and, in particular, it increases as the measurement resolution and accuracy increase Particle form factors are simpler to measure than sphericity, are less dependent on the measurement resolution and can better discriminate particles with different forms. In order to calculate form factors for a particle, its The main shortcoming of form dimensions is their dependency on the operator judgments The drag coefficient in the Stokes' regime is relatively insensitive to surface roughness Particle orientation is another parameter that can affect the drag coefficient of non-spherical particles. As a result, repeated experiments performed on a non-spherical particle of a given shape will show a spread in the measured drag coefficient due to the change in the particle orientation As Finally, secondary motions become fully developed in the Newton's regime (1000  Later, Ganser where and Ganser Particles used in our experiments were separated in different sample sets based on their size: Sample Set I and Sample Set II. Sample Set I includes 100 irregular volcanic particles, 13 cylinders, 4 parallelepiped and one spherical particle with 155 Sample Set II includes 78 irregular volcanic particles, 21 ellipsoids, 12 cylinders, 8 disks and 21 regular shape particles with 10.9 A list of all experimental data points used in this study, including those compiled from the literature, are summarized in The analytical solution of Oberbeck where and  Settling columns of heights between 0.45 and 3.6 The high-speed camera was automatically triggered when the particle was in the field of view. By using a AF Micro-Nikkor 60 The main error in measuring velocity of falling particles is due to the uncertainty in the particle centroid position. Considering the exposure time of videos (50 In the settling column experiments the particle acceleration could not be calculated accurately since the field of view of the camera was relatively small. In order to make sure that particles reached their terminal velocity, they were tested at least in two column heights and the change in the measured velocity was monitored. The drag coefficient could be measured only for the 41 particles that reached their terminal velocity. Measurements for remaining particles, however, were used to benchmark the ability of the final drag coefficient model to predict particle velocity within a given falling distance. For benchmarking accuracy of models, we compare their relative errors with respect to reference values (i.e. analytical solutions or experimental measurements) as follows: A 4 We present a new model for the determination of the drag coefficient that is based on the Stokes and Newton drag corrections, i.e. In order to evaluate the perfoemence of Eqs. Eq. The accuracy of Eqs. (6–9) and The use of Eq. A summary of error analyses for models shown in Another shape descriptor suggested by Loth In the search for a better shape descriptor, we found that Eq. Eq. As mentioned earlier ( It is also important to know how the effect of particle orientation on the drag coefficient depends on particle shape. As the particle shape becomes less spherical the effect of particle orientation becomes more significant due to the increase of the ratio between maximum and minimum projection areas ( The accurate correlation for estimating Another fundamental question is: how irregularities in the particle shape, e.g. surface roughness, small-scale vesicularity, that cannot be captured by Another insight provided by Hill and Power Non-spherical particles experience Newton's regime at different range of  In order to find another shape descriptor that has a better correlation with Note that As it is shown in An important point that can be mentioned regarding  In any case, this decrease cannot be due to the shift in the separation point for boundary layer, since, if this was the case, the reduction in the drag coefficient should have been much larger (e.g. ~  Additional data resulted from our wind tunnel study is the average of particle projection area normal to the airflow during suspension in the wind tunnel ( In the Newton's regime, as mentioned earlier ( In where A summary of error analyses of selected correlations on estimating Eqs.  In For particles in the parallel orientation, for which the drag coefficient are the lowest at a given It should be noted that Eq. Based on the dimensional analysis of Ganser It is important to note that the fitting constants in Eq. If we take a closer look at Results obtained in this study do not allow us to characterize secondary motion of irregular particles at intermediate range of Reynolds number systematically, simply because the field of view through our high-speed camera is too small (24 At higher Although a large number of data points in a wide range of This premature influence of density ratio at low The drag coefficient of non-spherical particles of regular and irregular shapes at subcritical A new general drag coefficient correlation is presented, Eq. If, we approximate non-spherical particles to ellipsoids by neglecting the term Effect of particle orientation on the drag coefficient is significant, in particular at high Out of all parameters describing particle shape, it is the particle form that has the greatest impact on the drag coefficient as opposed to the surface-related characteristics, such as sphericity. In the Stokes' regime ( The average drag coefficient of a non-spherical particle falling in a gas or a liquid is always higher than the drag coefficient of its volume-equivalent spheres, i.e. The impact of both shape and orientation on the drag coefficient of non-spherical particles increases with Effects of surface vesicularity and roughness on the drag coefficient of freely falling non-spherical particles was found to be < In the Newton's regime (1000 This project was funded by the Given that the size of particles tested in the settling columns is very small (0.15 where overbars indicate the arithmetic average of variables obtained from multiple projections. Estimations of Eqs.