Plasma Electrolytic Nitriding (PEN) is a cathodic atmospheric plasma process which has shown a promising deposition of metal coatings that exhibits a significant adhesion to the substrate as well as high deposition rates. The structure of tantalum alloy, microhardness and corrosion resistance behavior after cathodic plasma electrolytic nitriding (PEN) in electrolyte containing urea and distilled water were investigated. An Optical microscope (OM), X-ray diffractometer and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to characterize the phase composition of the modified layer and its surface morphology. The corrosion resistance properties of nitrided tantalum alloy are investigated. It was shown that various electrolytes provided metallic tantalum (Ta), TaN0.43, TaN0.1, Ta4N, Ta4N5 and TaN phases and nitrogen solid solution in tantalum. The cathodic PEN with 78 wt% urea and 21.6 wt% distilled water had a microhardness of 1198.18 VHN, which was selected as the best sample in term of electrolyte composition.Recently, different methods have been developed to enhance the properties of metal surfaces [ The PES is an environmental friendly processing technique that has a higher ability of producing relatively thick coatings. Furthermore, the obtained coating has electric insulation resistance and high microhardness as well as good binding with the substrate that makes it a good candidate for numerous applications [ During the process, interstitial atoms like C, O and N diffuse into the metals surface (e.g. tantalum) that leads to improve their surface properties [ PES has several advantages, including superior coating performance, cost-effective process and environmental compatibility. In addition, compared to the conventional vacuum method, PES has a much higher current density. Therefore, surface ionic bombardment may occur which leads to rapid heating and severe substrate surface activation. Plasma thermochemical interactions in a lot of surface discharges lead to growth of the coating in both directions of the substrate surface [ Tantalum (Ta) is a silvery refractory transition metal that can be used in the electronics industry [ There are several articles investigating PES process on metals such as Al, Mg, and Ti [ The aim of this work was to study the possibility of formation Nitride-containing layers on tantalum via PEN process. Furthermore, optimization of electrolyte concentration for surface modification was carried out. In order to investigate the morphology of saturated layers cross-section and examining the coating thickness, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used. The obtained phases on the surface were investigated through XRD analysis. The microhardness of the samples surfaces was measured via microhardness test. The polarization tests were also performed to elucidate the corrosion behavior of samples. For experimental analysis, a tantalum target with dimensions of 20 mm × 10 mm × 0.5 mm was prepared. Before starting the electrochemical process, the specimens were mechanically ground with SiC abrasive paper up to 2000 grit and were polished completely with a mechanical polishing machine. They were then ultrasonically cleaned with acetone in an ultrasonic bath and subsequently dried by hot air flow. An operating unit for the electrolyte plasma coating process consists of an electrolytic bath and a high power supply. Thus, PEN was performed using 60 kW DC power supply. A general schematic of the operating unit is shown in In this research, the tantalum targets were used as cathodes and a cylindrical graphite was selected as a metal anode. The surface area of the cylindrical graphite was several times higher than sample size (work sample). In order to find the optimum electrolyte composition, 8 experiments were carried out with different compositions at 110 °C. The compositions of urea and distilled water in the electrolyte solution are listed in For all experiments, the amount of sodium hydroxide was 0.4 wt%.The optimal combination was found at specific experiment time of 12 min. Since electrolyte concentration directly affects the critical and working voltages, various voltages were applied to obtain a stable plasma condition for each experiment. Scanning electron microscopy (FEI ESEM QUANTA 200) was used to determine the thickness of the coating. A light microscope of OLYMPUS BH-2 with a magnification of 1000 and a digital camera (JVC TK-1280 model) were also used to study the cross sections of the samples. The study of samples phases and crystallinity were performed, using X-ray diffraction analysis (INEL France EQUIPOX 3000 model). The polarization test was performed using the Ivium Compactstat instrument. It is worth noting to say that the surface area of samples was 1 cm The microhardness tool (Shimadzu model) was used to measure the microhardness of the coatings. The applied load was 50 g, with a loading time of about 10 to 20 s. The machine had weights of 15 to 1000 g. In this study, the electrolytic composition of urea or distilled water was determined for PEN process. The addition of urea increases the solution conduction resistance that increases the working and critical voltages, while the maximum current is decreased. X-ray diffraction (XRD) results ( XRD patterns represent the presence of tantalum with six distinct forms including, metallic tantalum (Ta), TaN It can be seen that as the urea increases, the intensity and diversity of nitride and oxide compounds increase. Due to the very low amounts of urea in sample A1, no nitride compounds were observed. In sample A2, tantalum nitride (TaN  Cross-section SEM and linescan analysis of A5–A8 samples are illustrated in The results indicated that the surface layers are more nitridized, and zones with lower tantalum have higher nitrogen content. This implies that tantalum nitride is formed. Besides, by increasing time, the penetration depth of tantalum nitride increases. The SEM images show that the tantalum oxide phase is also formed. Tantalum highly tends to react with interstitial gases such as oxygen that leads to formation of a tantalum oxide [ In order to elucidate the hardness of the saturated layers, the microhardness test was performed. The microhardness profile of samples are shown in The XRD results confirmed the microhardness tests. It can be seen that, after the gray layer, the microhardness showed a decreasing trend. Furthermore, a normal decreasing trend for hardness profile was observed for all samples. This is because the nitridation process is a chemical-thermal process in which free nitrogen radicals penetrate the surface and depth of the sample and form a complex layer on the surface. Increasing the nitrogen concentration in the plasma medium leads to higher diffusion of nitrogen in the diffusive area that can result in growth of nitrides in the matrix. In other words, according to the first law of Fick, the increment of the concentration gradient increases the flux and consequently diffusion. By increasing the nitrogen content in the plasma, the thickness of the gray layer and the concentration gradient in the diffusive layer were increased. This phenomenon accelerates the diffusion of nitrogen from the interface of the gray layer and the diffusion layer toward the depth of the diffusion layer and the thickness of this layer increases [ Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to determine the interfacial properties between the electrodes and the electrolyte. The frequency ranged between 10 EIS tests also confirmed the priority of sample 7. The equivalent circuit of EIS graph is shown in In which R According to above tables, the charge transfer resistance of sample A7 is higher than other samples. These results were in good accordance with the XRD and SEM results. For electrochemical potentiodynamic polarization analysis, base target and coated samples were immersed in a NaCl solution (3.5 wt%) for 10 min. The corrosion potential E The calculated values are listed in  The polarization resistance increased from 72.83 kohm.cm In this study the effect of electrolyte composition in plasma electrolytic nitridation was investigated for tantalum coating. In which different percentages of urea and distilled water in the electrolyte were used for the surface nitridation of Ta. The PEN layers were almost consisted of the TaN The main mechanism for this was a reduction of tantalum due to presence of N The XRD and SEM results confirmed the formation of the surface coating. It was found that by increasing the urea concentration, the electrical conductivity decreases, and the electrical resistance was increased. This leads to a decrease in the density of the stable plasma current. According to results, it was found that the A7 sample with 78 wt% urea, 21.6 wt% distilled water and 0.4 wt% hydroxide sodium was the best candidate for electrolyte composition in plasma electrolytic nitridation method. In future works using other nitrogen sources like HCONH The authors would like to acknowledge the support of