The structure of the fuels for the future Gen IV nuclear reactors will be totally different from those of PWR, especially for the GFR concept including a closed cycle. In these reactors, fissile materials (carbides or nitrides of actinides) should be surrounded by an inert matrix. In order to build a reprocessing process scheme, the behavior of the potential inert matrices (silicon carbide, titanium nitride, and zirconium carbide and nitride) was studied by hydro- and pyrometallurgy. This paper deals with the chlorination results at high temperature by pyrometallurgy. For the first time, the reactivity of the matrix towards chlorine gas was assessed in the gas phase. TiN, ZrN and ZrC are very reactive from 400°C whereas it is necessary to be over 900°C for SiC to be as fast. In molten chloride melts, the bubbling of chlorine gas is less efficient than in gas phase but it is possible to attack the matrices. Electrochemical methods were also used to dissolve the refractory materials, leading to promising results with TiN, ZrN and ZrC. The massive SiC samples used were not conductive enough to be studied and in this case specific SiC-coated carbon electrodes were used. The key point of these studies was to find a method to separate the matrix compounds from the fissile material in order to link the head to the core of the process (electrochemical separation or liquid–liquid reductive extraction in the case of a pyrochemical reprocessing).The structure of the fuels for the future Gen IV nuclear reactors will be totally different of those of PWR, especially for the GFR concept including a closed cycle (i.e. the fuel will be treated to separate all the actinides together from the fission products and to recycle them to fabricate new fuel assemblies) In order to build a reprocessing process scheme, the feasibility of the dissolution either of the fissile material or of the inert matrix must be assessed by hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical methods, and then a core of process must be developed to separate all the actinides from the fission products. In the present paper, which is dedicated to pyrochemistry, we present the results concerning the high temperature dissolution of some matrix candidates: silicon carbide (SiC), titanium nitride (TiN), and zirconium carbide (ZrC) and nitride (ZrN). This includes the study of the reactivity of the materials towards chlorine gas in gas phase and then chemical and electrochemical studies in molten chloride melts. The key point of these studies was to find a method to separate the matrix compounds from the fissile material in order to link the head of the process to a core of the process either by hydro- or pyrometallurgy, for example, the liquid–liquid reductive extraction in molten fluoride/liquid aluminum All the experiments were carried out in quartz cells, heated in a well furnace under argon or reactive (HCl, Cl Matrix powders were commercial and used without any further treatment (SiC, ZrC, ZrN and TiN from Goodfellow; 90% 45 Typically 400–800 The LiCl–KCl eutectic is prepared with pure LiCl (Aldrich 99.99%) and KCl (Aldrich 99.99%), in quartz crucible. The mixture of powders is first heated at 350 For an experiment, typically 400–800 The LiCl–KCl is prepared as described above. Similarly, pure KCl is dehydrated by bubbling pure HCl gas (N50, 99.999%, air liquid) for 1 Energies of the chlorination reactions were calculated with HSC Outokompu software for all the matrices. It showed that on a thermodynamical point of view, the chlorination of TiN, ZrN, ZrC and SiC, at 500 In the gas phase, TiN and ZrN and ZrC powders were easily attacked by chlorine gas from 400 As predicted, there was no residue with nitrides TiN and ZrN. Typically, during the first 30 With SiC and ZrC, the reaction is slower and at least solid carbon is recovered at the end of the experiment. With SiC, a temperature of 900 The chlorination of a ZrC powder is much easier and is possible even at 250 °C, but very slowly ( In molten chloride, the bubbling of chlorine is efficient for the four materials in powder form but less than in gas phase, mainly owing to the low solubility of chlorine in molten salts (LiCl–KCl at 500 Much more interesting is the electrochemical behaviour of the materials. First, an electrochemical study was performed both on TiN ( Then electro-dissolutions were carried out successfully, showing a fast dissolution/desegregation of the anodes, probably owing to a specific attack at the grain boundaries. A charge of 400 In order to perform an electrochemical study of SiC, the first tests were performed on massive anode plates (alpha SiC) but they were not conductive enough. We then use POCO rods coated with a SiC layer by CVD as anode. The very thin SiC layer (15 The same study was carried out on ZrC POCO electrode, with similar results ( Whatever the studied refractory matrix SiC, ZrC, TiN or ZrN, either a chemical or an electrochemical method was able to attack the material. The chemical attack with chlorine gas, directly on the solid seems to be the most efficient way to dissolve the material, at 500 Therefore, different scenarios can be developed to separate the fuel from the matrix in a head-end step of a reprocessing scheme: to volatilise the matrix and keep the fuel compounds as a solid (either oxide, carbide or chloride); to volatilise the fuel and keep the matrix as a solid; to dissolve the matrix in molten salt and not the fuel or dissolve the fuel and not the matrix and separate them by filtration; to dissolve both the matrix and the fuel and then find a chemical way to separate them. Among the studied matrices, SiC is the most resistant one towards chemical attacks, with temperatures over 900 With respect to a pyrochemical process, progress has been made at numerous levels, giving useful information to enable coherent scenarios to be proposed. In the future, the work will be focussed on the transition steps, allowing the coupling of each process part. The authors wish to express their gratitude to A. Lallemand (CEA/SAC/DRT/DTEN/S3ME/LTMEX) also to M. Perez (CEA/GRE/DRT/DTEN/S3ME/LMIC) for the providing ZrN and SiC and ZrC POCO anodes. They also express their gratitude to Dr Michael Hudson who deeply improved the quality of this paper.