Estimation of gas holdup from electrical conductivity measurements has been used in lab and industrial installations. The approach is based on the application of Maxwell’s model, which relates the concentration of a dispersed phase in a continuous medium to measurements of the electrical conductivity of the dispersed phase, continuous medium and the resulting mixture (dispersion). When applied to inferring the collection zone gas holdup in a three phase system and to facilitate real-time on-line measurement, the slurry is assumed to behave as the continuous medium and gas bubbles as a non-conducting dispersed phase. This article derives an equation for estimating gas holdup in a three phase system, eliminating the assumption that the slurry behaves as a continuous medium but rather as a dispersion of non-conducting solid particles in water. In this formulation only water behaves as the continuous medium in the sense of Maxwell, and gas holdup in a three phase system is then calculated from the application of the Maxwell model twice: (1) to determine solid content in a two-phase system, and (2) to determine solid plus gas holdup in a three phase system. To validate the new equation and quantify the errors incurred by assuming slurry is the continuous phase a laboratory flotation cell was instrumented to continuously measure the conductivity of two and three phase dispersions with known solids contents. As the amount of gas in a lab flotation machine is difficult to measure directly or by another indirect technique such as using pressure signals, 2.5mm dielectric plastic spheres having a density of ca. 1.3g/cm3 were used instead of air bubbles for validation. Experimental results demonstrated that the continuous medium assumption underestimates gas holdup and that the resulting bias error increases linearly with the solid content and decreases with the magnitude of gas holdup.Optimizing the metallurgical performance of the flotation process is challenging and demands, among others, reliable sensors to provide real-time information about the current state of the process. The collection (or pulp) zone gas holdup, the volumetric fraction of gas dispersed as bubbles in the slurry, is a potential variable to be incorporated in a control and optimization system as it carries important information about the process state. Indeed, gas holdup has been correlated to the bubble surface area flux, a variable directly related to the collection zone performance ( Gas hold up sensor based on conductivity measurements developed at McGill University has been widely used at the lab and industrial scale mainly for diagnostic purposes ( The article is organized as follows: next section introduces the Maxwell model and derives an equation to calculate gas holdup in a three phase system considering liquid as the only (and true) continuous phase present. Then the experimental set-up is described. After that, experimental results are presented followed by a discussion section. Finally, the main conclusions are provided.  Although Maxwell assumed that the spheres were separated by distances large enough not to disturb the flow of electric current, a condition limiting the approach to low volume fractions of dispersed phase, later studies showed that the Maxwell equation works over a wide range, up to values of 60% for solid spheres ( The total solid-gas holdup is the sum of the volumetric fractions of solid (particles) and gas (bubbles) in the three-phase suspension: The volumetric fraction of solids in an aerated slurry ( In previous work the slurry was assumed to behave as a continuous homogeneous medium resulting in the following equation for gas holdup: Compared to Eq. The relative error ( The last term in parenthesis in Eq. The setup to evaluate the new Eq. To calibrate the conductivity cell, a two-point calibration procedure was followed using Metler Toledo M300 conductivity meter. To that end, the cell was filled with distilled water up to a fixed level and its electrical conductivity was modified by adding NaCl salt to achieve 1.11 Solid holdup prediction using Maxwell (Eq. The performance of Maxwelĺs equation to predict gas holdup in a lab mechanical cell is not as easy to assess as it is for estimation of solids holdup. The difficulty arises because in a small flotation cell the amount of gas inside the vessel is difficult to measure independently, for example, directly by sampling or indirectly by using pressure signals as is commonly done in lab columns. To overcome, 2.5 In order to assess the impact of assuming the slurry as a continuous phase, plastic spheres holdup was calculated from Eqs. Assuming slurry is a continuous phase for determination of gas holdup using the McGill gas holdup sensor does incur a fundamental bias. It is shown here that the measurement can be modified to account for the bias. In practical terms, however, the bias incurred is small, typically less than 6–7%, and the McGill gas holdup sensor provides an estimation of gas holdup useful for most engineering applications, and extending to include the conductivity of liquid is not required unless high precision is demanded. A way to compensate without including conductivity of liquid is to include a factor as follows: The impact of assuming the slurry as a continuous phase in the calculation of gas holdup in a three phase system by applying Maxwell equation is assessed in a lab flotation cell equipped with a novel electrode array. A new equation to calculate the gas holdup in a three phase system is proposed considering the liquid as the only continuous phase. Experimental results show that the error in gas holdup estimation when assuming the slurry as a continuous phase increases linearly with solid concentration and decreases as the magnitude of the gas holdup increases. For many practical purposes, the error is small enough, usually less than 7%, such that the uncorrected gas holdup estimation should suffice. A correction factor is introduced which reduces the error. The authors acknowledge the financial support from To obtain Eq.