This chapter analyses how mode usage varies in the surrounding of bikesharing stations in the Montreal Area. Mobility interaction analysis zones are defined and used to construct vectors describing the daily patterns of usage of each mode as well as its intensity level. The analysis relies on the processing of streams of passive data from 6 modes of transportation (bikesharing, carsharing (1 station-based system and 2 free-floating services), transit (subway and bus) and taxi) to develop typical daily patterns of usage and visualize variability of usage from the perspective of time (one year), space (492 mobility interaction analysis zones in the surrounding of bikesharing stations) and transportation mode. Clustering methods are used to identify typical days of usage for all modes. Illustration of the insights gain by the developed typology is illustrated using various visualization views.Introduction Research objectives Structure of the chapter Background overview General methodology Case study Main steps of the methodology Description of the datasets Mobility interaction analysis zones Clustering approach and information vectors Temporal distribution Intensity level indicator Results Descriptive statistics Clustering results Insights from the cumulative clustering A-view B-view C-view Conclusion Acknowledgments References Authors would like to acknowledge the partners who provided access to data for research purpose (Societe de transport de Montreal, Taxi Diamond, Communauto, Bixi), the partners of the Mobilite research Chair for their continuous support and insight (STM, ARTM, City of Montreal, Exo, MTQ) as well as the Canada Research Chair program for financing this research through the Canada research Chair on Personal Mobility. In the last decade, we have seen an important diversification of travel options such as bikesharing, station-based carsharing, free-floating carsharing, on-demand transit, e-taxi, options that are being added to the more typical modes such as car, transit, taxi, cycling and walking. This diversification is bringing new challenges among the transportation planners since travel This paper is a step forward in the conduct of a 5-years program on the analysis and modeling of the interactions between modes in an urban setting. This program aims to develop an integrated view of travel demand at a metropolitan scale and provide the tools to assess the impacts of various scenarios and strategies. This chapter focuses on the examination of how mode usage varies in the surrounding of bikesharing stations in the Montreal Area. It also has the methodological objectives of exploring ways to process sets of longitudinal data since no single data set reflects the usage of all mobility options, as well as to assess the impact of parameters such as surrounding definition (scale and metric) and temporal distribution pattern description as input to clustering methods. This chapter is organized as follows: first, it proposes key elements from the literature, focusing on research looking at various modes simultaneously as well as the use of passive to expose typical patterns. Hence, both analytical and methodological key components are reflected in the review. The various datasets used in the analysis are then described, along with the description of the data processing methods used to make sense of the vectors of indicators developed to reflect daily patterns of usage and intensity level of usage. Many contributions can be found in the literature on the modeling of the usage of specific transportation modes. For instance, However, there are still very few researches looking simultaneously at the use of various modes and at their interactions i.e. how the use of one mode may impact the use of another mode. Taxi trips versus subway. They use binomial regression models to explore relationship between ridership of both modes and conclude there is a significant positive correlation between the two. After providing some basic elements of context, this section presents the main steps of the methodology developed as well as the various datasets used to feed the analysis. Afterword, is exposed the MIAZ concept which is proposed to represent the area surrounding the bikesharing stations among which are examined interactions between modes. Hence, the two information vectors developed to construct typical days of usage are described. The clustering approach used to obtain groups of days with similar vectors is then discussed. The study focuses on the Montreal case, namely the central part of the Island where bikesharing station (bixi system) are implemented. The bixi system was implemented in 2009 and has been in operation from April–November every year since then. It is good to know that the network of stations is fully The main steps of the methodology are the followings. The first step of the methodology is data preparation. With the amount and diversity of data involved in this research, data preparation is a large chunk of the work. Various stages are required to make the data usable for the analysis: passive stream processing, validation, standard formatting, including the specification of the usage indicator for each mode. The second step is the estimation of usage and temporal distribution indicators for each day of the 2016 In this study, six mobility options are examined simultaneously over one year (2016). To assist the exploration of interactions between modes, we propose the concept of MIAZ: mobility interaction analysis zone. These zones are developed around the 492 bikesharing stations of the 2016 network (in Montreal, the bikesharing stations can change location every year) and used to filter mode usage. The limits of these MIAZ can be set using various metrics (straight line or network distances for instance) and scale (400 or 800 To support the analysis of the interaction between modes, data mining techniques are used to create groups of days with similar temporal patterns and intensity levels, notwithstanding the modes. This means that each vector describes a MIAZ-mode-day. Two types of vectors are experimented, one putting more emphasis on the temporal patterns and the other one putting more emphasis on the intensity of use. Both vectors summarize the use of each mode over a 24-h period with 25 information data fields (24 for temporal distribution and one for intensity). A two-steps clustering approach is used to identify clusters with similar elements. First, a k-means algorithm is used with n to k clusters to help identify a relevant number of clusters using the within-sum of squares results from each number of clusters. Within sum of squares is plotted against number of clusters and the elbow method is used to identify relevant numbers of clusters. Then, a hierarchical classification with centers from 30 clusters from a k-means algorithm is applied and the resulting dendrogram is viewed also to assess a relevant number of clusters. Both methods are complementary to identify the number of clusters which will be both relevant and manageable for the analysis. Two ways of representing the temporal distribution of uses over a 24-h period are tested. They both rely on 24 data fields to represent how usage is distributed over each day and one field to represent daily intensity (X24 in the following table). The first approach includes the proportion of daily uses related to each hour of the day in each of these fields while the second approach uses the cumulative proportion of daily uses and provides the state of cumulative value at each of the 24 Examples of vectors using these two methods are show in To allow to use the same clustering process for all modes simultaneously, it is necessary to normalize the intensity levels since all modes do not operate at the same scale (1.3 million daily trips in the subway network vs. less than 1500 per day for free-floating carsharing for instance). The equation used to normalize the usage and estimate an intensity indicator is: First, some descriptive statistics on the content of MIAZ are exposed. This first thing to notice is that, throughout the year, the activity of the various modes within the MIAZ changes and that not all modes are in use every day in every MIAZ. The clustering results are presented for both vectors using the 400-m network based MIAZ. Seven clusters are selected in both cases. C C C C C C C  C C C C C C C Further analysis of the results from the cumulative clustering is conducted. Various types of analysis can be conducted using results from the clustering. The analysis cube below illustrates the various views from which visualizations can be constructed to gain insights into what the data can reveal. 3 This first view focus on the examination of the variability of daily usage of each mode in each MIAZ throughout the year and allows to compare if the patterns are similar between modes and MIAZ. The sequence of cumulative The second view focuses on the variability of mode usage among MIAZ for each day. A study of the correlation between intensity levels observed on a particular day (May 27th in the presented case) is conducted to assess if some modes have the same high-intensity days or the reverse (see The last view focuses on the analysis of the variability of mode use throughout the day for each MIAZ. We illustrate one possible analysis using the busiest MIAZ and examine the evolution of intensity level for non-business and business days when accounting for temperature (based on four classes: (1) less than 0 This paper presented an attempt to analyze the variability of use of six mobility options while accounting for the spatial component of this usage. For this purpose, we proposed the concept of MIAZs (mobility interaction analysis zones) defined as zones surrounding one key mobility point, in our case the bikesharing stations. These zones are used to observe how use of six transportation modes change over space and time (one-year span). Using two types of vector describing the temporal distribution of usage of each mode over each day, combined with a normalized indicator of usage (intensity), clustering of days combining all modes was conducted to output typical days of usage. The resulting clusters can be used to analyze the variability of daily patterns between modes (6 options), space (between MIAZ) and time (over one year). There is still a lot to do to experiment ways to make sense of the available passive streams of data related to modes with different scales, data structure, and usage patterns. While examining one mode at a time may lead to interesting indicators of variability, as seen in the literature, the complexity highly increases when multiple modes are combined into a spatial-temporal analysis. Modeling methods will eventually provide relevant results but there are various data exploration steps required a priori to correctly formulate the models and make sure we can make sense of the results. Main findings, current limits and perspectives can be identified as follows: It is clear that the most important challenge faced in this research is data processing, validation and transformation. Since each mobility option is observed using a different data stream, with different structure, spatial-temporal resolution and scale, particular processes are required for each. Hence, the usage of each mode must also be translated into a useable and comparable indicator. Representing usage from boardings (subway) is not equivalent to representing beginning of car reservation for station-based carsharing. Metrics are not compatible. Ways to better represent the use of each mode must be explored, namely by including the duration of the usage. A normalized intensity of use indicator was proposed but other formulations should be tested to assess the sensitivity of the results with respect to such definition. While various MIAZ definitions were proposed (based on distance – 400–800 Exploration of the results from the clustering was illustrated. Regression trees are now used to identify which exogenous variables can explain the type of days of each mode (why is today a C2 for bikesharing for instance). This will be further examined along the exploration of methods to explain combination of days including all modes.