Previous studies have shown that WC–Co material can plastically deform during indentation test, and microcracking is one of the dominant mechanisms for the plastic deformation. Microcracks follow several paths of microstructure: transgranular cracks within WC grains, intergranular cracks along grain boundary and cracks at WC/Co interface. In this study, six commercial grades of WC–Co material were tested using the Hertzian indentation technique at the same indentation load with the same size of an indenter. The microcrack number density of each grade was measured and its correlation with microstructural parameters was analyzed. Materials with high cobalt content, large grain size, large mean free path and low contiguity form more microcracks in the course of plastic deformation. The microcrack number density is also correlated with mechanical properties. High microcrack number density corresponds to low hardness and high toughness. The mechanism of how the microcracking affects the fracture toughness is also discussed.Cemented tungsten carbide, a class of two-phase composite with hard brittle WC embedded into ductile Co binder, is generally considered as brittle material because it often ends its service life with catastrophic failures. It is also widely recognized that WC–Co materials do have some degree of plasticity. Typically, there are two schools of thought pertaining to the plastic deformation of WC–Co materials Published studies available in the literature have shown that plastic deformation of WC–Co material is actually possible in compressive tests. Using compressive tests, the elastic and plastic deformation were studied in a number of published works More recently, using the Hertzian indentation technique, the present authors studied the evolution of plastic deformation of WC–Co composite During the past decades, a number of empirical or semiempirical relationships between microstructural parameters and mechanical properties of WC–Co materials have been proposed Six commercial WC–Co grades were selected for this study. These selected materials have different cobalt contents and different grain sizes, so that the microstructure, especially the mean free path and contiguity, of the materials varies, making it possible to capture the variations of deformation and fracture behavior as functions of the microstructure. The samples were fabricated using a sinter-HIP furnace. Carbon contents were controlled carefully during the entire fabrication process. After being sintered, the specimens were ground and polished with diamond suspension to 1 Vickers hardness tests were conducted using a Vickers hardness tester (Leco, LV 700AT). The indentation load for hardness testing was 30 To study the dependence of the density of microcracks on the microstructure, a Hertzian indentation test using “split-bond” technique Hertzian elastic theory In this study, microcrack number density is defined as the number of microcracks per WC grain, Therefore, the In order to acquire the accurate number of It should be noted that the density of microcracks can be defined in a number of different ways, e.g. the number of cracks in a unit area. The definition of the number of cracks per grain is selected to normalize the effect of the total number of grains because the cracks are mostly associated with the cobalt to WC grain interfaces. The finer the grain size, the more total number of grains there will be. The measured microstructural parameters, such as WC grain size, WC phase contiguity and binder phase mean free path, and mechanical properties including hardness ( As shown in After indentation tests, microcrack number density,  MFP is a measure of the thickness of the cobalt layer which depends on both the cobalt content and WC particle size. It is defined by the arithmetic mean of the distance from one carbide/binder interface to the others, measured within the binder phase. In Lee and Gurland Combining Eqs. The contiguity ( From the point of view of the fracture mechanics of WC–Co materials, fracture toughness is sensitive to MFP. For a WC–Co material with a large MFP, the strain energy is consumed by the plastic deformation of binder phase during crack propagation, yielding higher fracture toughness numbers. From this study, we learned that the plastic deformation of the binder phase is only one of the mechanisms of plastic deformation of WC–Co material. Another very important mechanism is the formation of microcracks. The fracture process involves not only the microstructural change of binder phase but also the microcracking at binder-to-WC interfaces. As discussed later in this article, microcracking plays an important role in toughening the material. The contiguity ( From the above results, a trend can be drawn that a WC–Co material with higher amount of binder phase, larger average WC grain size, larger mean free path and lower contiguity of WC phase will form more microcracks during the plastic deformation process.   In quasi-brittle solids, microcracking has a contradictory effect on the toughness of material: toughness degradation and crack shielding It is generally accepted that the fracture phenomena in quasi-brittle materials are characterized by the existence of a fracture process zone (FPZ) in which microcracking and bridging are the two main behaviors During the past decades, numerous analytical models Although a solution to the accurate model which includes the microcracking in fracture process zone of WC–Co material is beyond the scope of this article, further in depth research is ongoing in the corresponding author’s laboratory to model the fracture toughness of WC–Co materials incorporating the effect of microcracks. Using the Hertzian indentation method, the microcrack number densities of six WC–Co materials were measured. The correlations of microcrack number density versus microstructure and mechanical properties have been analyzed. The results show that with the higher cobalt content, larger average WC grain size, larger mean free path and lower contiguity of the WC phase, WC–Co materials are more likely to form microcracks during plastic deformation. Higher microcrack number density corresponds to material with lower hardness and higher fracture toughness. Microcracking toughens the WC–Co material through mechanism of crack shielding by softening the material in the fracture process zone.