To use the advantages of transarticular screw fixation while minimizing iatrogenic involved joint damage and screw irritation, it is important to determine the screw size. The aim of this study was to analyze the outcomes of percutaneous reduction and 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation for low-energy Lisfranc injuries and determine whether the procedure is a safe alternative to traditional screw fixation using a larger screw size. A review was performed for all patients who underwent percutaneous reduction and 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation for low-energy Lisfranc injuries at a single institution over a 6-year period. Thirty-one patients were enrolled in this study. Patients were assessed clinically and radiographically for demographics, foot function index (FFI), numerical rating scale (NRS) for pain, patient satisfaction, and complication rates. Factors affecting screw breakage and its clinical relevance were also analyzed. The FFI and NRS for pain were 17.2 ± 14.7 (range 0.8 to 57.8) and 3.1 ± 2.3 (range 0 to 8) points, respectively, at the 12-month follow-up visit. One patient (3.2%) underwent arthrodesis for the development of posttraumatic arthritis; all other patients recovered without sequelae. Screw breakage was identified in 7 patients (22.6%). There was no significant difference between patients with and without screw breakage in terms of FFI, NRS for pain, patient satisfaction, or complication rate. Body mass index (BMI) was significantly higher in patients with screw breakage than in those without screw breakage. Receiver operator characteristics curve analysis demonstrated a strong relationship between BMI and screw breakage (area under the curve = 90%, p < .001), and the potential BMI cutoff value was 27.8 kg/m2. After considering the incidence of screw breakage, percutaneous reduction and 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation can be a viable option for treating low-energy Lisfranc injuries in nonobese patients, especially those with BMI <27.8 kg/m2.Numerous factors (such as injury pattern, patient condition, fixative availability, and surgeon preference) influence the choice of treatment modality for Lisfranc injuries. Among these factors, injury pattern is crucial, because Lisfranc injuries vary widely from high-energy trauma with severe fracture-dislocation of the midfoot to sprains that are easily missed on initial evaluation ( Open reduction methods for Lisfranc injuries can be invasive and result in wound complications, infection, and complex regional pain syndromes ( To increase the advantages of percutaneous reduction and screw fixation while minimizing the disadvantages, it is important to determine the appropriate screw size. The most widely used screw size for Lisfranc injuries is 3.5 or 4.0 mm, either the cannulated or cortical type ( The aim of this study was to review the authors’ experience with a minimally invasive percutaneous reduction and 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation of low-energy Lisfranc injuries and report the results of this technique. The authors hypothesized that 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation would show favorable clinical results and be comparable with other screw fixations for the treatment of low-energy Lisfranc injuries. For the purposes of this study, the authors reviewed prospectively collected data of consecutive patients who visited their institution for Lisfranc injuries from January 2010 to December 2015. The local Ethics Committee approved the study. Over this 6-year period, a total of 86 patients underwent surgical treatment for Lisfranc injuries. As an inclusion criterion, low-energy Lisfranc injuries were defined as those due to the following mechanisms: athletic activity, ground-level twisting, or fall from <4 feet, as previously described ( Diagnosis was made from clinical examination and weightbearing radiographs. Computed tomography evaluations were performed in all patients to evaluate the presence of a marginal fracture and the ability to bear weight. Indications for surgery were >2 mm of diastasis between the first and second metatarsal bases and >1 mm of subluxation of a metatarsal base from its corresponding tarsal bone ( An identical postoperative protocol was implemented for all patients. A short leg splint was applied until 2 weeks postoperatively, and then partial weightbearing with a crutch was allowed using a controlled ankle movement walker boot. From this time, active ankle joint range of motion exercises were initiated. Six weeks after surgery, gradual, full weightbearing was allowed. One year after surgery, all patients underwent screw removal, even if the screw had not broken. Postoperative radiograph evaluations and clinical consultations were performed after 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, and 12 months. If there were signs of complications, additional follow-up visits were scheduled. Foot function index (FFI) and numerical rating scale (NRS) for pain were collected at 3 and 12 months after surgery. The FFI is a self-administered index that was developed to measure the effect of foot problems on function in terms of pain and disability ( Postoperative complications were categorized as malreduction, malunion, nonunion, delayed union, implant irritation, and infection. Two authors (Y.H.P., J.H.A.) independently reviewed the foot radiographs to assess reduction status; if there was a disagreement in the judgment of malreduction or malunion, a decision was made by consensus between the 2 ( To evaluate current patient satisfaction with current activity, a comprehensive telephone assessment was performed by 1 author (Y.H.P.). Patient satisfaction was determined by asking patients to describe their level of physical or sports activities using 1 of the following terms: “very satisfied,” “somewhat satisfied,” “neutral,” “somewhat dissatisfied,” or “dissatisfied.” Patients were also asked whether they had additional treatment for the discomfort of their injured foot after the final follow-up. For statistical analysis, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to determine whether the collected variables followed a normal distribution. The Mann–Whitney The mean age of patients was 43.0 years (range 19 to 71), and the mean follow-up period was 18.9 months (range 13 to 41). There were 18 men and 13 women. In all patient cohorts, the FFI was 62.6 ± 14.7 points (range 14.0 to 81.3) at 3 months and 17.2 ± 14.6 points (range 0.8 to 57.8) at 12 months. The NRS was 5.2 ± 1.9 points (range 1 to 9) at 3 months and 3.1 ± 2.3 points (range 0 to 8) at 12 months. When patients were divided into 2 groups according to whether they had a screw breakage or not, there were no significant differences between the groups in terms of FFI and NRS for pain at the 3- and 12-month follow-up visits ( Of 31 low-energy Lisfranc injuries in the study cohort, 7 (23%) were associated with screw breakage. Comparison of the characteristics of patients with and without screw breakage showed that body mass index (BMI) was significantly associated with screw breakage. Other variables did not reach statistical significance ( The overall complication rate was 13%, and the development of each type of complication was not evident in intergroup differences ( A telephone assessment regarding patient satisfaction was performed with all participating patients. The mean follow-up period was 55 months (range 26 to 92). Regarding patient satisfaction about current activity levels, there was no significant difference between the groups with and without screw breakage ( To reduce iatrogenic damage to the involved joints while taking advantage of percutaneous screw fixation, the authors used 2.7-mm cortical screws for the treatment of low-energy Lisfranc injuries. Of the 31 consecutive patients in this study, 1 patient (3%) developed posttraumatic arthritis. All other patients recovered without sequelae. Considering the clinical outcome, patient satisfaction, and the occurrence of complications, the authors suggest that percutaneous reduction and 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation can be a viable treatment option for low-energy Lisfranc injuries in nonobese patients. The most obvious advantage of using the 2.7-mm cortical screw was that none of the patients complained about protrusion of the screw head. Soft tissue around the tarsal bone is thin, therefore a small prominence in artificial implants can easily protrude to the skin and cause irritation during walking while wearing shoes. In our clinical findings, the heads of conventional 3.5- or 4.0-mm screws were large, and therefore irritations were often observed due to the protrusion of the screw head. This shortcoming was overcome when headless compression screws were used ( Major concerns when using 2.7-mm cortical screws for low-energy Lisfranc injuries are the effect of screw breakage on the clinical outcome and whether the screw will provide sufficient fixation. Indeed, 7 of the 31 patients (23%) in this study showed screw breakage before the 12-month follow-up visit. However, this high incidence of screw breakage is not a problem just in this study, but a fundamental limitation of screw fixation. Even in a study using 3.5-mm screws (thicker than in this study), screw breakage was observed in 25% of patients ( Posttraumatic arthritis is another concern with Lisfranc injury. In this study, 1 patient (3%) failed to maintain anatomic reduction during the follow-up period and later developed traumatic arthritis. Regarding this issue, Kuo et al ( Although early screw removal was performed in screw breakage patients, all other patients also underwent screw removal after the 12-month follow-up visit according to the treatment protocol of the current study. The reason that screw removal was performed in all patients is that the stress concentration occurring at the screw site due to the activity of the patient over time would eventually lead to screw breakage ( During the surgical treatment of Lisfranc injuries, when the lateral ray is unstable or irreducible, fixation is needed ( The most interesting finding of this study is the relationship between BMI and screw breakage. The mean BMI in the screw breakage group was higher than in the nonbreakage group. In addition, ROC analysis showed a higher possibility of screw breakage with increasing BMI and indicated 27.8 kg/m This study has 2 limitations. First, the study did not involve comparative analysis with the other treatment modalities of percutaneous screw fixation using other screw sizes and open reduction with plate fixation. Therefore, the premise that the 2.7-mm cortical screw has advantages regarding iatrogenic damage and irritation over other implants is still unproven. In addition, although screw breakage, which is a major drawback of the use of 2.7-mm cortical screws, does not affect clinical outcome, the overall results must be compatible with other treatment modalities to be applicable. Second, the relatively small number of patients in this study can cause a type II error, which increases the likelihood of not finding a statistically significant difference between the groups when a true difference exists. In addition, even though the difference in BMI between 2 groups has sufficient power (effect size, 1.74; power, 0.97), the ROC analysis to find a cutoff value can be sensitive to the number of subjects. However, because of the low incidence of Lisfranc injuries, which is ∼0.1% to 0.4% of all fractures and dislocations ( In conclusion, although there is a need for a comparative study with other implants, 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation for low-energy Lisfranc injuries showed favorable results. Screw breakage occurred in 23% of patients and was significantly associated with an increase in BMI, whereas the effect on clinical outcome was not significant. However, for clinicians and patients worried about screw breakage, 2.7-mm cortical screw fixation for Lisfranc injuries may be used selectively in nonobese patients, especially those with BMI <27.8 kg/m We thank Sun Young Hwang, PhD, for help with the statistical analysis.