Bond standard procedures are often used in design of comminution circuits, especially in the case of ball mill grinding circuits. Although it is usually considered as an industry standard, its procedure was not fully defined by Fred Bond, and sometimes sensible variations in test results can be obtained due to some undefined steps in the method. This is the case of the calculation of characteristic size in product (P80), which must be calculated through interpolation using some PSD (particle size distribution) function and Bond's procedure did not establish the way to perform this calculation. The purpose of this technical note is to outline an evaluation of the adjustment quality of different distribution models in order to determine P80 in Bond's ball mill test.Bond standard procedure is often used in crushing and grinding studies. Bond testing is a standard part of ore characterization for comminution circuits design and evaluation of performance. Bond Work Index (BWI) is usually understood as an ore grindability parameter ( Although superseded theoretically by mass-size balance methods, Bond's method ( According to The size distribution of any material can be characterized by different methods. The two most common methods are the Gates-Gaudin-Schuhmann and the Rosin-Rammler (  However, some functional forms can be found to give a reasonable fit for experimental data ( It is well known that experimental data adjustment quality depends on the model characteristics. Bond's procedure ( In order to determine the quality of the distribution model adjustment, for thirteen different mineral samples, a standard Bond test ( Quality adjustment of product size experimental data was evaluated for selected distribution models, using coefficient R   The homogeneity analysis of the residual variances shows that there are not significant differences in the reproducibility of the adjusted models for each mineral. The same result is obtained by comparing the reproducibility of the adjusted models for a same mineral. Considering the average value of reproducibility error of the models for each mineral, the best adjustment was Rosin-Ramler's size distribution model. Its average value was 1.02%, three times less in average than Gaudin-Schumann's size distribution model. The average R With regards to the reproducibility of the distribution models, for both cut sizes the calculated value of Chi-square is less than its critical value. Thus, there are not significant reproducibility differences. However, the Rosin-Rammler model gets the lowest average value of standard error of measurement ( As it can be seen in First conclusion is that sensible differences (up to 6.2%) can be observed the case of the same test, only due to the use of different size distributions in the calculation of P Regardless of the cut size for the thirteen minerals studied in this work, the product's particle size composition of the last cycle in Bond's test keeps a linear trend. In order to determine the parameter P