Imaging of subclinical atherosclerosis, rather than reliance on clinical risk factors, constitutes a new paradigm in risk assessment. There is strong evidence that detection of subclinical atherosclerosis provides prognostic information about future cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk, and may provide a window of opportunity for earlier treatment to delay or prevent cardiovascular events Over the last decade, computed tomography (CT) has come to the forefront of clinical atherosclerosis imaging due to its superior sensitivity for identifying and quantifying calcified plaque. Calcification occurs during the maturation of early atherosclerotic plaques via an active mineralization process highlighted by the deposition of hydroxyapatite crystals For example, calcification of the aorta has been observed to occur in its various segments at different rates, often with differential associations with CVD events and mortality In this issue of Indeed, other studies have similarly suggested that the abdominal aorta exhibits greater prevalence of atherosclerosis than the thoracic aorta Since CAC is perhaps the most potent available predictor of CVD events in asymptomatic patients There is increasing interest in the absence of CAC (CAC Though the prediction of hard CVD events has primacy, detection of extra-coronary atherosclerosis may identify subgroups that develop CAC sooner or experience more rapid CAC progression. Kuller et al. and Rivera et al. demonstrated that aortic calcium (TAC Where is this field headed? A promising endpoint would be the construction of a composite CT-calcification score comprised of a weighted combination measures, including extra-coronary calcification, to improve CVD prediction over CAC alone. To date this has not been possible, although attempts to combine measures of subclinical CVD have been made for other purposes. In the Rotterdam Study population, van der Meer et al. created a composite atherosclerosis score combining ultrasound-determined carotid plaque, CIMT, and AAC by radiograph and ankle–arm index, and demonstrated predictive value for myocardial infarction As with any screening test, it will be important to conduct cost-benefit analyses. As discussed by Waugh et al., cost-effective tests must sufficiently improve current screening strategies, namely global risk factor scoring algorithms, to alter treatment decisions and improve outcomes at an acceptable cost per quality-adjusted life year Although this study by Wong et al. expands our understanding of the relationship of early atherosclerosis in different vascular beds, research in this area is in its infancy and longer follow-up is required. However, there is clearly great promise. In this regard, we applaud the efforts of Wong et al. for strengthening the foundation for future research on the utility of multi-modality imaging for “detecting” multi-site atherosclerosis.