Along with chemicals deliberately added in the process, the process water quality is affected by species dissolved from the minerals and the air. In the case of the separation of calcite and apatite by flotation, Ca2+, CO3
                     2− and HCO3
                     − are such species, and the variations of their aqueous concentrations can be expected to influence the process performance. In this study, both the long-term and short-term variations of pH, as well as the above-mentioned concentrations in two process water streams at the Siilinjärvi apatite concentrating plant, were monitored on-line. Obvious seasonal and diurnal variations in these concentrations were observed in the recirculated water reclaimed from the tailings ponds. Such variations are probably due to changes in the biological activity in the ponds. Further, the commercial process titrator OMT 20 DX delivered by Murtac GmbH, and sampling using laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters delivered by Outokumpu Mintec, proved to be a reliable concept in the demanding conditions of a concentrating plant.Both in concentrating plant practice and in several research projects carried out at VTT Processes, it has been noted that the quality of the process waters may have a considerable effect on the flotation performance. Along with chemicals deliberately added in the process, the water quality is affected by species dissolved from the minerals and the air. However, the concentrations of dissolved species are usually not continuously monitored at most concentrating plants. A survey of the analytical techniques used at Finnish concentrating plants ( The aqueous species originating from the minerals are metals and lattice anions (e.g. PO In this study, both the long-term and short-term variations of dissolved Ca, CO Kemira Phosphates operates Finland’s largest mine at Siilinjärvi (400 km northeast of Helsinki) annually producing 795 After crushing, homogenization, grinding (25–35% finer than 70 μm), and conditioning, apatite is selectively floated in a circuit consisting of roughing, scavenging, and three cleaning stages. Scavenger flotation tails are pumped to cyclones, the cyclone overflow is taken to a 50 m-dia tailings thickener, while the underflow is split into three streams for calcite, mica, and biotite production. The tailings thickener underflow is pumped to the tailings pump sump, while the relative clear overflow is recirculated as the water needed in the grinding and flotation stages. In this study, dissolved Ca, CO Flotation tailings, corresponding to 70–90% of the feed and containing 40–50% solids, are pumped 7 km to the tailings area consisting of three ponds called Musti, Raasio, and Jaakonlampi. The clarified water reclaimed from the tailings ponds, along with the drainage water from the open pit, is recirculated to the concentrating plant corresponding to one third of the total water needed in the process. This water fraction was continuously analyzed in this study for pH and dissolved Ca, CO A commercial process titrator, OMT 20 DX delivered by Murtac GmbH of Austria, was employed in the study. The instrument was configured to analyze samples once an hour from two streams as illustrated in CERAMEC filters are sintered alumina membranes with uniform micropores to create a capillary action, which allows no air or solids to pass through the filter. The only process performed is the separation of liquid and solids. Such filters are widely used on an industrial scale in the minerals and chemical industries to dewater concentrates and other slurries. In this study, laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters (filtering area 2×1.3 dm The sampling lines and titration vessel were flushed by pumping sample through them into a drain prior to taking a 54 ml sample (the volume was adjusted using a siphon). After an adjustable delay time (≈30 s), the instrument measured the initial pH followed by a standard acidimetric titration with HCl to pH values 8.3 and 4.5 to determine the CO On-line analyses of the tailings thickener overflow were successfully used to monitor a full-scale process study although, in general, the interpretation of the information obtained is somewhat difficult and beyond the scope of this study. This campaign lasted for two months (May and June 2001) and confirmed the reliability of the OMT 20 DX titrator and laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters in such an application. Although the solid concentration in our case was at most about 1%, it is evident that laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters can be used to produce clear samples for analysis from much denser suspensions. However, in routine use the tedious periodic semi-manual filter cleaning procedure should be replaced by an automatic on-line cleaning procedure. Although no systematic and continuous long-term monitoring of the quality of the recirculated water reclaimed from the tailings ponds has earlier been performed at the Siilinjärvi concentrating plant, a few conclusions based on periodic sampling and laboratory analyses have been drawn. In winter, the pH is below 9, while in summer even values higher than 10 are observed. The total carbonate concentration in winter is about 380 mg/l going down to values of about 260 mg/l in summer. The temperature varies between 1 and 20 °C as can be expected in Finland. One of the goals of the present study was to confirm such seasonal variations in a systematic way and, especially, to monitor the water quality during the periods of greatest changes in spring and autumn. The quality of the recirculated water reclaimed from the tailings ponds was continuously monitored for six months in 2001, from ice drift at the end of April to mid November, but background information presented in In the beginning of the period of continuous monitoring at the end of April, pH was below 9, that is, still at the winter level, but an increasing trend is obvious. As can be seen from Reliable total carbonate data is available from the beginning of May to mid November and is presented in A decreasing trend from 14 to 9 mg/l in the total dissolved calcium concentration is observed in May as illustrated in The free carbonate concentration follows the pH and shows the most obvious seasonal variation as demonstrated in In addition to the long-term seasonal changes, apparent diurnal variation in the total carbonate and CO The commercial process titrator OMT 20 DX and sampling employing laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters proved to be a reliable concept in the demanding conditions of a concentrating plant. The lifetime of the pH electrodes in these alkaline conditions was found to be about one month, while the Ca-selective electrode lasted for about three months. No problems were observed with the acidimetric titrations to fixed pH values for carbonate determinations. Due to the ageing of the Ca-selective electrode, its response and, consequently, the shape of the titration curve changed as time passed. This occasionally caused some uncertainty in the automatically determined inflection points of the EGTA titrations. However, as all the titration points are stored on the hard disk of the instrument’s computer, the Gran linearization method ( The observed diurnal and seasonal variations in pH and carbonate concentrations are probably due to changes in the biological activity in the tailings ponds, as suggested by In concentrating plant practice, variations in ore quality are carefully monitored for process control purposes and the overflow of the water circulating system must be monitored due to governmental regulations. In contrast to this, the variations in incoming water quality are frequently overlooked. Usually pH and eventually temperature are monitored and controlled, but little or no attention is paid to such components as total carbonate. However, carbonates are present in all kinds of waters open to the atmosphere and for seasonal reasons their concentrations may vary within a wide range as found in the present study. The influence of such variations on the process behavior is a complicated question and beyond the scope of this study. However, these natural variations should be taken into consideration when the process behavior shows seasonal variations. In this study, the seasonal variation of the tailings ponds water quality was confirmed in a systematic way. In April, the increasing amount of sunlight penetrating the ponds initiates the primary production causing rapid changes in pH and carbonate concentrations during the late spring. For a few weeks around midsummer the situation is quite stable, until a slow change in the opposite direction takes place in August and September. Along with the long-term variations, surprisingly obvious diurnal concentration variations were observed. Such diurnal variations are scarcely observable by analyses of periodic samples, which usually are not taken more frequently than once a shift. Further, the commercial process titrator OMT 20 DX, and sampling employing laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters, proved to be a reliable concept in the demanding conditions of a concentrating plant. This work was carried out under the National Technology Programme On-line Measurements in the Process Industry. The authors wish to thank the National Technology Agency (TEKES), The Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT), and the mining companies, Inmet Mining Pyhäsalmi Mine Oy, Kemira Phosphates Oy, and Omya Oy, for financial support and permission to publish the results.