We review commonly observed failure mechanisms associated with footwall slopes, and examine the basic concepts underlying the limit equilibrium approach assessing footwall slope stability. The failure mechanisms described are those, where failure follows pre-existing joints or occurs in intact rock, namely, fully and partially joint-controlled bilinear and ploughing slab failures. Numerical models implemented using UDEC illustrate the code’s potential for analysing these failure mechanisms. Physical models representing the studied instability mechanisms were studied in a tilt-test set-up in the laboratory, with the empirical results comparing fairly well with the theoretical approaches.Surface mining of coal often involves the formation of extensive footwall slopes parallel to strata dips ( It has also been found that some of these mechanisms are not only prone to occur in surface coal mining operations, but are also encountered in mines and slopes, where instability is structurally controlled, typically by a joint set, fault or weak zone parallel or sub-parallel to the slope. Examples are the complex failures that occurred at Brenda Mines associated with metal mining Stead and Eberhardt For the study of particular cases, including bilinear slab failure, we propose an LE method that assumes either that there is friction In the study of footwall slopes, the use of a numerical distinct element method (DEM) like the UDEC code Within this general framework, we briefly review the failure mechanisms associated with footwall slope failure. We then describe an LE method and numerical approach obtaining High slopes with persistent discontinuities parallel to the face are prone to fail according to different mechanisms (as reviewed by The most commonly encountered fully controlled instability mechanisms (depicted in Bilinear slab failure, which occurs when there is sliding along a basal plane in combination with sliding along a secondary shallow dipping joint undercut by the slope face ( Ploughing slab failure, which takes place when sliding along a primary discontinuity combines with sliding along a joint striking sub-parallel to the slope face, causing the toe block to be lifted and eventually rotated out of the slope ( Three-hinge buckling, which requires the presence of at least three joints normal to bedding in the lower part of the slope. Failure is initiated when enough water pressure exists in the basal plane to induce rotation or shearing along cross-joints, leading to the extrusion of blocks ( Other cinematically possible failure modes undoubtedly exist, but they have not been observed or reported in the literature. Note also that, given the complex geometrical nature of strata (with rolls, folding and so on), complex mechanisms could also be included in one of the above groups. The three basic partially controlled instability mechanisms ( Bilinear slab failure, with shearing and/or crushing similar to that occurring along discontinuities, but with the rock mass failure penetrating through the slope toe. The authors have observed this mechanism in road slopes excavated in flysch rock in northern Spain ( Ploughing slab failure, with shearing of the rock mass in the slope face and shearing or tensile separation in the slope toe. Coulthard et al. Euler buckling of the first rock bed (excluded from our analysis), as described by Cavers These failure geometries are much more likely than the fully joint-controlled failures. Due to the higher strength of the rock mass compared to the rock joints, however, they tend to be less common and more difficult to identify; nonetheless, they should not be ruled out The LE method, which is based on the force and momentum equilibrium or on the presence of different sliding or toppling blocks in a rock mass, requires some more or less realistic assumptions to be made and the reliability of the results largely depend on how realistic these assumptions are. If, as in the case of fully joint-controlled mechanisms, failure is due to block movements fully limited by geological discontinuities, then geometry and joint shear strength are key parameters in the analysis. Provided the assumptions are true, the LE method is accurate enough to obtain reliable results. The LE calculations presented below, based on traditional approaches such as those proposed by Janbu The stability analysis was performed by dividing the sliding elements into an active block or slab (1) and a passive block (2) in the slope toe ( First calculated was the normal external force needed to ensure the stability ( If we assume that friction acts on the interface and that the upper block is in an LE, then In this case, The reliability of these assumptions varies according to the case, so neither should be considered Although the method of analysis was similar to that of the bilinear slab failure ( First of all, the only cinematically available possibility for the resisting block to move requires the interface between blocks to be in an LE. Consequently, an assumption of friction is a highly realistic assumption. Secondly, the passive block could feasibly move out of the slope either by sliding through the upper and lower limiting discontinuities or by rotating freely out of the slope toe. Consequently, different Assuming friction acting on the interface, stability was calculated as For the sliding mode, the For the toppling mode, certain geometric values, defined in Partially joint-controlled failure mechanisms can also be analysed using the LE method. In particular, we propose a geometric model in which, varying three input geometric parameters, both bilinear and ploughing slab failure modes can be simulated. The variable input parameters were In both cases, the joints forming the model should appear by shearing or tensioning in the rock mass. Since the sliding surfaces are not known The two limiting joints should have the strength parameters of the intact rock mass, including friction The Note that cohesion in any plane, water pressures and anchor forces can be included in all the For different footwall slope failure mechanisms, the LE method can be used to estimate A numerical model simulates reality and a modelled slope is either stable or fails. Therefore, in order to calculate the For the rigid models, joint normal and shear stiffness are fixed at 10 UDEC models are first built in the shape of a rectangle. The boundary conditions are fixed, and the code is run to achieve an initial elastic equilibrium. The slope is then excavated and the model is run again to obtain a new stable equilibrium or failure—which is quite visual, since the blocks have moved. The evolving displacements and velocities of significant points of the slope (the head or a block corner), together with unbalanced force, are monitored in the model; in the event of doubt, the histories of these parameters serve to ensure whether or not equilibrium has been achieved. If equilibrium has not been achieved, further steps are taken until a clear indication of equilibrium or failure is observed. To deepen our understanding of these mechanisms and to contrast techniques and highlight their advantages and drawbacks, we describe six theoretical examples analysed using an LE method and a numerical method (UDEC) combined with the SSR technique (henceforth, UDEC-SSR). The first five examples concern fully joint-controlled mechanisms, for which only rigid blocks are needed, whereas the sixth example refers to a partially joint-controlled mechanism. Note that we used a specific weight value of The analysis was conducted for a 50-m slope dipping 50° ( It can be confirmed that not only was there normal force in the interface in the frictionless model, but also shear force smaller than that needed to produce the movement of blocks along this interface in the friction model. It seems, thus, that when shear force appears, it is smaller than that needed for an LE. Consequently, the In order to analyse whether or not the position of the joint normal to bedding played a significant role in stability, another model was implemented. The only difference with the initial model, however, was that the joint normal to bedding and separating the two blocks moved 5 We analysed a 25-m slope dipping 50° ( The results are shown in We analysed a 25-m slope dipping 60° ( The results are shown in The differences in These examples, representative of the failure mechanisms in ploughing slab failure, illustrate sliding and toppling of the resisting block. In both, the LE method  For the case of sliding ( The analysis was conducted for a 40-m slope dipping 40° ( Using the LE method, in this case, was not so simple, as Eqs. The UDEC model, which included deformable blocks, found a value for In the light of what is referred to as the frictional plasticity theory, Fischer and Eberhardt As has been observed regarding the examples of footwall slopes analysed using the LE and UDEC-SSR approaches, there are some unresolved issues regarding, for instance, the use of a friction or frictionless approach for bilinear slab failure or the influence of round corners in the UDEC approach and in practice. In order to throw some light on these issues and examine bilinear slab and ploughing slab failures in greater detail, we built simple physical models which, in a tilt-test set-up, enabled us to further analyse this type of footwall slope failure mechanism. Small parallelepiped-shaped granite slabs were cut for dimensions of around 50×50×12 Using the blocks and different configurations, the fully and partially joint-controlled bilinear and ploughing slab failures described above were simulated ( For the set-up aimed at studying bilinear slab failure, we used various combinations of the parameters depicted in The same procedure was followed for ploughing slab failure, where toppling was expected due to the high value of The final results are summarized in Physical models tend not to show scale effects if one considers perfectly plane contacts between blocks with frictional strength and exact geometries. Following Barton We described, and illustrated with examples, two approaches to calculating The LE method is a good option for obtaining The combination of UDEC and SSR is a very suitable approach to estimating The physical models demonstrated the footwall slope failure mechanisms and also served to assess the accuracy of the LE method and numerical approach. For the cases described in this article, the Future research contemplates the application of the proposed approaches to real slope instability problems taken from the literature and observed by the authors. The authors acknowledge the