Celestite concentrate (SrSO4) is one of the most important raw materials used for the industrial production of strontium compounds. In this study, the effects of stirring speed, particle size, CO3
                     2– ion concentration and temperature on the conversion reaction rate of SrSO4 to SrCO3 in solutions obtained by dissolving/hydrolyzing a mixture of equimolar amounts of NH4HCO3 and NH4COONH2(AC) were investigated. The solution obtained after total dissolution/hydrolysis of AC consisted of NH4
                     +, CO3
                     2–, HCO3
                     –, H2CO3* and NH3. The conversion reaction proceeds according to dissolution and precipitation mechanism. Sr2+ ions formed during the dissolution of SrSO4 precipitates with CO3
                     2– ions as SrCO3 pseudomorphically and as a result porous SrCO3 layer is produced in the form of clusters. The rate determining step is the ion exchange reaction at the interface between dense SrSO4 and porous SrCO3 layers. The kinetic parameters for the ion exchange reaction were determined by applying the Shrinking Core Model. While the conversion reaction rate was found to be zero order up to a certain CO3
                     2– ion concentration, above this CO3
                     2– ion concentration, it was −0.7th order. The apparent activation energies for the zero and −0.7th order reactions were calculated as 64.84 and 47.79kJmol−1, respectively. The amount of S passed to the solution as SO4
                     2− ions was determined quantitatively by ICP-OES. The structural and morphological characterization of the celestite concentrate and solid reaction residues were carried out by XRD and SEM.The importance of hydrometallurgical processes for the production of metals and compounds increases rapidly considering the energy requirements and environmental factors. Concentrated celestite is the most common mineral of strontium which is used for the production of strontium compounds and metallic strontium. Direct applications of concentrated celestite are quite limited in industrial applications. Conventionally, SrSO There are two commercial SrCO      The use of (NH Celestite concentrate and AC (a mixture of equimolar amounts of NH Celestite concentrate was obtained as crushed, ground and enriched from Barit Maden Turk A.S., Sivas/Turkey. The celestite concentrate was wet sieved (Octagon 200) and four particle size fractions (− CO Details of the experimental set-up used to carry out the conversion reactions are given elsewhere ( Structural characterization and morphological analyses of solid reaction residues obtained at the end of experiment were carried out by XRD and scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JEOL JSM 5600), respectively. XRF quantitative analysis results and XRD pattern of celestite concentrates are shown in It was not possible to find a reagent grade product as ammonium carbonate ((NH During the dissolution of NH H Equilibrium Reactions 6 and 7 are achieved by considering Reaction 3, 4 and 5. Equilibrium conditions can be reached rapidly according to Reactions 6 and 7. Therefore, the concentrations of NH Acid dissociation constants of Reaction 3 and reverse Reactions 4 and 5 as a function of temperature are given in Eqs. Eqs. Concentrations of NH   Various amounts of AC were dissolved/hydrolyzed in 1 An intensive gas release as bubbles was observed during heating AC solutions above 331 The concentration of CO The amounts of reacted SrSO Experiments were carried out to investigate the effect of stirring speed on the conversion reaction rate using 2 Four different particle size fractions of celestite concentrate (− Experiments were carried out to investigate the effects of CO By considering X CO The conversion reaction rate can be best described by applying the Shrinking Core Model ( By using X The fact that the relationship between 1 For each constant temperature, ln β vs ln Cco According to In order to calculate the apparent activation energies (E With regard to the kinetic parameters obtained from the above calculations, kinetic model equations are derived for the fractional conversion of SrSO Using the known values of T, ρ The reaction mixtures obtained in the experiments carried out using 2  It is also seen from the image given in The conversion of SrSO SrSO In solid-liquid heterogeneous type of reactions carried out at constant temperature and reactant concentration using spherical dense particles, the plot of 1  D The apparent activation energies for diffusion controlled reaction (E The pores of SrCO D On the other hand, The diffusion rate of ions in the solution through the pores at constant temperature is given according to Fick's Equation which is a linear function of D The conversion reaction of SrSO CO The conversion of celestite concentrate to SrCO  wavelength equilibrium constants solubility product of SrSO solubility product of SrCO fractional conversion (fraction reacted) of SrSO mole amount of SrSO mole amount of SrSO time rate constant (i pre-exponential factor (i concentration density of SrSO initial radius of SrSO stoichiometric coefficient order of reaction activation energy (I temperature fit parameter for i species effective diffusion coefficient for i species diffusion coefficient for i species pre-exponential factor porosity labyrinth factor tortuosity The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the