Selective removal of Ni and Co, from a high pressure acid leach (HPAL) solution of a Brazilian laterite nickel ore that contains relatively high concentration of impurities, was carried out with an ion exchange chelating resin possessing iminodiacetic acid group (Amberlite IRC 748®). The resin was tested in column experiments. The experimental results showed that higher pH values improved the ion exchanger performance and higher nickel load capacities were achieved. Besides, increasing nickel concentration in solution, nickel uptake and selectivity were substantially improved. The breakthrough experimental curves also showed that many metals were immediately brokenthrough just after the initiation of the feed, while the breakthrough of Ni began later. These results suggested that it is feasible to purify HPAL solution recovering nickel selectively using the chelating resin Amberlite IRC748® if some specific conditions related to pH, flow rate and nickel concentration are applied. Removal of metals from the resin was successfully performed with HCl and H2SO4 solutions. Nickel was eluted concentrated more than 20 times its initial concentration in the feed solution, while only a trace amount of impurities was eluted.High pressure acid leaching (HPAL) of laterites is one of the alternatives to recover nickel and cobalt from equatorial lateritic ores, with high selectivity due to occurrence of simultaneous iron and aluminum dissolution, followed by their precipitation. Laterite leach solutions consist of a large number of metal sulfates, including Al, Mg, Ni, Mn, Zn, Fe, Co, Cu, obtained from the usage of excess sulfuric acid at high temperature and pressure. The metals concentration in the leach solution depends on the ore composition, the feed acidity, the temperature, the solid liquid ratio and the leaching time. The downstream Ni/Co recovery process is different in each of the existing nickel laterite processing plants ( Ion exchange processes, where cations are removed from solution, usually utilize ordinary ion exchange polymeric resins, containing either strongly acidic sulphonic or weakly acidic carboxylic functionalities ( The goal of these laboratory trails was to assess the suitability of the chelating iminodiacetic acid resin – Amberlite IRC 748® (Rohm and Haas Química Company–USA) – for nickel and cobalt recovery from HPAL discharge, to establish performance data and to optimize some operating conditions. The resin was evaluated with respect to Ni and Co uptake when changes in pH, metals concentration in the feed solution and flow rate through the column bed occur. Column tests with the resin Amberlite IRC 748® were carried out to determine its total metal loading and to evaluate its feasibility for practical use. The selective sorption of nickel from HPAL solution is a challenging work, because it has competing metal ions in addition to nickel and it is worthwhile to determine how the presence of these ions would affect the nickel uptake capacity of the resin. Breakthrough tests were carried out using a packed column of borosilicate glass with 40 cm height, an internal diameter of 4.5 cm and a sintered glass bottom. When filling the column with resin, a short backwash with deionised water was done to ensure proper packing of the bed. Amberlite IRC 748® was chosen to be used in these laboratory tests. The leach solution used in the experiments was obtained from a high pressure acid leaching of a Brazilian laterite. Solutions were passed through the column downflow in different flow rates, metal concentrations and pH values. Effluent solution samples were collected along the experiments and their metals concentration results were used to build breakthrough curves. After the experiment, the resins were washed with deionised water and eluted with sulfuric acid and hydrochloric acid solutions in different concentrations. The resin was pretreated in column. All the ion exchange experiments were done with sodium-converted resins. Resin was eluted with acid solution to remove metal species, rinsed with deionised water, eluted with four bed volumes of NaOH 5% solution and rinsed with distilled water until the pH value of the eluent reached 7.0–8.5. Rinsing was stopped at this pH range to avoid resin hydrolysis, i.e. formation of H The actual selectivity and loading capacity values observed for chelating resins depend on pH solution, flow rate, metal concentration and the presence of other metal complexing ligands. This makes absolute selectivities very difficult to determine. Because of this, laboratory testing is essential when a resin is required to remove one or more types of metal ions selectively. In general for Amberlite IRC 748®, the selectivity follows the following order: Na    From an economic point of view, it is crucial to obtain as high a metal concentration in the regenerant as possible. This can be achieved by utilizing concentrated acid solutions and employing an appropriate arrangement of ion exchange unit operation. Preliminary results for elution tests were obtained with H Five tests were carried out with HPAL solutions obtained with a Brazilian Laterite ore. Parameters such as Ni concentration, flow rate and pH were varied. Different nickel concentrations were adopted and for sample dilutions, acidified distilled water was used. The feed solution rate was controlled using a peristaltic pump. Sulfuric acid and lime were used to adjust the initial pH solution to lower and higher values, respectively. Initial comparative metals loading data for resin Amberlite IRC 748® were obtained by processing approximately 70 bed volumes (BV) of HPAL solution (1.5 g/L Ni) at pH 2.0 through 0.36 L resin bed at 4 L/h (11 BV/h) during 6 h and room temperature. At the beginning of the experiment, the ascending curve of Ni, Co, Al, Mn and Mg means that they were rapidly adsorbed on resin and then displaced to solution, since the ratio At pH 2.0 when Ni concentration in solution was low, the resin was more selective for Cu and Fe, and both metals presented the ratio  The breakthrough of Mg, Mn and Al began just after the initiation of the feed. The resin presented low selectivity for Mg, which was adsorbed and rapidly displaced to solution. Co and Al displacement also occurred. Co was adsorbed until 13 BV. From this point until 40 BV – when Co ions were displaced from the resin – iron was notably re-adsorbed on the resin until the end of the experiment with no iron saturation. From 40 BV onwards, cobalt loading was very low and constant.  Loading data for resin Amberlite IRC 748® were obtained by processing approximately 14 bed volumes (BV) of HPAL solution (7.3 g/L Ni) at pH 3.0 through 0.36 L resin bed at 0.6 L/h (1.7 BV/h) flow rate during 6 h and room temperature. Compared to test 2, although the pH condition has remained the same (pH 3.0), the influence of a higher nickel concentration (7.3 g/L Ni) and low iron concentration (0.8 g/L) has a significant effect on nickel selectivity.  Mg concentration in outlet solution presented a sharp increase at the beginning of the experiment, after passing 2 BV of solution through the resin, showing that under the applied conditions the resin is not selective for Mg, causing some Mg displacement from resin to solution from this point on. The same behavior was observed for Fe, Mn and Al, which were entirely adsorbed on resin until 3 BV and subsequently desorbed and returned to solution, since the outlet concentration started to be higher than the feed concentration. Comparing the three first tests, a solution with higher Ni concentration in feed solution (7.3 g/L), lower iron concentration (0.8 g/L) and higher pH enhanced nickel sorption and selectivity, with no displacement to solution. Higher Co sorption and resin loading capacity were also observed. The increase of Ni/Fe concentration ratio is an important parameter to be considered in load capacity evaluation. The higher it is, the less iron ions will compete with Ni, increasing Ni sorption.   According to  Test 5 corresponds to loading data for resin Amberlite IRC 748®, obtained by processing approximately 70 bed volumes (BV) of HPAL solution (1.8 g/L Ni) at pH 4.0 through 0.36 L resin bed at 11 BV/h during 6 h and room temperature. The breakthrough curves in  The resin was eluted with 10% HCl at 2 BV/h during 4 h. According to The results obtained allowed us to conclude that the ion exchange IRC 748® resin was suitable for nickel recovery from sulfuric acid solutions after hydrometallurgical high pressure leaching of nickel laterite ores. The selectivity for transition metals is achieved by the iminodiacetic acid functionality chemically bound to a macroreticular resin matrix. From HPAL solution, Ni in a large excess of impurities can be separated successfully by iminodiacetic resin to produce a Ni concentrated solution free from Al, Fe and Mg. The experimental results also confirmed that the apparent selectivity of the resin for metals separation depends upon nickel concentration, the presence of other species, mainly iron, and pH. It was determined that the largest separation coefficients of nickel were obtained in sulfate solutions at pH From breakthrough experiments, it was found that for most of them, the breakthrough of Fe, Al, Co occurred before Ni breakthrough, whereas their displacement is observed in most of the cases. It may be seen that their concentration rises well above the initial feed solution value. This indicates their desorption and nickel sorption in the upper layers of the Amberlite IRC 748® column. Comparing solutions with the same pH, the presence of low nickel concentration in solution is expected to reduce the resin selectivity for Ni, because of the competition between nickel and other metals in solution. Comparing solutions with the same metals concentration, the higher the pH, the better nickel sorption is achieved, due to low concentration of H Regeneration of this resin with inorganic acid was very efficient and adequately regeneration could be reached. Ni can be eluted with HCl and H The authors would like to thank Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (Brazil) for the financial support to conclude this work and Dr. Osmar Ailton Alves da Cunha (Rohm and Haas Química-Brazil Ltda), for the supply of the ion exchange polymeric resin.