The characteristics of, and pre-existing pathology associated with 75 cases of fatal lateral condylar fracture sustained by Thoroughbreds while racing in the UK were described. Cases were identified from 220 cases of fatal distal limb fracture submitted as part of studies designed to identify risk factors for all fatal distal limb fractures. Fractures were most common in hurdle races and affected the right forelimb twice as often as the left forelimb. Fracture dimensions were similar to previous reports, however there was a much greater prevalence of articular and diaphyseal comminution and of concurrent fractures in the current report. Pre-existing pathology was particularly common in the medial and lateral parasagittal grooves of the distal articular surfaces of the third metacarpus/metatarsus. The degree of this pathology was not associated with horse age, length of career or number of career starts.In the UK, fractures of the distal limb are the most common reason for equine euthanasia in all types of race ( It has been hypothesised that lateral condylar fractures are the end stage of a series of fatigue related events ( The objectives of the current study were to describe the characteristics of catastrophic lateral condylar fractures sustained during racing and to make comparisons between the current case series and those reported previously. In addition, the degree and site of pre-existing pathology in contralateral limbs was recorded, thus providing a baseline for comparison with future studies. The findings of this and other studies will determine whether characteristic patterns of pre-existing articular cartilage pathology are associated with fractures of the lateral condyles of MC/TIII. Cases of lateral condylar fracture were identified from cases submitted as part of studies designed to identify risk factors for all fatal distal limb fractures sustained during racing ( Fractures were classified by the bone(s) affected and by their location within the bone. Lateral condylar fractures were defined as those cases that included a fracture line within the lateral condyle of the distal articular surface of the third metacarpus (MCIII) or third metatarsus (MTIII). Limbs were examined macroscopically for evidence of pre-existing and post-fracture pathology. Photographic records were taken and all material was frozen at −20 °C and archived for future analysis. The protocol for post-mortem examination was as follows:   Acute pathology. Traumatic damage to articular surfaces, caused by fracture fragments, was described by the location and degree of cartilage and/or subchondral bone removed. Pre-existing pathology. Abnormalities of the distal articular surface of MC/TIII, such as discolouration, fibrillation, erosion, wear lines and fissures, were described by their location and by the depth of cartilage affected. Due to the high degree of post-fracture cartilage trauma it was impossible to consistently describe pre-existing pathology affecting the articular surfaces of fractured limbs. Details of such pathology are therefore reported for contralateral limbs only. Pre-existing pathology of the lateral and medial parasagittal grooves of distal MC/TIII was graded on a scale of 0–3: 0, absent; 1, discolouration; 2, fibrillation/erosion, and; 3, cartilage fissure. Horse details such as age, years in racing and number of race starts were collected from RacingPost.co.uk (MGN Ltd.). During the previously reported study, three control horses for each case of fatal distal limb fracture were selected at random from all uninjured runners in the same race as the case horse ( Details about the races in which case horses were running at the time of injury were obtained from Ordinal logistic regression, using a proportional odds model, was used to identify associations between the degree of pathology within the parasagittal grooves of distal MC/TIII and potential predictor variables such as age, number of years in racing and number of career races ( Between February 1999 and January 2003, 75 cases of fatal lateral condylar fracture of MC/TIII were identified. Comparison with Jockey Club records indicated that this represented all of the racecourse lateral condylar cases, reported to the Jockey Club by JCVO’s over that time period. The overall prevalence of fatal lateral condylar fracture in all types of race was 2.4 per 10,000 starts (75/319,205). The frequency was lowest in flat racing on turf with 0.9 per 10,000 starts (14/158,452) and highest in hurdle racing with 4.8 per 10,000 starts (32/66,639) ( The age distributions of horses in flat (turf and all weather) and National Hunt type (hurdle, steeplechase and National Hunt flat) races were compared separately. There were 26 lateral condylar cases and 257 uninjured horses (selected from the larger database) running in flat races ( The sex distributions of the 75 cases and sample of 660 uninjured horses running over the same period were not significantly different. Geldings represented 71% (53/75) of cases and 68% (448/660) of uninjured controls, females represented 17% (13/75) of cases and 23% (152/660) of controls and colts represented 12% (9/75) of cases and 9% (60/660) of controls. Seventy-two percent (54/75) of cases affected the forelimbs ( Races run on left-handed tracks accounted for 60% (45/75) of cases ( All fractures emanated from the lateral condyle of distal MC/TIII. The mean distance from the middle of the sagittal ridge to the fracture line, was 8 mm (range 4–19 mm) in the dorsal half of the condyle and 11 mm (range 7–25 mm) in the palmar/plantar half of the condyle. The difference between dorsal and palmar/plantar condyles was statistically significant ( All 75 cases were complete fractures and the mean proximo-distal length of the lateral condylar fragment, i.e., from the point at which the fracture line exited the lateral cortex to the articular surface, was 82 mm (range 60–110 mm) in the forelimb and 85 mm (range 55–110 mm) in the hind limb. Thirty-three cases (44%) had a comminuted fragment at the proximal end of the main lateral condylar fragment. Articular comminution along the fracture line ( In 8% (6/75) of cases fracture lines spiralled proximally within the diaphysis of MC/TIII. Five of these cases affected a forelimb and one affected a hind limb. Diaphyseal comminution was equally common in forelimb cases (24%: 13/54) and hind limb cases (24%: 5/21). Forty-one percent (13/32) of cases in hurdle racing included diaphyseal comminution compared to 7% (1/13), 17% (2/12), and 8% (1/13) in turf flat, all weather flat and steeplechase racing, respectively. In the forelimb, 69% (37/54) of cases included fractures of the proximal sesamoid bones alone and 17% (9/54) of cases included fractures of the proximal phalanx, as well as the proximal sesamoid bones ( Seventy-three percent (55/75) of non-fractured limbs had some form of macroscopic cartilage pathology associated with the distal end of MC/TIII. The most common sites of pathology were the lateral and medial parasagittal grooves. Pathology was present in 63% (47/75) and 55% (41/75) of lateral and medial parasagittal grooves, respectively. Of the 47 cases which included lateral parasagittal groove pathology, 49% (23/47) contained visible fissures, 53% (25/47) contained cartilage erosion and 25% (12/47) contained cartilage discolouration. Of the 41 cases which included medial parasagittal groove pathology, 39% (16/41) contained visible fissures, 63% (26/41) contained cartilage erosion and 24% (10/41) contained cartilage discolouration ( Cartilage erosion was present along the medial and lateral transverse ridges in 20% (11/54) of forelimb cases and 19% (4/21) of hind limb cases. Full thickness cartilage erosion exposing subchondral bone, palmar/plantar to the transverse ridges, previously referred to as traumatic osteochondrosis by ( There was no association between the degree of cartilage pathology within the lateral or medial parasagittal grooves and the age, number of years in racing or number of career starts of the 75 case horses. This paper has quantified the likelihood of fatality due to lateral condylar fracture in the five main types of horserace in the UK. The risk was highest in hurdle racing at 4.8 cases per 10,000 starts. ( An increased likelihood of lateral condylar fracture in all weather flat racing compared to turf flat racing was recorded. In a recent report, ( Fatal lateral condylar fractures of the right forelimb were twice as likely as fatal lateral condylar fractures of the left forelimb. Data providing the total number of horse starts on left and right-handed courses were not available; however, it was possible to identify the direction of running in each of the races in which the cases occurred. This suggested that there was no association between the side of fracture and the direction of running for either fore or hind limb cases. Previous workers have also identified left and right fore differences in the prevalence of lateral condylar fracture. For example ( There is clearly no consistent trend in these reports, all of which were case series of horses admitted for further examination and/or treatment at equine hospitals. It was possible to identify the more severe cases, i.e., complete fractures, from the studies by ( In the current paper, 67% (36/54) of forelimb cases affected the right limb. These findings suggest that in Thoroughbred racehorses the right forelimb may be more likely to sustain a severe or fatal lateral condylar fracture than the left forelimb. ( The severity of lateral condylar fracture has been related to the potential success of treatment in a number of ways. For example the presence of articular fragmentation, comminution and concurrent fractures of other bones have all been recorded as indicators of less favourable prognoses ( These comparisons highlight the differences in study populations; however, other factors may also important. For example the significantly higher rate of diaphyseal comminution in cases occurring in hurdle racing would increase the prevalence of this outcome in the UK compared to the USA, as hurdle racing is far more common in the UK. These results also demonstrate that the prognosis for the majority of cases would have been poor, justifying the decisions taken by veterinary surgeons to euthanase horses after clinical examination on the racecourse. In the current study, articular comminution was located in the dorsal and palmar/plantar halves of the condyle with approximately equal frequency. Previous reports have only reported comminution in the palmar/plantar halves of condyles ( Twenty-nine percent of cases also included a major fracture of the proximal phalanx, only previously reported by ( Concurrent proximal phalangeal fracture was significantly more common in the hind limb than the forelimb. This may be due to different biomechanical properties of fore and hind limbs ( The fracture dimensions recorded in the current study are very similar to those previously reported by other workers. The mean length of the fracture fragment, in complete fracture cases, recorded by both ( Pre-existing pathology was most often observed in the lateral (63%) and medial (55%) parasagittal grooves of distal MC/TIII. Neither of age, years in racing nor career race starts were associated with the degree of pathology in the parasagittal grooves of distal MC/TIII. This would suggest that pathological changes to the distal ends of MC/TIII may exist when Thoroughbreds commence racing and that such changes do not necessarily develop as horses get older or progress through their racing careers. As suggested by ( The degree of pre-existing pathology recorded may represent the level found in the “normal” racing Thoroughbred population. From this paper alone it is not possible to draw definitive conclusions about the presence of gross cartilage pathology and the risk of lateral condylar fracture. This case series will however act as a source of reference with which pathological findings from horses that have sustained other types of fracture can be compared. For example, it will be possible to determine if parasagittal groove pathology is more common in horses that sustained lateral condylar fractures than those that sustained proximal phalangeal fractures. ( In order to address some of these problems, the collection of limbs from horses that were euthanased or died on racecourses for non-orthopaedic reasons such as cardiovascular catastrophe has been commenced. This set of limbs, unaffected by fracture, may provide a better measure of the underlying level of cartilage pathology in the racing Thoroughbred population. When sufficient numbers have been recruited it will be possible to make further comparisons between this group and horses that have sustained different types of fracture. It is hoped that further investigation of different fracture types will significantly improve our understanding of the aetiopathogeneses of the most common catastrophic racing fractures. The continued collection of cases in the current study will yield much larger sample sizes and will help to identify associations with cartilage or subchondral bone pathology, potentially enabling the implementation of preventive measures based on early detection of pre-fracture pathology. The help provided by the Jockey Club Veterinary Officers was essential to the success of this work. The co-operation of the local racecourse vets, clerks, racehorse owners and trainers, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Jen Swindlehurst, Jo Cotton and Ron Cook at the University of Liverpool, Sarah Brookes from Myerscough College and Sebastian Garner from Racehorse Ambulance Services Ltd. The Horserace Betting Levy Board funded this work and the positions of Tim Parkin and Jen Swindlehurst, at the University of Liverpool.