Mineral-catalyzed Fenton-like system has been found to be effective for the discoloration of dyeing wastewater. In our present study, schorl has been successfully developed as a novel heterogeneous catalyst for discoloration of an active commercial dye, Argazol blue (BF-BR), in an aqueous solution. Through a number of batch discoloration experiments under various conditions, it was found that the reactivity of the system increased by, respectively, increasing schorl dosage, temperature, hydrogen peroxide starting concentration and by decreasing the pH. At the condition of pH 2, T
                     =55°C, [BF-BR]0
                     =200mg/L, [H2O2]0
                     =48.5mmol/L and schorl dosage=10g/L, 100% of discoloration ratio can be achieved in less than 4min, and 72% of total organic carbon (TOC) can be removed in less than 200min. The reaction kinetics analysis shows that the discoloration of BF-BR follows the first-order kinetics. The schorl samples after BF-BR discoloration was tested by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), and Scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the results rule out the possibility of formation of new solid phases during BF-BR discoloration. The content of Fe ion leaching in the solution was also measured using inductively coupling plasma-atomic emission spectra (ICP-AES). A mechanism proposed herein indicates adsorption and Fenton-like reaction (heterogeneous and homogeneous) are responsible for the discoloration of BF-BR.Fenton's reagent [Fe(II) To overcome this disadvantage, several studies have been conducted to explore heterogeneous catalysts for substitution of deliquescent Fe(II) reagent. Some inorganic materials seem to be better loaders of Fe(II). For example, Huling et al. Heterogeneous catalysis at mineral surfaces, or geocatalysis, may be important in natural systems Tourmaline is a kind of complex borosilicate mineral belonging to the trigonal space group R3m Schor samples from Chifeng (the east of inner-Mongolia, China) were collected with the help of the W.H.T.B. Mining Resource Corporation, inner-Mongolia, China. The mineral samples were ground and sieved, and samples of −64 XRD was employed to identify mineral phases and estimate crystallinity. Measurements were made on a Shimazu XD-5A instrument with Cu–K The catalytic activity of schorl was investigated on the discoloration of BF-BR, an active commercial dye with a vinyl sulphone and a monochlorotriazine group, as a model pollutant. A stock solution containing BF-BR (2000 The result of XRD analysis shows that the samples have the typical trigonal structure of schorl (matching JCPDS 22-469,  Successive runs demonstrate that the reactivity of the system increases by, respectively, increasing schorl dosage ( Although the blue color of BF-BR in an aqueous solution is invisible by treatment using mineral-catalyzed Fenton-like system of schorl and H Taking the logarithm of the concentration of BF-BR in solution after discoloration (ln A further investigation using XRD, FT-IR and SEM to characterize the schorl after BF-BR discoloration shows the following results that (1) there exist no new phases in the schorl samples, which can be detected by XRD ( So, the reaction mechanism of BF-BR discoloration is put forward in our present study. Besides adsorption, mineral-catalyzed Fenton-like reaction governs the process, including heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis. For homogeneous catalytic reaction, it can be described as follows, where ≡Fe(II) and ≡Fe(III) represent the Fe For heterogeneous catalytic reaction, it can be described as follows: A commercial dye, Argazol blue, in an aqueous solution can be effectively discolored by mineral-catalyzed Fenton-like system of schorl and H This work was supported by a grant from Heilongjiang Science Foundation for Young Scholars (No. QC07C02) and Scientific Foundation of Heilongjiang Office of Education (No. 11531035). The authors are also grateful to Wuhuatianbao Mining Resource Corporation, inner-Mongolia, China, for providing schorl samples.