Many investigators measured surface forces between hydrophobic macroscopic surfaces using atomic force microscope (AFM). Some investigators observed long-range attractions and attributed them to the presence of hydrophobic forces, while others suggested that they are artifacts of the nano-bubbles and cavities associated with the hydrophobic surfaces. Still others suggested that the long-range attractions are due to the electrostatic interactions between charged patches present on opposing surfaces and hence are unrelated to surface hydrophobicity. In the present work, we have measured long-range attractions between gold- (or silver-) coated surfaces hydrophobized in potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX) solutions at pH 9.2 under controlled potential conditions. The results of our AFM force measurements are consistent with those of the contact angle and voltammetry experiments, indicating that the long-range attractions are hydrophobic forces.Flotation is the most widely used method of separating minerals from one another. Of the various parameters affecting the process, particle hydrophobicity is most important and xanthate has been the most commonly used hydrophobizing agent for conducting minerals such as sulfide and precious metals. The mechanism by which xanthate renders a mineral hydrophobic is controlled by a pair of electrochemical reactions, involving oxidation of the xanthate ion (X Thermodynamically, xanthate adsorption should occur only at potentials above the reversible potential ( Spectroscopic studies showed that metal xanthates (MX In the present work, we have studied the mechanisms involved in the adsorption of potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX) on gold and silver at different potentials by monitoring the currents due to xanthate adsorption, water contact angles, and the hydrophobic forces acting between xanthate-coated surfaces. The hydrophobic forces measured using the atomic force microscope (AFM) may be useful for better understanding the mechanisms of xanthate adsorption particularly with regards to the role of the chemisorption mechanism in hydrophobizing gold and silver. Many investigators showed evidences for the chemisorption of xanthate on gold ( For AFM surface force measurements, glass plates and spheres (Duke Scientific) were coated with gold and silver from vapor phase using the Electron Beam Physical Vapor Deposition (EBPVD) system (PVD-250). The coated plates were also used for electrochemical studies and contact angle measurements. Prior to the vapor deposition, the substrates were cleaned in Piranha solution (H Potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX, >90%, TCI America) was recrystallized twice from acetone (HPLC grade, Fisher Scientific, Inc.) using diethyl ether (>99.9%, Sigma–Aldrich, Inc.). Sodium tetraborate decahydrate (Sigma–Aldrich) was used as supporting electrolyte. All solutions were prepared freshly using the Millipore pure water with a resistivity of 18.2 A three-electrode electrochemical cell was used for voltammetry experiment using gold- or silver-deposited glass plates as working electrode, a platinum mesh (10 Contact angle measurements were carried out at different potentials using the captive bubble technique. Electrode potentials were controlled using the three electrode system. In each measurement, a gold- or silver-coated glass plate was held initially at a reducing potential (−700 AFM force measurements were conducted in the same manner as described previously (  The voltammogram obtained in the presence of 10  As shown, the measured forces were substantially stronger and longer-ranged than the van der Waals force. The dashed line representing the van der Waals force was drawn using the value of the Hamaker constant ( Also shown in Note here that the contact angles increased sharply at potentials close to 0  Using the Nernst equation, one can calculate the reversible potential (  The decrease in hydrophobic force above 50 The surface force data obtained in the present work have been fitted to the single exponential force law (Eq. Note here that the In It has been shown in the present work that ethyl xanthate chemisorbs on both gold and silver. On silver, the chemisorption occurs at a potential as low as −350 An atomic force microscope (AFM) was used to measure the surface forces between gold-coated glass plate and sphere hydrophobized in 10 The AFM force measurements were also between silver-coated surfaces hydrophobized in 10 The results obtained in the present work showed clearly that the long-range attractions measured between xanthate-coated surfaces are closely related to the surface hydrophobicity. This finding suggests that the long-range attractions are due to hydrophobic interactions. The financial support from National Energy Technology Laboratory (NETL), US Department of Energy (DE-FC26-05NT42457, DE-FE0000699) is gratefully appreciated.