The disintegration behavior and mechanism of iron ore pellet in simulated shaft furnace conditions were investigated in details. Effects of temperature, reducing gas and gangue compositions were emphatically discussed. It was found that pellet disintegrated acutely as reduced by H2/CO=0.8 at 550°C. Gangue minerals in pellet were proved to ease the disintegration in various degrees. SiO2 or CaO could remarkably lower reduction disintegration index (RDI). But the effect of MgO or Al2O3 was much weaker. Furthermore, intrinsic relation between disintegration and reduction was revealed from microstructure aspect. Results demonstrated that lattice transition stress and crack generation brought about by the low temperature reduction led to pellet structure failure and therefore disintegration. The reduction degree showed positive correlation with disintegration level of pellet. Low melting point phase formed by SiO2 or CaO lessened crack formation in pellet. However, MgO or Al2O3 could not play a similar role.Approximately 10% of anthropogenic CO It is well known that disintegration of burdens always occurs around 500–600 An X-ray imaging technology was applied to the real-time observation of iron ore disintegration behavior It can be noticed that only few researchers studied disintegration of iron ore pellets during low temperature reduction with H Iron ore pellet sample supplied by a domestic pelletizing plant (China) was used as furnace burden in this work. The elemental composition of iron ore pellets was shown in  High purity (99.99%) H The schematic diagram of experimental apparatus and gas flow system used in this study were presented in Disintegration tests were conducted on the reduced samples based on Chinese industrial standards (GB/T13242-91), using a tumbling drum with an inner diameter of 130 The morphology (cross section) of reduced sample was observed by electron microscopy (Leica DMRXP). Cracks in every vision field were distinguished and counted by the equipped image analysis software (Qwin). The crack distribution (CD) was defined by Eq. The reduction disintegration indexes (RDIs) of pellets reduced at different temperatures was given in The lattice structure transformation of Fe Microstructure (cross section) of reduced samples at 500 As can be seen from  To understand the difference, reduction degree (RD) change of pellets with gas composition was examined as shown in Microstructure (cross section) of samples reduced by CO, H As presented in In consideration of the possible influence of gangue on pellet disintegration, magnetite powder (analytical pure) was mixed with different proportions of CaO, MgO, SiO It can be seen from the line chart that all the four usual gangue mentioned above could, to some extent, weaken the disintegration phenomenon. The disintegration of prepared pellets without any gangue composition was extremely serious (RDI Cross section of reduced pellets with equal Al As illustrated in In the present paper, disintegration behavior of iron ore pellet in simulated shaft furnace conditions was investigated in details. Disintegration was found to be most severe as pellet reduced by H Authors would like to express thanks to the