The air-assisted solvent extraction (AASX) concept uses a solvent-coated bubble to contact the organic and aqueous phases. Compared to conventional solvent extraction, a high contact area can be created using less solvent and the natural buoyancy provided by the air core promotes phase separation. A method of producing coated bubbles exploiting foaming properties of kerosene-based solvent is introduced. Coating thickness is estimated at ≈3 μm on a 0.44 cm diameter bubble giving a solvent specific surface area of ≈3000 cm2/cm3, equivalent to a solvent droplet of ≈20 μm. Such a droplet would have very poor phase separation properties. In extraction tests (500 mg/l Cu solution), high aqueous/organic ratios could be used (e.g., 75:1) while phase separation remained excellent. This shows the potential for AASX to treat large volume, low concentration streams such as acid mine drainage.Large volumes of dilute metal bearing effluents are generated in the metal extraction and processing industries. An important example is acid mine drainage (AMD), produced when sulphide minerals are exposed to oxygen and water in the presence of certain microorganisms ( A variety of treatment options have been proposed ( Solvent extraction is widely used in primary metal extraction, notably for Cu and U ( The need is to treat large volumes cheaply. In the minerals industry this was solved when flotation was introduced at the turn of the last century. If solvent could be carried as a thin layer on bubbles this could provide a high specific surface area with high a/o ratio while maintaining rapid phase disengagement due to buoyancy provided by the air core. This combination may open the way to adapting solvent extraction to dilute streams. This concept was termed “air-assisted solvent extraction” (AASX) by The concept has its origin in the periodic attempts to use oil to argument flotation (“oil-assisted flotation” ( The application in solvent extraction is to recovery metal ions. Air-assisted solvent extraction appears to offer potential for treating large dilute volumes. There is the prospect of obtaining high aqueous/organic ratio without the attendant problem of phase separation (entrainment of organic in the aqueous phase and vice versa), which keeps the recommended ratio close to 1:1. Some aspects of air-assisted solvent extraction are explored in this communication. Reagent grade CuSO For extraction tests the objective was to inject a single stream of solvent-coated bubbles into a column containing the aqueous phase ( Solvent extraction is pH sensitive. Trying to keep pH constant (with NaOH to counter the release of H One way to demonstrate coating is to measure the rise velocity compared to air bubbles alone. Velocities were measured in a square cross-section (10 cm As evident in The stability of a thin organic film on a bubble is governed thermodynamically by the spreading coefficient, If The average thickness of coating was estimated at ≈3 μm by estimated the reaction measuring solvent consumption for a known number of bubbles. In principle, an estimate of the mass of solvent carried per bubble (hence providing an estimate of average coating thickness) could be made from the decrease in rise velocity ( In separate experiments, solvent-coated bubbles (AASX) and solvent droplets (0.44 and 0.54 cm, respectively) were passed through the 150 ml, 500 mg/l Cu solution. Extraction was compared on the basis of cumulative surface area and volume of solvent. To allow for the difference in retention time (rise velocity of droplet was ≈13 cm/s; of solvent coated bubble, ≈22.5 cm/s) columns of different diameters were used giving heights of 7.4 cm (droplet) and 12.8 cm (coated bubble). The AASX tests were done three times and showed good repeatability ( In terms of surface area (  The comparison is unfair in the sense that the large droplets employed are not the practice. The data do permit calculation of the size of droplet required to equal the specific area of the solvent in the AASX. At the same 25% extraction the surface area of solvent in AASX is ≈3000 cm Air-assisted solvent extraction was compared to a conventional “shaking” test. For both experiments the same a/o ratio, 75:1, was used representing a possible condition for AASX. The shake test was made for two times, 2.5 and 5 min. The result was extraction of 80.1% and 81.4%, respectively, suggesting the equilibrium distribution had been reached. Extraction in AASX reached 40% by the time 2 ml solvent had been introduced. We can anticipate that the figure may be increased by additional bubble retention time (only ≈0.5 s in this test). The results do seem to confirm the potential of AASX to treat low concentration solutions by offering significant concentration enrichment while preserving ease of phase separation. A future paper will focus on its application to dilute solutions (e.g., <100 mg/l). The key to producing the coated bubble is the foaming of solvents. This property, how to produce and control it, will also be pursued in a subsequent paper.  Air-assisted solvent extraction (AASX) is proposed to overcome some drawbacks of conventional solvent extraction for treating dilute (e.g., effluent) streams by providing high aqueous/organic (a/o) ratio, and consequently high concentration enrichment, while maintaining ease of phase separation. The foaming properties of solvents can be used to generate coated bubbles. Solvent-coated bubbles of diameter 0.44 cm produced a coating thickness of ≈3 μm and a specific surface area of solvent of ≈3000 cm Using the same 75:1 a/o ratio, a conventional shake test took some 24 h for the phases to disengage, while in AASX disengagement was essentially instantaneous. The funding for this work was under a Collaborative Research and Development grant from the Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) with industrial sponsorship from Teck-Cominco, Inco, Falconbridge, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Noranda. The authors wish to thank Mr. Steve Olafson from Cognis (USA) for numerous discussions and provision of samples.