Surface boreholes were drilled in Southern West Virginia to obtain the specimens containing natural coal–rock interface. The shear behavior of the natural coal–rock interface was studied by performing direct shear tests under constant normal load conditions. The test results indicate that: (1) The average cohesion and friction angle of the coal–rock interfaces are 0.786MPa and 29.7 degrees, respectively; (2) the normal stiffness of the coal–rock interface ranges from 0.57 to 4.44MPa/mm, while the shear stiffness varies from 1.14 to 3.47MPa/mm. Additionally, analysis on the shear behavior of the coal–rock interface and the corresponding AE signals during shearing indicates that AE can be used to evaluate the shear behavior of the coal–rock interface. Furthermore, it has been found that when normal loads are smaller than 3kN (equivalent normal stress <1.5MPa), the shear behavior of coal–rock interface strongly depends on the surface roughness of coal–rock interface; as the normal load is increased to or larger than 4kN (equivalent normal stress >2.0MPa), however, the shear behavior of coal–rock interface are more influenced by the strength differences between the two halves rather than the surface roughness of the coal–rock interface.In the past few decades, computer modeling has been commonly employed for coal mine design where the coal–rock interface strength are often used In addition, many researchers and practitioners concluded that loss of coal–rock interface constraint occurred prior to the occurrence of some of the ground control problems in underground coal mines, such as coal bumps and severe floor heave In order to apply AE for monitoring the shear behavior of in situ coal–rock interface, it is necessary to monitor the shear behavior of specimens containing coal–rock interface in the laboratory. A few researchers have addressed the AE application for monitoring the shear behavior of rock–rock or rock–concrete joints In this research, laboratory direct shear tests under constant normal load condition were conducted to obtain the reference values of coal–rock interface properties for numerical simulation, and the AE signals were collected during the shearing of coal–rock interface for evaluating the correlation between shear behavior curves and AE signals. Core samples of coal–rock interface was obtained from surface borehole drilled in southern West Virginia, USA. The coal seam of interest was Pocahontas no. 3 seam, while the rocks were shale. The physical and strength properties of the shale and coal specimens are shown in The drilling procedure was carefully conducted to ensure the natural coal–rock interface unbroken as much as drilling performers can. Theoretically, each surface borehole could provide us with one possible sample containing natural coal–rock interface. However, only 23 standard specimens were obtained and qualified for laboratory direct shear testing although 72 surface boreholes were drilled. Note that the cylindrical samples provided by surface boreholes drilling were about 50 The direct shear test system (model RDS-200) designed by Geotechnical Consulting and Testing Systems (GCTS) and AE signal detecting unit (model AET 5500) were used in this research. For the direct shear test system, the shear boxes consist of two circular platens, an upper and a lower platen with an opening at the center. During each test, a specimen is placed in the center hole with sufficient length extending into both the upper and lower shear boxes. The lower box is fixed while a horizontal force induced by the movement of the shear arm is applied to the upper box in the direction parallel to the contact plane between the upper and lower boxes. The horizontal force is increased gradually until failure occurs along the contact plane. Prior to the application of the horizontal force, a normal force induced by the movement of the normal arm is applied on the upper box perpendicular to the contact plane. In order to ensure the normal force is always applied perpendicular to the upper box while the upper box is being moved by the horizontal force during testing, the hydraulic jack applying the normal force is mounted on a frame that is able to travel with the upper box. The shear and normal displacements during each test can be measured by the linear variable differential transformers (LVDT). The shear and normal load capacities of this shear system are 9 and 4.5 During each test, the AE was monitored by an AET 5500 system. Any AE signals were detected by a AE sensor, preamplified and then output to the AET 5500 system which was also attached to a PC to record the AE responses. The AE monitoring setup consisted of AET 5500 data acquisition software, used to control the 6-channel AE system, one PICO AE sensor with a frequency range of 100–400 Specimen encapsulation and AE sensor installation were the most complicated steps in this work. The specimen was concentrically positioned as much as possible into the lower half of the holding ring, and the prepared escapsulating-compound (mixture of the Sulfaset cement and water with weight ratio of 3:1) was poured into the annular space between the specimen and the wall of the lower half of the specimen holding ring, as shown in It should be emphasized that the specimens were sheared under constant normal load condition. Six levels of constant normal loads, i.e., 1    The normal and shear stiffnesses of interface are the required inputs for simulating the ground control problems when using some numerical modeling packages, such as FLAC Since the surface roughness of the sheared plane is very important to the shear behavior, especially to the residual strength The same approach was used to analyze the JRC values of the coal–rock interface of other specimens, and the JRC values are summaried The capacity of AE signals for monitoring the shear stress–shear displacement behavior is evaluated. The count and energy rates for each AE evaluation have been collected. Since these AE parameters show the same trends, only the AE energy rate is used to evaluate the correlation of AEs to shear behavior. It can be seen from It has been well know that there are two mechanisms dominating natural discontinuity behavior, namely, sliding on joint surface and the suppression of dilation and shearing through asperities, depending on the applied normal load (or stress) and joint surface roughness. In On the other hand, in The strength of the coal–rock interface is very important in the computer modeling of coal mine ground control problems including coal bumps and severe floor heaving. However, there is almost no published laboratory study of the direct shear tests on coal–rock interface due to the difficulty of obtaining samples containing natural coal–rock interface. In this study, the shear behavior of the natural coal–rock interface was studied by performing direct shear tests under constant normal loads in the range of engineering interest. The test results indicate that the cohesion and friction angle of the coal–rock interfaces are 0.786 For coal–rock interface under normal loads smaller than 3 This study was sponsored by the