The self-heating heat release rate coefficient QA (Jg−1
                     min−1) for Ni- and Cu-concentrates and sulphide mixtures has been determined. The QA for the concentrates were higher than those of the sulphide mixtures. This difference in QA between the materials, for which the reaction causing self-heating is surmised to be the same, may be attributed to differences in specific heat capacity Cp
                     , a steric effect, and in the case of the mixtures, a galvanic effect. The lack of clear relationship between QA and the energy of activation Ea
                      suggests at least both be measured to characterize the self-heating of sulphide materials.Along with apparent activation energy ( In previous work we determined the activation energy for some sulphide materials (nickel and copper concentrates and sulphide mixtures) ( For the determination of QA, the transient SH model of The term at left side of Eq. The samples were two Ni-concentrates, from Voisey’s Bay (Labrador, Canada) and Raglan (Nunavik, Canada), a Cu-concentrate from Voisey’s Bay and mixtures of sulphides: sphalerite/pyrite (Sp/Py), pyrite/galena (Py/Ga), chalcopyrite/galena (Chp/Ga), and sphalerite/galena (Sp/Ga). The principal components of the concentrates are shown in In the concentrates, note the presence of substantial pyrrhotite (Po), which is perhaps the most reactive sulphide ( The concentrate samples were shipped as slurry in sealed containers. They were pressure filtered, placed in plastic bags, sealed and stored in a freezer. Prior to a test, 500 For the sulphide mixtures around 4 The Experiments were performed using the SH test setup designed by The apparatus consists of the following major components: a Pyrex cell, a thermocouple, a gas inlet and an exhaust system, a heater, insulation, a stainless steel screen and a seal cover. The sample is placed in the middle of the Pyrex glass supported by the screen. Air is introduced from the bottom and exhausted, along with any other resulting gases, at the top of the cell. The heating response to a timed sequence of air injections is recorded, from which the heating rate (SHR) is computed. The standard test encompasses two stages, A and B, with the following conditions: Number of cycles: 10. Duration of air injection for every cycle: 15 Time between injections: 5 Temperature (°C): 70 (stage A), 140 Air flow rate (ml In this work, we are concerned only with stage A. The test was modified to have only 3 air injections over a range of temperatures. To comply with the Eq. Samples were tested at 45–85 The SHR for the concentrates are shown in Plots of ln (SHR) against 1000/ The ln (QA/ The QA values were then calculated from ln (SHR) using the The A plot of ln (QA) vs. The QA values for the concentrates were higher than those of the sulphide mixtures ( Another reason may be the influence of the steric factor on the Arrhenius factor A. The steric factor was perhaps different between the concentrates and the sulphide mixtures since the composition was different. The mobility of the reactants in different matrices is not the same. For this reason, the reaction may be retarded or accelerated, causing the variation in the steric factor. The difference in the QA values was noticed between the concentrates of different composition, the iron-and sulphur-rich concentrates ( The similarity between QA of the two sulphide mixtures with those of the Ni-concentrates from Raglan may be due to the galvanic effect in the sulphide mixture system ( It is significant that although the self-heating rates and energies of activation range over less than one order of magnitude (from ca. 0.100 to 0.763  The activation energy Funding is through the NSERC CRD program with sponsorship by: Teck, Vale, Xstrata Process Support, Xstrata Zinc, Golders Assoc and Cytec coordinated through CAMIRO – MPD.