A cone crusher is used for crushing rock material in mines and quarries. The performance of the crusher changes during its lifetime due to wear of the crusher liners. Previous research has made it possible to model, simulate and optimize the performance of a given crusher. A problem is that due to wear the optimized geometry will change and the performance will suffer. To design crusher geometry for optimized performance throughout the lifetime of the liners, it is desirable to predict the worn geometry. This paper presents a method for this purpose. In a previous study, a wear model was investigated for a laboratory scale crusher. This model has been implemented in a cone crusher. The controller in a modern cone crusher can, for example, keep the close side setting or the power draw constant. Such a controller was implemented in the model. Measurements of the worn geometry were conducted in order to validate the wear model. The worn geometry is well predicted although the wear rate, estimated from experiments presented in a previous study, was overestimated. The effect of constant power control and wear on various output parameters was studied in simulations.Cone crushers are used in the mining and aggregates industries to crush rock. Previous investigations on cone crusher performance have been carried out by To optimize the crusher liners for improved performance throughout the lifetime, it is desirable to be able to predict the change of the geometry of a given crusher. The aim of this study is to develop a model for this purpose.  In a previous study carried out by the author, wear was studied in a laboratory jaw crusher, see The laboratory jaw crusher was equipped with load cells in order to register crushing forces. Since the resulting force acting on the fixed liner is measured, it is possible to estimate the average pressure from the bed of rock material. The pressure here is hence a pseudo-pressure, and is defined as the crushing force divided by the active area of the liners. The true pressure distribution is unknown since the contact area of the rock particles squeezed against the liner is unknown. Relationship between this average pressure from the rock material, motion, and wear was studied. The tests reveal two different wear mechanisms on the fixed and moving liner respectively. On the fixed liner the bed of rock material slides against the liner surface whilst on the moving liner there is no such relative motion between rock and liner. A simple model was implemented. A modified version of the wear model suggested by In the present study the wear model described by Laboratory test have been conducted ( From the crushing chamber geometry, the nominal compression ratio ( The wear model presented by Archard suggests that wear is proportional to sliding distance and pressure. In the previous experiments carried out by the author (2003) it was found that wear occurs even if there is no macroscopic sliding motion between rock material and liner. In this case Archard’s model would yield no wear. Therefore the wear model was modified to account for the non-sliding wear. Eq. In order to verify the wear model, measurements have been conducted on a SANDVIK H-3000 crusher in operation. The crusher is stopped and a probe detects the location of the surfaces of the mantle and concave. The device is made of a frame that is attached to the mainshaft of the crusher (see The first measurement was conducted after 73 h of operating time since the last change of liners. The rock material was quartzite. The size distribution of the feed is shown in In order to verify the long-term validity of the model, it is necessary to simulate the change in geometry over a long time. Therefore the simulations discussed in this study, start from the new set of mantles. The controller of the crusher is set to keep the power draw constant. Comparisons between model and real crusher reflects the change from new liners until 73 h of operation. If the wear is computed in the direction normal to the liner surface and plotted against local Using the wear coefficient obtained in a previous study by the author ( Other factors that may contribute to the discrepancy is non-linear dependency between pressure and wear, dependency of wear rate and particle size. The wear coefficient from the previous study was obtained from crushing a feed material with median particle size Using the crusher model, it is possible to track changes in crusher performance as liners are worn. The crusher used in this study shared its output conveyor with another crusher that was running simultaneously. Therefore it was not possible to verify the computed capacity and size distribution. Readings off the control unit provides information about close side setting, power draw and hydraulic pressure. When running the simulations the volumetric filling ratio In the simulation power draw and axial thrust force fluctuates. During simulation the mantle is moved up or down until the desired thrust force or power draw is achieved. Here it is necessary to allow a coarse tolerance to achieve satisfactory computational speed. The flow model used here was introduced by As can be seen in The reason is, that if CSS, during operation, deviates considerably from what the set of liners were designed for, the lower end of either the mantle or the concave will not be utilized. This effect is not currently implemented in the crusher model. The formation of this lip is likely to have an even more detrimental effect on the capacity. Wear is computed on the mantle. The wear on the concave is assumed to be equal to the wear on the mantle, on the intersection between the normal of the mantle and concave. A wear model for cone crushers has been implemented, in order to predict the geometry of a worn crusher. The model was verified through measurements. Adjusting the model for good agreement of wear rate in the lower part of the crushers yields an under-prediction of wear rate in the upper part. According to plant operators and the crusher manufacturer the trend in capacity is well predicted for this plant, however it was not verified through measurements. The capacity drop is slow at first and then it accelerates. The effect of wear on CSS is not as well predicted. The reason is, that the deviation between measurement and simulation in the upper-middle part of the chamber as compared to the lower part of the crusher, where CSS is calibrated. The material used for rock crushers, manganese steel, also known as Hadfield material, is used because of its good capability of work hardening. In this study the crushed material was quartzite, a material known for being very abrasive. When crushing quartzite or other strongly abrasive rock materials it is a common conception in the mining and aggregates industry that no or little work hardening is achieved; as opposed to other rock materials where significant work hardening is assumed to occur. The model can predict the worn geometry although there is some discrepancy between measured and simulated worn geometry. There may be several explanations for this discrepancy. Work hardening of the liners has been mentioned. Other possible causes are non-linear dependency between pressure and wear, inaccuracy in the flow model, or dependency between particle size and wear rate. Future improvements of this wear model will include the “lip”-formation at the lower end of the chamber. The effect of work hardening of the liners has this far been neglected. A study is currently (spring–summer 2003) undertaken where this effect is being investigated. The following persons have been helpful in completing this work: Professor emeritus Göran Gerbert, Magnus Evertsson PhD, Jan Möller, Mats Persson at Chalmers University of Technology, Kristoffer Stasina at NCC AB, Södra Sandby.