The separation of copper(II), cobalt(II) and nickel(II) from aqueous chloride solutions by polymer inclusion membranes is presented. The tertiary amines, i.e. tri-n-octylamine (TOA) and triisooctylamine (TIOA) have been applied as the ion carriers in membrane. The source phase was an aqueous HCl solution containing Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II). The selective transport of Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) from aqueous chloride source phase through PIM containing cellulose triacatate (CTA) as the support, o-nitrophenyl pentyl ether (ONPPE) as the plasticizer and amines (TOA and TIOA) has been studied. Cu(II) and Co(II) ions were effectively removed from the source phase by transport through PIMs with TOA and TIOA as the ionic carriers into 0.1M NaOH as the receiving phase. The initial fluxes of Cu(II) and Co(II) were higher with TIOA than with TOA. Ni(II) was not detected in the receiving phase. The effect of chloride ions concentration on the transport of Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) has been investigated. Transport of Cu(II) and Co(II) increases with increasing of chloride ions concentration in the source phase. The metal ions fluxes decrease in the order Cu(II)>Co(II)>Ni(II).The transport of Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) from chloride solution of the composition similar to aqueous solutions after leaching of polymetallic nodules was studied. The nodules, which are located at the bottom of the world's oceans, constitute a major and strategic resource and reservoir of cobalt, copper and nickel After leaching of deep-sea nodules in hydrochloric acid, iron(III) is present in leach solutions and its elimination is a major operational problem in hydrometallurgy. The recovery of iron(III) from such aqueous solutions is usually carried out by precipitation as jarosite, goethite or hematite The separation of copper(II), cobalt(II) and nickel(II) from aqueous solutions is frequently required in hydrometallurgical processing. The applications of liquid membranes offer a potentially attractive alternative to solvent extraction process and combine the process of extraction and stripping in a single unit operation. Solvent extraction is performed in order to evaluate the best conditions for operation of the membrane separation systems. For example, Juang and Kao However, the liquid membranes containing an ion carrier have been used for the concentration and separation of metal ions. The application of liquid surfactant membranes (LSMs) for cobalt–nickel separation from a sulfuric liquor was investigated by Ribeiro et al. Development of polymer inclusion membranes (PIMs) containing specific metal ion carriers reached significant importance for use in separation and purification of metal ions in areas such as hydrometallurgy and water treatment. For example, Kozlowski et al. were investigated the transport of Cu(II), Co(II), Ni(II) and Zn(II) from aqueous solutions into distilled water through plasticized immobilized membranes. The hydrophobic β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) polymers have been used as the macrocyclic ion carriers. With the use of β-CD polymer as an ionic carrier in the competitive transport of metal ions shows the preferential selectivity order: Cu(II) The separation of Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) can be achieved using the organophosphorous acids, i.e. di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid D2EHPA A number of researchers utilized CTA membranes for carrier-mediated transport of metal ions from aqueous solutions. Kozlowski et al. have studied the transport of toxic metal ions, i.e. Cr(VI), Cd(II) and Zn(II) from acidic chloride aqueous solutions Inorganic chemicals, i.e. nickel(II), cobalt(II) and copper(II) chlorides, sodium chloride and hydrochloric acid were of analytical grade and were purchased from POCh (Gliwice, Poland).Organic reagents, i.e.cellulose triacetate (CTA), Solutions of cellulose triacetate (CTA), ion carriers (TOA, TIOA) and plasticizer (ONPPE) in dichloromethane were prepared. A portion of this solution was poured into a membrane mold comprised of a 6.0 The transport across PIMs was carried out in a permeation cell in which the membrane film was tightly clamped between two cell compartments. The effective membrane area, which was exposed to both phases was 3.14 The transport of cations through PIM membranes was described by the following equation: The permeability coefficient ( The initial flux ( The competitive transport of copper, cobalt and nickel through PIM with TOA and TIOA as the ion carriers and ONPPE as the plasticizer has been investigated. The kinetics of metal ions transported are shown in The separation properties of PIM containing 4 In next series of experiments, the influence of hydrochloric acid concentration in the source phase on the Cu(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) transport was studied. Kinetic plots for Cu(II) and Co(II) transport from aqueous source solutions containing different HCl concentration (0.5–2.0 TIOA and TOA (shown as R The difference in the transport behavior of these metal ions is attributed to the fact that in chloride solutions Cu(II) and Co(II) in contrast to Ni(II) form stable anionic complexes of the type MeCl Copper(II) and cobalt(II) can be effectively separated from aqueous solutions containing nickel(II) by polymer inclusion membranes transport with TOA and TIOA as the ion carriers. The highest fluxes of Cu(II) and Co(II) were obtained using membrane containing TIOA as the ion carrier. The initial fluxes of these metal ions depend strongly on the hydrochloric acid concentration in the source phase. It was found that the fluxes of Cu(II) and Co(II) are the highest at 2.0 Financial support of this work was provided by Polish Science Foundation Grants—grant no. 3 T09C 019 26.