The performance of heap leaching is dictated by a large number of processes acting at a wide range of length scales. One important scale is that of the individual particles, where the interaction between the rate kinetics at the surfaces of the individual mineral grains and the mass transport through the particle combine to give the overall apparent particle scale kinetics. It has been recognised for a long time that variability in the mineralogy, size and spatial distribution of the mineral grains within the particle are likely to have a large effect on the leach performance and its variability and thus, ultimately, the performance of the heap. In this paper a new method for quantifying this behaviour and its variability at scales from the particle through to the grain and down to the surface kinetics is presented. This method is based on the use of a series of XMT (also called micro-CT) images of a column taken at regular intervals over 168days of leaching. The key development in the analysis of this data is an algorithm that has allowed every single one of the hundreds of thousands of mineral grains within the column to be individually tracked across all the time points as they undergo dissolution. This has allowed the dependency of the mineral grain leach rate on its size and position in the particle to be decoupled from one another. It also meant that the variability in the surface kinetics of the grains could be assessed, with mineralogical variability being the key source of this variability. We demonstrate that understanding and quantifying this underlying kinetic variability is important as it has a major impact on the time evolution of the average kinetics of the leaching.While metal production has kept pace with increased demand this has generally been achieved by exploiting deposits with more problematic mineralogies and ever lower ore grades. As the grades of ores decrease, heap leaching is becoming a more attractive alternative to conventional processing routes, such as flotation followed by smelting, as it does not require milling of the ore and the operating cost per unit of metal is thus less sensitive to grade. Approximately 20% to 30% of the world's copper and more than 12% of gold is produced by this technique ( Research into heap leaching can be divided into a range of spatial scales involving different processes and sub-processes, including the macro-scale (heap scale effects), meso-scale (groups of particles, typically investigated through column scale studies), individual ore particle scale and grain scale ( The aim of this paper is not to attempt to mimic all the variability encountered in a real heap or to measure the impact of variability in the fluid conditions around the particles, but to rather examine the leach behaviour and its variability at the scale of the individual particles and the mineral grains within them. An experimental system consisting of multiple small columns was chosen, as this would ensure that all the particles within them would experience similar leach conditions. Small columns have the added advantage of being able to be repeatedly scanned at high resolution. The technology that allowed us to study the grain scale leach behaviour is X-ray micro-computed tomography (XMT, also termed μCT) coupled to advanced image analysis algorithms. The advantage of XMT is its ability to image the internal structure of materials, including geological samples ( In this work XMT has allowed 3D images of the mineral grain distributions to be obtained within the same leaching particles at a succession of time points. In order to analyse this data we have developed advanced image quantification algorithms ( The leached sample consisted of copper sulphide ore particles from Kennecott with a size ranging between 8 and 11.2 As this method is destructive, the composition is not that of the actual particles in the column, but rather that of similar particles. The small scale column leaching experiments were carried out using an incubator with temperature control, which allows multiple columns to be run at the same time. The reason for using an incubator is because, despite the exothermic reactions, small columns lose too much heat to be able to maintain the temperatures typically encountered within a heap. In these experiments the incubator was maintained at a temperature of 60 The leach solution used in these experiments contained 5 The columns used in this study were scanned using a Nikon Metris Custom Bay with a 1 While the entire column was initially imaged, in subsequent scans the same three sub-volumes of the column were imaged (see After scanning, the images needed to be reconstructed and relevant data quantified. The main image processing steps were as follows: The reconstructed image had a 3 The rock phase was thresholded using the Otsu algorithm ( The connected ore particles were separated using a distance transformation based method with marker control to avoid over segmentation. Each ore particle was then labelled and tracked over the leaching period using a centroid tracking algorithm ( After extracting the same ore particle from different scans, the initial ore particle was registered according to the later scan in order to have the same orientation at each time point. The extracted 4 The mineral grain phase was then thresholded using the Maximum Entropy algorithm ( All the mineral grains in the scanned volume were then tracked individually using a new fast tracking method. A detailed description of the grain tracking methodology can be found in In this section the leach behaviour and its variability at different scales are investigated. The average sulphide dissolution for the entire column, the average sulphide dissolution for the three scanning regions and the sulphide dissolution for all the tracked ore particles can be measured from the image analysis ( The vertical leach variability is small, with no discernible trend in the extraction with height ( The lack of variation in extraction with height in the column or with horizontal position means that the variability between particles is virtually all due to local effects such as differences in the mineralogy of the particles and the spatial and size distribution of the grains within then. The ore particle size effect is known to be an important mechanism affecting the sulphide dissolution ( The three main sources of leach variability within the particles are likely to come from the size distribution of the grains, the variability in the inherent surface kinetics (mainly a function of mineralogy and mineral associations) and the distribution of the distances of the grains to the ore particle surface (which will impact the mass transfer rate). The mineral grain distance distribution can be measured and quantified by applying a 3D distance map. In the distance map analysis, each voxel is assigned a value depending on the distance to the nearest ore particle boundary. The boundary voxels of the object are assigned a value of zero whereas the assigned value increases as the distance from the boundary increases. Generally, the mineral grains closer to surface should leach faster than the minerals located in the centre of ore particle. This is because the shorter the distance to the surface, the easier it is for the leaching solution to diffuse in and the dissolved species to diffuse out. Among all 26 particles, the majority have similar trends to that shown in The mineral extraction is a strong function of its distance to the ore particle surface (see Analysing tens of thousands of grains individually is not very meaningful or efficient, especially for smaller grains, which have high measurement errors and uncertainties when considered on their own. Combining the measurements from many similar grains will, however, significantly reduce this uncertainty ( The average sulphide dissolution for different size–distance categories is shown in While it is obvious that the leach rate of a grain should depend upon its distance from the surface and its size, it is interesting to investigate the relative importance of these dependencies and how they vary with time. From From Within a single ore particle, Our error analysis has shown that for all but the smallest grains (those below about 100 voxels (equivalent spherical diameter of ~ This variability in leach rate initially causes the variability in extraction to increase with time, but as the number of completely leached grains increases, the variability in the extraction starts to decrease again as, irrespective of the variability in the rate at which they are leached, fully leached grains have no variability in their extraction. It is desirable to go a step further than simply looking at the variability in the extraction to look at the underlying grain scale variability in the leach kinetics as this can be used to estimate how the apparent leach kinetics are likely to vary with time and the macroscopic extent of extraction. The variability in the surface kinetics is an important factor in the ultimate performance of a heap as it controls how the apparent kinetics will evolve with time. Since grains with high leach kinetics will disappear faster than those with slow surface kinetics, the average surface kinetics will decrease with time. Additionally, the faster leaching classes such as grains near the particle surface or smaller grains will also disappear faster. The evolution of the apparent leach kinetics of a particle is thus the result of a complex interaction between the evolution of the surface rate kinetic distribution, the size and location distribution of the grains and how these interact with mass transport within the particle. Accounting for all these factors is complex and can only really be assessed using a fully coupled modelling and simulation approach (e.g. In order to assess the distribution of the surface rate kinetics we need to be able to use the extraction of the individual grains to calculate their rate kinetics. To do this we start with a very generic rate equation for surface kinetics. In the derivation below we have made no assumption about the order of the reaction (in fact, for the purposes of this derivation we need not even assume that there is a power law dependency): The mass of the grain is, in turn, related to its volume by its density, Combining these equations gives the following differential equation for the rate of change of grain volume: Eq. We can do the same analysis for the grain in the same size and distance category with the average surface rate, In this analysis we are assuming that all the grains in a particular size and distance from the surface category experience the same concentration history. At a specific time, distance from the surface is thus treated as a proxy for concentration. This would be true if the permeability and initial grain distribution were uniform. Some of the variability in our apparent surface kinetics thus actually comes from mass transport variability. We do not need to assume that the concentration experienced by grains in a category remain constant with time, though, as that variability is included within the integral on the RHS of the above equations. Dividing Eq. This equation can also be written out in terms of the extraction from a grain This analysis gives the surface rate constant of a grain relative to the average rate constant within a category and thus, by combining all the grains within a category, it can give the distribution of the apparent surface kinetics. In the analysis below, the distributions are calculated by using the sulphide dissolution of the all the measured mineral grains over the first 23  In This underlying variability in the apparent surface leach kinetics together with the size and spatial distribution of the grains are key to the time evolution of the particle scale leach kinetics. In a related paper ( The distribution of the surface kinetics ( The extraction within a size and distance category is a function time, though not a known function for an arbitrary category. The extraction for the grain with the average surface kinetics can thus be written as a function of a time dependent variable, By combining Eqs. If It should be noted that this is not a calculation for the evolution of the grain size distribution within an overall ore particle, but is rather a calculation of the evolution of the grain size distribution for grains at a similar distance to the surface and similar initial size. The overall grain size distribution requires that the extraction in each category at the desired leach time, as well as the initial number of grains in that category, be known (see In Because of the variability in the surface leach rates, a particle's size and location does not completely dictate its evolution. At low recoveries the concave nature of the curve indicates that the average extent of dissolution is dominated by the rapid dissolution of relatively few fast leaching grains. As the overall extent of extraction increases the proportion of the grains contributing significantly to the dissolution needs to increase, while the faster leaching grains will have completely leached by this stage and therefore not contribute to any increase in the extraction. This means that the average surface kinetics of the grains will decrease with time. To some extent this will be countered by the fact that the grains near the surface will become depleted and thus reduce the mass transfer barrier for the grains deeper in ore particle (near surface grains will consume reagents before than can reach the deeper grains and will also release leached material and thus reduce the concentration gradients required for diffusive mass transport deeper in the particle). Most of the surface kinetic variability will come from differences in the mineralogy of the grains and their associations (though some will also come from variability in the permeability of the material surrounding the grains). Ideally we would have liked to be able to associate the changes in the surface leach kinetics with the mineralogy, but unfortunately the x-ray attenuation of the sulphides in this system are virtually identical. At lower x-ray energies the attenuation contrast between the sulphides would increase, but while lower energies could be used for smaller samples, they could not be used on the comparatively large columns used in this study with a reasonable scan time. An alternative is to section a representative sample of particles post leaching and directly determine their mineralogy. Unfortunately by the end of the leach period a large portion of the grains had completely dissolved and most of the remaining grains were pyrite, giving little insight into how the surface leach kinetic distribution correlated to the mineralogy. In this paper tomographic quantification and multi-scale analysis was performed on a small scale leaching column over 168 leaching days. A huge variation (18%–96%) was found in the extents of extraction among the ore particles. However, no correlation was found between sulphide dissolution and the particle's location within the column. The narrow size distribution used also meant that the particle to particle variability was much stronger than any trend with respect to the size of the particles in the column. This meant that virtually all the variability in the extent of sulphide dissolution was due to variations in the mineral grain size and spatial distributions within the particles, as well as the grain mineralogy. In order to assess this a grain tracking algorithm was developed that allowed all the hundreds of thousands of mineral grains to be tracked in time as they underwent dissolution. The massive data set produced meant that the grains could be binned into narrow size and distance to surface categories with enough grains in each category to not only assess changes in the average behaviour, but also the variability in this behaviour at the grain scale. It was found that, not unsurprisingly, the smaller grains leach quicker than larger ones and that those near the surface leach quicker than those near the centre of the particle. What was interesting, though was that the dependency on the initial grain size decreased with time. This was not because the dependency on the current size decreased, but was rather because the dependency of the current size on the initial size became weaker with time. This was because there was quite a large variability in the leach rate even within each narrow size and distance to the surface category. This variability is caused by variability in the surface kinetics of the individual grains, which, in turn, will be dependent on the mineralogy of the grains and the permeability of the material surrounding the grains. We developed an equation and methodology by which the distribution of the surface rate kinetics could be distinguished from that associated with the specific location and size of the grain. This distribution of kinetics is crucial to the performance of a heap and how it evolves with time. If this distribution is wide then the average initial kinetics will have little bearing on the long term kinetics of the systems, with the extraction slowing markedly with time as the faster leaching species are depleted. On the other hand, a narrow distribution would indicate kinetics that would be less variable with time, though there will always be a decrease in the kinetics as the grains near the surface are depleted and thus the kinetics become more dependent on those grains deeper within the particles. The variability in the leach rate with grain size and distance from the surface together with the variability within a particular size and distance category are key factors in the time evolution of the apparent particle scale leach kinetics. This is because the more variability there is in the leach behaviour of individual grains, the more the effective leach rate will change with time as the faster leaching grains are depleted. This paper gives a methodology for the quantitative assessment of this variability, which is the first step in the development and validation of improved particle scale leach kinetic models. This study was performed in the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery at Imperial College London, and at the Manchester X-ray Imaging Facility at Harwell, which was funded in part by the