A novel geometry for the acquisition of powder X-ray diffraction data, referred to as focal construct geometry (FCG), is presented. Diffraction data obtained by FCG have been shown to possess significantly enhanced intensity due to the hollow tube beam arrangement utilized. In contrast to conventional diffraction, the detector is translated to collect images along a primary axis and record the location of Bragg maxima. These high intensity condensation foci are unique to FCG and appear due to the convergence of Debye cones at single points on the primary axis. This work focuses on a two dimensional, fundamental parameter's approach to simulate experimental data and subsequently aid with interpretation. This convolution method is shown to favorably reproduce the experimental diffractograms and can also accommodate preferred orientation effects in some circumstances.For nearly a century, X-ray diffraction has been vital to analytical chemistry for materials characterization. Powder diffraction (PXRD) techniques provide a wide array of capabilities for chemists, ranging from phase identification by “fingerprinting” methods to full crystal structure determination Of particular interest here is analysis of diffractograms using ‘fundamental parameters' to model the diffraction optics and thus mitigate the use of external standards for appropriate whole pattern fitting methods. In general, this approach involves using analytical functions to represent each of the diffractometer's optic elements and the X-ray spectrum. These moderating functions are then convolved with Bragg peak positions to produce a calculated diffractogram Despite significant advances in X-ray sources, detectors and optics, the fundamental approach to collecting diffraction data has changed little with a few well established beam geometries dominating Details of the FCG apparatus used to measure diffraction data have been provided elsewhere To generate data for comparison to that calculated from the convolution algorithm, 3 samples with differing properties were selected: Ceramic corundum (aluminum oxide) in the form of a sintered plate (0.18 Copper foil, the manufacture of which introduced significant preferred orientation. Aluminum foil exhibiting extreme preferred orientation. Each sample was placed 150 Simulations were performed corresponding to each of the experiment data sets. At each sample to detector distance, the annular source image was convolved numerically with a Debye cone projection image. The Debye image was created by assuming that diffracted radiation was emitted uniformly throughout the sample thickness at angles between (2 In this paper we present for the first time a simulation and analysis method based on the fundamental parameters approach that facilitates a greater understanding of FCG and enables improved data interpretation. This is accomplished using the known geometry of a system to project Debye cones (which would be produced by an ideal point source) at an array of distances, and then convolving those images with one of the X-ray source projection on the sample. The resultant images are equivalent to those recorded by an area detector at each of the distances considered. These images may be treated in exactly the same way as images produced by an area detector experimentally. The arrangement presented previously If a continuum of sources is arranged in an annulus, then each sample plane produces a bright convergence point at a unique position along the principal axis of the instrument. From the arrangement shown in To extend the fundamental parameters approach to FCG, a two dimensional function representing the annular source was convolved with another representing the Debye cones. We have sought an analytical solution to the convolution for the subsequent ease of analysis and application. Both the annular source and Debye cones may be considered simple rings (when projected on to a flat surface normal to the principal axis), and thus can be described in one dimension using a radial co-ordinate system. To take the simplest form of the problem, consider an ideal ring source described a function This simplified model is limited by the discontinuous nature of the top hat and delta functions. If the problem is re-defined using Gaussian functions for the functions Although this equation is perhaps less intuitive than equation This simple convolution model does not take account of X-ray divergence or sample thickness, which may be accommodated by substituting a more complex function to represent the Debye cones. The commensurate increase in the convolution complexity, involving non-Gaussian forms, does not provide the basis for concise analysis. However, an alternative approach is to convolve numerically the two dimensional images representing the source intensity profile and Debye cones. A polycrystalline material, ideal for X-ray powder diffraction, consists of a sample composed of small, randomly oriented crystal grains. In cases where the crystallites show some preferred alignment, the Debye cones circumferential intensity is non-uniform, in extreme cases the diffraction rings appear as separated intensity arcs. In order to accommodate this possibility, our approach has been to modulate the Debye ring intensity function prior to the convolution. Geometric relationships between the crystallographic planes can be used to modify appropriately each Debye cone's intensity. Two dimensional diffraction data are presented for the samples interrogated. In each case, a simulated scattering distribution is shown with its corresponding measured distribution. For each material the patterns are recorded with the detector positioned at a Bragg convergence point and also shifted to satisfy  In the experiment images, occasional bright spots appear superimposed onto the ring pattern. These are caused by larger crystallites incorporated into the sample which are not considered in the simulation. The experiment rings also exhibit minor rotational asymmetry not seen in the simulations. This difference is caused by variations in the X-ray beam angle around the wall of the annulus, which is a result of a non ideal X-ray source and collimator, and their imperfect matching. The ring intensity is also not as predicted and this will be discussed in greater detail later.  The copper sample (data shown in Having generated two dimensional experiment and simulated image sequences for each sample, conventional one dimensional diffractograms were calculated. Background levels were calculated assuming the dominant source of background radiation was incoherent scatter from the sample and applying an inverse square correction. This approach provided a good fit to the diffractograms from the aluminum oxide and aluminum samples, but could not account for the shape of the background in the copper sample where the background reduces above Considering the diffractograms presented in We have shown that a two dimensional fundamental parameters based model can be used to simulate the diffraction data from FCG experiments. This model could equally well be used as an analysis tool similarly to the fundamental parameters approach applied to standard diffraction problems. The results presented indicate an increased tolerance to preferred orientation of sample crystallites compared to the more conventional powder diffraction geometry. Another major advantage of this geometry is that a large area detector is not required in order to integrate a Debye ring, since the scattering intensity is ‘focused’ to a single point. It is also worthy of note that all experiments to date have been performed using a standard sealed tube source and simple brass collimator. Work is now in progress to identify and test a more ideal optic/source combination for FCG. FCG relies upon formation of the primary Debye cones of radiation; it is well suited to analysis of polycrystalline and non-crystalline samples. The particular strengths of FCG become apparent in any situation where extended samples, especially in sheet form, must be examined for high throughput applications. The large size of the X-ray annulus compared to a pencil beam is attractive for scanning applications since this combined with the intensity gain should increase scanning speed significantly. As such where rapid data acquisition is required and spatial resolution is of secondary concern (e.g. in-line security screening, mineral processing, polymer production etc) the technique would be, in principal, attractive for identification of chemical phase. We wish to thank the EPSRC (EP/F017596/1) and the Innovative Research Call in Explosives and Weapons Detection, a cross-government program sponsored by a number of