This study was performed to investigate the effects of the cyclonic separation mechanism on the removal of magnesium from phosphate ore. An analysis of the particle-bubble collision mechanism in a cyclonic force field was used to design two different pulp circulation systems for a cyclonic-static micro-bubble flotation column (FCSMC). Experiments comparing the two conditions were then conducted. Size analysis of the feed and separated products was conducted with a BXF cyclone size analyzer. The results show that about 34.60% of the total MgO content in the feed exists in the −10μm fraction. This demonstrates that magnesium removal from phosphate ore has the characteristics of a micro-fine particle flotation problem. Under conditions of cyclonic circulation the MgO level of the concentrate is 1.74%, which is lower than that obtained from the column operated in direct-flow circulation by 0.34%. These results indicate that the cyclonic circulation mechanism of the FCSMC can promote removal of micro-fine particles containing magnesium. This is attributed to the function of surface flotation and to the reduction of the lower separation limit under conditions of cyclonic circulation.Phosphorus is an important basic material for industry and agriculture. Phosphate resources are abundant in China and sedimentary phosphate accounts for 70% of the total resources Currently, the common method of treating middle to low grade phosphate ore is a flotation process that uses conventional flotation equipment. This technique has some disadvantages. It is a long process that requires a large area for its operation and it incurs a high running expense. Progress in mineral processing has caused flotation columns to gain increasing attention for separation. Considerable amounts of work have been conducted in the field where magnesium has been removed from the phosphate ore using a series of flotation columns The column flotation process based on FCSMC technology lays a solid foundation for large-scale exploitation of middle to low grade phosphate ore. The study discussed herein was carried out to investigate the effects of different ways to introduce circulating pulp on the efficiency of magnesium removal from the phosphate ore. The fundamental cause of efficient removal of MgO from the −10 The ore samples were acquired from the Kungyang Phosphate Mine of the Yunnan Phosphate Chemical Group (YPCG). This mine is part of a large marine sedimentary deposit of phosphate. The main minerals are collophane, dolomite, and a small amount of terrigenous clastic rock. The main valuable minerals are the collophane and aplite collophane. The main gangue minerals include the dolomite and calcite. There are also small amounts of silicate, chalcedony, limonite, feldspar, muscovite, glauconite, kaolinite, rutile, and zircon present. By chemical components the ore’s industrial type is one of calcareous phosphorite. The experiments were conducted with a laboratory flotation column, as shown in The main separation equipment used in this study has 100 It is common knowledge that carbonate minerals have greater tendency to float than phosphate minerals. Therefore, a reverse flotation process is commonly adopted for removal of magnesium from middle to low grade phosphate ore. In this study phosphoric acid was used as the main inhibitor and sulfuric acid was an auxiliary inhibitor and pH regulator. YP2-3, from YPCG, was used as the collector for the carbonates. This material is mostly a fatty acid. The aim was to investigate how different circulation feeds affected magnesium removal. Exploratory tests showed that a circuit of single reverse flotation was appropriate. The experimental conditions, including reagent concentrations and technical parameters, are shown in The cyclonic circulation in an FCSMC separator provides two functions. One is the repetitious mineralization of particles contained within the circulating pulp and the other is a surface flotation function provided by the high intensity centrifugal force field formed at the bottom of the column. Furthermore, this centrifugal force field can also decrease the flotation lower particle size limit and efficiently promote the separation of micro-fine particles The relative speed between particles and bubbles is the key to mineralization efficiency. The larger the relative speed the stronger the collisions between particles and bubbles: This causes better attachment between them. The centrifugal force field formed in the column by the cyclonic circulation causes the bubbles to move from the edge to the center, along the diameter of the column. The velocity of bubbles in the centrifugal force field, The bubbles travel in a direction opposite to that of the particles. Therefore, the relative velocity between bubbles and particles can be defined as: The inefficient flotation of micro-fine particles is a weak link in flotation designs. This is also why studies on improving the separation efficiency of micro-fine particles are always hot research topics Stokes number serves as a criterion of inertial collision probability between the particles and the bubbles. Previous work carried out by other researchers has proved that the value of Stokes number where inertial collision can happen between particles and bubbles is 1/24 This formula demonstrates that there is a strong correlation between the lower limit for efficient flotation and the centrifugal acceleration. The centrifugal acceleration can be changed by varying the energy input from the circulation pump. The higher circulation pressures provide higher centrifugal accelerations, which lower the efficient flotation limit. Therefore, the cyclonic force field can expand the size fraction range for common fine particle flotation and allow for efficient separation of micro-fine particles.  It is well known that magnesium removal from collophane is done with a typical flotation system having suitable characteristics for micro-fine argillaceous minerals. The proportion of particles smaller than 74 It can be clearly seen from Experiments comparing the two different pulp circulation methods were conducted under equivalent conditions that are shown in It can be seen in We also used a cyclone size analyzer to investigate the size distribution of the products. The size distribution of the tailings and the size fractions of the MgO removed from the concentrate are shown in   The cyclonic circulation in a cyclonic-static micro-bubble flotation column provides a centrifugal force field where the efficient flotation lower limit, The −74 Cyclonic circulation gave a MgO level in the concentrate of 1.74%, which is lower than that from direct-flow circulation by 0.34%. The higher removal of MgO from the −10 This research is financially supported by the