A new method for extraction of zirconium from leach liquor of zircon concentrate is proposed. The procedure is based on the adsorption of Zr(IV) ions on rice bran. The sorption capacity of the biomass for zirconium is 50mgg−1. Adsorption equilibrium was achieved in less than 1min and slightly affected by solution acidity. In the optimum conditions, the adsorption efficiencies of other associated metal ions such as Ti4+, Fe3+, Al3+, La3+, Ce3+ were significantly lower than Zr(IV) ion and this biomass is excellent sorbent for the selective uptake of zirconium from acidic aqueous solutions.Zirconium is one of the abundant elements and is widely distributed in the Earth’s crust. Most of the zirconium is used as compounds for the ceramic industry, refractories, glazes, enamels, foundry mold and abrasive grits and compounds for electrical ceramics. Zirconium metal is used almost entirely for cladding uranium fuel elements for nuclear power plants ( With dilution by water, sodium silicate is removed while sodium zirconate is hydrolysed to hydrated zirconia. The resultant hydrated cake is dissolved in hydrochloric acid as given in the following reaction: The resulting leach solution is commonly containing some of impurities such as Fe, La, Ce, Ti, Al that must be separated from the solution. The methods such as liquid–liquid extraction, ion exchange resin, and liquid membranes have been reported for the extraction and separation of zirconium from the leach liquor of zircon concentrate ( Stock solution of 1000 The determination of all cations was performed on a Varian model Liberty 150 AX inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP–OES). Two gram of zircon concentrate was mixed with NaOH (50%) with phase ratio 1/1 in a nickel crucible and heated at 600 Batch experiments were performed at room temperature (25 The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration in the range 0.1–5.0 The effect of contact time between aqueous solution and rice bran on the retention of zirconium was investigated. The results show that adsorption of zirconium is very fast and distribution equilibrium between aqueous solution and biosorbent is established in less than 1 To determine sorption capacity of the rice bran, the distribution isotherm of zirconium was used. The maximum zirconium adsorption capacity of the bran is 50 The adsorption behavior of hafnium(IV), titanium(IV), aluminum(III), iron(III), lanthanum(III) and cerium(III) (100 The proposed method has been used for extraction and recovery of zirconium from zircon concentrate. An aliquot (20 The proposed methods have several advantages over those of previously reported for extraction of zirconium from zircon. The method is clean, simple and low cost. Adsorption rate is very fast and preference over classical ion exchanger. The adsorption capacity for the proposed cation is relatively high and can be applied for their removal in the range of milligram per liter or higher. The method need no pre-equilibration and is free from interference due to commonly associated elements.