Manufacturing industries require certified reference materials (CRMs) to ensure the quality control of analyses for the characterisation of product quality and their compliance to relevant norms and regulations. The European Commission (through the BCR activity) is active in the production of CRMs in support of EC policies. A series of projects has been selected which aims to produce materials in support of manufacturing industry needs in the area of polymers, glass and paint products for inorganic analyses. This article summarises the certification of three types of materials, namely glass, polyethylene, and alkyd resin paint coatings for their trace element contents. Details of the production, homogeneity and stability of the reference materials are reviewed, as well as the results of the certification.The lack of quality control of measurements carried out routinely in testing laboratories may lead to severe economic losses due to the possible misuse of inaccurate data Glass analyses are performed for evaluating the quality of products and associated risks (e.g. evaluation of air pollution upon melting of glass) in compliance to regulations. In particular, emission contents are more accurately calculated from a mass balance based on the amount retained in the glass, rather than by measuring their concentrations directly in the fumes. The quality control of trace element measurements require that glass CRMs are used at regular intervals. Glass CRMs are available from the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST, USA), e.g. SRMs 610–616, but in many instances elements covered by the EC Directive on emission control or regulating packaging and packaging waste are not certified or are given for information only in these materials. The need for glass CRMs to respond to EC regulatory requirements has justified the launching of an interlaboratory project The basic material used for the preparation of the candidate CRM was a soda-lime glass, which had been fully characterised for its major element composition The homogeneity of the glass CRM was checked by direct analysis on the glass plate using XRF, analysing one sample in five-fold out of each 40 samples taken during the CRM production. Verifications were based on the determination of trace elements (S, Pb, Sr and Fe) and major constituents of the glass (Si, Na, K, Ca and Al). Details on the study are published elsewhere The chemical composition of glass is known to be generally stable over long-term periods Each participating laboratory made six independent replicate determinations on two different bottles and on two different days. All precautions taken to ensure a good quality control are described in detail in the certification report The techniques and the sample decomposition procedures used by the participating laboratories for the certified elements are described in detail elsewhere The results were discussed in a technical meeting with all participating laboratories. The results accepted after the technical scrutiny were submitted to a statistical evaluation: Kolmogorov–Smirnov–Lilliefors tests for the assessment of the conformity of the distributions of individual results and of laboratory means to normal distributions; the Nalimov test to detect `outlying' values in the population of individual results and in the population of laboratory means; the Bartlett test to assess the overall consistency of the variance values obtained in the participating laboratories; the Cochran test to detect `outlying' values in the laboratory variances ( Elemental analysis is common in the polymer industry. Currently, and in support of the industrial development phase, production control and quality management, more than 60 elements need to be measured, in concentrations ranging from percent down to the ng/kg level The materials were prepared at BASF, Ludwigshafen (Germany). They consist of polyethylene granulate to which additives comprising the elements to be certified were added, with all necessary precautions to ensure a proper homogenisation of the final materials The homogeneity testing was designed in order to include the between-bottle variations in the overall uncertainty of the certified values For homogeneous materials, there will be no significant difference between The minimum sample intake with which the certified uncertainty can be obtained was studied by solid-sampling AAS for Cd, Hg and Pb (on sample masses ranging from 0.01 to 4 mg). In this method, sample sizes are so small that the variation observed depends mainly on the variation within the material but not on the analytical variation The stability of the reference materials was studied by storage over 8 months at three different temperatures (−18, 5 and 20°C). In addition, tests with artificial ageing, thermally (80°C for 11 and 18 days) and UV-induced (UV radiation at 20°C for 5, 10 and 15 days), were performed. The samples were stored in such a way that they could be measured at the same time (isochronous measurements The samples stored at −18°C during 8 months were used as reference for the samples stored at 5, 20, 80°C, respectively, and for the UV-aged samples. Measurements were performed in triplicate by ID–ICP–MS (Cr, Cd, Pb) and CVAAS (Hg). Additional details on the design of the study and analytical methods are given elsewhere Accelerated ageing by exposure of the material to heat and UV light offered a practical means of investigating the durability of the polyethylene matrix and the element stability of the material. It is important that the physical and chemical changes induced by artificial ageing duplicate those resulting from natural ageing under standard laboratory conditions. Since no information is available on natural ageing, some assumptions were made to transform the time scales of thermal and UV-induced accelerated ageing experiments to ageing under laboratory conditions (20°C). With respect to thermal ageing, the rates of degradation processes in organic materials generally increased with increasing temperature. The used exposure times of 11 and 18 days were estimated to correspond to ca. 2 and 3 years at normal laboratory conditions The tests carried out over 8 months at −18, 5 and 20°C did not show any instability for both materials. The stability of polyethylene at room temperature is well established. The pigments used are all known to be stable, even the organic substance phtalocyanine green. It was therefore concluded that the contribution of possible instability is negligible for these materials. Each participating laboratory made six independent replicate determinations on two different bottles and on two different days. All precautions taken to ensure a good quality control are described in detail in the certification report Similarly to the approach summarised in The certified values were calculated on the basis of the means of the laboratory means. Their overall uncertainty consists of three parts, namely uncertainties due to the characterisation of the material, due to inhomogeneity and due to stability of the material The EU Toy Safety Directive (88/378/EEC) The selection of the materials was based on the representativeness of paint products that would reflect current manufacturing practice (e.g. nitrocellulose, alkyd resin, or acrylic paint). Metal, plastic and wood were taken as base materials for the CRMs, as they are common fabrication materials for toys. The production of a comminuted paint reference material was also considered useful, enabling laboratories to quantify their extraction and analytical determination procedures, without the added complication of the paint scraping stage that is known to be a major contributor to the overall variation in results. Five types of materials were considered, namely mild steel panels coated with alkyd resin paint, aluminium panels coated with nitrocellulose paint, beechwood panels coated with nitrocellulose paint, ABS plastic panels coated with acrylic paint, and comminuted alkyd resin paint flakes. The levels of toxic elements in the materials to be aimed at should be at or about the maximum level allowed for in the Directive but with a reasonable variation and range in actual values An order was placed with a specialist paint manufacturing company for the production of 80 l of alkyd resin paint for the mild steel panels and the comminuted paint Following production of each batch of adulterated paint, the levels of migratable toxic elements in the paint were checked by analysis of a sprayed test panel. Each test panel was scraped and tested for migratable toxic elements using method EN71-3:1994. Following readjustments to the concentration of elements in the paints, the following production was decided and undertaken: (1) 2500 mild steel panels, size 150×100 mm, sprayed on one side with alkyd resin paint, (2) 2500 beechwood panels, size 150×100 mm, sprayed on one side with nitrocellulose paint, and (3) 5500 g of comminuted dried paint flakes prepared from alkyd resin paint. The spraying was carried out without delay to minimise any standing time after production, since the paint formulations may not be as stable as commercial consumer products. Each tin of paint was thoroughly re-mixed at the sprayer's premises using a mechanical shaking device. The specification required that the amount of paint sprayed onto each panel should be such that it was possible to scrape off at least 1 g of paint Prior to spraying with paint, the mild steel panels were degreased and abraded on one side by sand blasting. The comminuted paint flakes were produced by spraying the alkyd resin paint onto sheets of plastic. Just before the paint was fully dry, the film of paint was scraped off and left to air dry. The flakes produced were gently comminuted using a water-cooled analytical grinder with a stainless steel interior and moving parts. The ground particles were then sieved and that material passing through a 500 μm mesh. The composition of each of the paint reference materials and the candidate material are given in the literature with respect to their total trace element contents The bulk comminuted paint flakes were re-sieved through a 500 μm mesh and thoroughly mixed in a PTFE bottle for 1 week on a turbula mixer before being dispensed into 5 ml amber glass bottles with plastic screw caps using a PTFE spatula. Two grams of material was weighed into each bottle, with the necessary care to minimise possible effects of static electricity. The mild steel plates (150×100 mm) were packed for storage by wrapping them individually in tissue paper and bulking then together in groups of 10 plates in brown paper. The ABS plastic plates (150×100 mm) were packed for storage by wrapping them individually in tissue paper and bulking then together in groups of 10 plates in brown paper. The much thicker beechwood plates were wrapped individually in tissue paper and then bulked together in brown paper The homogeneity testing was based on the determination of total element contents at the 0.5 g level of intake following the British Standard for sampling chemical products (BS5309 Part 1). For each candidate reference material, 41 units (individual plates or bottles of comminuted paint flakes) were randomly chosen and analysed in duplicate. Each plate was analysed by dividing the area of each plate into two halves, scraping each half separately to obtain 2×0.5 g samples and analysing the two samples separately. The total element concentrations of As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Hg, Pb, Sb and Se in each paint material were measured using a total digestion method based on ISO method 11466:1995 (BS7755:1995). The method utilises an aqua-regia digest of the sample, under reflux, in a flask fitted with a trap containing aqua-regia to prevent the loss of volatile species. Additional details on this study are given elsewhere Based on the total element contents, it was found that some of the elements in some materials were not homogeneous at either the 95% or 99% confidence levels. However, the paint reference materials are industrial products and, by their nature and method of production, inherently more heterogeneous than some other reference materials. The materials were then still considered sufficiently homogeneous to be `fit for purpose' because the degree of inhomogeneity in them is acceptable in comparison to the method variation typically found using EN71-3:1994 Since the homogeneity was assessed on the basis of total element contents (and not on migration levels), the above approach was based on the use of `relative uncertainties' (i.e. uncertainty due to inhomogeneity expressed as a fraction of the mean analyte value) which was multiplied by the certified value for each element; this gave the uncertainty due to inhomogeneity which was then added in quadrature to the uncertainty resulting from the certification (i.e. the half-width of the 95% confidence interval of the mean of laboratory means). Thus, an expanded uncertainty was calculated for each element, including contributions from both certification data and material inhomogeneity. Details regarding the homogeneity data are given in the literature The stability of the migratable trace elements in the candidate CRMs was evaluated by comparing the trace element contents in materials stored at 25°C after 10 months with the A separate study was performed on the CRM 620, which was stored at temperatures of 10°C, 20°C and 40°C for a 12 month period. The certified values of selected elements (As, Ba, Cd, Cr and Sb) were verified by repeating the analyses for migratable element contents after 1 year. Results indicated that even at 40°C, no instability was detected for the elements tested in the CRM 620. On the basis of these data, the migratable elements in paints were considered to be stable and the materials (CRMs 620 and 623) suitable for certification The paint reference materials were certified by an interlaboratory trial involving 10 expert laboratories experienced in either toy testing or certification work. The certification was based on five separate extractions as specified in the harmonised European Standard EN71-3:1994 The same approach as described in For the CRM 620 – mild steel coated with alkyd resin paint – certified values were assigned for the following elements, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Pb, Sb and Se; for the CRM 623 – comminuted paint from alkyd resin paint – certified values could be assigned for the following elements, As, Ba, Cd, Cr, Pb, Sb and Se. Certification was not considered possible for the RM 621 because of the spread of results. However, indicative values could be given for As, Ba, Cd and Se while only the range of laboratory means could be justified for Sb, Cr, Pb and Hg. As highlighted above, CRM 622 was not certified owing to instability problems (hence no data are given for this material). For Hg only the range of laboratory means could be justified because of technical problems measuring this element in all the RMs The mean of the laboratory means was adopted as the certified value for each element in CRMs 620 and 623. The expanded uncertainty of the certified value was calculated as a 95% confidence interval, by combining the 95% confidence interval obtained from the interlaboratory certification study with the 95%/95% tolerance interval obtained from the homogeneity data for the material. A summary of the certified values, indicative values and range of laboratory means for each element in each reference material, as appropriate, is given in The reference materials described in this paper are available at the Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM), Retieseweg, B-2240 Geel, Belgium (Fax: +32 (14) 590406 – email: bcr.sales@irmm.jrc.be). A full report is delivered upon purchase of each material, containing detailed information on the preparation of the material, homogeneity and stability studies, technical and statistical evaluation of results and analytical methods used and of individual results