The precipitation parameters of mixed hydroxide precipitate (MHP) using caustic calcined magnesia were evaluated at simulated industrial conditions using a mixed sulphate–chloride feed solution and fine magnesia powder. Controlling the rate of magnesia addition was found to decrease the manganese content of the precipitate but the benefit was minimal. Thermodynamic analysis combined with oxidation–reduction potential measurements suggests that some of the manganese is reporting to the solids by an oxidative precipitation reaction. The oxidative precipitation of manganese in air was confirmed experimentally. Contacting MHP with feed solution was found to substantially improve the solids' nickel and cobalt grade while decreasing the manganese and magnesium content. Precipitate contacting with the feed solution also resulted in a higher concentration of sulphate and chloride in the precipitate.Mixed hydroxide precipitation (MHP) using magnesia is increasingly being considered to produce a nickel–cobalt intermediate product in the processing of nickel laterite ores. Industrial alternatives to MHP are mixed sulfide precipitation or solvent extraction. The MHP process is partially selective for nickel and cobalt in that most of the manganese, magnesium, calcium and sodium remain in solution. Mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide precipitation was first developed by California Nickel to “eliminate the costly and undesirable H The selective precipitation of nickel and cobalt was developed for the Cawse Nickel project and has been recently described in some detail ( Industrial piloting of the MHP process using magnesia was described where 95% of the nickel and 98% of the cobalt were recovered in the first stage by precipitating at pH 7.5 for 200–300 The industrial precipitation of MHP was described again in more detail by The piloting of an industrial MHP process was recently described to recover nickel and cobalt in the treatment of a copper–nickel sulphide concentrate (“Mesaba Concentrate”) using magnesia as the precipitant ( The precipitation of nickel hydroxide was studied by The precipitation of MHP using magnesia to recover nickel and cobalt from heap leach solution was studied at 25 Enriching MHP solid content by contacting the precipitate with feed solution was devised by The effect of various elements and ageing time was recently studied by Producing high quality MHP requires compromises between the various quality measures. The major inherent quality measures are chemical purity, crystallinity and particle size, which affect settling, filtering, material handling, re-dissolution and other processing requirements. Important considerations are equipment, process configuration, residence time, temperature, seeding, washing, filtering, precipitant selection and precipitant reactivity. The aim of the research is to evaluate the precipitation of MHP at a laboratory scale, at industrially relevant conditions (temperature, solution chemistry, and seeding), to determine whether the process can be optimized or improved. Both the reaction kinetics and thermodynamics were considered. Magnesia (EMAG45) used in this test work was sourced from Queensland Magnesia. EMAG45 was chosen due to its high purity, slow reactivity relative to CaOH and NaOH, and narrow and fine particle size distribution. It is 92 Analytical grade metal salts were used to make the feed solution. The composition was intended to simulate typical saline process solution post neutralization (free of iron, aluminium and chromium). Precipitation was performed in an agitated 1 A single batch of MHP seed material used in all the experiments was prepared by sequential precipitation, three times in series. The procedure to generate the seed material was carried out at conditions similar to the precipitation experiments described in the following section. Magnesia was added once, at 1.13 The precipitation reaction was initiated by the addition of seed MHP to the feed solution followed by the addition of dry magnesia (EMAG45) 30 The benefit of re-contacting MHP with feed liquor was experimentally evaluated. MHP that was precipitated at the standard conditions (100% seeding, 50 The effect of aeration on the precipitation of manganese was also evaluated. Three experiments were conducted at atmospheric pressure under different conditions of aeration. Air or nitrogen gas was purged into the reactor through a porous ceramic frit to maximize the interfacial area between the solution and the gas phase. A stoichiometric amount of magnesia base on the precipitation of Mn as Mn(OH) Solution samples were syringe filtered through a 0.22 MHP solids were characterized using a Malvern Mastersizer2000 to obtain the particle size distribution. A moderate ultrasonic frequency was applied for one minute to disperse the loosely bound aggregates. The particle morphology and chemical composition were determined by a Phillips XL30 SEM with EDX spectrometer. The dry solid phases were measured using a Bragg Brentano Bruker D8 Advance XRD. The MHP solid moisture content was determined by heating to 105 The solid chemical composition was determined by Analytical Laboratory Services (ALS), a commercial laboratory in Brisbane, Australia. Fusion/ICP was performed to determine the Ni, Co, Mn, Mg, Ca and Na content of the solids. LECO was used for total sulphur content, while titrimetric techniques were used by ALS for total chloride content. The rate of magnesia addition was evaluated to determine whether the quality of MHP could be enhanced by staging the addition of magnesia to lessen the level of supersaturation. The feed solution (1  Although the rate of magnesia addition clearly affects the rate of precipitation, no substantial effect on precipitate particle size was observed ( The MHP chemical purity is slightly improved by the staged addition of magnesia in terms of higher nickel content, lower manganese content and lower sulfur content ( There was no noticeable change in particle morphology or crystallinity, based on the SEM and XRD analyses. An example of an SEM micrograph of the dried MHP is shown in  The most important parameter in the precipitation of metal hydroxides is the pH, because the reaction is directly dependent on the activity of the proton (Eq. The activity of water and other dissolved electrolytes in the test solution was estimated by multiplying the molality by the estimated activity coefficient using the Harvie modified Pitzer equation from commercial software ( Reaction equilibrium constants were determined from enthalpy, entropy and heat capacity functions also contained in the software. The heat capacity functions provided by the software for the ion species were estimated using the Criss–Cobble entropy correspondence principle ( The thermodynamic hydroxide precipitation diagram based on Eq. The nickel precipitation reaction may be kinetically hindered or the amorphous MHP solid formed may be less stable than the crystalline Ni(OH) Manganese is not precipitated to the same extent as cobalt and nickel under the experimental conditions, which is in agreement with the thermodynamic prediction based on a hydroxide manganous precipitation. Nevertheless, 30–40% of the manganese is lost to the precipitate regardless, which may be a combination of lower activity of manganese in the mixed solid or oxidative precipitation. The activities in the solid phase remain unknown, but the oxidation–reduction potential measurements suggest that the potential is being controlled by the oxidation of manganese. Under sufficiently high oxidizing conditions, certain metal hydroxides can be preferentially precipitated by oxidation. Manganese is more susceptible to oxidative precipitation than nickel and cobalt. According to During the MHP experiments, the potential was monitored using a Pt–Ag/AgCl cell. The measured potential was converted to the hydrogen electrode scale at 50 From To further investigate the precipitation behavior of manganese, three experiments were conducted at different oxidizing conditions. The non-oxidizing condition was achieved by de-aerating the manganese solution by purging with nitrogen gas. The oxidizing conditions were achieved by leaving the solution naturally aerated and purging the solution with air. The manganese precipitation kinetics is shown in Re-contacting MHP with feed liquor increased the concentration of nickel, cobalt, sulphate and chloride in the solids while decreasing the concentration of magnesium and to a lesser extent manganese ( The benefit of supersaturation control by staged magnesia addition was minimal under the industrially relevant conditions of a 3 Thermodynamic analysis indicates that cobalt is precipitating well before its expected equilibrium value based on cobalt(II) hydroxide precipitation while the experimental nickel values are in relatively close agreement with the thermodynamic prediction. Thermodynamic analysis combined with oxidation–reduction potential measurements suggests that some of the manganese co-precipitation is due to an oxidative precipitation reaction with oxygen from the air. This was confirmed experimentally with manganese precipitation experiments in the presence and absence of air. We thank