The recovery of vanadium in ammonium molybdate production with raw sodium molybdate solution was studied. Experimental results showed that the vanadium and some of impurities P, As and Si can be adsorbed along with the molybdenum from the feed liquid by the weak base resin D314 in the pH range of 2.5–3.5 and then they can be eluted from the loaded resin with ammonia liquor. The vanadium can partially natural-precipitate from the eluted solution. The lower the pH value is and, the longer the standing time is, the less the vanadium remained in the solution will be. Standing for 24h in pH value 6.9, the vanadium in the solution was reduced to 0.51g/L V2O5. It was found that the precipitate is ammonium isopoly-vanadate and it is impure. By washing the precipitate with hydrochloric acid and ammonia solution sequentially and then roasting at 500°C for 2h, the product of V2O5 with the purity 99.12% was obtained. The impurities P, As and Si in the stood solution were removed by purifying with MgCl2 under the pH value range of 8.0–9.0 at 60–80°C for about 2h, while the removal of the vanadium in the solution was performed by adsorbing with the strong base resin D296 in pH value about 7.0. The devanadiumized solution can be used to produce high-quality ammonium molybdate. The loaded vanadium resin was eluted with HCl 6mol/L and, the eluted solution was returned to adjust the sodium molybdate solution pH value. The vanadium can be effectively separated and recovered in the process.Due to numerous co-properties in chemistry of molybdenum and vanadium, it is relatively more difficult to separate and recover vanadium from molybdate solution. In ammonium molybdate production, if the average vanadium concentration is more than 0.01 In the leaching solution, the vanadium (V) is in the form of VO To produce pure ammonium molybdate, many methods, such as ammoniate precipitation ( The present investigation deals with the application of ammoniate precipitation and ion exchange to separate vanadium from ammonium molybdate solution and to obtain purified ammonium metavanadate by using hydrochloric acid and ammonia solution to decontaminate for the vanadium precipitate. The sodium molybdate solution used to produce ammonium molybdate was obtained from Qinghe Huanqiu Chemical Plant, which was produced by roasting high impurity ferromolybdenum powder with sodium carbonate in air and leaching the calcined powder with water ( Molybdenum was determined with ammonium thiocyanate colorimetry by spectrophotometer, vanadium was titrated with ammonium ferrous sulfate ( The resins were respectively first soaked in distilled water for 24 Trials for the sodium molybdate solution ion exchange with the resin D314 were carried out in a glass column ϕ2.0 The separation of vanadium from ammonium molybdate solution with the resin D296 was carried out in a glass column ϕ2.0 The separation and recovery of vanadium in ammonium molybdate production were performed according to the flow sheet as shown in  From The molybdenum and the vanadium can be eluted from the loaded weak base resin with ammonia liquor. The composition of the eluted solution is listed in  From By adsorption with the resin D296 in pH value about 7.0, the concentration of vanadium was less than 0.008 The vanadium precipitate used to produce vanadium pentoxide was obtained from Qinghe Huanqiu Chemical Plant because the vanadium precipitate formed in the experimental solution is too little to be used.  For ammonium molybdate production, vanadium is a harmful substance as well as a valuable constituent. The vanadium can be effectively concentrated along with the molybdenum from sodium molybdate solution by adsorbing with weak base anion exchange resin in the pH range of 2.5–3.5 and eluting with ammonia liquor. Most of the vanadium in the eluted solution can be precipitated by adjusting the pH value to 7.0–8.0 and standing for 24–48