Grass is an abundant feedstock which is commonly used as animal fodder. It can also be utilized for bio-production, however its availability is generally not consistent through time. Storage is therefore an economic necessity to ensure continuous, steady supply for bioprocessing. Extrusion tests were performed, before or after Ca(OH)2 addition (75, 100 or 200 g kg−1 total solid (TS) of grass), with the objective to achieve 3 months storability without major carbon loss. The performances were determined by the changes in biomass characterisation, methane production through anaerobic digestion and carboxylate production through fermentation, in three storage conditions: fresh (no storage), and afterensiling or wilting for 3 months. For wilting, Ca(OH)2 addition of 100 and 200 g kg−1 TS before extrusion, and 200 g kg−1 TS after extrusion significantly preserved the biomass. For ensiling, the biomass were well preserved. Ensiling with Ca(OH)2 addition of 100 g kg−1 TS before extrusion was found the optimum preservation method in this study, with methane production of 237 ± 10 (test) vs 265 ± 29 (initial control) cm3 g−1 VSinitial CH4, and carboxylate production of 124 ± 8 (test) vs 109 ± 4 (initial control) mg g−1 VSinitial Carbon. Especially when storage conditions were sub-optimal (wilting), addition of 100 g kg−1 TS Ca(OH)2 before extrusion outperformed the non-treated, wilted condition to a large extent (178 ± 18 vs 50 ± 8 cm3 g−1 VSinitial CH4 and 86 ± 17 vs 18 ± 4 mg g−1 VSinitial Carbon). Overall, combined extrusion and alkali pretreatment improves grass storability.Lignocellulosic biomass can be a renewable resource for biogas and biochemicals such as carboxylic and hydroxycarboxylic acids [ In the past, several methods have been investigated including ensiling, drying and pelletizing, use of chemicals such as acid and alkali and among others on farm storage systems [ Herrmann et al. [ Next to physical methods such as extrusion, acid and alkali addition have also been widely studied for their applications in biomass treatment [ Considering the above, the objective of this study was to investigate the possibility of combining extrusion and Ca(OH) Lignocellulosic biomass – grass (from landscape, West Flanders, extensive management, harvested on September 2014) was harvested using a flail mower and kindly provided by Inagro (West Flanders, Belgium; Latitude: 50.901,545; Longitude: 3.124,464). The grass was coarsely sieved to remove fine particles and the length distributions of grass were 2–5 cm. The grass was stored in vacuum bags at 4 °C until usage. In this study, the grass was subjected to a series of process steps including pretreatment, storage, anaerobic digestion and fermentation. The overall process scheme is presented in The pilot scale twin-screw extruder (MSZ B 22e, 2 × 11 kW) was kindly supplied by Lehmann-maschinenbau (Pohl, Germany). The grass was split into two batches, one batch was not extruded, and the other batch was extruded at rotation speed of 6.28 rad s The two sub-batches of grass were stored at room temperature (average 18 ± 3 °C) for 3 months (90 days) for storability test. Two storage conditions were used – (i) ensiling and (ii) wilting. For ensiling, 5 g of grass were stored in 8 cm BMP test was performed to study the effect of the pretreatment and storage on methane yield from the substrates. The performance was scored in three conditions: fresh (24 h after pretreatment or non-treated), and after ensiling or wilting for 3 months. The inoculum (total solid 58.2 ± 3.2 g kg Batch fermentation was performed simultaneously to investigate the fermentability of the treated biomass to carboxylates. The performance was scored in three conditions: fresh (24 h after pretreatment), and after ensiling or wilting for 3 months. Fermentation was carried out in 20 cm Total solid (TS), volatile solid (VS), ash content, soluble chemical oxygen demand (sCOD) and solids COD were measured according to standard methods. Ammonium (NH One-way ANOVA was used to determine the significant differences in the mean values of the VS loss, methane production and carboxylate production. Tukey's range test was performed as a post-hoc analysis to pinpoint the mean values which are significantly different from each other between each treatment. The analysis was carried out with a 95% confidence interval. After 3 months of wilting, treatments with 100 and 200 g kg Ensiling performed better than wilting for every treatment considering VS loss, with or without Ca(OH) In terms of pH, for wilting, final pH of non-treated and extrusion-only grass increased versus initial pH ( Some pretreatments can induce losses in TS and VS due to aggressive reactions such as high temperature, high shear, or chemical reactions [ Addition of alkali before extrusion was more successful in preserving the biomass, by considering addition of 100 g kg Fresh, non-treated grass produced 265 ± 29 cm After wilting, all treatments had a lower methane production than the initial. It is well known that wilting can induce losses in both carbohydrates contents and volatile fatty acids [ After 3 month ensiling, non-treated and extruded-only grass retained the same methane production, 189 ± 11 vs 200 ± 15 cm By comparing the 100 g kg Both the experimental and statistical analysis for ensiling and wilting pointed towards the 100 g kg Similarly to digestion, the (non-)treated grass was subjected to fermentation before and after storage ( After storage under wilting condition, 100 and 200 g kg After 3 month of ensiling, 100 g kg Before storage, extrusion-only grass gave a carboxylate production of 121 ± 3 mg g Assuming Ca(OH) This paper illustrated the possibility of alternative storage technologies for grass and suggests that Ca(OH) This work was funded by Special Research Fund (BOF, project number: