As far as geological and mining activities are concerned, drilling protection boreholes in rocks is a frequent research and prevention practice The objective of the Authors was to construct an instrument that would ensure a high quality of the registered video material and work independently, thus making it possible to register images in long boreholes. Apart from the question of the introscopic camera design, the problem concerning the transportation of the device alongside the examined borehole was also solved. Additionally, all the elements had to be intrinsically safe. The CCD commercial camera was chosen as the basic building block of an introscopic probe. This camera makes it possible to register video sequences with a HDTV resolution of 720p (1280×720), and with a speed of 60 frames per second. The instrument was equipped with an optical converter, which yields a sharp image in a borehole of the required diameter. The inside of the examined borehole was illuminated with a set of LEDs powered by a lithium-ion battery. The camera, together with its auxiliary systems, was placed in a hermetic casing made of a steel tube whose diameter was The constructed instrument is presented in In the case of vertical boreholes, the necessary distance between the camera and the side of the borehole is ensured by rollers fixed to flat, springy elements ( Under laboratory conditions, registration of the coal surface was tested. Of course, it needs to be stated that in-situ conditions pose a far greater challenge for researchers. Although the optical system of the camera was constructed in such a way as to ensure the maximum sharpness for the probe operating inside a Some of the earliest attempts to use the color camera in the process of analyzing rock fractures within a borehole were presented in the article The camera presented in this article has a construction that is slightly different from the cameras commonly used in the mining industry. In the article Another difference stems from the recording of the image registered by cameras. A typical construction The method proposed in the article was created so that selected lithological properties of the drilled rock material could be interpreted in a “swift” manner. The fact that the method is fast and simple results, albeit sometimes, in certain oversimplifications when it comes to evaluating particular structural parameters of drilled rocks. If an analyzed rock fragment is covered with stone debris or rock waste, the number, width, or length of the existing fractures might not be estimated in a satisfactory way (this may happen in particular when the color of the stone debris or rock waste is similar to the color of the surrounding rocks). However, these potential inadequacies may be eliminated (to some extent) by the application of high-class optical solutions (really high definition will make it possible to detect even traces of fractures), as well as by adequate illumination while taking pictures, and proper optical zoom. In order to accurately determine the directions and size of fissures and fractures within the borehole, Palchik Underground tests were carried out in a drainage borehole The procedure of the wedge installation encompassed the following stages: (a) weaving a steel line (whose length is at least twice the depth of the borehole) through a reel; (b) placing the wedge inside the drilling perch (the steel rod placed inside the perch); (c) transporting the wedge to the bottom of the borehole by means of a driller machine (the line was being unwound at the time), (d) propping the wedge at the bottom of the borehole (the contact force generated by the drill pushed out the nails holding the two sections of the wedge together; the wedge remained at the bottom of the borehole), and (e) taking the drilling perches out of the borehole. A measurement with an introscopic camera was performed in an active drainage borehole of a 65-mm diameter, ahead of the wall front. Inside the borehole, the system for transporting research probes (described above) was installed. At the entrance to the borehole, there was a 6-m long casing pipe. The length of the borehole was 80.5 We now discuss the results of the lithological analyses of the rocks occurring in the area of the borehole. It needs to be stated, however, that these were not analyses carried out by means of standard research methods, consisting in examining a rock core obtained in the course of a drilling procedure. An innovative step was to describe the rocks in question on the basis of the frames of the video material documenting the consecutive sections of the borehole. Such a description has its drawbacks, which shall be discussed later—still, it makes it possible to identify significant features in situ that could be irretrievably lost in the process of extracting a core from a borehole. One should also remember that, as far the drillings carried out as part of the methane outburst prevention etc. (methane drainage) are concerned, drilling cores are not extracted. Thus, the information obtained due to the procedure discussed here is unique and one of a kind—and this means that there is no other way of conducting any analyses of the lithological features of the rock material occurring in the area. The video material registered inside the borehole offers an opportunity to observe the rock mass in situ, i.e. the rock formations occurring there in their natural forms created in the ancient geological periods. It is also possible to observe structural distortions and other macroscopically visible geological alterations and peculiarities. Another unique opportunity for researchers is that they are able to evaluate the effects of the mining activity on the borehole. It is beyond doubt that it is impossible to come up with a full description of the rock occurring in a borehole using photographs only (i.e. frames of the video material). A comprehensive description can be provided by a geologist who has a natural rock in the form of a core at their disposal. Still, some (though not all) lithological features of rocks can still be evaluated on the basis of photographs (a video material) taken inside a rock mass. Depending on some specific characteristics of the original material (the type of the rocks subjected to drillings), one may investigate its selected structural and textural characteristics (such as the size and shape of the rock components, the way they come together, their arrangement, and spatial design—identifying the larger pores, fractures, and cracks), as well as its color, gloss, or bedding. By careful observation of the recorded material, it is also possible to discern any distortions or geological peculiarities (changes in compactness, the presence of the rock debris, atypical color, local discontinuities, caverns The features observed in the photographs usually allow a researcher to precisely identify the group and the type of the rock through which a borehole is being drilled—and even to provide a general lithological profile of the drilled area. At this point, it needs to be stated that preventive drillings are conducted in areas whose lithology has been at least partly established. This information is essential when it comes to reducing the number of mistakes in descriptions compiled on the basis of video materials recorded in boreholes. There are a number of advantages, as well as limitations connected with the proposed method. The most significant advantages of the method include: an opportunity to observe the rock mass in situ, as well as an opportunity to provide a general description of the rocks and entire geological formations occurring there, together with estimation of selected structural and textural properties (such as alterations, fracturing, discontinuity, and other geological phenomena and peculiarities), an opportunity to analyze a large section of the rock mass at one time, within a relatively short period of time. This is connected with the length of a borehole and the depth of the camera insertion, an opportunity to provide a comprehensive description for the whole length of the borehole. This minimizes the risk of overlooking the borderline between the lithological formations, the depth of occurrence, dislocation etc., an opportunity to register a magnified video material. The scale of the obtained magnifications depends on the optical solutions applied in the camera, which, in practice, yields several times magnification (macro magnifications), an opportunity to carry out observations while conducting preventive drillings, which has a significant impact on the economic aspects of the method. In such situations, there is no need to drill boreholes or extract the core material for the purpose of geological description. The costs of the method are connected with the equipment, only, and the equipment can be used many times, advantages related to the preventive measures taken in mines. This is connected with the fact that the method can be used to issue immediate warnings about any atypical lithological and structural changes in the rock mass, as well as “atypical” areas, such as distorted, porous, and fractured areas, or local discontinuities. The most significant disadvantages of the method include: the fact that the observation and interpretation of the image from the video recording cannot fully replace analyses performed upon the natural rock material. The method can only yield a general description containing some rough information, and it excludes examining such properties as hardness of rocks, their actual color, smell, response to the application of HCl etc., a risk of a temporary loss of the image sharpness due to the occasional unevenness of the borehole and the changing distance between the camera and the rock surface problems connected with the white balance, reflections, and occasional insufficient illumination, too fast and irregular movements of the camera, which make it impossible to provide a comprehensive description of particular rock types, a risk of a distortion of the image accuracy due to the presence of the drilling fluid, whose excess blurs the natural rock color and, occasionally, also pores and cracks a risk of contamination of the glass surface of the camera lens, or a potential damage to the camera during a borehole inspection. The disadvantages listed above (apart from the first one) may – but do not have to – occur, and can be successfully eliminated by perfecting the research instrument and using the best components possible. The individual frames of the video material registered by the constructed introscopic camera, moved alongside a directional well cutting through a litostratigraphic mudstone layer (the westphalian A—the Załęże beds In the course of the analyses of the video material, the researchers encountered some problems (such as problems connected with sharpness, the presence of the drilling fluid, or the camera moving too fast). The interpretation of the analyzed images – regardless of certain limitations – led to the correct identification of the changes in the layer lithology or in the rock porosity. Furthermore, it made it possible to identify certain geological peculiarities, such as structural distortions (cracks, fractures, comminution of the rock material). The end result of such efforts may be a general lithological profile of the drilled rock formations. The profile of the drilled rock formations is represented by a group of psammite rocks. These include fine-grained and medium-grained quartz sandstones ( The paper discusses the tests of the constructed introscopic camera, used to obtain high-quality images of the inside of boreholes (such as drainage boreholes)—i.e. the inside of the rock mass itself. The information analyzed includes: the lithology of the drilled rocks, their structural and textural properties, changes in porosity, fracturing, and other geological peculiarities. It was demonstrated that the introscopic imaging is a method that can be applied in underground conditions, and that it may, in certain cases, constitute an effective alternative to analyzing natural samples in the form of drilling cores. Moreover, the method – when applied in preventive drillings – is the only available source of geological information on the drilled rock material. Additionally, the method enables researchers to inspect the nature of this material and provide the in situ evaluation. As a result of analyzing the recorded video material, warnings can be issued to mine employees about changes in the layer continuity, rapid changes in macroporosity, fracturing, etc. In other words, the method can be an important part of the outburst and methane hazard prevention in hard coal mines. The presented method, regardless of its certain weak points and limitations, has enough advantages (mostly economic, scientific, and preventive ones) to be further developed. The application of optimized instruments, adjusted to underground conditions, should guarantee high-quality results. The present paper is a research task undertaken as part of the Strategic Project “Improving Work Safety in Mines”, Research Task no. 4.3.2: Studies on the inflow methane with an indication of pressure distribution in the drainage holes.