Adsorption properties of natural clay (from Eskişehir of Turkey) were investigated by depending on different adsorption conditions such as different initial dye concentrations and contact times. The chemical composition of the natural clay was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF). The removal of basic dyes such as Nile Blue (NB) and Brilliant Cresyl Blue (BCB) from aqueous solutions using natural clay in this study was described. After the equilibrium adsorption time of 8h, the adsorption capacities for NB and BCB reach about 25mg/g and 42mg/g, respectively. Lagergren kinetic equation was used to test the experimental data to examine the controlling mechanism of adsorption processes. Adsorption data of the BCB and NB onto natural clay were fitted well by the pseudo-first-order model. The adsorption isotherms data were correlated with the Freundlich equation and the Freundlich constants K
                     f (mg/g) and n (intensity of adsorption) were calculated. The r
                     2 (regression coefficients) values were 0.9835 and 0.9849 for NB and BCB, respectively. The adsorption capacities of natural clay for NB and BCB have the following order: BCB>NB.Colored organic effluent is produced in the textile, paper, plastic, leather, food and mineral processing industries In this work, we describe the removal of basic dyes such as Nile Blue and Brilliant Cresyl Blue from aqueous solutions using natural clay. Natural clay used as an adsorbent was obtained from Eskişehir of Turkey. It contains various amounts of dioctahedral smectites (Ca-montmorillonite), natural zeolites (analcime), and loughlinite, which is a kind of sepiolite Basic dyes [Nile Blue (NB) and Brilliant Cresyl Blue (BCB)] were obtained from Merck. The chemical structures of the dyes are shown in The chemical composition of the natural clay was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF). Spectrophotometric measurements were carried out using Jenway 6105 UV/Vis Spectrophotometer. Natural clay, grey in color was used as an adsorbent. Firstly it was dried at 110 NB and BCB solutions were prepared by dissolving dye in deionized water to the required concentrations. The natural clay (0.2  Pseudo-first-order kinetic equation was used to test the experimental data to examine the controlling mechanism of adsorption processes. The pseudo-first-order kinetic model was suggested by Lagergren for the adsorption of solid/liquid systems and its linear form can be formulated as The equilibrium adsorption capacity, The Freundlich equations were used to fit the equilibrium isotherms. The Freundlich equation Adsorption properties of basic dyes NB and BCB on the natural clay (from Eskişehir of Turkey) were investigated. Adsorption properties of the adsorbent were evaluated by depending on different adsorption conditions such as different initial dye concentrations and contact times. The isotherm data were fitted with Freundlich isotherm. The following conclusions can be drawn: The adsorption capacities for NB and BCB increase with the increase of the adsorption time. After the equilibrium adsorption time of 8 Linear plots of log Adsorption data of the NB and BCB onto natural clay were fitted well by the pseudo-first-order model. It was found that the regression coefficient for the pseudo-first-order kinetic model is high ( The adsorption capacities of natural clay for NB and BCB have the following order: BCB Natural clay sample was kindly provided by Professor G. Atun from the Chemistry Department of Istanbul University. We would like to thank Professor S. Pişkin and A. Kantürk from Yıldız Technical University for help in XRF.