The purpose of this study was to examine the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) during osteoblastic differentiation of cultured human periosteal-derived cells. Periosteal tissues were obtained from mandible during surgical extraction of lower impacted third molars. Periosteal-derived cells were introduced into cell culture. After passage 3, the periosteal-derived cells were further cultured for 42 days in an osteogenic-inductive culture medium containing dexamethasone, ascorbic acid, and β-glycerophosphate. The alkaline phosphatase activity in the cultured periosteal-derived cells increased rapidly up to day 14, followed by decrease in activity. The Runx2 protein was expressed at day 7 and day 14, and its expression was not observed thereafter. Both VEGF165 and VEGF121 were expressed strongly at days 35 and 42 of culture, particularly during the later stages of differentiation. Alizarin red S-positive nodules were first observed on day 14 and then increased in number during the entire culture period. Osteocalcin and VEGF were first detected in the culture medium on day 14, and their levels increased thereafter in a time-dependent manner. These results suggest that VEGF secretion from cultured human periosteal-derived cells increases along with the mineralization process of the extracellular matrix.Angiogenesis is an essential part of bone formation and bone fracture healing. Among the many angiogenic factors, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is one of the most important cytokines. VEGF is secreted from many cell types, including osteoblasts and osteoblast-like cells. VEGF-mediated angiogenesis is essential for bone formation and repair. Recently, substantial progress has been made toward developing tissue-engineered alternatives to autologous bone grafting for the treatment of maxillofacial bony defects. The advantage of tissue engineering is that small biopsy specimens from relatively uninvolved sites can be obtained from the outpatient under local anesthesia, and the involved cells can be isolated, cultured, and expanded into large numbers. A minimally invasive and easily accessible alternative would be to derive the cells from the periosteum. The periosteum also contains precursor cells with the potential to differentiate in vitro into osteoblasts and chondrocytes. Several studies have reported the bone formation potential of periosteal-derived cells. However, the quantification of VEGF during cultured human periosteal cell-derived osteogenesis has not yet been investigated. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the level of VEGF during osteoblastic differentiation of cultured human periosteal-derived cells. Periosteal tissues with approximate dimensions of 5 mm × 20 mm were obtained from mandible during surgical extraction of the lower impacted third molar from 3 patients, with informed consent as required by the ethics committee of Gyeongsang National University Hospital. The periosteal explants were placed in a 100-mm culture dish and cultured in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. The explants were incubated at 37°C in 95% humidified air and 5% CO The activity of ALP released from the periosteal-derived cells was determined biochemically using p-nitrophenylphosphate as a substrate. The cultured cells were sonicated in 0.1 mol/L Tris buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100. The ALP activity was determined using 50 mmol/L p-nitrophenylphosphate in a glycine-NaOH buffer at pH 10.4. The amount of p-nitrophenylphosphate released was estimated by measuring the absorbance at 410 nm. The ALP activity was expressed as mean (n = 3) of μmol p-nitrophenylphosphate produced per minute per mg of protein. The total protein concentration was determined using the Bradford protein assay reagent. For detection of Runx2 protein expression, the cells were lysed by placing them in NP-40 lysis buffer (20 mmol/L Tris, pH 7.5, 140 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40, 5 μmol/L AEBSF, 1.5 nmol/L aprotinin, 10 nmol/L E-64, and 10 nmol/L leupeptin) for 30 minutes. The cells were then sonicated and centrifuged at 12,000 For the mineralized nodule formation assay, the mineralized matrix was analyzed using the alizarin red S technique. The cell cultures were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fixed in 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes. The cells were washed with distilled water, treated with a 2% alizarin red S solution for 5 minutes, and washed several times with distilled water to remove the remaining staining. Periosteal-derived cells staining red represent positive alizarin red S staining. Forty-eight hours before the assay, the culture media was replaced with a serum-free osteogenic medium containing 10 nmol dexamethasone, 50 μg/mL L-ascorbic acid 2-phosphate, and 10 mmol/L β-glycerophosphate. After incubation for 48 hours, the amounts of osteocalcin and VEGF secreted into the culture media were analyzed using an intact human osteocalcin enzyme immunoassay kit (Biomedical Technologies, Stoughton, MA) and a human VEGF enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (R & D Systems, Mineapolis, MN) according to the companys' instructions. The osteocalcin and VEGF levels were expressed as mean (n = 3) ng of osteocalcin and pg of VEGF by mL medium. The periosteal-derived cells showed a fibroblast-like morphology in the nonosteogenic-inductive culture medium for the early passages. The cell morphology then changed to a cuboidal-shaped form in an osteogenic-inductive culture medium. In addition, the formation of many cell clusters in multiple layers was observed ( The ALP activity in the periosteal-derived cells increased rapidly up to day 14, and then decreased steadily to day 35 and remained constant thereafter ( Alizarin red S-positive mineralization nodules were first observed at day 14, which was followed by an increase in number over the entire culture period ( The VEGF secretion was undetectable on day 7. The periosteal-derived cells secreted VEGF from day 14 to the end of the culture period. The level of VEGF secretion also increased in a time-dependent manner from day 14 to day 42 of the culture period. The level of VEGF secretion on day 14 in culture was 372.4 pg/mL. It showed a 1.3-, 1.99-, 2.94-, and 3.04-fold increase on days 21, 28, 35, and 42, respectively, compared with that observed on day 14 ( The potential donor site morbidity associated with autologous bone grafting has led to the recent development of alternative tissue-engineering approaches for restoring maxillofacial bony defects. For tissue-engineered bone formation, the procurement of autologous precursor cells that can mature into bone cells with the proper form and phenotype is the most important factor. Several types of cells, including bone marrow–derived mesenchymal stem cells and periosteal-derived cells, have been used in bone tissue engineering. The periosteum is another source of osteogenic precursor cells for tissue-engineered bone formation. Like bone marrow–derived mesenchymal stem cells, periosteal-derived cells contain multipotent cells with the potential to differentiate into osteoblasts and chondrocytes. The present study examined the osteogenic activity of cultured human periosteal-derived cells. There is a set of markers that are sequentially expressed during the differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells into osteoblasts. In general, ALP and Runx2 are early markers of osteoblast differentiation, whereas the secretion of osteocalcin and the mineralization of the matrix are associated with the late phase of osteoblast differentiation. Alizarin red S and von Kossa staining are the most common methods used to examine a mineralized matrix. The bone tissue is a complex and highly vascularized tissue. Therefore, an evaluation of the angiogenic activity in bone tissue engineering is important. Angiogenesis is an essential part of normal bone development and bone fracture healing. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), belonging to the platelet-derived growth factor/VEGF family of growth factors, is a key regulator of angiogenesis. VEGF is secreted from many cell types, including osteoblasts and osteoblastic-like cells. VEGF-mediated angiogenesis is essential for bone formation to occur. The present study examined the expression of VEGF (VEGF These results show that an increase in the level of VEGF secretion from cultured human periosteal-derived cells occurs with periosteal-derived osteogenesis. This suggests that VEGF signaling during the periosteal-derived osteogenesis might depend on the osteoblastic differentiation stage and may be a marker for the osteoblastic differentiation of periosteal-derived cells.