Germanium recovery from real fly ash (FA) leachates was studied using ion-exchange procedures. The procedure was based on germanium complexation with catechol (CAT) in an aqueous solution followed by the retention of the Ge–CAT complex onto a conventional strongly basic anionic resin (IRA-900). A centred composite rotatable design (CCRD) with two factors was employed for experimental design and analysis of the results. The factors examined during sorption tests were CAT amount and resin dosage. Optimum values of these parameters were: a CAT/Ge molar ratio of 9 and resin/Ge dosage of 3, obtaining 96.1% germanium retention. The obtained response surface and mathematical model are significant with high correlation coefficients (R
                     2
                     =0.8794).
                  The maximum amount of retained germanium was calculated to be 215.5mg/g resin. The elution of the germanium complex was achieved with acid solutions in an ethanol matrix.Germanium is not very abundant in the Earth’s crust, occurring to the range of 1–7 Most of the Ge in the lithosphere is in association with zinc and its minerals, so nowadays Ge is mainly obtained as a by-product of zinc ore processing. In addition, around 30% of the Ge used in the world is obtained from recycled materials, particularly electronic devices ( Many techniques have been used to separate germanium from other elements contained in leachates including precipitation with tannin ( In relation to ion-exchange methods, conventional strongly basic resins are described as not suitable to separate Ge (IV) in a selective way by several authors ( Because Ge forms complexes with diphenolic and polysaccaride compounds ( In this paper the use of conventional anionic resins has been tested to extract germanium from an aqueous solution successfully. To achieve the selective extraction of Ge, its anionic catechol complex is formed first and following this, the complex is adsorbed onto the anionic resin. In previous work ( Following our investigations of Ge extraction and separation with ion-exchange resins, the present experiments were undertaken to study in depth the extraction of germanium from real aqueous leachates as well as the selectivity of the process and the efficiency of sorption and elution. The reaction of exchange between the resin and the Ge–CAT complex is shown in The selectivity of the method was mainly based on the selective complex formation of Ge and CAT. In addition, ionic exchange resins generally have a greater selectivity towards the ions of major valence or load. Among ions with the same valence they find greater affinities towards ions with a higher atomic weight. Therefore, in an aqueous solution containing various metals, since the complexing action increases the sorption of a metal species on ion-exchange resins ( An ion-exchanger shows preference for highly charged ions, for smaller solvated volumetric ions and for ions which interact more strongly with the matrix. Therefore, it would be possible to predict the behaviour of the elements accompanying germanium in leachates knowing the most probable form in which these elements can be in aqueous solutions at pH According to this information, of the present elements in the original solution, the theoretical affinity of the resin for the present species would be: Traditional methods of experimentation do not depict the combined effect of all the factors involved and, moreover, they do not ensure the determination of optimal conditions, but these limitations can be avoided using a properly statistical technique for designing experiments such as a response surface map (RSM) ( The resin IRA-900 in chloride form was obtained from Rohm-Haas and was chosen from among the conventional strongly basic anionic resins with a pore size sufficiently large to sport to the germanium and catechol complex. The properties of the resin are given in Batch adsorption tests were performed in 150 Samples were maintained for 24 Several papers assured that anionic resins did not obtain a selective extraction of Ge ( Preliminary tests carried out without catechol showed that germanium retention onto IRA-900 decreased <40%. Therefore, experiments adding catechol to solutions in order on one hand, to increase the germanium retention, and on the other, to obtain selective retention by means of the presence of the germanium–catechol complex because its anionic nature, along with its high molecular mass, implies (in principle) an advantage in reaching higher selectivity for germanium ( After the contact, the loaded resins and raffinates were separated by vacuum filtration (0.45 Acid solutions (HCl and H To analyze the interaction between the parameters, a one-replicate five-level and two-variable central composite rotatable design (CCRD) with 13 experiments was employed for optimization of germanium retention with respect to catechol and resin dosages expressed as catechol/Ge molar ratio (  Total organic carbon (TOC) is the amount of carbon bound in an organic compound, and it has been used as a non-specific indicator of catechol presence in solutions. The organic carbon present was measured by subtracting the inorganic carbon (IC) from the total carbon content (TC). The IC is a combination of carbonates and bicarbonates. A Total Organic Carbon Analyzer, high-sensitivity Shimadzu TOC–V CPH PC-controlled model with auto sampling was used. The experimental efficiency of the retention of germanium and other impurities present in the leachates are given in The statistical significance of the model was checked by an F-test and the analysis of variance (ANOVA) and is summarized in The relationship between the dependent and independent variables was studied using contour and response surface plots as shown in It is worth noting the high efficiency of the retention of germanium that was reached in all tests, indicating that this method is suitable for recovering the germanium of these kinds of dilute aqueous fly ash leachates. From the equations and response surfaces obtained, the following conclusions can be extracted: the amount added of catechol and resin positively influenced the retention of germanium (coefficients Using the ANOVA programme, the maximum germanium sorption yield minimizing both catechol and resin additions can be estimated and the results are: CAT/Ge (molar) In terms of the efficiency of retention, Co, Mn, Mo, The response surface equations in coded terms for Ni and Sb extraction are shown in Eqs. If the response surfaces of Ge, Sb and Ni are compared ( For experimental data, relative selectivity ( The separation factor ( The experimental affinities that IRA-900 showed two different groups ( Experimental affinities agreed with the theoretical affinity of the resin for the present species but some deviations in elements with low contents in the leachate such as Mo, Ga, The selectivity of the method was demonstrated since the separation factors of the main possible interfering elements are very high: As (602.8), Ni (148.8), Sb (87.3) and Zn (71.1) ( According to the results of previous work ( Three samples of 100 Both 1 A minor quantity of eluting involved a reduction in the stripping yield. With regard to the impurities, the final solution is almost free of interferences ( In order to verify the possibility of resin reutilization, the resins previously used (tests 1–6 of the Section  The results of the present paper show that a selective recovery of the germanium from real leachates in the presence of other elements such as: arsenic, antimony, cobalt, vanadium, molybdenum, nickel and zinc, using ion-exchange procedures is possible. Common anionic resin has been tested with excellent results. To achieve a selective extraction, an organic complex of germanium was formed. The selectivity sorption of germanium was also tested, and the following order of affinities was found: Ge, Mo, Ga and Finally, the germanium is eluted of the resin with an eluting solution. HCl in 50% of ethanol was found to be the best eluting agent. After this, the elution resin was in chloride form, ready for a new utilization. A rotatable central composite design was applied to study the effect of catechol amounts and resin dosages on the sorption yield. A quadratic model was developed. Optimum extraction yields were calculated to achieve a quantitative sorption. The possibility of resin reutilization was checked and high germanium extraction yields (97.6–98.3%) were very high after regenerating the resin. The total organic carbon measures show that the catechol retained in resin is the stoichiometric amount (CAT/Ge