The energy required to crush rocks is proportional to the amount of new surface area that is created; hence, a very important percentage of the energy consumed to produce construction aggregates is spent in producing non-commercial fines. Data gathered during visits to quarries, an extensive survey and laboratory experiments are used to explore the role of mineralogy and fracture mode in fines production during the crushing of single aggregates and aggregates within granular packs. Results show that particle-level loading conditions determine the failure mode, resulting particle shape and fines generation. Point loading (both single particles and grains in loose packings) produces clean fractures and a small percentage of fines. In choked operations, high inter-particle coordination controls particle-level loading conditions, causes micro-fractures on new aggregate faces and generates a large amount of fines. The generation of fines increases when shear is imposed during crushing. Aggregates produced in current crushing operations show the effects of multiple loading conditions and fracture modes. Results support the producers' empirical observations that the desired cubicity of aggregates is obtained at the expense of increased fines generation when standard equipment is used.The absence of natural aggregate at cost-effective transportation distances has prompted extensive use of manufactured aggregates. The US aggregate industry produces ∼ Aggregate manufacturing typically starts by blasting rock masses and is followed by a series of crushing stages. Comminution in typical hard rock quarries is sketched in Crushers used for hard rock are sketched in Fines that do not meet minimum particle size requirements for use in concrete find little use and remain stockpiled (in Georgia, these fines account for approximately 4% of the total aggregate production). In addition, there is virtually no use for pond screenings that are obtained after washing the different gradations, in particular manufactured sand ( The purposes of this study are to explore the role of mineralogy and crushing mode on fines production and resulting particle shape. These topics are studied with a combination of data gathered during visits to quarries, an extensive mail-in survey and laboratory experiments. (Note: within the context of this manuscript, the term “fines” refers to particles that pass the #200 sieve.) Information about crushing sequence, fines production, mineralogy and mechanical properties of granites were collected from a survey of 35 quarries in Georgia. Granite specimens in the area contain orthoclase, quartz, plagioclase and biotite, often in enough quantity and size to be identifiable by the unaided eye. In the absence of specific mineralogy data, the reported oxides are used as indicators of specific minerals, for example: SiO The specific gravity of granite-forming minerals follows: quartz  Finally, there is no correlation between the amount of pond screenings that were reported and the parameters considered above, including the content of various oxides (i.e., mineralogy), specific gravity and LA abrasion. Therefore, differences in mineralogy among the various granites in the area play a secondary role in defining the amount of generated fines. The next two sections focus on the effect of crushing conditions on fines generation. Crushers break rocks by fracture propagation induced by the applied compression and shear forces. The theoretical bases for fracture mechanics started in 1921 when Griffith related fracture propagation to pre-existing cracks or defects. Later, in 1957, Irwin introduced the concept of stress intensity to assess fracture propagation and suggested that a fracture propagates when the stress intensity factor approaches a critical value that is characteristic for each material. The stress intensity varies with the fracture mode; there are three primary modes: ‘mode I’ (opening) is due to normal tensile stress and ‘mode II’ (sliding) and ‘Mode III’ (tearing) are due to in-plane shear. In most cases, loading conditions produce mixed-mode fracture propagation. Mixed mode fracture surfaces, such as mode II superposed on mode I, exhibit multiple transverse fractures that look like flower petals inclined with respect to the planar surface produced by the mode I fracture (experiments conducted in collaboration with L. Germanovich— Granites are made of different mineral grains; hence, there are interfaces. The failure in cohesive granular materials is intrinsically related to the presence of microcavities and the stiffness contrast between components. Pores (width-to-length ratio > When a compressive load is first applied, the randomly oriented cracks tend to close. If the load is increased, the faces of the microcavity slide relative to each other. This displacement produces tensile stresses at the tips, causing the fracture to propagate in tension in the direction of the load. The interaction between neighboring cracks alters the stress field and the original propagation path of a fracture ( The previous observations suggest that fracture propagation is closely related to the internal structure and mechanical properties of rock grains and minerals. For instance, dense, fine-grained rocks such as limestone develop very straight needle-shaped fractures that propagate without interacting with each other leading to an explosive failure ( Preliminary laboratory tests on the influence of the loading conditions on cohesive materials were conducted with gypsum specimens. Sand was mixed in the gypsum paste to model a material with some internal granularity and stiffness contrast. The various load configurations and corresponding results are summarized in The effects of load configuration were studied further with granite specimens. Cores of granite ( Results are summarized in The fracture faces that formed during the four-point flexural test and the Brazilian test were rough and clean, there was no evidence of attrition powder, fractures developed along grain boundaries, and both cleavage fractures in biotite and feldspars and conchoidal fractures in quartz were easily identifiable on fracture faces. However, fracture surfaces that resulted from the compression tests were covered with small and shallow transverse cracks (i.e., mixed mode), showed a teeth-like texture, and fine powder on surfaces evidenced the attrition between the coarse aggregates. The shape of aggregates generated after crushing is assessed in terms of the long L, intermediate I and short S axes (as in The previous results point to the relevance of shear and mixed failure modes in fines generation. The faces of aggregates sampled from secondary and tertiary crushers during the site visits conducted as part of this study showed both planar surfaces with powder (as observed in compression tests) as well as clean rough surfaces (as observed in tensile tests), often on the same particle. This suggests that multiple loading conditions take place during crushing. Intensive particle-to-particle interaction takes place during crushing operations, particularly when crushers are choke-fed. Crushing of granular packs has been extensively studied in the last two decades. The most important observations relevant to this context are: Interparticle coordination plays an important role in the crushing of granular packs. When particles are of similar size, the coordination number is low, and they are more likely to be loaded at opposite poles and to experience splitting-type failures. On the contrary, splitting failures are hindered when particles are loaded by smaller size neighbors; the higher coordination number causes a distributed load condition ( The probability of a particle crushing within a granular packing increases with: increasing confining pressure, particle size and particle angularity, and decreasing coefficient of uniformity, density and coordination number ( Particle crushing contributes to volume contraction and reduced dilation in shear ( The particle size distribution of the granular material crushed in one-dimensional loading (i.e., zero lateral strain) often approaches a linear trend on a log-log scale, suggesting a fractal distribution of grain sizes ( Given the axial and transverse relative motion of crusher surfaces, further insight is needed into grain crushing when the granular pack is subjected to shear as compared to one-dimensional compression. In addition, data are also needed about the evolution of particle shape. These questions are explored next. Two types of loading conditions were implemented: one-dimensional compression and simple shear (devices are shown in Stress vs. void ratio plots for a loose and a dense specimen are presented in The grain size distribution curves before and after one-dimensional compression and shear loading are compared in Fines produced in one-dimensional and simple shear tests were characterized via optical and scanning electron microscopy to gain further insight into the prevailing fracture mechanisms that result from different loading conditions and the associated shapes of the fines produced. Coarse particles resembled the original particles and showed local contact damage and abrasion streaks, as can be seen in the SEM image in Average sphericity and roundness values for the different fines fractions are plotted in The energy required to crush rock material is proportional to the amount of new surface area that is created. Therefore, energy consumption increases with fines generation, and it can be estimated that 10 times more energy is spent in producing pond screenings than in producing 10SM sand, for the same weight. It can be concluded that a very important percentage of consumed energy is spent in producing the non-commercial products. The packing density that develops within crushers as the aggregates pass through affect the energy required to crush rock and the characteristics of the products (fines content and particle shape). The evolution of packing density is determined by choking conditions and the geometry of the crusher. The average normal contact force per particle Therefore, it is estimated that the average contact force per particle in a dense packing is smaller than in a loose packing by a factor of approximately 3/4. In addition, the loading of low coordination number particles in loose packings resembles diametric point loading (weak resistance), while the loading of high coordination number particles in dense packings produces a multi-directional loading condition that solicits a stronger aggregate response ( The void ratio vs. logarithm of the applied load e-log The relative motion between the crushers' walls determines the degree of shear strain imposed on grains. The increase in fines generation with the application of shear is the result of increased principal stress ( Site visits and an extensive survey revealed the most common characteristics among granite and carbonate crushing operations in Georgia. In addition, the analysis of previously published results and new experimental studies with single aggregates and grain packs provide support to the following conclusions: A large percentage of the energy required to crush rocks is spent in producing non-commercial fine-grained products. Single-aggregate and grain-pack crushing studies show that particle-level loading conditions determine the failure mode, resulting particle shape and fines generation. “Point loading” develops in single aggregates subjected to in-line, longitudinal and Brazilian loading conditions. A similar failure mode takes place in grains with low interparticle coordination within loose packings. Point loading promotes mode I fracture propagation, which generates the least amount of fines as shown by clean fracture faces on aggregates. Conversely, aggregates with high interparticle coordination in dense packings and single aggregates that are loaded through large contact areas experience mixed-mode fracture propagation, show evidence of micro-fracturing on new aggregate faces and generate a large amount of fines. The generation of fines increases with increasing shear, in both low and high interparticle coordination packings. The results from this study support the producers' empirical observations that unwanted fines generation and desired aggregate cubicity are mutually dependent—at least in the context of current crushing technology. In general, loading conditions that promote low coordination and mode I fracture propagation produce flaky and rod-shaped aggregates; these can be readily broken in flexural loading to improve cubicity, with minimal fines generation. On the other hand, operations that promote high coordination produce higher cubicity at the expense of increased fines generation through abrasion and asperity breakage. The evolution of packing density within a crusher depends on its operation and geometric design. Choke feeding promotes high coordination, favors cubicity and produces a large amount of fines. The analysis of aggregates produced in current crushing operations suggests that multiple loading conditions and fracture modes occur. The faces of aggregates sampled from secondary and tertiary crushers show both planar surfaces with powder (as observed in compression tests and high coordination specimens) as well as clean rough surfaces (as observed in tensile tests and low coordination specimens). This research was conducted by the authors while at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Support was provided by Georgia crushed stone companies and The Goizueta Foundation. Results sketched in