Policies are encouraging to reduce emissions in all sectors, due to the high energy demand during the life cycle of the processes. Constructions are not an exception and policies are encouraging to reduce energy demand in buildings. Although new constructions are reducing their energy demand according to new directives, without interventions in the actual building stock, the European goals proposed for 2050 cannot be achieved.
                  Insulation is known to achieve an important reduction in the energy demand in the operation phase of the buildings. Despite that, this implementation carries out an initial investment in both, cost and impact, which suggest that using low embodied materials, such us bio-based materials, could improve this solution. Despite their good thermal properties, these new materials are not arriving at the actual market for insulators. In order to improve this scalability, an evaluation of the efficiency of different materials is carried out, with a following combination of the efficient materials in order to generate new hybrid solutions. These hybrid materials cope to simplify the applicability of bio-based materials, generating sandwich panels or combined mats to generate materials similar to the commercialized ones which have an increasing market nowadays.
                  The methodology presented combines Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) and Building modelling simulation. Using thermal simulations of EnergyPlus and the evaluation of efficiency and further projections of DEA.
                  Seven bio-based materials and polyurethane for comparison have been studied, with a thickness that varies from 1cm and 26cm in increments of 5cm. DEA analysis is used to quantify the efficiency score of the different thicknesses of the materials. The non-efficient materials are projected to this frontier, achieving a combination of materials. Those combinations have been analysed in order to model only the feasible solutions, which have proved to achieve efficiency in all the combinations proposed.Reducing the primary energy consumption seems one of the rows to achieve a sustainable development, so focusing in one of the main consumers of this energy is essential. In Spain, buildings represent a 32% of this primary energy demand, which main consumption is done in conditioning the building. Insulation of the building has been proved to achieve an important reduction in this consumption. Despite that, this implementation should be carried out in a sensible way, as in the majority of the cases the materials used are high embodied energy materials which can counter-effect the improvements achieved counting the whole life cycle of the solution. To skip this trade-off, bio-based materials may represent an important alternative, as their thermal and acoustic properties are really competitive comparing with commercial ones. Despite that, the commercial scalability of those materials is growing slowly what suggest that a major boost for trade is required. Taking into account this fact and the high demand for sandwich panels in the building sector, a hybrid generation of insulation materials could generate a change in the actual commercial tendency of bio-based materials. Previous research has been carried out combining Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) and LCA, but only a little research has been carried out in the building sector and only one has combined LCA A systematic methodology to evaluate the ecoefficiency of these materials and a further generation of hybrid combinations is proposed via a Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA). This methodology consists in a benchmarking of the different solutions against predefined inputs and outputs. The main goal of this research is focused on the opportunity for the non-efficient solutions, which can be projected to the efficient frontier generating hybrid combinations of different materials in order to control their properties and achieve new materials. The methodology we propose allows assessing the ecoefficiency of candidate alternatives (i.e., materials and thicknesses) and systematically generate ecoefficient materials combinations from inefficient ones. This strategy comprises three main steps and integrates energy simulations, life cycle cost and impact as well as DEA. The first step corresponds to the data generation, where each alternative is simulated in a building model providing the energy requirements. These requirements are then used to calculate the total life-cycle cost and impact associated with each alternative. The second step consists in an objective reduction, which is carried out in order to simplify subsequent calculations by ruling out of the analysis redundant indicators. In the third step, which is the core of our methodology, we apply DEA to benchmark the efficiency of the different alternatives. To this end, each alternative is modelled as a decision-making unit (DMU) whose performance is evaluated from the cost and impact indicators determined in step one and retained after step two. The efficient alternatives (efficiency score of 1), would be saved as a reference. Conversely, the non-efficient would be used to systematically identify hybrid materials potentially ecoefficient (see further details in To analyse the performance of the different materials, a cubicle-like building has been modelled in EnergyPlus. In energy terms, this software includes the equations set which define the energy consumption of the building taking into account the climate conditions and the heat and mass transfer balances. This simulation provides the energy demand during a specific time period (1 year). This energy demand and the materials stock of the building are used to evaluate the environmental impact associated with each category and the total cost of the different solutions to evaluate. The different impact categories and the cost would be different inputs of our model, while the output selected is an output dummy that quantifies if the solution achieves the defined conditions of the building (1 fulfilled, 0 not fulfilled). Finally, the impacts and cost associated with each combination of material and thickness correspond to a DMU in DEA. To quantify the inputs of each DMU, 2 different databases have been used, in order to quantify the cost and the environmental impact of the solutions. On the first hand, for the total cost of the solutions, iTEC database has been used to achieve the price of all the conventional construction materials, whereas, for the bio-based materials, their cost has been extracted directly for different suppliers. The total cost of the materials used ( On the other hand, for the environmental impact, each material has been evaluated with all the impact categories of Ecoindicator99; each one has been calculated based on the mass used. The impact of the electricity has been evaluated with the impact of low voltage electricity of the Spanish mix for 1 kWh. In order to eliminate the redundant objectives, a dimensionality reduction analysis is carried out. This analysis can be done in the inputs, outputs or both, in this methodology it has been carried out only in the inputs. The different inputs may differ in the magnitude order between them, in order to solve the problems originated by the nature of the data; each input and output is normalized between 0 and 1. Seven of the total inputs have been extracted from the further analysis due to their redundancy with the other inputs. The final objectives chosen are Land Occupation, Ozone layer depletion, Fossil Fuels, Mineral extraction and Total cost. A combined method of LCA + DEA is applied in this research; the main reason for the inclusion of DEA methodology is due to the necessity to implement its projection method. Despite that, it is also a beneficial methodology in order to quantify the efficiency of the different insulation materials and thicknesses. Due to the nature of our inputs and outputs, an input-oriented method is required, which determines the proportional reduction in inputs required by an inefficient solution in order to become efficient, while the output is constant. The model used corresponds to BCC model (  After this combination, a deeper analysis has to be done in order to verify the manufacturing possibility of mixing the different DEA suggested materials. The different restrictions applied are shown on the following list: PU used for comparative; PU mixings are excluded from the following steps. Cellulose installation method is not compatible with other materials. Natural fibres can be combined in order to produce mats with other materials. Wood and cork can be used as external layers of sandwich panels. Not more than 3 materials combined would be used as hybrid solutions. Finally, the proposed combinations are evaluated in order to verify their efficiency. We next present and discuss the results of the applying methodology to seven bio-based materials and polyurethane. For each material, six different thicknesses have been analysed, 0.01, 0.06, 0.11, 0.16, 0.21 and 0.26 As it is shown, wool is efficient in five out of six thicknesses, this is due to its thermal properties and its low cost which helps to achieve the efficiency. On the other hand, cork does not achieve efficiency in any of its solutions. This can be explained because their properties are really similar to wood and hemp but with a higher price and impacts. We can also see that thicker insulation layers achieve better efficiencies than lower ones. This can be explained because thicker layers require less energy demand and the electricity mix in Spain is expensive and dependent on fossil fuels, which tends to penalize those solutions with higher energy demand. When we take into account the projected solutions, 27 different combinations are achieved, mixing between two and four different materials as it is shown in  Once the solutions are selected, the thicknesses of each material are achieved with the combination of the percentage of the materials and the thickness of the selected DMU, achieving the following hybrid materials: All the thickness vary between 21 and 25cm, this higher thickness minimizes the energy consumption. These values are achieved due to the low impact of those materials and the reasonable cost of them, which penalize the energy consumption against the installation of thicker layers of insulation. Finally, A methodology which systematically provides combinative solutions of insulation materials have been proposed and proved its results in a modelled building. The objective reduction proposed has been able to reduce 7 inputs out of 12, this has helped to eliminate redundant solutions that do not provide new information compared to the actual results. A total of 21 out of 48 solutions have achieved an efficiency score of 1 without requiring to be combined with other materials. Thick insulation layers are requested in order to achieve efficiency in the majority of the solutions, this proves that reducing the energy demand with insulation achieves lower costs and impacts according to the eco-efficiency score obtained. Only 7 from 21 hybrid combination were feasible solutions due to the restrictions of the model. More similar materials should be applied in order to increase the number of applicable solutions. Extracting PU would also help to find more applicable solutions. All the 7 hybrid combinations have been able to achieve an efficiency score of 1, providing new materials which could be implemented as insulation layers.