During the steel production in the basic oxygen furnace (BOF), approximately 7–15kg of dust per tonne of produced steel is generated. This dust contains approximately 1.4–3.2% Zn and 54–70% Fe. Regarding the zinc content, the BOF dust is considered to be highly problematic, and therefore new technological processes for recycling dusts and sludge from metallurgical production are still searched for. In this study the hydrometallurgical processing of BOF sludge in the sulphuric acid solutions under atmospheric pressure and temperatures up to 100°C is investigated on laboratory scale. The influence of sulphuric acid concentration, temperature, time and liquid to solid ratio (L:S) on the leaching process was studied. The main aim of this study was to determine optimal conditions when the maximum amount of zinc passes into the solution whilst iron remains in a solid residue.The generation of steelmaking dusts is an integral part of melting in steelmaking plants. Steelmaking dusts are waste oxide materials, whose major components are iron oxides. These steelmaking dusts are obtained either in the form of dust, from dry dust separation, or in the form of sludge from wet dust separation. Due to the zinc content in the steelmaking dusts and sludge they cannot be recycled, hence they are deposited in landfills. Large grain size scattering as well as varied chemical and mineralogical composition are typical features of steelmaking dusts. Both BOF dust and sludge are categorized as hazardous wastes However, hydrometallurgy does not offer a solution to the steelmaking waste processing by only one versatile way. The leaching methods are individual and depend not only on the type of the processed waste but on the physical, physico-chemical, chemical and mineralogical properties as well. Research in the field of hydrometallurgical processing is becoming more and more intensive. It is mainly because of the need to process complex raw materials, environmental aspects and also due to the legislative pressure for environmental protection. This work focuses on a study of the influence of the temperature and sulphuric acid concentration on zinc extraction into the solution as well as the determination of the optimal conditions under which the maximum amount of zinc passes into the solution and iron remains in solid residue. The aim is to design a recycling method for BOF sludge. The sample of BOF sludge was dried and homogenized before the leaching experiments. The chemical analysis was performed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). The chemical composition of dust from converter gas treatment is shown in The mineralogical composition was determined by XRD phase analysis ( In the sample of BOF sludge no phase containing zinc was identified. This can be caused by the following reasons: Small amounts of Zn in the sample, 0.1–3%. These amounts create a small amount of phases, and if zinc is distributed to various phases (zinkite, franklinite, and complex franklinite) their diffractions can vanish in the background of the XRD pattern. The diffraction measurement was carried out on Cu Kα radiation. In principle, this radiation is not very suitable for samples with high iron content, because fluorescent radiation is activated, which results in the increased background of the diffraction pattern, and therefore small diffraction peaks are vanishing in the background. It is assumed that a part of the sample, in regard to its origin, is not totally crystallized. Amorphous parts result in the increased background of the diffraction pattern. In addition, the carbon present causes similar effects. Another reason can be the fact that franklinite and magnetite are isostructural and the diffraction peaks appear approximately at the same diffraction angles. However, the most important fact seems to be the existence of isomorphic structures, which are created by ferrites very often. The analysis results also showed the presence of various ferrites and/or structurally very similar substances.  The input sample of the sludge was further analyzed by the sedimentation analysis for particles distribution on the Scanning photo sedimentograph Fritsch Analysette 20. The sample of BOF sludge was dispersed by ultrasound for 2 The outcomes of the analysis are displayed in Distribution and cumulative curves of scatter for the BOF sludge sample are shown in The leaching experiments were carried out in the apparatus, which is shown in A glass reactor of 800 The chemical analysis, carried out in order to determine Zn and Fe content, was made by means of AAS variant Spectrometer AA 20+. In each sample the pH value was measured. All results were recalculated due to the change of the pulp volume caused by sampling and evaporation. During the BOF sludge leaching by sulphuric acid, the following chemical reactions are assumed: Reaction Calcium present in the input sample of the BOF sludge was identified as calcite CaCO Several facts result from the thermodynamic study  From the thermodynamic point of view increasing the temperature in the leaching system does not change the situation significantly, From the thermodynamic study it results that zinc creates soluble sulphates in the wide range of pH values in the acid area at normal temperatures, and the stability area of this ion widens with decreasing temperature. Iron also creates a wide stability area in the acid area in the range of pH values similar to the stability area of soluble zinc ions. From the viewpoint of the redox potential values zinc creates a stability area of Zn As it was found during the test experiments, under certain conditions a white coagulation is precipitated from the solution. Following the chemical analysis and calculation it was specified, that the white coagulation is calcium sulphate. The    In From   The aim of the experimental work was to verify the zinc leachability from fine-grain BOF sludge in acid medium. The BOF sludge is a very heterogeneous material, and therefore it is difficult to choose suitable concentration of the leaching medium. The sulphuric acid solution in the concentration range up to 1 This work was supported by