The porous structure of coal directly determines its gas transport property. The fluid flow behavior of coal is one of the key science questions that will influence the coal energy industry. In this study, the influence of real coal macropore structure on the fluid flow through coal was studied through 3-D coal structure reconstruction by the CT images. Based on the reconstructed coal structure, the micron-scale structure parameters were quantitatively analyzed. A newly programmed Matlab code was established to find the volume fractal dimension, obtain the relationship between porosity/permeability of coal and volume fractal dimension, and estimate the tortuosity fractal dimension by using the 3-D box dimension algorithm. The results show that the volume fractal dimensions of 6 coal samples range from 2.25 to 2.79 and the tortuosity fractal dimensions of capillaries range from 2.15 to 2.73. The 3-D coal structure cannot only quantitatively estimate the real porosity of the coal, but it can be used to characterize the complexity of coal's porous structure through mean deviation of surface porosity. It can be clearly seen from the reconstructed coal that coal specimen-C3 is highly heterogeneous because it has complex pore structure as well as wider pore size distribution and the highest mean deviation of the surface porosity. The volume fractal dimension can be used to quantitatively define the complexity of pores. The larger the porosity of coal, the greater the fractal dimension. The permeability and porosity of coal are negatively correlated with the volume fractal dimension. The tortuosity fractal dimension can effectively characterize coal permeability, but it weakly correlates with coal porosity. The outcome of this study helps to understand the structure-based flow characterization and gas transport behavior in heterogenous coal which will have the implication of the gas extraction from coalbed methane reservoirs and coal mine gas drainage.Coal, known as a complex and natural porous medium, contains vast of pores and fractures with different scales and shapes. Fractal theory has wide application to define the properties of porous medium. Katz et al. In this study, a systematic method was established to reconstruct the real 3D coal structure through stacking the 2D micro-CT images. Based on the 3D coal structure, the pore size distribution (PSD), pore volume, porosity, and permeability of tested coals were statistically characterized and analyzed. Followed this, we analyzed the heterogeneity by using the probability distributions of pore size and volume based on the surface porosities of tested coals. Through this study, a Matlab-based tool was developed to establish an automated process to study the surficial and volumetric fractal properties of coal by importing the 3D structural information from the digitalized 3D coal structure. Moreover, this study obtained the tortuosity fractal dimension through the pore structure parameters obtained by CT 3-D reconstruction combined with the tortuosity fractal math model, separately explored the relationships of both volume fractal dimension and tortuosity fractal dimension to coal's porosity and permeability, and quantitatively described the effects of different pores and fractures structures on coal's porosity and permeability. This current study will lay the foundation for our future work of fluid flow transport characterization of coal with applications of gas adsorption on coal, seepage and coal seam water injection, and subsequent mechanical theory and engineering design of coal mines. Six different coal samples were collected from different sampling sites in China. CT technology is a computer-based image reconstruction of a series of X-ray images obtained from specified cross-sections with different density and display in the form of high-resolution digitalized 3-D images. The CT scanner used in this study is the Xradia 510 Versa high-resolution 3D X-ray microscope manufactured by ZEISS X-ray Microscopy Inc. The CT scanner was fine tuned to be capable of measuring coal samples with desirable resolution. During each experiment, the coal core was placed on the high-precision console and positioned and rotated under the control of the console. X-ray beam transmits the coal along the axis and the transmitted X-ray will be captured by a CCD detector. In the scanning process, the turntable is rotated 0.9° each time per scan. After CT experiment, about 1000 sheets of CT slices with a resolution of 2 μm were obtained for each coal sample. The concept of fractal dimension was first introduced by Hausdorff in 1919, and the fractal geometry was initially proposed by Mandelbrot in 1977. Fractal is considered as the important theory and effective method to quantitatively describe the heterogeneity of irregular geometries and geometries. Fractal theory has been proven to be an effective framework to quantitatively describe the complexity of the pore structure in both 2-D and 3-D space. The 3-D fractal dimension principle used in this study is based on the box dimension method. For the 3-D data body, the box is a cube. When There are a large number of interconnected pores and fractures inside the coal body that form many curved capillary bundles with different cross sections. When the fluid passes through a random and complex pore structure, the following fractal Eq.  Jointing Eqs. Many studies show that the coal with a large number of pores and fractures is a fractal body and its porosity, permeability and physical properties all have fractal characteristics. The permeability is an important parameter used to describe the macroscopic seepage properties of coal samples. For the relationship between fractal dimension and permeability of coal reservoirs, Fu This study aims at finding the absolute permeability of coal that measures the ability of saturated single-phase fluid or seepage to pass through pores and fractures in the coal. This means inside the coal there must exist effective pores interconnecting one another so as to provide corresponding conduits for seepage. Therefore, in order to ensure the numerical simulation of permeability for smooth progress and fast convergence, it is necessary to detect the connectivity of the 3-D pore structure, remove isolated pores and fractures, extract interconnected pores, perform the box grid division and optimization of the porous space, and use finite element software to numerically simulate the permeability. In the process of simulating seepage, assuming that the density of gas is constant, that is, it is regarded as an unsteady incompressible viscous flow that follows the laws of conservation of mass, the law of conservation of mass, and the law of conservation of energy. Thus, the Navier-Stokes equation can be used to simulate micro-flow in the porous space and its the vector form Based on the data obtained from the seepage simulation, the coal sample permeability is calculated by the following formula: Among the above parameters, L, A, and ΔP can be obtained by seepage simulation, Q can be obtained by the following formula: The viscosity of methane gas is calculated according to formula below: By the means of CT 3D reconstruction and fractal theory, the method of studying pore fracture is established. As shown in The images of coal samples were obtained by CT experiments. It is clear that the CT images can capture the pores, fractures and minerals for different coal samples as shown in For each slice of image, the original image needs to be processed for the 3-D coal structure reconstruction. As shown in After finishing the segmentation, the watershed lines connecting independent distinguishable pores is obtained using a fast watershed algorithm based on topological theory and rendered using the color-cycling illumination model. In other words, each pore is attached with a unique label. Thus, the corresponding porous structures could be easily extracted for quantitative analysis. Both the pore size and distribution are important parameters of porous media which defines the macroscopic properties of the media. Different types and ranks of coal will occur different shapes and sizes of pore structures which are influenced by the coal sedimentary history, geological evolution and coalification degree. Therefore, it is essential to utilize the real 3-D coal structures to investigate the adsorption, desorption, diffusion and seepage of methane within the coalbed. All six coal samples described in the experimental section were reconstructed to 3-D structure as shown in Through the 3-D pore structure reconstructed by CT, we label different sizes of pore structures and quantitatively analyze the pore sizes. In the study, assuming that each pore is a sphere with equal volume, the equivalent pore size can be calculated according to the following equation In order to more intuitively quantify and compare the pore distributions of the 6 coal samples, we draw the comparison figures of both pore-size probability distribution curve and pore volume probability distribution curve of the 6 coal samples, respectively, as shown in The heterogeneity of pores in coal affects the macroscopic heterogeneity of coal to some extent. The permeability of coal with high heterogeneity will be less conductive and low permeability is expected, which will affect the performance of gas transport through the coal formation. In order to further quantitatively characterize the heterogeneity of the coal sample, the surface porosity and its mean deviation are introduced to analyze the heterogeneity of the pore fracture structure. The stronger the heterogeneity of the coal sample, the more complicated the pore fracture structure. The current research shows that using fractal dimension to characterize the microscopic heterogeneity of pore structure in coalbeds is effective. In this work, the coal samples were analyzed based on CT technology and fractal theory. Through the three-dimensional reconstruction of the realistic pores of different coal samples, a large number of coal samples were obtained. In order to verify the accuracy of the data, mercury intrusion test, which utilizing the non-wetting property of mercury on coal to determine the pore structure of coal, was carried out on coal samples using an AutoPore IV 9500 automatic mercury intrusion meter. The mercury intrusion equipment has the maximum working pressure of 413 MPa and the pore size measurement range of 3 nm–370 μm. The relative errors of porosity and permeability obtained by mercury intrusion experiment were calculated by comparing with the 3D reconstruction data. The volume fractal dimension of pore structure of samples was calculated using the method proposed by Angulo et al. The porosity of the coal is calculated using the porosity formula based on the data from the three-dimensional reconstruction. The permeability of the coal sample is estimated using the formula of the permeability based on the seepage simulation results. The pore structure of the six kinds of coal samples is introduced into ANSYS for seepage simulation. The parameters of normal gas serve for the assignment of fluid's basic properties. The opposite sides of the model are used as the velocity inlet boundary and the pressure outlet boundary, other flow boundaries and pore walls are seen as the non-slip walls, the flow rate is zero. The seepage characteristics of the six kinds of coal samples are simulated respectively.  Theoretically, for the coal mass with the same pore distribution, their permeability will deteriorate with the growth of volume fractal dimension D Capillary tortuosity fractal dimension is a function of capillary radius. In this paper, the method combined with CT 3-D reconstruction and fractal theory is used to characterize the microstructure of coal. The reconstructed 3-D coal pore structure is used to obtain the microscopic parameters of the coal and quantitatively analyzed and characterized the fracture structure of the coal. The volume fractal dimension could be calculated using 3-D box dimension based on the 3-D data and tortuosity fractal dimension using equations. The relationship of the two important parameters of coal structures: porosity and permeability, with volume fractal dimension and tortuosity fractal dimension were discussed, respectively, and the following conclusions are drawn. The three-dimensional pore structure of six kinds of coal samples can be obtained by CT 3D reconstruction to reproduce the distribution of coal pore and pore structure and help us to preliminarily understanding the complexity of coal samples. The microscopic parameters of coal pores and fractures structure including pore size, pore volume, surface porosity could be obtained using mathematical algorithms in AVIZO to quantitatively characterize the fine features of coal samples. The heterogeneity of coal samples was analyzed by pore size and mean deviation of surface porosity. The heterogeneity of coal samples ranks from strong to weak in the order of C3>C2>C1>C5>C4>C6. This conclusion can also be proved and referenced by the fractal theory of coal mass. The calculated volume and tortuosity fractal dimensions of the 6 kinds of coal samples range from 2.25 to 2.79 and from 2.15 to 2.73, respectively; the larger the volume fractal dimension, the more complicated the porous structure; the smaller the volume fractal dimension, the more homogeneous the porous structure. C3 has the maximum volume fractal dimension, so its porous structure is the most complex. The complexities of porous structures of the rest coal samples rank in the order of C2>C1>C5>C4>C6. The higher the complexity of the coal pore fracture structure, the higher the heterogeneity. Therefore, samples with higher complexity of the pore fracture structure obtained by the fractal dimension have higher heterogeneity obtained by pore size and surface porosity analyses. Although theoretically the volume fractal dimension is negatively correlated with porosity and permeability, it is known from C4 data that there is a special case in practice. The distribution and connectivity of coal pores play a decisive role in the permeability of coal samples. The tortuosity fractal dimension fully reflects the effect of micropore-throat structure on permeability. After the tortuosity fractal dimension introduced, the permeability of each coal sample is negatively correlated to the tortuosity fractal dimension. The greater the tortuosity fractal dimension is, the poorer the seepage ability of coal reservoirs. The porosity is poorly correlated to the tortuosity fractal dimension, also showing that the pore-throat structure of coal samples is very complex, while its pore-throat develops better. This study combines both CT-based 3-D reconstruction technique and fractal dimension theory to effectively examine coal's porous structure. The validity of CT reconstruction and fractal theory in characterizing the pores and fractures structure of coal mass is demonstrated. This method can make up the shortage of traditional physical experiments and provide a new platform for the research of coal structure. With the development of computer technology and the wide application of CT technology, the joint CT 3-D reconstruction and fractal dimension will play an important role in studies on coal's microparameters. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the