Injuries of the extensor mechanism are still a challenge for orthopaedic surgeons. Early accurate diagnosis is important, as the method of treatment and the outcome depend on this. However, other factors include the time since injury, as those treated acutely have a more favourable outcome. Numerous techniques have been described for treating disruption of the quadriceps and patellar tendon. The best results have been obtained by anatomical reconstruction of fresh disruption. For patellar fractures, the best results are reported after anatomical reduction and internal fixation with a tension band, while the worst choice is total patellectomy.Active knee extension is necessary for both standing and walking. However, during these activities, high energy is generated at the knee and the patellofemoral joint, especially during running, jumping and climbing. The extensor mechanism of the knee consists of the quadriceps muscle and tendon, patella and patellar tendon. The quadriceps muscle originates from the pelvic bones (m. rectus femoris from the anterior inferior iliac spine), the anterior surface of the femur and the intermuscular septa (m.vastus intermedius, vastus medialis and lateralis) inserting into the patella, with a 2 Since the patella is a subcutaneous bone, without subcutaneous soft tissue, it is susceptible to injury by a direct blow. Other than this, injuries of the extensor mechanism are caused by an excessively forceful quadriceps tendon contraction. In young healthy individuals it is less likely for a disruption to occur, while it is more probable and common in the old, or in persons with predisposing factors such as renal failure, secondary hyperparathyroidism, diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, gout and other metabolic diseases. It may be caused by large doses of corticosteroids or direct steroid injections. Fractures of the patella occur most frequently in patients between 40 and 50 years of age and they comprise 1% of all fractures. The aim of treatment is to restore anatomically the articular congruity and extension efficency, as well as to permit early knee motion and weight bearing. In the case of gross comminution, the patella must be sacrificed, and a partial or even total patellectomy is performed. In the latter situation, one must be aware of a significant loss of extension strength and anterior knee protection that results. According to Scuderi, fractures of the patella can easily be overlooked. Standard conventional antero-posterior and lateral radiographs are mandatory in the evaluation of both patellar fractures and disruptions of the quadriceps or patellar tendon. When there is doubt about the existence of patella bipartita or a tendon disruption, a radiograph of the opposite knee joint is helpful. The accessory ossicle of the bipartite patella is always on the superolateral corner of both patellae. If there is a symmetrical high or low position of the patella, this may just be a patella alta or patella baja. An assymetrical patellar position suggests a tendon injury lesion. CT and/or MRI imaging is useful in the evaluation of chondral and tendon injuries. Fractures with a displacement less than 2–3 Non-displaced fractures with an intact, undamaged extensor retinaculum, can be treated non-operatively, with a plaster cast above the knee or a knee brace for a period of 4–6 weeks. Isometric quadriceps contraction exercises are instituted immediately, followed by straight leg raising. Weight bearing is allowed. After 6 weeks in a brace, the knee immobiliser can be unlocked to allow an increasing range-of-motion. In displaced patellar fractures surgical treatment is indicated. Transverse patellar fractures are fixed internally with a modified tension band, developed by the AO group ( Ecker modified Magnusson's technique by adding an anterior tension band. In the presence of large fragments, fixation can be done with a cannulated screw. Fixation with screws is also performed when the number of fragments should be reduced, prior to the placement of the tension band. Small fragments, which should not be excised, can be fixed with small K wires, which are cut at the surface level. In cases with patellar comminution, fragments can be put together concentrically by hooping with metal wire. External fixation may be indicated in open patellar fractures. Partial or total patellectomy is performed when there is no possibility for reconstruction of the patella. Partial patellectomy is preferable to total excision, with preservation of any kind of bone-to-bone contact. In the case of comminution of the proximal or distal pole, the quadriceps or patellar tendon is reattached to the remaining patella bone tissue by per osseous sutures. Primary total patellectomy is now rarely done, because total patellectomy is a mutilating operation and should be avoided whenever possible. In cases where there is severe patello-femoral arthrosis with pain after internal fixation of a patellar fracture, it is never too late to do the patellectomy. The final result is poor. External fixation is recommended for open fractures. Complications after patellar fractures include: stiffness of the knee, patella infera, non-unions, malunions, patello-femoral arthrosis. Open fractures of the patella are usually the result of a high-energy trauma and they are associated with gross comminution. After thorough debridement and irrigation, the treatment should include internal fixation or partial patellectomy. Scuderi recommended internal fixation to preserve as much of the patella as possible. Other distinct types of patellar fracture are avulsion and stress fractures of the patella, especially in children. This can often be inadvertently overlooked. Avulsion patellar fractures are divided into: superior, inferior, medial or lateral avulsion patellar fractures. The superolateral fracture must be distinguished from the patella bipartita, and the inferior one from Sinding–Larsen–Johansson disease, which is common in jumpers. On the other hand, stress fractures occur mostly in jumpers and running athletes One must keep in mind that stress fractures heal more slowly than acute traumatic ones, and that they can be associated with patellar avascular necrosis. Besides patellar fractures, another cause of extensor mechanism dysfunction due to trauma is disruption of the quadriceps or patellar tendon. These are less common than fractures of the patella. In addition to disruption of the tendon adjacent to the patella, disruption can also occur at the musculo-tendinous junction or inside the quadriceps muscle belly itself. Avulsion of m.rectus femoris from the anterior inferior iliac spine is seen on pelvic radiograms. This is not a common injury and it can be treated by rest and analgesics. Surgery is indicated only for competitive sportsmen. Distally, injuries of the quadriceps muscle belly can occur in the midsubstance. These are commonly misdiagnosed as quadriceps muscle contusions. Actually, the rupture usually occurs in m.rectus femoris and m.vastus medialis. Rupture of the quadriceps tendon is infrequent and occurs mainly in persons over 40 years old, Surgery is indicated in most cases of acute and chronic quadriceps tendon ruptures. The history of surgical treatment of extensor mechanism disruptions dates from the time of Gallie. In 1927, Gallie and Le Mesurier In acute ruptures, repair can be obtained by an end-to-end heavy suture, In chronic disruption of the quadriceps tendon, there is retraction of the tendon tissue by a few centimeters. Patellar tendon ruptures are at the most distal localisation of the extensor mechanism and occur, as mentioned above, in people younger than 40 years. Patellar tendon rupture is a last stage of tendinopathy, because healthy tendons rarely rupture. Acute patellar tendon ruptures can be treated by end-to-end sutures. Early surgery gives the best results. For chronic cases (delayed diagnosis) with proximal migration of the patella, both distal mobilisation of the patella (by Steinam pin placed through the patella, or by V–Y lengthening of the quadriceps tendon) and augmentation or tendon substitution are carried out. The results of the delayed repair are inferior to those of acute repair. The patellar tendon can be substituted with semitendinosus and gracilis grafts, according to Ecker The timing of patellar tendon repair is the only factor that correlates with the final outcome. Namely, early surgery is the best choice, while rehabilitation in delayed repair is longer and more conservative. Finally, the extensor mechanism can be disrupted at the distal tubercle level, an avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity. This type of injury may be associated with pre-existing Osgood Schlatter disease. Avulsion of the tibial tubercle is most commonly seen in adolescents (ages 12–17)