The direct conversion of celestite (SrSO4) to strontium carbonate by mechanochemical processing was studied under wet milling conditions by varying the amount of sodium carbonate with respect to the stoichiometric amount required for the conversion reaction. The effect of solid to liquid ratio and change of particle size distribution during the milling were examined. The resulting conversion–time curve was fitted using the shrinking particle model. It was observed that celestite completely converted to strontium carbonate within 45 min, when the solid to liquid ratio was 0.1. With 50% excess sodium carbonate was used at a solid to liquid ratio of 0.2 the apparent rate constant was 0.0131 min−1, at a solid to liquid ratio of 0.1 the rate was 0.0211 min−1. The order of mechanochemical conversion was proportional to the 1.21 power of the CO3
                     2− concentration.Mechanochemical processes use mechanical energy to activate chemical reactions and structural changes. They can be classified into three different types ( Potential uses of mechanochemical processing include mineral and waste processing, metals refining, combustion reactions, ultrafine powder production, production of finely dispersed of second-phase particles, extension of solubility limits, refinement of the matrix microstructure by nanograin formation, synthesis of novel crystalline phases, formation of amorphous phases, the possibility of alloying difficult-to alloy elements, and scalability. Mechanochemical processing is more promising in the small scale and expensive technological processes ( Celestite (SrSO The driving force for this reaction is the difference between the solubility products of the celestite (Ksp Mechanochemical processing of celestite was first experienced by The aim of this present study is to investigate the kinetics of the wet mechanochemical processing of celestite with sodium carbonate to produce strontium carbonate. As a process variable, the effect of solid to liquid ratio on the mechanochemical conversion was examined. Celestite crystals were collected from a celestite deposit near Sivas, Turkey. The celestite samples were first crushed by a hammer and then ground in a laboratory type porcelain mill containing porcelain balls. The ground sample was washed several times with diluted HCl solution to remove any carbonate present. After acid washing, rinsing with distilled water and drying at 105 °C for 24 h, the sample was screened using ASTM E-11 type laboratory test sieves. The fraction that passed through a 0.6 mm sieve was used for the subsequent testing, the Mechanochemical processing was performed in a high energy Gyro-mill (Glen Creston Ltd., Stanmore, UK), a high speed multi-amplitude vibration machine, including 500 mL capacity chrome steel bowl, one puck and two rings. In detail, the vibrator head of this disc type mill is supported on six freely vibrating springs on a square shape machine frame. The vibrator head makes horizontal circular movements, which are transmitted to the grinding barrel, plug, ring and subject material contained inside, which are crushed by the strong impact forces generated by the vibration action. Particle size distribution of the milled samples was determined using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal, Germany) which includes a wet ultrasonic dispersing module to conduct measurements in suspension. For mechanochemical processing, 40 or 80 g of the celestite sample was added to 400 mL Na  The effect of solid to liquid ratio as a process variable was investigated using 50% excess Na  The conversion of celestite can be explained by surface chemical reaction model ( Where If the surface reaction controls the rate, the relation between the left side of Eq. The reaction kinetics and solid to liquid ratio was examined for the wet mechanochemical processing of celestite, SrSO