We propose detailed microscale modelling of flotation processes by means of Density Functional Hydrodynamics (DFH), which is the direct 3D numerical modelling method for compositional flow with gas, liquid and solid phases taking into account viscosity, compressibility, interfacial tension, gravity, diffusion, and a range of rheological models. The DFH governing equations are conservation laws for chemical components, momentum and energy. The constitutive relations involve Helmholtz energy or entropy of the multicomponent multiphase mixture.
                  In this work, we outline the necessary background of the DFH equations. Then we demonstrate a set of relevant numerical simulations for three-phase mixtures comprising contact angles, wettability, rheological properties, and gravitational segregation. The proposed modelling is expected to help in screening and optimization in mineral processing and waste-water treatment.Flotation technology is widely used for liquid-solid separation in mineral processing and liquid-liquid separation in waste-water treatment ( The foundation of the DFH is the density functional theory (DFT), in which energy of a heterogeneous system is assumed to be a functional of densities of chemical components constituting the system. DFT can be traced to Thomas-Fermi model of electron gas developed in 1927; see review by In 1995–1998, the DFT approach was proposed in multiphase compositional hydrodynamics by The DFH governing equations involve mass, momentum, and energy conservation laws augmented with specific constitutive relations derived to ensure consistency between hydrodynamic and thermodynamic descriptions of multiphase compositional system in the frame of the density functional approach. The specific expression for the density functional uses square gradients of molar densities, which enables description of surface tension. To enable modelling of mobile solid particles that are present in the mixture, the dynamic equation for Almansi strain tensor is used as an additional governing equation. In this work, we begin with exposition of the basic concepts and equations of the DFH ( In In We consider a multiphase mixture with The governing equations are hydrodynamic equations, which describe local conservation of chemical components, momentum, and energy ( The system In the DFH, this is done by analysing consistency of Eqs. The consistency of dynamic Eqs. We assume that for the thermodynamic functions Going further, we suppose that two phases are identified by different molar densities, Eq. The energy density In order to write down constitutive relations for diffusion and heat fluxes, it is convenient to introduce additional notations To conclude this section, we put here a brief summary on how various multiphase phenomena are accounted for in the frame of the DFH. Interfacial tension is taken into account by means of the molar density gradient term that enters the expression for entropy Eq. Adsorption (e.g., surfactants) into interfacial area between mobile liquid phases is incorporated into the theory by the dependence of coefficients Coalescence and breakup of droplets and bubbles, as well as any other topological changes of interfacial boundaries, happen naturally and can be traced from evolution of molar density fields. DFH is not limited to Newtonian rheology and can handle non-Newtonian rheologies by using appropriate expression for viscous stress tensor. In particular, visco-elastic, visco-elasto-plastic, as well as the general Herschel-Bulkley rheological models can be employed by using appropriate expressions for Phase transitions are governed by the bulk entropy or Helmholtz energy properties following the principles of chemical thermodynamics. Hydrodynamic Eqs. Equilibrium multiphase states without motion satisfy conditions that There are extensions of DFH published elsewhere ( As explained in our previous publications ( The governing Eqs. To date, we have devoted considerable effort to verification of the DFH method and validation of the numerical code we use for simulation. In simple cases where analytical solutions exist, we have always used them for reference. In more complex case, we have made comparisons with existing semiempirical relations and with experimental data. Although that work is not related to flotation applications (since addressing those is the first such attempt aimed here), but analytical solutions as well as many of the experimental observations are of quite general nature and have universal applicability; we, therefore, refere the reader to that multitude of our validation exercises found in ( Floatability of suspended matter (solid particles or liquid droplets) depends on a number of factors and have been extensively discussed in the literature ( Interfacial energy balance. Capture is possible if there is a reduction in combined interfacial energy of both bubble and particle due to their contact after capture; such reduction occurs in case of hydrophobic, or aerophilic suspended matter. Hydrodynamic conditions of a collision. While for slow moving bubbles and particles the capturing probability depends almost exclusively on the interfacial energy balance, in faster moving conditions, velocity and trajectory of a bubble relative to a particle become important ( The detailed study of the factors in the first group was a subject of numerous publications. The comprehensive explanation of the associated phenomena involves nanoscale description of the electromagnetic interactions between the molecules, van der Waals forces, and disjoining pressure ( In this section, we present numerical simulation of several problems relevant for flotation processes. In each case, the numerical simulations have been performed by solving the DFH Eqs. We begin by presenting simulation examples involving a single droplet or particle and a single bubble. We pursue demonstration at different hydrodynamic regimes and in order to have that we vary reference size of the suspended matter and air bubbles. The problem statements used here provide necessary convenience for detailed study of the basic capture mechanisms. A three-component mixture was used in the modelling. To describe thermodynamic behaviour of the mixture, a polynomial approximation of the Helmholtz free energy near three equilibrium phases, Phases A, B, and C, was employed ( In case when suspends are liquid droplets, the contact angles on the triple contact line ( In case when suspends are solid particles, Young’s equation is used instead of Eq. For the interfacial tensions specified above, the corresponding contact angles calculated using Eq. Two series of simulations with two cases within each series have been carried out on a vertical parallelepiped model with dimensions 1.8 mm × 1.8 mm × 4.5 mm in Case 1 and 9 mm × 9 mm × 22.5 mm in Case 2. In each case the model was approximated by 120 × 120 × 250 cubic cells. The model was periodic in both of the lateral dimensions, that is periodic boundary conditions have been established on the lateral sides of the model. The top and bottom sides of the model were impermeable walls. The gravity field with gravitational acceleration equal to The initial conditions for the modelling were as follows. The model was filled with water (Phase A) and a gas bubble of Phase C was placed within the model near its bottom and shifted slightly left from the vertical axis of symmetry of the model ( In accordance with the model dimensions, the diameter of the bubble, Due to the difference in dimensions, the two cases in each series are distinct in hydrodynamic regime. In Case 1, the bubble is relatively slow-moving, while in Case 2 it is rather fast moving. Indeed, according to the Hadamard-Rybczynski formula ( The simulation results for Case 1 of Series 1 are shown in The first pair of images (top and bottom) corresponding to 0.03 s is captured at the moment when the bubble just starts being influenced by the presence of the suspended droplet (the droplet does not move yet, since to facilitate the detailed observation of all stages of the contact phenomena, its mass density has been selected to be exactly the same as that of the ambient liquid). At the next pair of images at 0.034 s, slight deformation of surfaces of both the bubble and the droplet becomes visible. The deformation indicates elastic response of the interfaces to inertial collision. Then, at 0.045 s, only a water film separates the bubble and the droplet while the energy of the collision has been dissipated by viscous friction and the interfaces retained their round shape. At 0.051 s, the full contact has established; the images in cross-sections are useful for close inspection of contact phenomena. Finally, at the end of the simulation, due to buoyancy, the bubble came at the top of the droplet and the whole agglomerate begins rising at a slow pace. In Case 2 of Series 1 ( Qualitatively similar simulation results were obtained in the simulation Series 2 where the suspended solid particle was used instead of the liquid droplet. The consecutive movie frames for Case 1 of Series 2 were captured at 0.034 s, 0.041 s, 0.047 s, 0.076 s, and 0.126 s. The rising bubble undergoes only very slight deformation in getting close to the suspended particle. After the water is pushed from between the bubble and the particle, a firm contact is established. The particle is captured and is floated up to the top of the model. In Case 2 of Series 2, the consecutive movie frames have been captured at 0.048 s, 0.057 s, 0.075 s, 0.093 s, and 0.126 s. Similarly to the corresponding case of Series 1, the bubble rises in ellipsoidal shape regime, and there is a huge deformation of the bubble at 0.057 s when it collides with the particle (there is no deformation of the solid particle, of course, because the particle was modelled using the elastic rheology model). Although there is a firm contact between the bubble and the particle while the bubble still stays below the particle, the bubble drops the particle once it finally moves above the latter. Thus, in this subsection, we demonstrated direct numerical simulation of the bubble-droplet and bubble-particle capture mechanisms in different inertial regimes. Previously, those mechanisms have been extensively studied by using approximate analytical and semi-analytical models ( In this subsection, we demonstrate more complex statements involving many bubbles and suspended liquid droplets or solid particles. We also vary interfacial tensions to obtain statements with hydrophobic or hydrophilic suspended matter. Two simulation series have been carried out. In Series 1, the suspended matter was liquid droplets, while in Series 2 it was solid particles. The model used in the simulations of Series 1 was a vertical parallelepiped with dimensions 0.6 mm × 0.6 mm × 0.9 mm approximated by 200 × 200 × 300 cubic cells. In Series 2, the parallelepiped was slightly smaller, with dimensions 0.45 mm × 0.45 mm × 0.675 mm approximated by 150 × 150 × 225 cubic cells. The models were periodic in both the lateral dimensions. The top and bottom sides of the models were impermeable walls. The gravity field was acting downwards in vertical direction. The properties of phases and components were the same as those of the  The numerical simulation results for the three cases of Series 1 are presented in In Case 1, most of the floating up bubbles immediately attach to the suspended droplets since the interfacial tension between the droplets and the bubbles is smaller than between the droplets and the surrounding liquid ( In Case 2 ( Finally, in Case 3 the condition The results for Series 2 are shown in For simulation of the dissolved air flotation (DAF) it is necessary to model phase transitions phenomena, which is explicitly captured by DFH as was demonstrated in our previous publications ( The difference between problem statement used here and in the previous Two cases, different in the solution composition, were simulated. In Case 1, Phases A and C (water and gas) were mixed at 75% (molar) of water and 25% of gas, while in Case 2 the composition was at 80% and 20%, respectively. Both compositions lie on the binodal part of the Helmholtz energy surface ( Numerical simulation results for Case 1 are shown in In Case 2 ( The main result of this paper is the proof of possibility to have direct microscale numerical simulations of the fundamental flotation mechanisms using DFH equations. We have provided a brief outline of the DFH equations and discussed their history of use that involves successful application to a variety of practical problems. We have referenced the reader to publications summarizing our validation effort we have devoted to DFH equations. Then, have shown simulation of fundamental mechanisms using simple statements involving just one gas bubble and one liquid droplet or solid particle. Such statements are convenient for detailed observation of individual aspects pertaining to the capturing and flotation processes. We demonstrated that depending on hydrodynamic regime the droplet or particle can be either successfully brought up or dropped by the rising bubble. Further on, we have presented two simulation series with multiple gas bubbles and several liquid droplets or particles. The resulting flotation processes exhibited complex succession of events that we tried to describe. Finally, we have demonstrated modelling of DAF with several liquid droplets involved. The simulations have been carried out at different initial solution compositions corresponding to different gas saturations. In this work, we do not claim that we have encompassed the complexity of the flotation mechanisms; we rather tried to demonstrate modelling possibilities. The detailed study of the processes we encountered in the modelling can be the subject of multiple specific papers. Also, many assumptions used in the present work, while convenient for demonstration, may not be the best in terms of industrial use. Making the statements closer to the practical problems can be the focus of future work. Also, it is important to prepare the way to incorporate our microscale study in the macroscale flotation models, which are used in the industrial designs. This is planned to be done by providing new quantitative input data to predictive population balance models with account for particles wettability, interfacial tensions, viscosities, diffusion rates, flow regimes, and collective effects. The further link from population balance models to macroscale flotation models is developed already by other research teams. We thank Schlumberger for permission to publish this work. We are grateful to Denis Klemin and Vladimir Khan for conducting internal review of the manuscript. We also thank our local colleague Mikhail Stukan for the gift of molecular dynamics simulation image incorporated within