Equipment wear and corrosion have significant adverse impact on the operating cost and efficiency of mineral processing plants. In this study, advanced surface enhancement technologies were investigated to improve the wear resistance of metal surface of mineral processing equipment. Enhanced metal surfaces were achieved through surface conversion, enrichment, and coating by use of advanced high-density-infrared (HDI) technology. Attempts were made to determine the effects of process parameters on surface properties and corresponding optimum conditions. The microstructure of the enhanced metal surfaces was characterized by SEM, EDS, and microindentation. Laboratory dry sliding wear testing was carried out to investigate the wear performance and the viable coating candidate was determined.The economic cost caused by wear is a serious problem in many sectors of the economy. It is estimated that the annual cost associated with wear and corrosion in the US is in excess of $100 billion ( In the past two decades, research efforts have been addressed on reducing the wear of mineral processing equipment such as cyclones, pumps, and heavy medium vessels. However, little has been done to reduce the wear of screens, chains for conveyors, and piping where conventional wear enhancement methods, e.g. ceramic lining, are impractical. Screen aperture increases as material wears, resulting in inconsistent aperture sizes and lower screening efficiency. This creates non-ideal feed to downstream operations, further reducing processing efficiency. Frequent replacements increase equipment downtime and maintenance cost and reduce process efficiency. In light of this, development of advanced surface enhancement technology is of great interest for the mineral processing and coal preparation industry. The use of coatings has been well established in engineering applications and many coating techniques have been extensively studied ( Infrared heating provides an inherently clean, non-contact heating method; rapid-response energy fluxes capable of heating rates in excess of 500 AISI 4140 is one of the chromium, molybdenum, manganese low alloy steels noted for high toughness, good tensile strength as well as high fatigue strength. It is widely used in fabrication of components for the equipment used in the mineral processing industry. Therefore, AISI 4140 alloy steel was chosen as the substrate material in the present research. A significant trend in the coating development is the growing interest in the study and application of composite coatings in which tungsten carbides (WC) and iron-based amorphous coatings are two main components. WC has high hardness, good strength and is stable at high temperatures ( In case of carbide coatings, it has been shown that the binding matrix has a significant influence on the coating performance ( The objectives of this study were to establish the benefits of coating through HDI process, to investigate the microstructure of coatings synthesized by HDI process through a range of characterization methods including SEM, EDS and microindentation, to rank and compare the wear resistance of samples prepared from different coating materials, to optimize the HDI processing parameters for coating applications. Seven 55 WC particles (60 Each HDI treated coupon was cross-sectioned. The samples were then mounted and polished to obtain mirror-like surfaces. Nital (2%) was used as an etchant with etching time of 10 The as-processed coupons were sectioned in cross-section followed by grinding and polishing to get a scratch-free surface for microhardness measurements using a Vickers indenter on a Microhardness Tester (Micro Photonics, Irvine, CA). The microhardness measurements were carried out at the ambient temperature. Indentations were made on both sides along the interface between coating and substrate of the specimens. Standard microindentation mode was employed and both the loading time and unloading time were set to 30 Sliding wear, which is defined as the wear due to hard particles or hard protuberance forced against and moving along a solid surface ( The specimen was positioned on the machine when the disk attained a constant speed in the range of 1000 The cross section SEM morphology of the samples is shown in For the iron-based amorphous coatings fabricated in this study ( EDS analysis was performed on different locations to investigate elemental distribution in the coatings. For the white islands in the samples with WC coatings, high amount of tungsten was detected by EDS ( The EDS results shown in The microhardness profile of each sample is depicted in Another important observation from the microhardness profile curves is that the microhardness of WC coatings is higher than that of the amorphous coatings. This is possibly due to the defects (porosity and voids) in the amorphous coatings formed during thermal spray and HDI processing. It is also noted that the microhardness values exhibited fluctuation during measurement. This was mainly caused by the heterogeneity of materials (discrete distribution of WC in Fe matrix for WC coatings and presence of porosity/voids in amorphous coatings). Microhardness has long been used as a quantitative means to assess the coating quality ( During the block-on-disk tests, the total weight loss with respect to the wear test duration for each coupon was recorded and results are presented in From the perspective of contact mechanics, wear rate is dominated by plastic deformation of the component surface ( The following conclusions can be made based on the results obtained from the present study: SEM characterization showed that metallurgical bonds between coating and AISI 4140 steel were formed during the HDI process. The WC composite coatings prepared by HDI were characterized by the microstructure without macro-porosity and substantially higher microhardness than the AISI 4140 substrate. A scanning rate of 10 Metallurgical bonding was also formed between amorphous coatings and the substrate as a result of HDI processing; however, amorphous coatings were less effective than WC coatings in wear resistance enhancement. The EDS analyses revealed the presence of undissolved WC particles in the coating; Fe and C diffused rapidly from the substrate to the coating during HDI processing. The application of WC coating significantly decreased the wear rate of AISI 4140 steel, indicating this technology would increase the service time of metal components in the mineral processing industry. This study was sponsored by the US Department of Energy (DOE) under the contract DE-FC26-03NT41787 managed by Mr. Morgan Mosser. The industrial partners and government agencies involved in this project, including Carbontronics Fuel Management, LLC., CONSOL, Massey Energy, Horizon Natural Resources, Florida Rock Industries, Inc., Kurtz Bros., Inc., Innovative Screen Technology, Jeffery Chain Corp., Phelps Dodge Mining Company, Energy Industries of Ohio, Kentucky Coal Association and Ohio Coal Development Office, are acknowledged for their technical and financial support.