In earth sciences, estimation of heavy metal concentration at unknown locations is one of the most challenging problems. In multivariate cases, cokriging has been the traditional approach to solve the problem. Cokriging (CK) has some disadvantages such as modeling a number of auto and cross-variograms together to avoid facing unsolvable equation systems. In this study, minimum spatial cross-correlation kriging (MSCK) is introduced as an alternative method to cokriging (CK) approach. This method transforms spatially correlated variables into spatially uncorrelated factors, then estimates each factor separately and back-transforms the estimation results into the original data space. Jura data set is used to compare the performance of the new developed method to those of CK and principal component kriging (PCK). Performance comparison shows that although CK is a theoretically better estimation method, it does not outperform MSCK and PCK in all cases. Related to the methods based on factor estimation, improvement in spatial orthogonality does not lead to better performance.Estimation of soil properties such as heavy metal concentration is one of the most challenging problems of earth sciences. In univariate case, the problem can be easily solved by kriging method; e.g., But, in multivariate case, where there are several cross-correlated variables, it is necessary to use multivariate estimation methods such as cokriging. However, cokriging has not gained wide acceptance due to difficulties in modeling cross-variograms. A prerequisite for a valid variogram model is the positive definiteness condition, which ensures that the coefficient matrix for the system of kriging equations is invertible. For this, Cauchy-Schwartz inequality must be satisfied as a necessary condition modeling cross-variograms for a large set of variables is a difficult and tedious task ( Because of disadvantages of cokriging method, researchers have developed methods in which spatially correlated variables are transformed into spatially uncorrelated factors (orthogonal factors) and each factor is estimated independently using any univariate estimation method and then estimates are back-transformed into the original space (  Recently the method of minimum/maximum autocorrelation factors (MAF) developed by   In the present study minimum spatial cross-correlation (MSC) method is introduced for generating approximately uncorrelated factors. It aims to minimize cross-variance matrices at different lag distances using the gradient descent algorithm. The method divides The outline of the paper is as follows: the second section presents cokriging and kriging estimation of orthogonal factors. The third section gives a brief theory of PCA. The fourth section explains the MSC method in details. The method is presented in 2D (for two variables) space and then is generalized into Let For the estimation of variables at unsampled locations In equation system 3, In cokriging estimation method, it is necessary to model Let Now, the purpose is to find an orthogonal demixing matrix Then each factor This section is largely based on One popular method for whitening is to use the eigen-value decomposition of the covariance matrix Whitening transforms the mixing matrix into a new one, The new mixing matrix We see that whitening reduces the number of parameters to be estimated. Instead of having to estimate the In the rest of the paper, we assume that the data are pre-processed by centering and whitening. For simplicity, we denote the pre-processed data by Researchers have proposed various methods for generating spatially orthogonal factors. Some criteria have also been introduced to measure how well these methods orthogonalize the variogram matrices at different lag distances. For example While developing our method in deriving the approximately spatially uncorrelated factors we will consider Eq. In Eq. In minimization problems the derivatives of functions are used widely. It is known that absolute value of functions may not be differentiable at some points in their domains. So, as we work with the whitened data which has cross-variograms lying between − Columns of the orthogonal matrix Assume that the experimental semivariogram matrix for The objective is to find a 2 Eq. For minimization of Iteration A 3-D orthogonal transformation can be done using three 2-D rotations in 3-D. These rotations should be performed about three axes using rotation angles As it is demonstrated in We continue the process by rotating the obtained Therefore, a new coordinate system would consist of In the case of Blind source separation methods such as independent component algorithms ( The Jura data set used in this study were collected by Swiss Federal Institute of Technology at Lausanne. 359 samples in the topsoil were analyzed to measure the concentrations of seven heavy metals; cadmium, cobalt, chromium, copper, nickel, lead and zinc. In this study, five of these elements were chosen to test the MSC estimation method against well known PCK and cokriging methods. The samples were divided into a validation set (100 locations) and a prediction set (259 locations). In Auto-variograms of variables show small nugget effects. In auto and cross-variograms of these variables, two spherical structures can be recognized. These structures are related to local and global scales consequently. The main structure of all auto and cross-variograms is related to the global scale. Except for the zinc's auto-variogram and the cross-variogram of cadmium and copper, the short range structure is more effective than nugget effect. To avoid facing with negative definite matrices and insoluble equation system in cokriging algorithm, Cauchy–Schwarz inequality was considered in variogram modeling process (  Data were standardized prior to generating orthogonalized factors. Transformation matrices which were used to generate MSC and PC factors are shown in the following;       Correlation coefficient matrix of each set of variables was decomposed using spectral decomposition to generate the PC factors. For producing the MSC factors, five different lag distances including 200 The experimental and model variograms of factors are shown in Concentration values of Cd, Pb and Cu were estimated by MSCK, PCK and CK methods at 100 test locations considering second variables as presented in In the estimation of Cu and Pb, PCK performs better than MSCK and CK. In addition we can not see any noticeable difference between MSCK and CK in terms of ME. Correlation coefficient for MSCK is considerably higher than CK. For Cd, CK outperforms PCK and MSCK. Good performance of PCK against MSCK is surprising because MSC factors have the lowest spatial orthogonality, compared to that of PCA factors. For MSCK, MSE increases and ME decreases as the number of secondary variables increases. We can not observe any relationship between performance criteria and the number of secondary variables for PCK and CK. Correlation coefficient between estimated values and actual values is very low for the three methods. This is probably due to high skewness of the variables. The estimated values of CK and PCK are plotted against MSCK estimations in In this study, minimum spatial cross-correlation kriging (MSCK) was introduced as a new multivariate geostatistical estimation method and compared to PCK and the traditional cokriging approach. The most considerable advantage of MSCK and generally all orthogonalization methods over cokriging is that they provide spatially uncorrelated factors that can be estimated independently. In cokriging, it is necessary to model cross-variograms as well as auto-variograms regarding Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. In most cases, this leads to undesirably intervening the real spatial correlation structure. The case study shows that cross-variograms of the MSC factors, generally, lie in tighter intervals than those of the PC factors. At the same time, All the factors have negligible cross variogram values at all lag distances. This allowed us to estimate them independently by kriging. The variograms of the PC factors have higher nugget effects than those of the MSC factors. Cokriging is a theoretically better method because it uses all information available across variables. However the results of the case study indicate that the performance of the methods considered in this study is case specific. For example in the case of Cu and Pb, PCK shows better performance, then MSCK and CK come. For Cd, CK performs better than PCK and MSCK. On the other hand, CK produces smooth estimates compared to PCK and MSCK. Another observation is that PCK produces better results than MSCK. Good performance of PCK against MSCK shows that reducing spatial cross correlations does not lead to better estimations. In this study, equal weights are given to all lag distances. However the factor approach might call for giving different weights to all variance–covariance matrices when observations are clustered. Therefore, this issue will be considered as a future work. This study is supported by the Proof: We can multiply Derivative of Expansion of Derivative of Then