Aim of this work was the development of a new non-biological factor to determine microbial in situ bioavailability of chemicals in soils. Pesticide residues were extracted from ten highly different agricultural soils that had been incubated with the 14C-herbicide isoproturon (IPU) under comparable soil conditions (water tension – 15kPa; soil density 1.3gcm−3). Two different pesticide extraction approaches were compared: (i) 14C-pesticide residues were measured in the pore water (PW) which was extracted from soil by centrifugation; (ii) 14C-pesticide residues were extracted from soil samples with an excess of water (EEW). We introduce the pesticide’s in situ mass distribution quotient (iMDQ) as a measure for pesticide bioavailability, which is calculated as a quotient of adsorbed and dissolved chemical amounts for both approaches (iMDQPW, iMDQEEW). Pesticide mineralization in soils served as a reference for real microbial availability. A highly significant correlation between iMDQPW and mineralization showed that PW extraction is adequate to assess IPU bioavailability. In contrast, no correlation exists between IPU mineralization and its extractability from soil with EEW. Therefore, it can be concluded that soil equilibration at comparable conditions and subsequent PW extraction is vital for a isoproturon bioavailability ranking of soils.One of the main processes controlling the degradation of chemicals in soils is their microbial availability. Although the term bioavailability was discussed intensively in the past decade ( Since bioavailability is organism and even species dependent, developing a chemical test to exactly mimic bioavailability to all receptors is not going to be attainable ( Using classical batch methods with an excess of water (EEW) and vigorous shaking, soil aggregates can break down, leading to a significant increase of the soil surface area available to interact with pesticides molecules ( Our hypothesis was: co-metabolic pesticide mineralization is controlled by the pesticide’s bioavailability. Therefore, a correlation between the co-metabolic mineralization of the test compound and its bioavailability is given. In case this is not true for certain soils, these soils have to exhibit either: (a) metabolic degradation kinetics, which would result in higher biodegradation in comparison to soils with similar bioavailability and co-metabolic degradation ( Ten soils, representing typical but very different agricultural soils of Germany and Slovenia, were used for the experiments. The relevant soil characteristics are summarized in  For HPLC analysis, non-labeled IPU, [3-(4-isopropylphenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea], monodesmethyl-isoproturon (MD-IPU), [3-(4-isopropylphenyl)-1-methyl-urea], didesmethyl-isoproturon, and 4-isopropyl-aniline (4IA), [3-(4-isopropylphenyl)-urea] were purchased from Dr. Ehrenstorfer (Augsburg, Germany). 2-Hydroxymonodesmethyl-isoproturon [3-(4-(2-hydroxyisopropylphenyl)1-methylurea] was donated by Agrevo (Frankfurt-Hoechst, Germany). The solvents were HPLC grade and were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, Missouri, USA). The mineralization of IPU was investigated in all soils and in a soil suspension culture of one selected soil. All experiments were conducted in triplicates. Biodegradation of The incubation vessels were placed in the dark at 20 At the end of the degradation experiment after 46 d, 30 Five gram of soil (dry mass) were incubated in 100 At each sampling, the absorption liquid in the first tube was mixed with 10 Pesticide metabolites of the degradation experiments were analyzed in all soils, but only in those soil PW samples, where enough pesticide residues were detectable for residue analysis. At the end of the experiments, soil aliquots were extracted with methanol in an accelerated solvent extractor (ASE 200, Dionex, Idstein, Germany) at 90 Diluted ASE extracts as well as PW samples were extracted with SPE columns (Lichrolut ENV 200 Twenty microliter of each sample were injected to a HPLC system L-6200 Intelligent Pump (Merck-Hitachi, Darmstadt, Germany) that was equipped with a UV/VIS detector (240 After ASE soil material was dried and homogenized intensively. Three aliquots of each soil sample were filled into combustion cups and mixed with 3–4 drops of saturated aqueous sugar solution to guarantee a complete oxidation of the Pesticide bioavailability was determined by two approaches: pesticide extraction with PW and EEW. For this approach, 30 After incubation of soils with the A new factor was defined to describe the In contrast to the widely used At the end of the degradation experiment, the iMDQ The relatively young science of metabolomics aims at the identification of metabolic differences or changes (e.g. effects of toxicity or gene transfer) in and between biological systems ( The Shannon Index The observed Soils have been ranked from 1–10 according to the calculated iMDQ We compared the two different series of iMDQ values with the cumulative herbicide mineralization as a parameter for “real microbial bioavailability” ( There was no significant correlation between iMDQ Such an outstanding behaviour of soils is explicable if the respective soils follow non-co-metabolic or biologically hampered mineralization dynamics as described in our hypothesis. Besides the exceptional high mineralization in soil Cunnersdorf, another indication for extraordinary mineralization dynamics for soils Cunnersdorf and Sneberje was given by the outstanding result for the quotient (Q Metabolite analysis ( Former studies ( Taking all results into account, we identified soil Cunnersdorf as a soil being able to mineralize IPU metabolically. Due to this discrepancy with the premises of our hypothesis, this soil was affirmed to be an outlier in the correlation between iMDQ At the end of the degradation experiment, IPU metabolites could be identified and quantified in PW of only five soils (Kelheim, Konjišče, Sneberje, Marsdorf, Neumarkt) due to detection limit reasons. Thereby, soil Sneberje showed the highest amount and number of IPU metabolites ( An indication for the cause of metabolic impairment is that this soil might be significantly affected by floods, possibly depositing contaminants. Soil material was taken from the upper Ap horizon of this alluvial soil (Fluvisol), that is developed along the first terrace of the Sava River, Ljubljana, Slovenia, where floods occur in 5–10 There exists no correlation between iMDQ In contrast, there was a highly significant correlation between iMDQ A strong correlation was found between pesticide residues mineralization and iMDQ For a better comparability, we excerpted data for the respective soils from We clearly showed that our newly defined measure of bioavailability iMDQ Our results underline the suggestion of