The selectivity in flotation separation of spodumene from other pegmatic aluminosilicates such as feldspar and mica, using a single fatty acid anionic collector, is found to be very difficult. It is attributed to the same surface Al site for interaction with fatty acid. In this study, a collector mixture of sodium oleate (NaOL) and dodecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (DTAC) demonstrates a high selectivity for the flotation of spodumene from feldspar. The influences of important factors such as molar ratio of the mixed collectors, dosages of calcium chloride, sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate, and pulp temperature on spodumene and feldspar flotation using the mixed collectors have been investigated through micro-flotation tests. The optimum molar ratio of NaOL and DTAC is found to be 9:1. Sodium hydroxide has to be used as a pH regulator. Without the use of depressants, no selectivity is observed as the flotation of spodumene and feldspar are activated by Ca2+. Sodium carbonate must be used as depressant of feldspar. A comparison of the flotation for a lithium pegmatite ore using mixed fatty acid soaps and mixed anionic/cationic collectors (NaOL/DTAC) was carried out by the batch flotation tests. The results indicated that NaOL/DTAC decrease collector consumption by two-thirds. The recovery and grade of Li2O concentrates increase by 4.93% and 0.31%, respectively.Lithium has become a precious commodity since about a quarter of all lithium production is used for energy storage. The increased demand for lithium in batteries, especially for electric vehicles has focused attention on the adequacy of known and anticipated lithium resources ( The Flotation is the most widely used industrially for the beneficiation of spodumene from associated silicate minerals with fatty acid collectors such as sodium oleate, naphthenic soap, and oxidized paraffin soap, among which a combination of the two is used sometime ( In recent years, many studies have been carried out to improve and strengthen spodumene flotation by adding activated ion such as Ca However, the reports on more selective collectors for strengthening spodumene flotation are rare. A new single collector with a long development cycle has too high a cost to be used. A collector mixture is a good choice for this purpose. Recent researches showed that the flotation separation efficiency of minerals could be enhanced using a mixture of anionic collectors with anionic, nonionic and cationic collectors, respectively ( Quaternary ammonium salts (QAS) are extensively used as an efficient collector for clay-type aluminosilicate minerals such as kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite in Chinese diasporic bauxite reverse flotation ( The pure mineral samples of spodumene and feldspar (albite) were obtained from the The lithium pegmatite ore for batch flotation was also from the In the microflotation tests, the anionic collector NaOL and cationic collector DTAC of analytical grade were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. The mixed NaOL/DTAC collectors were freshly prepared when used to avoid precipitation. Calcium chloride (CaCl In the batch flotation tests, the home-made mixed collectors NaOL/DTAC were used as collector. As a contrastive study, mixed fatty acid soaps (oxidized paraffin wax soap and naphthenic soap) are employed as collector. Sodium carbonate, sodium hydroxide and calcium chloride were used as regulators. All reagents used in batch flotation were of industrial grade. Tap water was used for batch flotation tests. The micro-flotation tests were carried out in flotation machine of XFG-1600 with a 40 In the batch flotation tests, 500 Numerous microflotation studies of spodumene have been made using the anionic collector NaOL, while no reports have been made using cationic collector DTAC. The present tests are intended to compare the response of spodumene and feldspar when floated with NaOL and DTAC. Firstly, the flotation separation using the single collector NaOL and DTAC were evaluated. The results in The recovery–collector concentration curves at pH 7.0–7.5 are presented in From The mole ratio of the mixed collectors (NaOL/DTAC) was found to be an important factor in mineral flotation ( The effect of temperature on the flotation of anionic collectors such as oleic acid and NaOL at mineral/water interfaces is very well documented in the literature ( It can be concluded that the mixed collectors NaOL/DTAC have a good cold-resistance. And the future industrial application of the NaOL/DTAC accords with the policy of energy saving and emission reduction in China, which has a wide development prospect. NaOH, Na In the practical mineral separations, the existence of unavoidable metal ions, such as Ca In view of the above, the activation of Ca The results of single micro-mineral flotation tests present that mixed collectors NaOL/DTAC have excellent separation ability of spodumene from feldspar. Flotation tests of mixed mineral samples were then carried out to further investigate their selectivity performance. The flotation results of a mixture of minerals (2.62% Li Based on the optimized flotation conditions and open circuit tests, the bench-scale locked cycle tests for a feed material containing 1.43% Li Rai et al. have reported that there are more Al atoms on the spodumene exposed surfaces (1 The mixed collectors NaOL/DTAC exhibit selective collecting of spodumene from feldspar, allowing preferential flotation separation by control of the regulators. The micro-flotation tests show that the molar ratio of the mixed collectors, the dosages of calcium chloride, sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate, pulp temperature are crucial factors affecting the recovery of spodumene. An optimal molar ratio 9:1 of NaOL and DTAC is found. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) has to be used as a pH regulator. When spodumene and feldspar are activated by Ca The batch flotation tests also indicated the mixed collectors SXQ could achieve selective flotation of spodumene from a lithium pegmatite ore from the With a lower dosage, a better cold-resistance and higher selectivity, the mixed collectors NaOL/DTAC exhibit great potential for industrial application in spodumene flotation. In addition, further studies should be carried out to investigate selective flotation and adsorption mechanism of mixed anionic/cationic collectors NaOL/DTAC on spodumene. The authors would like to thank the