A composite mixture of the colossal magnetoresistive oxide, La0.67Ca0.33MnO3 and non-magnetic, insulating silicate/borate has been prepared, using the glass route with different nucleating agents. It is found that Sb2O3 is very effective in preferentially nucleating the LCMO phase compared to Cr2O3. The LCMO phase present in the as-quenched state in the three cases is found to grow as a result of annealing at 900
                     °C only when nucleated with Sb2O3. In the other two cases, simultaneous growth of other crystalline phases, such as LaBO3 and CaB2O4 is found to be accompanied with the growth of LCMO. The magnetic studies show that the LCMO phase nucleated by Sb2O3 has the highest value of magnetization. The magnetization, however, was found to be lower than the bulk value, indicative of the presence of magnetic disorder and non-magnetic phases, which was observed in the electrical transport behavior also. The LCMO phase nucleated with either of the nucleants, Sb2O3 or Cr2O3, has a high resistivity compared to the LCMO phase formed without any nucleants.The presence of large magnetoresistance (MR) in mixed valence manganites with a perovskite type structure has lead to considerable scientific and technological interest in these oxides. These oxides are of the generic type R The two microstructural length scales that have a direct influence on the MR behavior in these materials are: (1) size (volume) of the ferromagnetic phase and (2) the spin-scattering distance of charge carriers. Both these length scales can be significantly influenced by the processing conditions. In the present work, the glass-ceramic technique is used to engineer the microstructure to produce a manganite/non-magnetic insulator composite. The size and volume fraction of the ferromagnetic manganite phase is controlled by nucleation with different nucleating agents. The spin-scattering distance which depends on the composition and extent of order at the manganite/insulator interface, however cannot be directly controlled. The manganite/non-magnetic insulator composite in the present work consists of predominantly La The magnetic glass-ceramic composite, La The presence of various phases in the composites at different stages of processing was determined by X-ray diffraction and the results are shown in Transmission electron microscopy together with selected area diffraction of the etched powders clearly shows a glass-ceramic two phase structure in all the cases. A typical bright field image together with the diffraction pattern is shown in The variation of magnetization The zero magnetic field electrical resistivity The electron transport and magnetic behavior of LCMO depends critically on factors, such as oxygen concentration, substitutional doping, absolute grain size and the presence of non-magnetic, insulating phases The role of nucleants on the formation of crystalline La