This paper presents a life-cycle analysis for a new concept in solar thermal power generation. BRRIMS denotes Brayton-cycle, re-heated, recuperated, integrated, modular and storage-equipped. This concept envisages collection temperatures of around 250 °C, thermal storage in pebble beds, thermal-electric conversion in a piston–cylinder engine and air as the heat transfer fluid and working gas of the engine. The analysis applies to the manufacturing phase of the overall power plant and separately to the pebble bed thermal storage component. Three sustainability metrics are included – life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions, cumulative energy demand and energy payback time. On these metrics, the BRRIMS concept has broadly similar results to a conventional parabolic trough plant with molten salt thermal storage.It is widely appreciated that the cost of photovoltaic and wind power is falling rapidly. Solar thermal power currently has a higher Levelised Cost of Electricity (LCOE) than PV or wind, but nonetheless has attractions through its capability for co-firing and the availability and engineering simplicity of thermal storage. These features enable dispatchable power generation during cloudy periods or after dark. Currently, most solar thermal plants are based on the Rankine steam cycle, with heat collection through parabolic troughs, Fresnel mirrors, dishes or heliostats/towers. At utility scale, thermal storage is usually achieved using solar salt, a 60–40 mixture of sodium and potassium nitrates. An overview of these solar thermal concepts is provided by Lovegrove et al. There is a vast literature on Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA), as seen from online searches ( Barnhart & Benson The present work applies the LCA methodology to a new concept for solar thermal power generation. The acronym for the new concept is BRRIMS, which denotes Brayton-cycle, re-heated, recuperated, integrated, modular and storage equipped, for which daytime and night-time flowsheets are given in Advantages with this concept are (1) the thermal-electric efficiency of recuperated Brayton-cycle engines is acceptable, especially at modest pressure ratios, (2) pebble bed thermal storage is relatively cheap, durable and has a good round-trip efficiency, (3) air is the heat transfer fluid and working gas of the engine, so heat exchangers and condensers are not required, (4) the system does not need special materials, and (5) dispatchable power is available from thermal storage and co-firing if necessary. Disadvantages with the concept are (1) the engine has a high back-work ratio ( As the BRRIMS concept emphasises storage, Section Following Barnhart & Benson The number of cycles until failure is designated In cases where electrical energy is being stored directly, the round-trip efficiency The specific capital cost, The specific energy density by mass, The embodied energy ratio, This metric examines the raw materials required for the proposed energy storage system. A variety of sub-metrics are available, as typified by the case for steel. There is the abundance ( This metric is defined as For example if In this example the equipment lasts 10 years with less-than-perfect performance due to depth of discharge and round-trip efficiency. The levelised embodied energy over 30 years is 4.167 times the cradle-to-gate embodied energy of a new system. Following Barnhart & Benson This metric is the amount of electrical energy stored in the whole of life divided by the energy required for manufacture. The larger the ESOI, the better is the storage system. Larger values of ESOI can be obtained by increasing the number of cycles ( LCA calculations are now presented for a 100 kW Estimates for the manufacturing phase of the 100 kW BRRIMS plant are now summarised in Burkhardt et al. For the manufacturing phase in Ref. In It is noteworthy that the life-cycle impact metrics of In Ref. In a major survey, Fthenakis et al. On the figures presented above, the proposed BRRIMS system has favourable life-cycle characteristics when compared to both PV and existing solar thermal generation options. The electricity industry in Australia is currently observing two major trends – an increase in prices for electricity provided from the grid and a decrease in prices for electricity generated from wind and rooftop PV panels. If cheap and reliable electricity storage was to become available, a dramatic shift in the industry could be expected, with many consumers opting to leave the grid and choosing instead to generate and store their own electricity. It is therefore important to develop methodologies to characterise the technical and financial performance of storage technologies. The work by Barnhart & Benson The BRRIMS concept illustrated in The 100 MW parabolic trough plant of The above estimates assume that the solar salt is naturally mined. In the case where synthetic salts are used (which according to Burkhart et al. is slightly more than half of all installations), there is a much larger CED since the manufacturing process involves pre-production of ammonia, which in turn has a requirement for natural gas. Many individual items are taken into account in the above figure for CED; these include obvious items like steel, concrete, pumps, heat exchangers, insulation and solar salt. However the biggest individual item is the energy required to keep the solar salt molten and stirred on an ongoing basis. Current research focuses on one-tank systems with a thermocline or partition between ‘hot’ and ‘cold’ salt. If these tanks are installed in major projects they will lead to a better ESOI figure.  This paper has presented a life-cycle analysis for the manufacturing phase of a new concept in solar thermal power generation (BRRIMS). For the manufacturing phase, the Cumulative Energy Demand of the BRRIMS system is 0.193 MJ/kWh The Energy Payback Time for the manufacturing phase of the BRRIMS plant is 1.6 years when based on electrical output and 0.4 years when based on an equivalent primary energy output. The BRRIMS EPBT figure is superior to EPBT scores for mono-Si and multi-Si solar cells, but not as good as the score for CdTe thin film cells. GHG emissions for the manufacturing phase of the proposed BRRIMS system are less than those for PV cells, which lie in the range 18–37 g CO This paper also assessed the performance of the pebble bed storage component of the proposed BRRIMS system. For this, Barnhart & Benson's ESOI metric Overall the LCA results presented here are supportive of the BRRIMS concept. Accordingly work continues to establish the technological and commercial case for development of a BRRIMS prototype.