In practice, the advantages of high-quality hydrocyclone separation are often restricted due to varying feed suspension properties, solids concentrations and particle size distributions. Control systems of large hydrocyclones are usually fitted with controllable underflow nozzles, which is not practical for small hydrocyclone batteries. Therefore, a new control system for a battery of hydrocyclones with a nominal diameter of 150 mm was invented at the LUR in co-operation with AKW Apparate und Verfahren [Computergesteuerte Hydrozyklonbatterie erfolgreich eingesetzt, Aufbereitungstechnik 42 (2001) Nr. 12, Th. Neeße, F. Donhauser, Advances in the theory and practice of hydrocyclone technique, Proceedings of the XXI International Mineral Processing Congress, Rome, Italy Juli 2000, V.A., p A4 – 74., Th. Neeße, F. Donhauser, M. Schneider, Computer-controlled hydrocyclone battery, Advances in Filtration and Separation Technology, Science and Technology of Filtration and Separations for the 21st Century, Editors Shiao-Hung Chiang and Samuel E. Lee, American Filtration and Separation Society, Vol. 15, Pittsburgh, 2001., M. Schneider, Th. Neeße, F. Donhauser, Mechatronik für eine Hydrozyklon-batterie, Aufbereitungstechnik 40 (1999) Nr. 2, S. 79 – 83 AT., M. Schneider, T. Neeße, B. Schricker, F. Donhauser, Overflow-control system for a hydrocyclone battery, Proceedings of the International Congress for Particle Technology PARTEC 2001, Nürnberg, March 2001]
                  This process was developed for bentonite slurry regeneration associated with tunnel excavation using bentonite slurry as a transport aid and lubricant.An important function of a process control system for a hydrocyclone plant is the stabilization of the cut point or slurry density in the overflow, respectively, for feeds with varying solid concentrations and particle size compositions. So far, appropriate regulation of the volume split has been restricted to single hydrocyclones of larger diameters in which adjustable underflow nozzles have been fitted. For smaller hydrocyclones, interconnected in batteries, this concept is not feasible. Moreover, the following two preconditions must be given: measurable process variables for the characterization of hydrocyclone separation controlled process quantities, without manipulation of the individual hydrocyclone. It is known that the maximum solids recovery of coarse solids in the hydrocyclone depends on the form of the underflow discharge. The maximum recovery and a high solid content in the underflow will occur when this discharge has the form 2 shown in When the discharge takes the form of a strand, solid material is dammed up in the cone of the cyclone and is forced into the overflow. In comparison, with umbrella discharge, the core of air formed inside the cyclone, owing to the action of the centrifugal forces, penetrates into the underflow resulting in more fines being swept into the underflow with low solid content. At the core of the control system are the sensors, which detect the three different flow conditions ( Optical method. Contact free scanning of the shape of the discharge using a laser beam. Gravimetrical method. The recurrence of rope or umbrella discharge is determined by the quantity of solids stored in the cyclone. The solids mass or the hydrocyclone weight, respectively, can be measured with a gravimetric cell using a special fastening means for the hydrocyclone. Capacitive method. The best results were achieved using a capacitive sensor which was modified to a slurry resistant sensor at the LUR. The transition between rope and umbrella discharge is registered by contact of the discharge spray and the sensor. The signals (1) of the operational status are transmitted to the computer together with the values for the power input (2) of the feed pump, feed pressure, and counter pressure in the overflow (3) ( The presented automatic control concept has been initially developed for separation plants used with tunnel driving projects, wherein the feed solids concentrations varied between 50 and 500 g/l and corresponding solids discharges varied between 2 and 16 t/h per 150-mm hydrocyclone The operational conditions of a 150-mm hydrocyclone in a two-stage separation plant used in a tunneling separation operation are given in The aim of the control process in this application was stabilizing to a cut size of ∼30 μm independent of the feed solid content and, additionally, to allow replacement of the two-stage hydrocyclone plant with a single-stage unit. This would permit the elimination of the preliminary separation of coarse particles in a 500-mm hydrocyclone prior to fine particle separation. As can be seen from With the control system implemented in a 150-mm hydrocyclone, it is possible to stabilize separation for varying solid concentrations up to 500 g/l at a cut point of approximately 30 μm ( Selected technological values of this 150-mm hydrocyclone separation process are listed in  This represents such an improvement in the discharge capacity of the 150-mm hydrocyclone that the installation of a preliminary cyclone of a larger diameter is no longer necessary. With such a computer-controlled process, it is also possible to replace a two-stage hydrocyclone circuit with a single-stage plant. Possible remote control of the hydrocyclone plant on the basis of remote data transmission is another benefit. For small hydrocyclones connected in a battery, a computer-controlled system has been developed. The elements of this control system consist of sensors for measuring the operating state, a process control computer for recording and processing the measured data, and the activator, in this case a control valve downstream of the overflow collector of the hydrocyclone battery. With this system, the hydrocyclone battery can be operated at the optimum operating point, corresponding with the transition from rope to umbrella discharge of the underflow.