High production cost and scarcity of raw materials may hinder the application and accessibility of ultra-high performance concrete (UHPC). In the present study, mine tailings, mineral waste products from mining sites, were applied to mitigate these problems. Two types of quartz-based mine tailings produced in South Korea were used to substitute silica powder and silica sand by half and fully in UHPC. The characteristics of UHPC with the tailings, including the compressive strength, workability, water absorption, and leachability of toxic elements, were experimentally evaluated. The effects of the tailings on the characteristics of UHPC varied according to the shape and size of particles of the tailings. The leaching of toxic trace elements from the tailings was highly controlled due to the chemical and physical capsulation of UHPC.Ultra high performance concrete (UHPC) is mostly known for its remarkable strength both in compression and tension, generally above 150 MPa and 5 MPa, respectively, which is achieved through dense particle packing, reducing the water-cement ratio, and using adequate reinforcing fibers. UHPC has additional engineering merits such as high durability, workability, and impact resistance A number of studies have been carried out to lower the cost of UHPC by using different approaches. Allena and Newtson Along with these, mine tailings, mineral waste products from mining sites, were utilized in the present study to decrease the production cost of UHPC. Mine tailings are a residual product after the separation process of the valuable fraction from the ore. Their particle sizes are very small due to the comminution process, i.e., grinding of ore into fine particles to extract the valuable fraction. In general, when the target elements are rarer and more expensive such as gold and rare earth elements, the particle size of tailings become finer Zhao et al. In the present study, various types of quartz-based mine tailings, by-products produced in South Korea were used to substitute the silica powder and silica sand in UHPC. In order to verify the Characteristics of the solid materials, including particle size distribution, density, chemical composition, crystalline structures, and heavy metal contents, are shown in Portland Type 1 cement and silica fume (Elkem 940U) were used throughout the experiments. Silica powder with a mean particle size of about 4 µm and two types of silica sand with mean particle sizes of 0.15 mm and 0.5 mm, i.e., silica sand A and B, respectively, were used. Quartz-based tailings obtained from two different mine sites, namely the Sun-shin and Sang-dong mines in South Korea, were adopted in this research. The XRD patterns in The Sun-shin mine is located in Jeolla Province, 404 km south of Seoul. As the target element was mainly gold (Au), the particle size of the tailings is very fine As shown in The Sang-dong mine is a tungsten mining site in the Gangwon Province, located 187 km southeast of Seoul The brass coated steel fiber used in all mixtures has a diameter of 0.2 mm and a length of 19.5 mm. A polycarboxylate-based superplasticizer with 25% solid content by weight was used to enhance particle dispersions within the mixture. Mix proportions of the mixtures are listed in A Hobart-type mixer was operated and a common UHPC mixing procedure was used to prepare the mixtures. The solid materials except steel fiber were mixed thoroughly for an approximate time of 10 min, and then water and superplasticizer were added while the mixer was spinning. Once the mixture shows adequate consistency, steel fibers were added and mixed for an additional 5 min. Further information on the mixing process can be found in Pyo The The results of compressive strength were collected for 7, 14, 28, and 181 days. Note that the curing in air was adopted to imitate the practical fabrication process of UHPC products. Details of the curing conditions for each mixture are listed in The toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) specified in US EPA Method 1311  The flow of fresh mixtures was drastically decreased by adding the Sun-shin tailings, and there was no influence by the microwave treatment as well. The flow results of SSR50, SSR100, SSM50, and SSM100 mixtures were smaller than 110 mm, indicating that there was no flowability. It can be postulated that the thin platelet shape of the Sun-shin tailings caused a decrease of flow (see When CSD substituted 50% and 100% of the silica sand A, the flow of fresh mixtures was increased by about 50 mm. As aforementioned, the flow of UHPC is generally influenced by packing density. To increase the packing density of the materials, a finer fraction should fill the free spaces between the particles of the next coarser fraction Results of the porosity and capillary water absorption of hardened UHPC specimens are shown in On the other hand, the porosities of the CSD specimens were greater than that of the control. The increase in porosities of the CSD specimens was ascribed to an increase in volume of entrapped pores, which might be increased by the higher flowability. Moreover, this is also due to the CSD particles being relatively smaller than silica sand A, and some of these particles had similar sizes with the coarser particles of cement. Some CSD particles might fill between cement particles and thus the volume of small sized pores in the cement matrix was increased.   The results in However, there was no substantial decrease in compressive strength when silica sand was substituted with CSD. It was found that the compressive strength decreased slightly, less than 5%, even when silica sands were substituted up to 100%. This might be explained by the fact that the particle size distribution of CSD was similar with that of silica sand A. As shown in  The results of a TCLP test of UHPC containing the tailings are listed in Considering the concentrations of heavy metals in raw materials shown in Although the mechanism of chemical and physical binding is not clearly understood, these results indicate that the heavy metals in the tailings were not extracted thoroughly by the acetic acid used for the TCLP test. Most of the heavy metals in the tailings are embedded inside the particles, and could be extracted only by a very strong acid solution, such as aqua regia. In the present study, two types of quartz-based mine tailings were used to substitute silica sand and silica powder in the production of UHPC. To investigate the possibility of using tailings as substitutes in UHPC, experimental assessments were carried out on compressive strength, workability, porosities, and leachability of toxic elements. From the series of investigations, the following conclusions can be drawn. The adoption of Sun-shin tailings as a replacement of silica powder caused a decrease in workability because the platelet-shaped particles interlocked with each other. The flow results of the mixtures with the tailings as a substitute for silica powder were smaller than 110 mm, indicating that there was no flowability. On the other hand, the use of the coarser Sang-dong tailing to replace silica sand led to increased workability. Their flow values increased to 200 mm, which is considered high workability. The strength of mixtures with 50% and 100% of Sun-shin tailings was lower than that of the control mixture within a range of 7 to 18% and 19 to 30%, respectively. This was mainly because of platelet-shaped particles blocking the hydration products between cement grains. However, the coarser Sang-dong tailings showed a slight increase in strength, i.e., about 5%, due to the favorable particle size. A compressive strength difference between the raw and microwaved tailings was not observed. The results of the TCLP test of UHPC containing the tailings were below the regulatory standard of the USEPA. This might be attributed to the large content of cement in UHPC improving physical and chemical bonding of the toxic elements with the hydration products of the cement and the dense microstructures of UHPC. In general, this study shows the promising capability of tailings as substitutes for silica powder and silica sand in UHPC. Employing tailings with good particle size gradation, packing density, and circular or round particle shape would minimize the limitations noted in this research. The research described here in was supported by grants from the