A rapid, precise method for simultaneous measurement of ferrous and ferric iron concentrations in drainage and other waters is reported. The determination of both ferric and total iron concentrations are made in the same solution at different light wavelengths, which significantly reduces the error of the analytical procedure. The method is based on the colorimetric measurement of red-colored ferric–sulfosalicylate complex formed at low pH. After the addition of ammonia which leads to the increase in pH, the 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) forms a yellow complex with all the iron ions in solution. The wavelengths of maximal light absorbance for both these complexes were determined. They were 500 and 425 nm, respectively. The relationship between both the ferric and total iron concentrations and the light absorbance obeys Beer's law under the conditions studied. The optimal ratio and volumes of the reagents used were determined. The effect of the ions usually found in mine drainage waters along with iron ions was studied. The cultivation media for the iron-oxidizing bacteria Thiobacillus ferrooxidans and the bacterial mass itself were found to have no effect on the iron determination. It was found that the color complexes were stable for a long time (at least 48 h).There are many practical cases where the concentration of iron ions in aqueous solutions has to be determined quantitatively. The oxidation of iron sulfides and ferrous ions by bacterial cells such as The colorimetric determination of iron ions is regarded as the most precise and simple method. Among the most popular colorimetric reagents is 1,10-phenanthroline ( Atomic absorbance spectrophotometry is useful for the determination of iron, but it measures only total iron ( The main problem in the above methods is that only one of the oxidation states of the iron (either Fe It is known that 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) forms a red-colored complex with Fe The aim of this work is to propose a simple, rapid colorimetric method for simultaneous quantitative determination of both ferrous and ferric ions in drainage waters and other solutions, using 5-sulfosalicylic acid as an indicator. The effects of various parameters of this analytical method were studied, including the wavelengths of maximum absorption, the volumes and ratios of the reagents, the effect of various ions and bacterial cell concentration, as well as the stability of the color complexes in time. Crystallic heptahydrate (99+% pure) ferrous sulfate and analytical grade ferric sulfate (Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO, USA) were used in this study. The 5-sulfosalicylic acid dihydrate and sulfuric acids were produced by E. Merck GmbH, Germany and were p.a. grade. All other salts used in this study, including ferrous sulfate, were also analytical grade. Ferric sulfate with an exact concentration of Fe The spectrophotometer used was a Spectronic 20D (Milton Roy, USA) with a wavelength range between 340 and 600 nm, accuracy of 2.5 nm, and readability of 1 nm. The cuvette pathlength was 10 mm. The microbial culture of Sulfosalicylic acid forms a red-colored complex with ferric ions in water. Our first goal was to find the wavelength of the maximal optical absorbance of this complex using a solution containing 0.1 ml aqueous solution of Fe A yellow complex with all the iron ions is formed when ammonia is added to the aqueous solution of iron–SSA complex. We studied the effect of the light wavelength on the optical absorbance of solution containing this complex. The complex was prepared by adding 5 ml of 25% aqueous solution of NH The effect of volumes of ammonia (25% w/v) and SSA (10% w/v) solutions, used in the analysis, was studied next. The volumes of these solutions were varied between 1 and 5 ml in steps of 0.5 ml. The total volume of the red-colored complex was always kept at 100 ml by adding various amounts of deionized water; the volume of the yellow solution was always 105 ml, also corrected with deionized water. Our results showed that the optimal ratio between the volumes of ammonia and SSA solutions is 1:1. The best results were obtained when each of these volumes was either 3, 4 or 5 ml. The color complex obtained under these conditions was very stable for a long time period, at least several hours. However, the complexes obtained under the following volume ratios (ml SSA/ml ammonia): 1/2, 2/1, 1/1, 2/3 and 2/2 were unstable in time. As a result of these experiments, we decided to use further 3 ml of each ammonia and SSA solutions. The following procedure was adopted in the next experiments:   The dependence between the ferric iron concentration and the light absorbance was studied next. The Fe The following linear regression equation was obtained: The relationship between total iron concentration in the initial solution ( The effect of ferrous ion concentration on determination of Fe The ferrous iron concentration was calculated as a difference between the total and ferric iron. Obviously, the precision in the Fe The stability of both color complexes in time was also studied. Solutions containing ferric iron with concentrations between 0.09 and 9 g/l were used. The colored solutions were kept at a temperature of 22 °C. Our results showed that the absorbance of both the red and yellow complexes did not change significantly during 48 h after their preparation. The maximum change observed was below 1% of the initial value. The effect of cations and anions, usually found along with iron in both drainage waters and other solutions, on the precision of the new analytical method, was studied. The following cations (as sulfates) were used: Mg The effect of the above-mentioned ions on the ferric iron determination is shown in The effect of the above-mentioned ions on the total iron determination was also studied ( In addition, a solution containing a mixture of several different ions was studied. The cations used were: Al A synthetic AMD was also prepared and the iron speciation in it was determined. A typical AMD contains ( As mentioned in The effect of the sterile (no cells) salt composition of A rapid, precise spectrophotometric method for quantitative measurement of both ferric and total iron in drainage waters and similar aqueous solutions is reported. Both forms of dissolved iron are measured in the same single sample which significantly reduces the error in measuring the ratio between the both oxidation states of iron ions. The most appropriate conditions for the analytical procedure were determined. The concentration of total iron in the analyzed solution should be below 10 mg/l. The ratio between the volume of that solution and volumes of SSA and ammonia solutions should be 100:3:3. It has been shown that the color complexes are stable in time; no significant change in absorption was detected at least 48 h after their preparation. The effect of most of the cations and anions usually present in drainage waters was studied. Neither the microorganism This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. Technical assistance from Zac Clarkson is gratefully acknowledged.