The grain boundary groove shapes for solid succinonitrile solution (SCN–5mole% NPG) in equilibrium with the succinonitrile (SCN)–neopentylglycol (NPG) eutectic liquid (SCN–9.55mole% NPG) have been directly observed by using a horizontal linear temperature gradient apparatus at 317.1K equilibrium temperature. From the observed grain boundary groove shapes, the Gibbs–Thomson coefficient (Г) and solid-liquid interfacial energy (σ
                     SL) of solid SCN solution have been determined to be (5.43±0.50)×10−8
                     Km and (8.09±1.21)×10−3
                     Jm−2, respectively. The grain boundary energy of solid SCN solution has been determined to be (14.22±2.28)×10−3
                     Jm−2 from the observed grain boundary groove shapes. The thermal conductivity for SCN–9.55mole% NPG eutectic solid phase and the thermal conductivity ratio of eutectic liquid phase to eutectic solid phase at the melting temperature have also been measured with a radial heat flow apparatus and Bridgman type growth apparatus, respectively.The solid–liquid interfacial energy ( The solid–liquid interfacial energy ( In the case of interfaces involving solids, however, it is not immediately obvious that The equilibrated solid–liquid interface in metallic systems will tend to maintain the equilibrium configuration of atoms on the interface so that the difference between the interfacial energy and surface tension may be negligible. Thus, experimental studies on solids which are based on equilibrium shapes of interfaces are preferable to the dynamic experiments in which the time of relaxation is much larger than the rate of motion of the interface. For this reason the grain boundary groove method for determining the solid–liquid interface energies will be emphasised A technique for the quantification of solid–liquid interfacial energy from the grain boundary groove shape has been established Eq. The left-hand side of Eq. The value of Bayender et al. The phase diagram of SCN–NPG system was determined by Witusiewicz et al. The experimental technique requires the preparation of thin slides containing the high-purity test material and the necessary thermocouple assemblies. Accordingly, the preparation of specimens for purified transparent material involved three primary operations: (i) the purification of test materials by distillation, (ii) the design and assembly of the thin-slide specimen cell, and (iii) filling the specimen cell with the purified test materials under vacuum. The SCN and NPG that have the purity of 99% were supplied from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Company. The SCN and NPG were purified in quantities of approximately 100 The experimental technique requires the preparation of rectangular thin slides containing the test material and the necessary thermocouple assemblies. Accordingly, the preparation of specimens for transparent material involves two primary operations; the design and assembly of the thin-slide specimen cell, and filling the specimen cell with the test materials under vacuum. The melting temperature of SCN–5 The specimen cells were fabricated such that the test material was contained between two parallel ground glass plates (50 Test specimens were prepared by the remelting of the SCN–5 Bayender et al. A liquid layer (2 or 3 The temperature gradients ( The thermal conductivity ratio of the eutectic liquid phase to solid SCN solution phase, The thermal conductivity of eutectic solid phase was measured with a radial heat flow apparatus. The details of the radial heat flow apparatus and technique are given in Refs. It is not possible to measure the thermal conductivity of liquid phase with the radial heat flow apparatus since a thick liquid layer (10 The ratio of thermal conductivities can be obtained during directional growth with a Bridgman type growth apparatus. The heat flow away from the interface through the solid phase must balance the heat flow from the liquid phase plus the latent heat generated at the interface A directional growth apparatus, which was first constructed by McCartney The specimen was heated to 30 The ratio between the thermal conductivity of liquid phase and the thermal conductivity of solid phase can be obtained from the cooling rate ratio of liquid phase to solid phase. The cooling rate of the liquid and solid phases is given by The thermal conductivity of eutectic liquid phase, The Gibbs–Thomson coefficients for solid SCN solution in equilibrium with the SCN–9.55 As a consequence, the mean value of To determine the solid–liquid interfacial energy it is also necessary to know the entropy of fusion per unit volume and it is given by The entropy of fusion per unit volume (Δ If the values of the Gibbs–Thomson coefficient and the entropy of fusion per unit volume are measured or known, the solid–liquid interfacial energy can be obtained from Eq. As mentioned above, the groove profile method actually measures Granasy et al. The grain boundary energy ( Experiments were performed to directly observe the equilibrium grain boundary groove shapes formed at the solid SCN solution in equilibrium with the SCN–9.55 This project was supported by the