Izmir is a large metropolitan city with a population of 3,114,860. The city consists of 27 townships, each township has a population of not less than 10,000 inhabitants. The two major solid waste disposal sites are in the townships of Uzundere and Harmandalı. The amount of solid waste that is disposed at each of these sites is about 800 and 1800 t/day, respectively. In Uzundere, compost is produced from the organic fraction of urban solid wastes while the residual material is deposited at a disposal site with a remaining capacity of 700,000 m3 as of 2001. Gas monitoring and measurements were carried out at the disposal site in Uzundere. For this purpose, nine sampling wells were drilled on selected locations. Each well was furnished with perforated metal pipes suitable for gas monitoring and measurements. The following gases were monitored: O2, CH4, CO, CO2, and H2S. The most important finding was that the concentrations of CH4 in the wells ranged from 7 to 57%. Dilution of the CH4 by O2 down to the LEL levels (5–15%) is always possible and poses a continuing risk at the site. Furthermore, the levels of O2 require that access to the site be limited to only authorized personnel.Various gases such as CH The landfill is an extremely heterogeneous formation. Gas probe readings taken in the anaerobic zone of a “mature” landfill (between 2 and 20 m deep) showed that the gas phase was mainly represented by the mixture of CH Production of CH Although many variables influence landfill CH Uncontrolled release of landfill gas from solid waste disposal sites is an environmental risk. Inhalation of very small amounts of some of these gases is extremely dangerous. Exposure to concentrations of H In this study, quantitative determination of gases such as O The Uzundere site is located near the Uzundere Suburb within the borders of the Uzundere Municipality. The Uzundere Municipality is situated in the southeastern part of the City of Izmir ( The material which cannot be composted (the residue) is sent to the disposal site. One ton of household-waste delivered to the composting plant consists of about 400 kg of water, 450 kg of residue and 150 kg of organic matter. The composition of the waste received by the plant varies depending on the time of the year. For example, during the summer, the moisture content varies between 60 and 65% whereas in the winter months the moisture content ranges from 40 to 45%. In addition, the amount of ash from household stoves is around 30–35% during the winter months ( A Garmin model hand-held GPS was employed in determining the actual layout of the Uzundere solid waste disposal site and the location of the wells. The coordinates were established by means of the Universal Transverse Mercator Projection System. In order to determine the presence of CH The total area of the disposal site covered by the solid waste was calculated to be 100,178.5 m In situ gas measurements were conducted by means of the chimneys placed on the wells using a Pac EX model CH The data show that there is a relatively high concentration of CH Anaerobic degradation takes place primarily in two stages. In the first stage, materials such as carbohydrates, proteins and fats are converted into organic fatty acids by fermentation and hydrolysis. In the second stage, these acids are converted into gaseous products, mainly CH On the other hand, when the concentration of O These discrepancies may be attributed to the varying thickness of the solid waste cut by the wells, temperature differences and the escape of certain gases due to these types of geometrical variations. However, the inverse relationship between the CH Measurements of gas concentrations were carried out in nine wells in the Uzundere solid waste disposal site. The findings of this study can be summarized as follows: All nine wells showed relatively high concentrations of CH The CO The O Since the concentrations of CH