In this work, the conceptual designs of the established Organosolv process and a novel biphasic, so-called Organocat process are developed and analyzed. Solvent recycling and energy integration are emphasized to properly assess economic viability. Both processes show a similar energy consumption (approximately 5MJ/kgdry biomass). However, they still show a lack of economic attractiveness even at larger scale. The Organocat process is more favorable due to more efficient lignin separation. The analysis uncovers the remaining challenges toward an economically viable design. They largely originate from by-products formation, product isolation, and solvent recycling. Necessary improvements in process chemistry, equipment design, energy efficiency and process design are discussed to establish economically attractive Organosolv-like processes of moderate capacity as a building block of a future biorefinery.The advent of declining fossil fuels and the anticipated environmental impact of their exploitation has triggered significant research activity to replace fossil-based processing for the supply of chemicals and energy by more sustainable value chains. Their realization requires novel products and processing concepts to tap the full potential of this shift from fossil to biorenewable carbon feedstock ( Wood is considered a promising feedstock, because it is estimated to constitute more than half of today’s total biorenewable carbon resources ( A more promising approach to fractionate wood into its three main constituents is offered by Organosolv-like processing ( However, previous work largely focused on the reaction conditions. The few process studies available either focus on a particular unit operation ( Recently, a related concept of a biphasic process for biomass pretreatment has been suggested. It uses an aqueous solution of oxalic acid as a catalytic agent and 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (MTHF) as an organic solvent, which is largely immiscible with the aqueous phase ( Though bi-phasic systems for biomass pretreatment and lignin recovery are known for more than 80 In this work, a comparative model-based conceptual design study of a classical Organosolv and the recently suggested Organocat process for biomass fractionation is provided to assess their economic viability in a biorefinery application. After a description of the conceptual designs and the simulation models, the energy demand and process economics are assessed for both processes. To account for the different levels of maturity of these processes, a two-stage analysis has been chosen: a conceptual design without by-product formation is analyzed first, followed by a more detailed analysis to assess the differences in energy demand and economic potential, which also covers the impact of by-products and the economy of scale. The bottlenecks of both process concepts are finally discussed to point out important research questions for the development of viable Organosolv-like biomass pretreatment and fractionation processes. The Organosolv and the Organocat process are designed to fractionate wood into its major constituents. Lignin and depolymerized hemicelluloses are recovered as dry solids, while the fibrous cellulose fraction is converted into a concentrated aqueous glucose solution by means of enzymatic hydrolysis. Both designs are based on a capacity of 50,000 The design of the Organosolv process is mainly based on experimental data published by The biomass (stream 1A) is fed to the process together with fresh solvent, a mixture of 3877 The reactor effluent, stream 3A, contains the solid components cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin, as well as the liquid components water, ethanol, dissolved lignin, unspecified substances, i.e., “others” comprising inorganics and residues, and dissolved C The precipitated lignin is then separated by filtration and drying in unit CS7 with a reported yield of 67 The filtrate (stream 8A) produced in unit CS7 is composed of a mixture of water and ethanol containing dissolved hemicelluloses, others, non-precipitated lignin and sugars. The dissolved solids need to be recovered as a product stream, while the solvents are recycled to the reactor R2. Considerable amounts of ethanol are also contained in the washing liquor, stream 42C, withdrawn from unit CS6M41AB, which is therefore mixed with stream 8A to form stream 9D. As the fractionation requires a precise solvent composition, the ethanol is separated from water by means of one flash vessel and one distillation column. The flash separation in unit F9 recovers a large fraction of the ethanol from the mixture as stream 10A. The liquid stream 11A leaving unit F9 is processed in a 20-stage distillation column (D11), which operates at a reflux ratio of 0.455 to remove and recycle all of the remaining ethanol in stream 12A. The calculation of the vapor–liquid equilibria assumes that most of the dissolved compounds behave as solids and do not affect the thermodynamic properties of the fluid ( The bottom stream 13A of the distillation column still contains dissolved hemicelluloses, others, sugars and few remaining lignin in water. Volatile compounds and water are flashed in unit F13+F15 in order to obtain a water vapor stream 14F, which is recycled for washing. The solid product stream XYLOSE is composed of 64 The cellulose-rich solids stream 6A is withdrawn from the fractionation unit CS3+F5 at a solid content of 25 The amount of washing liquor, Next, the solid cellulose is hydrolyzed in the hydrolysis reactor R32A. The stream 31A is diluted by the recycle stream 38A to form stream 32A at a solid content of 14 After hydrolysis, the sugar stream 33 needs to be purified. The unconverted solid residue consisting of 292 The flowsheet of the Organocat process developed in this work is based on the experimental results presented by 6250 In contrast, the processing of the aqueous hemicellulose-rich stream 21 is more complicated, since oxalic acid, sugars and the remaining dissolved MTHF (7 The cellulose-rich solids in stream 5A are purified in the washing unit M41CS42. A stream of 19,012 Aspen Plus Process Modeling (version 7.2) is used to solve the mass and energy balances of the Organsolv and Organocat process flowsheets. The fractionation reactions are modeled by means of yield data based on envisaged conversion factors as reported in State-of-the-art heat integration is considered to reduce the energy demand of both processes following the same strategy in both designs. The feed streams of all the flash units are preheated using the flash streams that have a higher condensation temperature by vapor recompression. The distillation columns are always designed to deliver most of the heat from the condenser to the reboiler by heat integration (cf. The results from process simulation allow for an economic analysis of the suggested processes which considers capital cost, costs of utilities and raw materials, and the revenue from product sales. The capital costs of both designs are determined as total annualized investment costs through annuity payments for given project life-time of 10 The calculations of operating costs and revenues require prices for raw materials, utilities and products. The raw materials are priced as follows: wood at 100 Process economics can be further assessed by performance indicators ( To assess the effect of plant capacity on economic viability, the increased cost of biomass feedstock due to limited regional availability and longer transportation distances has to be considered. This effect of biomass logistics is calculated as the distance-variable cost according to This section first presents an analysis of the energy demand and then assesses the economic viability of the Organosolv and Organocat processes. At this point, the conceptual designs do not consider the formation of acetic acid and furfural, because the formation of these by-products has been only confirmed experimentally for the Organosolv but not for the Organocat process. This enables a fair comparison between biphasic and homogeneous processing as a reference for subsequent evaluation and a more detailed discussion. Both processes mainly rely on thermal energy, i.e., for heating of the feedstock to reaction conditions, for product separation by drying, and for thermal solvent recovery. Without heat integration, the total specific energy demand of the Organosolv process amounts to 28.8 The energy integration scheme suggested in this work allows for a considerable reduction of the specific energy demand. The heat-integrated Organosolv process requires 1.6 The energy demand of energy-integrated Organocat process is reduced to a specific energy demand of 4.9 Hence, the fractionation of biomass by Organosolv-like processes is clearly energy-intensive. Only heat integration allows for a reduction of the energy demand below the energy content of the raw material. Despite the liquid–liquid phase separation in the Organocat process, this does not lead to lower energy consumption of the overall process. Rather, the energy demand is similar for both processes and does not favor one over the other from an energetic point of view. The origin of the rather high energy demand of both processes can be identified in the solvent recycles. A large amount of water is required in the Organosolv process to dilute the ethanol and to induce precipitation of lignin. The water ends up in the solvent recovery system, which is by far the most energy-intensive processing step. In fact, the solvent stream to the recovery system (streams 4A, 42C, 43 and W4) reveals a biomass to liquid load of almost 1:10 (w/w) compared to the load of only 1:6 (w/w) in the fractionation reactor. Nevertheless, the biphasic Organocat process was developed to enable fractionation without addition of an anti-solvent to precipitate lignin. Though successful in this regard, the processing concept does not result in a significantly lower specific energy demand, which can be explained again by analyzing the solvent flows. The Organocat process employs a 1:1 mixture (v/v) of water and MTHF but with a biomass to aqueous phase load of 1:10 (w/v). This essentially translates into 80% higher mass flow rates in the solvent recycles compared to those in the Organosolv process. More precisely, the total enthalpy of vaporization of the solvents in the reactor effluent is 19.3 The total investment cost of the energy-integrated Organosolv process with an annual capacity of 50,000 t biomass is estimated to 30.8 A breakdown of the annual costs, revenues and earnings is presented in All these costs have to be balanced by the revenue of 16.3 The total investment cost of the Organocat process is estimated to 34.4 Despite the higher total investment, the annualized capital cost of the Organocat process is only slightly higher in comparison to the Organosolv process ( The economic analysis of the conceptual designs thus reveals that both processes generate a moderate profit. There seems to be a slight advantage for the Organocat process because of the higher yield of the more valuable lignin. However, these results strongly depend on the assumption that lignin is a high-value product. If the prize of lignin would be below 500 One significant technical uncertainty in the designed processes is for instance the solvent loss. In particular, 7 However, the economic analysis of the conceptual designs of the Organosolv and the Organocat processes indicate that Organosolv-like processes are not yet economically attractive in general. Further improvements have to be realized to promote industrial implementation. A first major bottleneck was already identified in the solvent load. The following sections analyze additional pitfalls and further optimization potential of Organosolv-like processes. So far, the formation of by-products has been neglected, though it may have significant impact on feasibility and economic viability of Organosolv-like processes. Experimental investigations on Organosolv processing ( The efficient removal of acetic acid from stream 14F at a low concentration of 0.4 The simplest way to remove acetic acid from the process is to purge stream 14F from the process. While no extra investment is necessary with this strategy, extra cost of 0.2 Furfural is formed as another by-product by dehydration of pentoses at only 3 The separation of these two known by-products increases the energy demand of the energy-integrated Organosolv process from 5.4 to 7.8 At this early stage of development, there is no appropriate knowledge on by-products formation in Organocat processing, though similar by-products are likely to occur. It might be possible to extract furfural into MTHF from the aqueous phase, which might be easier than distillation in Organosolv processing but needs further investigation. Nevertheless, rather small quantities of by-products can obviously have a strong impact on energy demand and process economics. The risk due to this uncertainty can only be mitigated by achieving a process design with a higher margin in order to robustify the design against unforeseen effects. A common strategy to improve the economic performance of a particular process is to exploit the economy of scale. The investigated designs assumed a rather small capacity of 50,000  The advantage in specific earnings of the Organocat process is due to the higher revenues from lignin ( The results of this work reveal substantial bottlenecks and uncertainties of Organosolv-like biomass fractionation processes. An industrial implementation will only proceed if a technology push is provided with significantly improved process concepts. Essential research topics can be identified in three areas, namely process chemistry, unit operations, and process design. In view of the The uncertainties regarding by-product formation also point to the yet inadequate product characterization. Though further integration of pretreatment and fermentation should be established, a quality specification of the tolerable amounts of degradation products from the carbohydrate or aromatic fractions in the sugar stream for fermentation is essential to reduce the uncertainty in the conceptual design of the pretreatment process. Lignin requires special attention, because Organosolv-like processes are shown to be only economically viable if lignin is obtained as a high-value intermediate product in a chemical value chain. The strong impact of lignin revenue on process economics requires characterization of the lignin during the very early stages of process development. Hence, pathways for (bio-)chemical transformation of lignin into valuable products need to be discovered in combination with comprehensive process analytical technologies to monitor the lignin quality provided by the particular pretreatment and fractionation. On the level of Similarly, the processing of solid biomass has not yet been investigated with sufficient rigor. There is a lack of quantitative data on washing to separate soluble solids from process streams particularly in the non-kinetic regime, e.g., at high solvent loads. High loads lead to integrated solids processing and (bio-)chemical conversion, i.e., mechano-catalytic processing ( The overall analysis at the The production and recovery of the solid product or the highly concentrated sugar solution from the liquid streams by evaporation and drying might be a starting point. The involved isolation and purification steps strongly contribute to the capital and energy costs. Consequently, the solvent flow rate has to be as low as possible. A back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that doubling the load of biomass per unit mass of solvent in the Organocat process could be sufficient to achieve acceptable ROI figures. Hence, process intensification for high biomass loads and very high solvent recycling rates should be aimed at in any Organosolv-like process. Another option to lower drying and solvent recovery cost is the integrated conversion of the solid biomass fractions into valuable platform chemicals at high yield. The target molecules should enable simple and efficient isolation even from dilute streams. In summary, Organosolv-like fractionation of lignocellulosic feedstock thus calls for further intensification of process chemistry, unit operations, and process concepts to achieve economically viable biomass-to-chemicals processes as a building block of a future bioeconomy. Two Organosolv-like biomass fractionation processes were designed and investigated using process modeling based on available experimental data. Both processes are economically viable but still show insufficient performance indicators. The production of lignin of defined quality as a high-value intermediate product is mandatory to improve process economics. Despite the high energy consumption of both processes, the cost structure indicates only low optimization potential. Further improvement can only be envisaged, if the fractionation chemistry is better understood, if a low-cost and high-yield solvent recovery system can be put in place, and if the process is more tightly integrated. This work was performed as part of the Cluster of Excellence “Tailor-Made Fuels from Biomass”, which is funded by the Excellence Initiative by the German federal and state governments to promote science and research at German universities. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 