An analytical theory has been developed for the capillary bridge force between non-perfectly wettable, equal-sized spherical particles for the pendular regime. In this theory, the meridional profile of the axisymmetric capillary bridge is represented by part of an ellipse. The geometrical parameters in this description are determined from the boundary conditions at the three-phase contact circle at the spherical particles and at the neck and by the condition that the mean curvature be equal at the three-phase contact circle and at the neck. Thus, the current theory takes into account properties of the governing Young-Laplace equation. These geometrical parameters are expressed in terms of the volume of the capillary bridge and the separation distance between the spherical particles. The theory results in a rupture criterion that agrees well with a rupture criterion from literature that is based on many numerical solutions to the Young-Laplace equation. The predicted dependence of the capillary force on capillary bridge volume and interparticle separation agrees well with that obtained from numerical solutions of the Young-Laplace equation, without having introduced any calibrated fitting parameters, when the contact angle θ is in the range 0° ≤ θ ≤ 20° and when the ratio of capillary bridge volume to the radius of the spheres cubed is smaller than 10−3.Capillary bridges between particles are ubiquitous in nature [ Depending on the liquid content, different regimes are observed, listed here in the order of increasing liquid content: (i) This study focusses on the pendular regime, considering its importance to the behaviour of granular systems with low liquid content and the complexity of the distribution of capillary bridges in granular systems in the funicular regime [ Experimental studies of the dependence of the capillary bridge force on the separation distance between two spherical particles have been reported in [ Theoretical approaches to describe capillary bridges between two spherical particles are generally based on the well-established Young-Laplace equation, for example [ Besides numerical solutions of the Young-Laplace equation (that are effectively exact when the discretisation of the governing equation is sufficiently fine) [ Fisher [ Recently, Kruyt and Millet [ The objective of the current study is to extend their approach to the case of The outline of the study is as follows. The geometry of the capillary bridge, the governing Young-Laplace equation and the adopted numerical solution method are presented in In this study, an axisymmetric capillary bridge between two equal-sized spherical particles in the pendular regime, in the absence of gravity, is considered. The surfaces of the spherical particles are assumed to be smooth so that contact angle hysteresis, that arises due to surface roughness and heterogeneity [ All coordinates are made dimensionless by scaling them with the particle radius In the following, two locations on the meridional profile are very important: (i) the neck that is located in the middle between the two spherical particles, with meridional coordinates (0, Since capillary bridges with small volume, and hence small filling angle Considering the symmetry of the capillary bridge between the two equal-sized spherical particles, we have at the neck At the contact circle, the following conditions are satisfied The capillary bridge profile Solutions to the Young-Laplace equation, Eq. The Young-Laplace equation is a second-order nonlinear ordinary differential equation, for which appropriate boundary conditions are given by Eqs. The capillary bridge force The Young-Laplace equation is an ordinary differential equation, for which various numerical solution methods have been suggested [ Based on the obtained meridional profile By specifying, for a number of values for the contact angle In this section, an analytical theory is developed in which the meridional profile of the capillary bridge is approximated by a part of an ellipse, as suggested in [ Based on observations of the meridional profile The accuracy of the description of the meridional profile From the boundary conditions given by Eqs. Since the coordinates By substituting Eqs. Note that in the toroidal approximation (see [ For the perfectly wetting case with contact angle In the current approach the meridional profile is described by an ellipse that contains the parameters This requirement means that the property of constant mean curvature of the Young-Laplace equation is taken into account, contrary to in the often-used toroidal approximation. Combining the closure relation Eq. This function  The theoretical closure relation For larger capillary bridge volumes For the determination of the capillary force in To this end, it has been suggested in [ Alternatively, a new and simpler approximate method is proposed here to directly obtain The coefficients After substitution of Eq. Through the use of Eq. With the ellipse equation Eq. As discussed in [ The good accuracy of these approximations to the functions Substituting Eq. For contact angles 0 The discriminant (see for example [ Comparing Eq. Two regimes can be identified for solutions to Eq. For small separations For large separations In comparison to the solution for Following the approach suggested in [ The accuracy of the approximation Eq. Note that for zero separation distance, In According to experimental observations [ Here it is shown how the developed analytical theory results in a prediction for this critical separation For large separation distance The current, analytical rupture criterion given by Eq. Given values of the capillary bridge volume When the contact angle The dimensionless capillary forces The deviation in the dimensionless capillary bridge force predicted by the current theory, When the separation When Given the capillary bridge volume Checking that the separation distance Calculating Substituting With the obtained value of Substituting the values of Values required for An analytical theory has been developed for properties of axisymmetric capillary bridges with equal-sized, non-perfectly wettable (with The validity of the approximation of the meridional profile of the surface of the capillary bridge by a part of an ellipse has been demonstrated, for large and small separation distances The geometrical parameters required to describe the ellipse have been obtained for the case of non-perfectly wetting spherical particles The approach suggested in [ A rupture criterion, valid for non-perfectly wetting spherical particles with An expression for the dimensionless capillary force For further study it is recommended to consider the case of spherical particles with unequal radii. Furthermore, the developed analytical framework could also be used as a starting point for formulating simpler or more accurate fits that are also appropriate for larger capillary bridge volumes. The authors acknowledge support by the international scientific network GDRI-GeoMech (Multi-Physics and Multi-Scale Couplings in Geo-Environmental Mechanics). As described in Based upon the closure relation Eq. Substituting the coefficients in Eq. Good accuracy of Eq. By solving Eq.