The extraction of zinc(II), iron(II) and iron(III) with solutions of dibutylbutylphosphonate (DBBP) from hydrochloric acid solutions was studied. Iron(II) was only slightly extracted by DBBP. The isotherms of zinc(II) extraction with DBBP were compared with those for tributylphosphate (TBP). They indicated that extraction efficiency was higher for DBBP than for TBP. The transfer of iron(III) was effective, due to the presence of a neutral chlorocomplex at high Cl− and HCl concentrations. Thus, selective zinc(II) separation from strong chloride solution containing iron(III) with DBBP was not possible. Addition of kerosene (20–40 vol.%) increased the hydrophobicity of DBBP while slightly decreasing the efficiency of zinc(II) extraction. As a result, water content in the organic phase decreased with decreasing DBBP concentration from almost 9 to about 4%. Hydrochloric acid co-extraction was observed, and it decreased in the following order of the accompanying metal ions: Zn(II)>Fe(II)>Fe(III) for 100 and 80% DBBP. Above a DBBP concentration of 40 vol.% zinc(II) complexes with two DBBP molecules in the organic phase. At lower DBBP concentrations zinc(II) species form a complex with only one DBBP molecule. DBBP enables selective removal of zinc(II) in the presence of iron(II). The selectivity of zinc(II) extraction over iron(II) with 80% DBBP is very high and exceeds 103. Zinc(II) can be effectively stripped (over 90%) from loaded DBBP with water in three stages.Spent pickling solutions from hot-dip galvanizing plants are a significant environmental and economic problem. There are more than 50 hot-dip galvanizing plants in Poland producing spent pickling solutions containing up to 130 g/L Zn(II), 90 g/L Fe (mainly Fe(II)) and 100 g/L HCl ( Regeneration of hydrochloric acid from spent pickling solutions can be realized by means of a pyrometallurgical process (OSKO, Austria). However, only spent pickling solutions with below 0.5 g/L Zn(II) can be processed by pyrohydrolysis. Some small plants use lime to precipitate zinc and iron hydroxides and to separate zinc(II) from waste water. However, in this case, special sealed landfill sites are required for disposal of the toxic elements to prevent their penetration into the soil and ground water. Solvent extraction has been proposed for pretreatment of spent pickling solutions containing high metal concentrations by reducing the zinc below 0.5 g/L before pyrohydrolysis ( Some authors ( Thus, it is the aim of the work to study zinc(II) and iron ions extraction from hydrochloric acid solutions with dibutylbutylphosphonate. Moreover, hydrochloric acid transfer to the strip phase and zinc(II) stripping from loaded organic phase are observed. Dibutyl butylphosphonate (Rhodia, USA) was used as an extractant and low-aromatic kerosene Exxsol®D 220/230 (Exxon Mobil Chemical, Germany) as a diluent (aromatic content: 0.05 wt.%, distillation range 222–234 °C). DBBP was used as 100, 80 and 60 vol.% solution (later marked as 100, 80 and 60% DBBP). All chemicals were used as delivered without any purification. Aqueous feeds used for the determination of extraction isotherms and Zn:DBBP stoichiometry contained 1.8 and 10 wt.% HCl (marked as 1.8 and 10% in the text), 0.2–80 g/L Zn(II), Fe(II) or Fe(III). Salts were introduced as chlorides and the concentration of chloride was adjusted to 5 M with NaCl (POCh, Poland). The contents of the model aqueous feed, used for extraction at organic to aqueous volume phase ratio O/W Extraction was carried out in a small scale at the volume ratio O/W equal to 1, 5 or 9. Phases were mechanically shaken for 15 min and left to stand for separation. Scrubbing of loaded DBBP was carried out with deionized water at a O/W ratio of 5. Stripping of scrubbed DBBP was carried out with deionized water at a volume ratio of 1:1. Each experiment was carried out at least in duplicate, and the results agreed within 5%. Zn(II) concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by potentiometric titration (702 SM Titrino, Metrohm, Switzerland) with 0.05 M EDTA, while Zn(II) concentration in the aqueous phase containing Fe(II) was determined by amperometric titration with 0.05 M K Concentrations of metal ions, HCl and Cl Based on data from the Polish hot-dip galvanizing plant Belos Bielsko-Biala, the authors decided to examine solutions containing more than 10 g/L Zn(II) in hydrochloric acid. The isotherms of zinc(II) extraction from 1.8 ( Only slight extraction of iron(II) is observed ( These effects can be attributed to the DBBP only extracting neutral complexes. Zinc forms ZnCl The extraction effectiveness of neutral organophosphorus compounds depends upon the polarity of P−O bond and increases significantly with the increasing number of C–P bonds in the following order: (RO) The only disadvantage of DBBP could be its hydrophilicity, which is higher than for TBP because of the higher polarity of the phosphoryl group in the phosphonate molecule. However, addition of kerosene (20–40 vol.%) increases the hydrophobicity of DBBP without significant reduction in its extraction power (  Previously reports support the extraction of ZnCl The extraction equilibrium constant is given by the equation, indices Total zinc(II) concentration [Zn] Taking into account stability constants of individual complexes, Eq. The following equations for the logarithm of distribution coefficient can be derived after introducing Eqs. Where distribution coefficient ( Thus, the derived Eq. Finally Eqs. From the above equation, a plot of log Isotherms of zinc(II) stripping with water from loaded 80% DBBP are presented in The stripping isotherms are determined using loaded organic phase obtained in extraction with feeds containing 0.1–50 g/L Zn(II) and 10% ( The stripping isotherms confirm that zinc(II) can be effectively stripped from loaded DBBP with water. After the first stage of stripping with water (O/W Finally, attempts to separate zinc(II) from iron(II) from a solution containing 80 g/L of Zn(II), 30 g/L of Fe(II), 2.5 M HCl and 6.5 M Cl To separate zinc(II) from iron(II), we propose to scrub the loaded organic phase with a small amount of water (O/W  DBBP is a very effective extractant of zinc(II) from hydrochloric acid solutions. It removes up to 90% of zinc(II) at O/W Water content in the organic phase decreases with decreasing DBBP concentration from almost 9 to about 4%. Hydrochloric acid co-extraction is observed, and it decreases in the following order of the accompanying metal ions: Zn(II) Compared with TBP, DBBP has a higher extraction power. It can be loaded with more zinc(II), even at lower extractant concentrations. Zinc(II) species form a complex with two DBBP molecules in the organic phase at concentrations of DBBP above 40 vol.% (1.4 M). At DBBP concentrations below 40 vol.% zinc(II) species form a complex with only one DBBP molecule. DBBP enables efficient stripping of zinc(II) (more than 90%) with water in three successive steps. It can effectively replace other extractants (e.g., TBP) because, at a lower concentration (60%), it enables both efficient extraction and stripping of zinc(II). Moreover, it is not as corrosive as TBP towards steel and plastic elements. Selectivity of zinc(II) extraction over iron(II) is very high and exceeds 10 List of abbreviations: The work was supported by the grant No. 32-044/06-DS. M. Regel-Rosocka is a beneficiary of the Foundation for Polish Science (FNP) domestic grant for young scientists in 2005 and 2006. We thank Rhodia Company (USA) for providing us with a free sample of DBBP.