Objective
                  To correlate the functional outcomes and radiographic indices of proximal humerus fractures treated using an anatomical locking plate for the proximal humerus.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-nine patients with fractures of the proximal humerus who had been treated using an anatomical locking plate were assessed after a mean follow-up of 27 months. These patients were assessed using the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) score and their range of motion was evaluated using the method of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons on the operated shoulder and comparative radiographs on both shoulders. The correlation between radiographic measurements and functional outcomes was established.
               
                  Results
                  We found that 64% of the results were good or excellent, according to the UCLA score, with the following means: elevation of 124°; lateral rotation of 44°; and medial rotation of thumb to T9. The type of fracture according to Neer's classification and the patient's age had significant correlations with the range of motion, such that the greater the number of parts in the fracture and the greater the patient's age were, the worse the results also were. Elevation and UCLA score were found to present associations with the anatomical neck-shaft angle in anteroposterior view; fractures fixed with varus deviations greater than 15° showed the worst results (p
                     <0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The variation in the neck-shaft angle measurements in anteroposterior view showed a significant correlation with the range of motion; varus deviations greater than 15° were not well tolerated. This parameter may be one of the predictors of functional results from proximal humerus fractures treated using a locking plate.Proximal humeral fractures are relatively frequent; they account for 5–10% of all fractures. The most common mechanism of injury is fall from standing protected by the extended hand According to the literature, there is no unique treatment method that is effective for all types of proximal humeral fractures. The most commonly used surgical techniques are: closed reduction and fixation with pins or percutaneous screws, open reduction and internal fixation with plate and screws or with tension band, intramedullary nails, and hemiarthroplasty. Internal fixation of the proximal humerus with locking anatomic plate favors the maintenance of the reduction obtained during surgery, allowing for earlier passive mobilization and thus facilitating post-operative rehabilitation. However, this technique is not free from complications. The most common among them are: limitation of range of movement, avascular necrosis, loosening of the synthesis material, articular penetration of screws, and/or varus fixation of the humeral head. This study aimed to evaluate the correlation between functional outcomes and radiographic indices of proximal humeral fractures treated with locking anatomical plate. This was a retrospective study conducted by the Shoulder and Elbow Group of the Orthopedics and Traumatology Service of the hospital, from January 2012 to March 2013, with 46 patients who suffered fracture of the proximal humerus and underwent surgical treatment (open reduction and internal fixation) with locking anatomic plate (PHILOS – Synthes The following patients were excluded: 1 individual for presenting infection (re-operated for removal of the synthesis material); 1, for developing avascular necrosis of the humeral head; and 5 due to loss of follow-up. Of the 39 patients available for study, 21 (54%) had a fracture on the left side and 18 (46%) on the right side; 18 (46%) fractured the dominant side, and 21 (54%), the non-dominant; 26 (67%) were female and 13 (33%) male. The mean age was 69 years (range 45–87 years) for the women and 51 years (range 19–71 years) for the men. The mean follow-up was 27 months (range 20–34 months). The most common mechanism of injury was fall from standing in 89% of cases. Comparing the frequency of age by gender, it is observed that among the women, 25% were between 45 and 61 years; 50%, between 61 and 77; and 25%, above 78. Among the men, 25% were between 19 and 46 years; 50%, between 47 and 65; and 25%, above 66 ( The classification used in this study was described by Neer For diagnosis and preoperative classification, X-rays in the true shoulder anteroposterior, scapular Y, and Velpeau views were used, as well as CT scan when there was doubt regarding articular involvement. Of the 39 studied fractures, 13 (33.3%) were classified as two-part, 12 as three-part (30.8%), and 14 as four-part (35.9%). To assess the functional results, patients with a minimum of 12 months of follow-up were included. The degree of flexion and rotation (lateral and medial) of both shoulders was measured in accordance to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons For the age analysis, patients were divided into two groups: 60 years or less (15 patients – 38%) and above 60 (24 patients – 62%), taking into account Law No. 10.741 of the Brazilian Constitution, which declares the Elderly Statute, considering as such individuals aged over 60 years. Postoperative radiographic evaluation was standardized with a 100 The radiographic measurements assessed were the cervicodiaphyseal angle (formed by the intersection between a line perpendicular to the anatomical neck and a line parallel to the axis of the humeral diaphysis), compared to the non-operated side in true shoulder anteroposterior view The presence of pseudoarthrosis, avascular necrosis, and osteolysis was investigated. For the analysis of the difference of cervicodiaphyseal angle in anteroposterior incidence, a variation up to 15° varus was used as an evaluation parameter, following the line of thought described by Solberg et al. For the analysis of the distance between the plate and the apex of the greater tuberosity, patients were divided into two groups: the first group had values lower than 8 Subsequently, the correlation between changes in radiographic measurements and functional results was calculated. In the statistical analysis, the variables were presented on tables with absolute and relative frequency distribution. Associations were tested using the chi-squared test, and the normality of the variables was assessed using the Shapiro–Wilk test. Continuous variables were evaluated using paired and unpaired Student's The information collected was stored in a database developed in Excel For the 39 patients analyzed, the mean elevation of the operated limb was 123.9° (80–180°), with a standard deviation of 26.4°. As for the contralateral shoulder, a mean of 154.1° (110–180°), with a standard deviation of 19°, was obtained. A mean loss of 30° (20%) of elevation for the operated shoulder was observed when compared with the contralateral. The mean external rotation (ER) was 44.2° (5–80°) for the operated shoulder, with a standard deviation of 19.2°. For the contralateral shoulder, the mean was 62.9° (30–85°), with a standard deviation of 14.4°. A mean external rotation loss of 18.7° (30%) was observed for the operated shoulder when compared with the contralateral. The mean internal rotation (IR) was thumb-T9 (T4-L5) of the operated shoulder In the UCLA score, Thirteen patients (33.3%) had two-part fractures, with a mean UCLA score Twelve patients (30.8%) had three-part fractures, with an average of UCLA score The worst scores in the study were in four-part fractures, observed in 14 patients (35.9%), with mean UCLA score Younger patients (60 years or less) had the best results in the UCLA score Statistically significant results were observed ( In the radiographic evaluation, one patient (2.43%) had avascular necrosis (the fracture had been classified as four-part preoperatively) and one patient (2.43%) presented infection (it was necessary to remove the synthesis material). It was not possible to assess the pre-established study measurements for these two patients. Of the 39 patients studied, the mean cervicodiaphyseal angle in anteroposterior view was: 129° on the operated side (range: 82–170°; standard deviation: 19°) and 140° in the contralateral shoulder (range: 124–153°; standard deviation: 6.9°). The greatest differences were observed in four-part fractures, especifically in the anteroposterior view, which showed a difference of 21° when compared to the non-operated side. Patients who had less than 15° variation in the cervicodiaphyseal angle measurement in anteroposterior view between the operated shoulder and the contralateral had better functional outcomes: better UCLA score Correlation was observed between cervicodiaphyseal angle measurement in anteroposterior incidence and elevation ( When measuring the distance between the proximal end of the plate and the apex of the greater tuberosity, a mean of 6.6 The comparisons among the results of the UCLA score, The worst functional outcomes were observed in cases where the difference between the operated and contralateral side was greater than or equal to 15° varus in the anteroposterior incidence. In such cases, the patients had lower mean flexion (108.7°) and worse UCLA score For analysis of the distance between the proximal end of the plate and the apex of the greater tuberosity, patients were divided into two groups: the first, with values lower than 8 In the present study, it was observed that deviations greater than 15° varus relative to contralateral shoulder in anteroposterior view are not well tolerated by the patient and lead to with flexion loss and a worse UCLA score. Solberg et al. Resch, The surgical technique of osteosynthesis with locking anatomical plate for the proximal humerus (PHILOS – Synthes In the functional evaluation, three patients were not satisfied with the treatment, and their results were considered as poor (according to the UCLA score The 61.5% excellent and good results observed in the present study are below levels reported in the literature. In 2011, Hirschmann et al. In the present study, the higher the age of the patient and the number of parts of the fracture, the worst the flexion and the UCLA score. In the present study, the cervicodiaphyseal angle was used as a comparative radiographic parameter with the contralateral shoulder for correlation with functional outcomes. However, there is no universal standardized method to measure this angle. This study indicated that the alteration of the cervicodiaphyseal angle in anteroposterior view was significantly correlated with the range of motion; displacements greater than 15° varus were not well tolerated. This radiographic parameter can be one of the predictors of functional results in fractures of the proximal humerus treated with locking plates. The greater the age of the patient and the number of parts of the fracture, the worse the functional outcomes are. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.