Remelting aluminium requires about 5–10% of the energy used for primary production, so that recycling is very attractive from an energy point of view. Besides smelting secondary aluminium production includes other processes like collection and material processing. The energy demand for these processes rises with an increasing recycling quota because of lower metal contents and greater specific mass flows, respectively. So in a closed loop recycling system there is a minimum energy demand of mixed aluminium production from primary and secondary raw materials. In this article a first approximation of this optimal recycling quota is given. As an example, the recycling system of lightweight packaging material (LPM) in Germany is analysed and its overall energy input is determined. Based on this analysis, a scenario is developed to study the energy demand at recycling rates higher than the present one. Additionally, several options to calculate the energy demand of secondary aluminium production are discussed.This study aims at an energy-related discussion and evaluation of improved aluminium recycling concepts. As a basis for the analysis the energy consumption and recycling quota of lightweight packaging recycling in Germany are assessed using a process chain model. A scenario is developed for increased recycling achieved with alternative or improved processes. The evaluation starts with the determination of primary energy equivalents of electricity and fuel consumption of different processes as well as their combinations. In the next step, an additional energy input materials is considered, which is supplied by the energy content of the secondary raw materials, i.e. the fraction of aluminium oxidised during remelting and the accompanying organics. In the third step, the system is extended to the incineration of that part of packaging materials, which is treated together with the household waste. Finally, a credit system for power produced in incineration plants is used. Different calculation methods are discussed to show the energetic limits of recycling activities and the difficulties of process evaluation. Packaging material is chosen as an example because of the competitive ways of material processing and the existing optimisation potentials in all stages of the recycling process. In order to model the complex system of metal production and recycling an integrated resource management system is used. This system has been developed by the Collaborative Research Centre CRC 525. This research institution was established in 1997 at the Aachen University of Technology and the Forschungszentrum Jülich. Here nine departments co-operate in order to achieve a ‘Resource-Orientated Analysis of the Material Flow of Metallic Raw Materials’ ( The integrated approach of the CRC 525 provides support for finding decisions based on the concept of sustainable development. The goal of the research program is the identification of options for resource-sensitive supplying and processing of metallic raw materials considering the conflicts between technical developments, economic and ecological aims. For metal recycling, the recycling quota consists of the collection quota and the technical recycling quota. This separation clarifies the different levels of recycling and permits a resource-orientated point of view ( The collection quota CQ is the quantity of secondary material, which is recovered by collection systems, related to the total quantity of used products: The technical recycling quota RQ The technical recycling quota consists of two sections. First, the processing quota indicates how much metallic aluminium of the collected quantity is supplied for melting. Second, the smelting yield describes how much of the aluminium supplied is won as liquid metal, i.e. here the losses in the resulting salt cake or dross are considered. The product of CQ and RQ In contrast to the quota, the recycled content is the share of secondary metal, which is used for product manufacturing. It is usually smaller than the recycling quota. Due to an increasing aluminium demand more primary metal must be produced than would be required for replacing the losses. The primary energy demand of remelting aluminium amounts to only 5–10% of that for primary production. To produce primary aluminium large amounts of electricity are required for electrolysis while for mining, transport and production of alumina and anodes only minor amounts of energy have to be supplied. For remelting just the melting energy has to be supplied, which is mostly done by natural gas combustion. Besides remelting, collection and material processing are necessary steps in the process chain of recycling. The energy consumption for those processes depends on the recycling quota. For high recycling quotas, the material flows to be processed reach very large scales in relation to the metal content. So due to the high efforts of complete material collection and processing, the overall energy consumption for aluminium recycling rises disproportionate at high recycling quotas and goes to infinity for a quota approaching 100% (see dotted lines in Furthermore, the energy demand of the production of 1 t of aluminium depends on the recycled content. To handle both, the recycling quota and the recycled content, a closed loop recycling system is assumed. So the recycling quota is equivalent to the maximum recycled content of that closed system. A further assumption is necessary due to different metal qualities obtained from different process alternatives. The amount of aluminium obtained from each recycling path is assumed to substitute primary aluminium. Material depending metal losses during remelting are considered but the quality of the obtained alloy is neglected, so that cast alloys are assumed to substitute primary aluminium in the same way as wrought alloys. Combining the dotted curves in The use of aluminium as packaging material is still increasing. The variety of its application ranges from combined coffee packaging to beverage cans. In Germany, aluminium packaging is recycled together with other lightweight packaging material (LPM) by the Duales System Deutschland AG (DSD). LPM is collected separately from household waste and recycled afterwards. The system for the recycling of aluminium can be divided into three levels. First, the secondary raw material is collected. Second, the material has to be processed in order to achieve an aluminium product, which can be remelted. Third, the processed material is remelted. At each level of recycling different technical processes are linked together by transportation steps, which are also taken into consideration.  On the second level of recycling first an aluminium fraction is separated from other packaging material in so-called sorting plants. A drum sieve separates large volume items, foils, and films. Before the foils and films are pressed to bales and transported to a plastic recycling plant, impurities are sorted out by hand. After the sieve, all ferrous material is separated. A magnet extracts packaging containing iron such as tinplate cans, bottle caps and jar lids. Lighter packaging as paper or plastics are separated by pneumatic separation. Next the recyclable material is sorted by hand. Beverage cartons, plastic packaging, and composites are separated. The last step of the sorting plant is the separation of aluminium from the remaining sorting rest. This is done by an eddy current separator. As the resulting aluminium fraction has an aluminium content of approximately 40%, further processing is necessary prior to remelting. Currently, this is done using three different techniques, which are mechanical processing, pyrolysis and decomposition of combined material with subsequent pyrolysis. The production shares are 10, 55 and 35%, respectively. For the mechanical treatment, the material is shred into pieces smaller than 50 mm. Comparable to the steps of the sorting plant, an aluminium fraction is sorted out. Since the shredded pieces are smaller, a more exact sorting is possible. In the pyrolysis process the Al40 fraction, which consists of approximately 40% aluminium, 40% plastics (PP, PE), water, oxides and paper, is processed. At temperatures around 550 The third installed process is the mechanical decomposition of combined material. In a high-speed mill, the composites are split up into two fractions, an aluminium fraction of high quality, which can be remelted directly and another fraction of low aluminium concentration. The latter needs further treatment, which is done by pyrolysis. Finally, remelting of the aluminium fractions takes place at secondary aluminium smelters. The aluminium is molten in two different types of furnaces, the multi chamber furnace and the rotary drum furnace. During remelting a certain amount of metal is lost in dross or salt cake due to oxidation. The efficiency of the recycling system for aluminium packaging in Germany can be described for collection, processing and remelting. Each level of recycling causes losses of metal (see Beside the existing processes a new technology is considered in the calculation representing technical progress of the recycling concept. The so-called Sortec 3.0 is a fully automated sorting plant for mixed packaging materials as they are collected by the DSD. It can be subdivided into a dry-mechanical pre-sorting stage, a wet processing stage and a plastics beneficiation stage. The products of the first stage are tinplate, beverage cartons and PET, which are compressed for further utilisation. The lightweight fraction of the LPM-fraction is processed in the wet part of the plant. By using a wet dissolving step in combination with a subsequent comminution, the wet processing separates combined packaging material. Aluminium is recovered by eddy current separation. Further products of the wet processing are paper fibres. The aluminium product, which contains 85% of metal is recovered with a yield of 94%. The plastics beneficiation stage includes separation of different plastic types, drying, agglomeration and granulation ( The aluminium fraction is subsequently treated by pyrolysis. For this process chain, the overall recycling quota (collection, processing, remelting) reaches 76.3% and the technical recycling quota (processing, remelting) 85.7%. If the Al85-fraction is remelted directly without the pyrolysis step the overall recycling quota decreases to 60.8% and the technical quota to 68.3%, respectively. This impressively shows the benefit of further aluminium concentration before remelting. In this evaluation steps all packaging material, which is not utilised by the DSD, is assumed to be collected via municipal waste collection. Besides disposal in landfill sites, one third of the municipal waste is incinerated. Two thirds of the incineration slag are processed for further utilisation, e.g. for road construction ( To improve the metal yield of the incineration path it seems useful to install further eddy current separators (ECS) in the slag treatment plant in order to extract non-ferrous metals from the slag product. Since they work best, when the piece size of the raw material does not vary too much, sieves are installed to gain fractions with defined piece sizes (see Based on the analysis of the current LPM recycling system in Germany, a scenario of increasing recycling quotas is developed in several steps. The presented differentiation and evaluation of the technical potential allows statements about an optimal recycling quota from an energy-focused point of view. The calculation starts with representing the current recycling system for aluminium in LPM comparing the different technologies of material processing and remelting. Then technical development is introduced by implementing the Sortec process in the recycling chain. The following steps have been calculated: Individual analysis of the three process chains of mechanical processing, pyrolysis and processing of combined material with subsequent pyrolysis. Calculation using the existing capacity weighted process mix considering the 1997 reference state. Exclusive LPM-recycling by fully automated separation (Sortec) and rotary drum furnace for remelting the resulting Al85 fraction. LPM recycling by fully automated separation (Sortec) with subsequent pyrolysis and multi chamber furnace for remelting the resulting Al99 fraction with best metal recovery. Besides the recycling system of DSD, the remaining 11% of the used packaging material are collected as a part of the municipal waste of which currently one third is incinerated. The extension of the assessment to the waste incineration has to consider the collection efficiency of the complete German system. So all further calculations now refer to the resource-orientated recycling quota (RQ The extended system is calculated according to the following steps: Current situation with one third of the municipal waste being incinerated (including 11% of LPM) and two thirds of the resulting slag being processed, DSD processing by the 1997 process mix. Partial incineration as in step 5 but use of the Sortec process for DSD processing instead of the 1997 process mix. Installation of a pyrolysis plant following the Sortec process of step 6 and use of a multi chamber furnace for remelting instead of the rotary drum furnace. Sortec and incineration combination according to step 7 but assuming an increase of slag processing from two thirds to 100%. Installation of an additional treatment for the slag product within the improved system of step 8. For further increase of the amount of recovered material and the resource-orientated recycling quota of LPM, respectively, there are three theoretical options. First, the packaging fraction could be separated from the municipal waste, which does not seem realistic due to the huge amount of waste material. A second option could be the complete waste incineration of the LPM-fraction contained in the municipal waste without a preceding sorting process. This is assumed for a further calculation step of the scenario. The expenditures of incineration of the LPM-fraction are allocated by mass to the aluminium and the other non-ferrous metal fraction, which consists mainly of brass. The third theoretical possibility to increase the amount of collected material beyond the current collection quota of 89% is to improve the consumer's behaviour, which means a bette individual separation practice of LPM already in the private household and an increasing collection quota of the DSD. The latter two options lead to further calculations, which define the two extreme situations of complete collection: Increase of the recovery rate to 100% by complete incineration of household waste for the optimised system according to step 9. Increase of the collection quota of LPM by the DSD according to step 4 from 89 to 100% with the processing technology of Sortec and subsequent pyrolysis. All processes of the LPM recycling, including transport, processing and remelting have been balanced by mass and energy flow analysis within the work of the CRC 525. The resulting process chain model was used for the calculation of the energy demand of the different existing and possible process systems. Besides the final energy inputs (gas, diesel, electricity etc.) listed in To compare the energy consumption of the various process steps, each using different forms of energy, the final energy requirements of the processes were converted into primary energy demand considering the efficiency of power and fuel supply (see During smelting processes in fuel fired furnaces the oxidation of metal cannot be avoided. To this reaction a heat value can be assigned. For aluminium it amounts to 31.05 MJ/kg, which supplies a considerable contribution to the energy input. For the aluminium fraction of LPM processing the specific loss by oxidation amounts to 5–15%. For the recycling of aluminium with pyrolysis as a concentration process more energy is needed than for the other recycling paths. For this process the energy content of the organics is used. Since this energy could be used in another way (for example, for the production of district heating) it must be considered as an energy input to the pyrolysis process. The organic content of the feed material for the pyrolysis varies from 15 to 85% but at about 40% an autothermal operation i.e. without any additional fuel supply can be achieved. So the advantage of the Sortec plant reaching a highly enriched aluminium fraction turns into a disadvantage from an energy point of view. Due to the small amount of organics additional heating of the subsequent pyrolysis is necessary. In practice a blending of input materials is common. Considering the industrial practice of blending input material, the different pyrolysis processes with their different input qualities have to be offset against the autothermal condition. Therefore, the difference between the actual organic input and the one necessary for autothermal operation is either added in case of a lower organic content or subtracted in case of a higher content. Extending the system to municipal waste incineration the question of accounting energy contents changes to a fundamental one concerning the preference of thermal dissipation or material utilisation. Since aluminium is a minority component in the waste, it is necessary to allocate the combusted energy content in both cases. In case of thermal dissipation the following boundary conditions have been assumed. First, the amount of incinerated material is limited to the fraction of packaging material. Second, the energy content of the LPM fraction is allocated by mass between the aluminium and the brass fraction of the slag product. Furthermore, it is assumed that the aluminium yield of the incineration slag treatment is the same for all the different origins of the metal and therefore also applies to the aluminium from packaging material. Further case studies have been calculated: The average heat value of the LPM-fraction is only about 17 MJ/kg due to the high content of water (20%) and inert oxidic materials. Only plastics (40%) and paper (2%) supply a heat input. The scenario contains additional process steps according to step 9 assuming aluminium as the target product. In this case the expenditures e.g. energy inputs can be allocated to the aluminium content. Usually, the off-heat of waste incineration is used for production of electricity, process heat and/or district heating. This important point has not been considered in the calculations so far. In order to keep calculations inside the system of aluminium production waste, incineration plants are assumed to produce electricity exclusively. This electric energy is then to be consumed by German primary smelters for aluminium electrolysis to replace recycling metal losses. The conversion efficiency of waste incineration power plants is approximately 15% ( The overall energy consumption for the different ways of recycling are shown in Usually Life Cycle Inventories consider fossil fuels and electricity as energy inputs. Applying this method for LPM recycling most energy (20 GJ/t) is needed for the recycling path of mechanical processing. Two concentration processes are needed for this way of recycling, which consume energy. Furthermore, this process chain comes with the lowest specific aluminium output of about 44% which makes it the most unfavourable system for recycling. The best technical recycling quota of nearly 70% within the current DSD system is reached by decomposition of combined material with partial following pyrolysis (see Assessing additionally the oxidation heat of aluminium, the energy demand rises considerably by 6 GJ/t for the paths of mechanical processing and Sortec. Here, the aluminium fraction Al85 causes high oxidation losses of 15%, whereas only 5% of the Al99 fraction, obtained by all other process chains, oxidise during remelting. Consequently, aluminium oxidation contributes with only less than 2 GJ/t to the energy input. Assigning the energy content of organic adhering completely to the overall energy demand for the existing LPM recycling system results in a higher energy input (case c). For the current two process chains with pyrolysis and an organic content of 60% the energy demand is four times higher. The mechanical processing and Sortec without following pyrolysis supply a fraction with an organic content of only 15% which is oxidised during remelting and only adds about 5 GJ/t to the overall energy demand. Finally considering the current industrial practice of blending the pyrolysis input material to operate the process auto-thermally and thereby only assigning an organic content of 40% to the energy input reduces the demand considerably once more (case d). This is most obvious for the decomposition path because here the pyrolysis input consists of 85% organics. On the other hand, the energy input rises for the Sortec process followed by pyrolysis. In this case, the input's amount of organics does not meet the conditions for auto-thermal operation so that additional energy is needed. The calculation shows a nearly equal overall energy demand for both Sortec alternatives, with and without following pyrolysis, the latter being favourable due to its better recycling quota. Altogether the current German recycling system for aluminium in LPM reaches a technical recycling quota of 67% consuming 11.6 GJ primary energy due to electricity and fuel demand per tonne of secondary metal. Applying a new technology of fully automated sorting followed by pyrolysis processing, the technical recycling quota can be increased up to 85.7% while using 20% less primary energy. In principle all energy contributions, i.e. both, external inputs of electricity or fuels and material-bound energy contents like organics, must be considered for the overall energy balance. Thereby the primary energy demand of the current DSD system approximately doubles to 23.3 GJ/t and the overall energy consumption of the Sortec/pyrolysis recycling path triples. With 25.5 GJ/t it slightly exceeds the energy demand of the current system. But with the overall energy demand of primary metal production, which amounts to 165 GJ/t for aluminium available in Germany, switching to the new technology in order to improve the recycling quota is advantageous from the energy point of view. In order to further increase the recycling quota, the collection process has to be considered, because of its aluminium loss of 11%. The technical potential of the processing steps seems to be exhausted by reaching a metal yield of 94% in the Sortec process. For that purpose Regarding first the recycling efficiency the resource orientated quota can be increased from 59 to 76.3% replacing the current DSD system exclusively by the combination of fully automated sorting and pyrolysis. Processing 100% of waste incineration slag instead of only 2/3 only adds 0.7% points to the quota. But improved slag processing shifts the overall efficiency up to 79%. Further, large increase by another 5.5% points is achieved recovering 100% of LPM in household wastes by incineration and improved slag processing. The hypothetical case of complete collection of LPM by the DSD results in a resource orientated recycling quota of 85.7%, which naturally corresponds to the technical quota of the Sortec/pyrolysis system. Considering only energy inputs by electricity and fuels, the systems do not differ considerably. Even with material-bound energy contents taken into account and pyrolysis calculated auto-thermally the overall energy demand of around 25 GJ/t stays nearly constant. Thereby it seems reasonable to incinerate all LPM not collected by the DSD but with the household waste, to recover aluminium from the slag and to reach finally an overall recycling quota close to the technical one. For balancing waste incineration in analogy to the other processing steps again material-bound energy content has to be considered. Doing so the overall energy demand for secondary aluminium production generally nearly doubles to about 46 GJ/t. In spite of the quite small share of aluminium recovered from incineration slag, the influence of incineration on energy balancing is enormous. The non-ferrous metal content in LPM only amounts to 5% but the whole energy content of the fraction is assigned to this share. Due to the same reason the overall energy demand doubles to 88 GJ/t for 100% recovery by incineration. Thus this method to increase the recycling quota seems questionable from an energy-related point of view. The use of incineration heat for power production must not be neglected. In order to calculate appropriate energy credits the balancing system has to be extended to primary aluminium production. The inclusion of the incineration plant results in the additional system's output of electrical energy. To avoid allocation by system extension an energy credit for power production from LPM incineration is given for the electrolysis applied for primary aluminium production. In Considering the energy inputs by electricity and fuels the values decrease up to the highest quota. The same applies to the adapted values for autothermal pyrolysis. Taking into account the energy content of the LPM-fraction, when assessing waste incineration, the energy demand again increases above 79% for both calculations (e, f). This minimum indicates that at this point there is an optimal recycling quota concerning energy consumption. The energy credit for electricity production from incineration lowers the energy demand of the total system from 74.2 to 67.1 GJ/t. The recycling of the aluminium content of LPM in Germany is actually done at a resource orientated recycling quota of 59%. The presented calculations show that by increasing the recycling quota to the optimal one concerning energy demand, 27.6% of the energy, which is required now, could be saved. A further increase of the resource orientated recycling quota over 79% would not be reasonable concerning the overall energy demand including primary energy as well as the heat content of burnt materials. Although remelting of aluminium requires less energy than primary production also at high recycling quotas the results identify a turning point. Above that point methodological and social aspects (like consumer behaviour) influence the recycling practice and therefore the calculated results. It must be emphasised, that the results can only be seen under the assumptions made. The development of the scenario concentrates on increasing the recycling quota. Here the new technology of fully automated sorting is a big step towards highly efficient metal recovery and reduced energy requirement. At the same time further fractions of usable materials are won. Reaching higher sorting selectivity of one of these materials might result in quality losses of the other ones. Also pyrolysis can be identified as an important part of a material efficient process chain. Besides the technical improvement new strategies to increase the overall recovery rate of secondary raw materials have to be considered. Here the collection quota shows potentials to increase recycling efficiency. Other target values to determine an optimal recycling quota such as economical, social or ecological ones are not considered in this paper and will have to be subject of further research Special thanks to Sebastian Briem, Matthias Dienhart and Zeynel Alkan for important contributions to this paper. The study is part of the German Collaborative Research Center 525 ‘Resource-orientated analysis of metallic raw material flows’, established in 1997. Thanks are due to the German Research Council (DFG) for financial support.