This issue of The geriatric patient with acetabular fracture depends on a well-orchestrated care plan that promotes timely return of preinjury functionality. These often-fragile patients cannot tolerate prolonged periods of immobility. The complications of prolonged recumbence are well established and should be avoided. The promotion of musculoskeletal health often translates into improved patient survivorship and overall wellness. The incidence of acetabular fracture in the geriatric patient is unfortunately on the increase and underscores the importance of optimal treatment protocols for these injuries. Acetabular fracture in the elderly patient is becoming a recognized public health dilemma. In a study by Ferguson et al, These low-energy acetabular fractures that occur through weakened osteopenic bone deserve special consideration. The physiology of the host, preinjury functionality, and specific fracture pattern/characteristics are the primary determinants used for management recommendations. Decisions are made through a multidisciplinary approach. The geriatric medical team plays an integral role in the initial and ongoing management of these elderly patients. Their role is critical in optimizing both acute and chronic medical conditions. Furthermore, they are responsible for stratifying patient risk as it relates to the musculoskeletal treatment strategy. The burden of surgical fracture care needs to match the physiological reserve of the geriatric patient. The orthopedic trauma service has a multitude of treatment options available for geriatric acetabular fracture, including conservative modalities, traction, percutaneous fixation, formal open reduction internal fixation, and arthroplasty. Defining the personality of the injury is integral for preoperative planning. In contrast to the young patient with acetabular fracture, bone quality is a prime consideration when one designs an operative strategy. Further, the characteristics of the bony and soft-tissue injury deserve special attention. Both elementary and associated acetabular fractures as defined by Letournel and Judet The gold standard practice for managing displaced acetabular fracture is formal reconstruction of the native anatomy with internal fixation. However, when considering the geriatric patient with acetabular fracture, certain injury characteristics portend a poorer prognosis when considering internal fixation as the reconstruction option of choice. Acetabular fractures in conjunction with ipsilateral proximal femoral injury have an unacceptable high risk of avascular necrosis and early posttraumatic arthrosis. Marginal impaction, especially of the dome, is associated with difficulties in achieving/maintaining reduction, hip instability, and early posttraumatic hip degeneration. Moreover, in selected patients with substantial medical comorbidities, formal open reduction, internal fixation may not be a rational operative plan because of concerns over substantial blood loss and increased operative times. In the sicker geriatric patient, alternative options for management of acetabular fracture should be considered. Limited open reduction techniques are suitable for certain fracture variants in an effort to limit surgical burden while maximizing acetabular reduction and stability. The use of the Stoppa approach has become popular for managing acetabular fractures involving the anterior column and/or quadrilateral plate. Acute or delayed total hip replacement is considered a viable treatment option for the elderly patient with acetabular fracture. These options are considered in the setting of the geriatric patient with preexisting coxarthrosis. Furthermore, arthroplasty solutions are most reasonable when attempts at joint preserving reconstructive surgery are fraught with treatment failure. Finally, for selected acetabular fractures, combined treatment that uses both internal fixation and arthroplasty techniques may best serve the geriatric patient. In this issue of