Alkylphenols are endocrine disruptors that show estrogen-like effects in various wildlife species. However, little information is available about the action of these chemicals on bone metabolism. We investigated the effects of alkylphenols, such as nonylphenol (NP) and octylphenol (OP), on the formation of bone using several culture systems for osteoclasts and osteoblasts, as well as in vivo experiments. NP and OP dose-dependently inhibited the formation of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-positive multinucleated cells (osteoclasts) in cocultures of mouse spleen cells or mouse bone marrow cells with ST2 cells. However, β-estradiol at 10−9
                     M to 10−6
                     M did not affect this process. In contrast, neither compound affected the proliferation and differentiation of rat calvarial osteoblast-like cells (ROB cells). When NP or OP (0.1mg/kg body weight) was administered subcutaneously to pregnant mice at 10 days, 12 days and 14 days post-coitus, fetuses at 17.5 days post-coitus showed stimulation of sternebrae bone calcification. Our findings suggest that alkylphenols have critical effects on the formation of bone by non-estrogenic effects.Endocrine disruptors are exogenous chemicals that mimic or inhibit the action of estrogens or other hormones. Alkylphenols have been reported to act as a weak estrogen ( Bone is a highly specialized form of connective tissue that provides an internal support system in all higher vertebrates. Osteoclasts are multinucleated giant cells with the ability to resorb mineralized tissue ( Here, we used cocultures of mouse spleen cells or mouse bone marrow cells (osteoclast precursor cells) and ST2 cells (osteoclast-supporting cells), and single cultures of mouse spleen cells and mouse bone marrow cells with addition of M-CSF and soluble RANKL. Both culture systems represent well-characterized models that have been used to study osteoclast differentiation, fusion, and resorption activity ( The formation of bone involves a complex series of events, such as the proliferation and differentiation of osteoprogenitor cells that eventually result in the formation of a mineralized extracellular matrix. Several model systems have been developed for studying the proliferation and differentiation of bone-forming cells We screened various endocrine disruptors for their ability to regulate the proliferation, differentiation and function of cultured osteoblasts and osteoclasts, and reported that a ligand of dioxin receptor 3-methylcholanthrene (  Spleen cells were collected from splenic tissues of 6-week-old male ddY mice (Sankyo Laboservice, Tokyo, Japan). Erythrocytes contaminating the spleen cell fraction were eliminated by adding 0.83% ammonium chloride in 10 For a single culture, mouse spleen cells (2.4 The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Toin University of Yokohama approved the animal protocols and procedures. Multinucleated osteoclastic cells were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 5 Rat osteoblast-like cells (ROB cells) were isolated enzymatically from the calvariae of newborn Wistar rats, as described previously ( We used MTT (Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan) to examine the viability of ROB cells. Cells (1 ROB cells were subcultured in 12-well plates (3.8 ROB cells were subcultured in α-MEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 5 BALB/c female mice (10 weeks old) from Charles River Japan Breeding Laboratories (Tokyo, Japan) were examined the morning after mating for the presence of vaginal plugs. Noon on the day of evidence of a vaginal plug was considered to be 0.5 For whole-mount skeletal analysis, fetuses at 17.5 Numerical data were expressed as means We utilized a coculture system that consisted of mouse spleen cells ( We also examined by RT-PCR whether NP and OP regulate expression of osteoclast-differentiating factors in ST2 cells. However, NP and OP did not affect expression of M-CSF, RANKL or OPG mRNAs by ST2 cells. We examined the effects of alkylphenols on proliferation and differentiation of ROB cells that had previously been well characterized. We first confirmed, using MTT, that NP at 10 We examined the effects of NP and OP on the formation of bone in fetuses in pregnant mice. We collected 31 control (exposure to mineral oil only) fetuses, 31 fetuses that had been exposed to NP (0.1 The specific risk to bone metabolism in mammals from exposure to environmental endocrine disruptors is not well understood. The aim of this study is to clarify the potential effects of alkylphenols, such as NP and OP, on bone metabolism of bone. We found that, based on It has been shown that estrogen enhances osteoblast differentiation and bone formation ( In the present study, alkylphenols showed accelerated ossification of the sternebrae bone in fetuses. NP and OP also inhibited the formation of osteoclasts in experiments We would like to thank Mrs. K. Nakata for assistance with cell culture. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.