Polymer-ceramic materials based on poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and hydroxyapatite were applied as sorption material in Monolithic In-Needle Extraction (MINE) device. The presented device provides new possibilities for the examination of bisphosphonates affinity for bone and will be a helpful tool in evaluation of potential antiresorptive drugs suitability. A ceramic part of monoliths was prepared by incorporation of hydroxyapatite (HA) into the reaction mixture or by using a soaking method (mineralization of HA on the PVA). The parameters of synthesis conditions were optimized to achieve a monolithic material having the appropriate dimensions after the soaking process enabling placing of the monolithic material inside the needle. Furthermore, the material must have had optimal dimensions after the re-soaking process to fit perfectly to the needle. Among the sixteen monolithic materials, eight of them were selected for further study, and then four of them were selected as a sorbent material for the MINE device. The material properties were examined on the basis of several parameters: swelling ratio, initial mass reversion and initial diameter reversion, mass growth due to the HA formation, and antiresorptive drug sorption. The MINE device might be then used as a tool for examination of interactions between bisphosphonate and bone. The simulated body fluid containing sodium risedronate (RSD) as a standard compound was passed through the MINE device. The obtained device allowed for sorption about 0.38mg of RSD. The desorption process was carried out in five steps allowing insightful analysis. The MINE device turned out to be a helpful tool for determination of the bisphosphonates affinity to the ceramic part of sorbent (hydroxyapatite) and to assess the usefulness of them as antiresorptive drugs in the future.The examination of the interaction between bisphosphonates (BPs) and hydroxyapatite (HA) is an important issue. BPs are the most widely used class of antiresorptive agents for the treatment of metabolic bone diseases, such as osteoporosis. The high binding affinities of most BPs for bones may affect several important biological properties of these compounds including an uptake and retention by the skeleton. The length of the inhibition of a bone resorption process to recover after bisphosphonate therapy might be caused by the differences in mineral binding affinity of bisphosphonates ( The combination of three branches: in-needle extraction, monolithic columns and antiresorptive drugs sorption on HA allowed to obtain a device on which sorption and desorption processes of antiresorptive drugs can be examined. In general, the affinity examination of bisphosphonates for bones is based on the sorption of potential drugs on the powdery hydroxyapatite. For example, the adsorption experiments with risedronate (RSD), a commercially available antiresorptive drug, were carried out by The affinity evaluation of compounds with potential antiretroviral properties with using hydroxyapatite in the loose form causes many difficulties because such studies are affected with human error associated with the weighing out a constant and reproducible quantity of hydroxyapatite and additionally with the time contact controlling. Therefore, the Monolithic In-Needle Extraction (MINE) device was designed for investigation of the interactions between analytes (drugs) and HA. Initially, the MINE device was presented ( In our previous works ( In this work, an attempt was made to synthesize monolithic materials with a polymer part more compatible with human body. In recent years there have been more and more applications of PVA as a biomaterial to replace or to repair hard and soft tissues. It is related to a highly porous structure with high content of free water, which is similar to that found in soft tissue, and that makes it an excellent potential biomaterial for the replacement of natural articular cartilage ( The fabrication of a PVA and HA composite monolithic materials can be realized in two ways. The first method includes HA introduction into the reaction mixture and in situ growth of HA crystallites initiated with ammonia (HA/PVA) ( In this work, both methods were applied and both types of materials were prepared (HA/PVA and PVA/HA). Additionally, a series of materials was made where both methods were used. More specifically: the formation of HA was carried out on HA/PVA monolithic material (HA/PVA/HA). The aim of this work was to obtain monolithic material containing ceramic part in its structure which will be a useful tool to determine the binding affinity of potential antiresorptive drugs for HA. Moreover, the monolithic material must have high permeability to permit flow of the simulated body fluid (SBF) and adhering precisely to the inner surface of the needle. Furthermore, the polymer part of the MINE device should be inert to the tested analytes. Poly(vinyl) alcohol (PVA) with molecular weight 85,000–124,000 99 Risedronate sodium (RSD) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Stainless steel needles (internal diameter 2.7 Simulated body fluid (SBF) was prepared by dissolving NaCl (8.035 Two types of monolithic materials were prepared in glass tubes: without (PVA1-5) and with (HA/PVA6-16) HA in the reaction mixture ( The PVA monoliths were prepared according to the freeze–thawing method described by The HA/PVA monoliths were prepared according to the freeze–thawing method described by The in situ mineralization of hydroxyapatite on PVA monolith was carried out according to the method described by The PVA and HA/PVA monoliths (in the form of disks) were immersed into 10 The monolithic materials in the needle devices were treated in the same way. Through each needle, 10 For the determination of the swelling ratio dried monolithic materials were immersed into 5 For the determination of the initial mass reversion the extent of the materials shape return (after drying and soaking) in comparison with the initial state (after synthesis) was examined. For the determination of the initial diameter reversion the extent of the materials shape return (after drying and soaking) in comparison with the initial state (after synthesis) was examined. For the determination of the HA formation on/in PVA and HA/PVA materials, the dried monoliths were weighed before and after the modification. The percentage of HA formed on the monoliths was calculated from the expression The monolithic discs (about 25 To determine the sorption step, 3 The UV-VIS spectrophotometer JASCO V-630 (JASCO, Japan) was applied for the Sodium risedronate concentration determination. The measurements were carried out in the range of 220–400 The SEM images of the monolithic materials were obtained with using a FEI Quanta 250 FEG field-emission scanning electron microscope at the accelerating voltage of 10 The extraction procedures were repeated five times. A Dixon's Q test was used to determine and reject statistical outliers with a critical value of 0.71 at 95% confidence ( The PVA-based monolithic materials were obtained according to point 2.3. The major problem associated with preparing monolith in the needle device is that this kind of materials shrink after drying. Even after the re-soaking process the PVA material does not return to its original shape. Therefore, the monolithic materials were prepared in the glass tubes with the internal diameter twice as large as the needle device. The obtained materials must have had optimal dimensions to fit perfectly to the needle device. For this reason materials properties were examined upon several parameters. The first step of the investigation was the determination of the swelling ratio ( The swelling ratio parameter was previously ( The materials, which had the greatest regained sizes after drying and re-soaking were: PVA3, PVA11, PVA15 according to the initial diameter reversion ( The materials selection was also based on the best shape memory properties. The materials with satisfactory shape memory properties were: PVA2, HA/PVA11, HA/PVA15 and HA/PVA/16 ( As mentioned before, the obtained materials must have had optimal dimensions to fit perfectly to the needle device. In view of all these studies, the most important parameters seem to be the initial diameter reversion and the shape memory. On the basis of these two parameters the materials for further part of studies were selected. Conclusions reached on the basis of the other two parameters are highly similar and allowed to nominate the same materials. The selected materials (the columns marked in blue in The materials HA/PVA9 and HA/PVA12 were not selected. These two were prepared at room temperature and we tried to compare materials obtained under equal polymerisation conditions. The mechanical process for the formation of new apatite is explained by the PVA attracting a thin positive Ca-rich layer which then combines with negatively charged PO For the determination of the HA formation two methods were applied: calculations based on an increase in material weight ( The morphology of the obtained monolith was observed by SEM ( The material HA/PVA/HA17 turned out to have the highest sorption properties ( The sorption capacity of the materials without the HA formation process was also conducted. The blank PVA material (without HA) shows negligible/minor affinity for RSD (PVA3). Monolithic material containing 20% of HA in the reaction mixture (HA/PVA15), absorbed amount of RSD < The HA formation process was conducted in four cycles of mineralization. The difference between the sorption capacity of material HA/PVA/HA20 wherein the process was performed in one and four cycles did not exceed 5% of RSD. Therefore, it can be concluded that one cycle of HA formation process was sufficient. Four types of materials were selected for further work. The needles were filled with following materials: PVA2; PVA3; HA/PVA11 and HA/PVA14. Mineralization of hydroxyapatite on PVA monolith was carried out. Thus four final materials were obtained: PVA/HA17; PVA/HA18; HA/PVA/HA19 and HA/PVA.HA20. A series of three needles of each type of monolithic material was prepared for examination. The results for individual needles did not differ significantly: the relative standard deviation was < The MINE device was applied in this work to determine the affinity of tested compound to hydroxyapatite (which is a principal component). The sorption capacity, indicating the mass of an analyte that can be retained on monolithic material was determined ( Not only the sorption but also the desorption demonstrates the strength of interaction between the hydroxyapatite and drugs. Slow elution process of the BPs proves its higher affinity for the hydroxyapatite. BPs should be easily desorbed which is associated with their recycling potential. Quickly released drug into bloodstream can be resorbed onto bone surfaces faster ( The most preferred material again turned out to be HA/PVA/HA17 because allowed the desorption on the highest extent ( The materials obtained in this work could be used as fillings in the MINE device. The monoliths chosen in this work contained 0.5 and 1.0% of GA and the selected temperature of their synthesis was: − The blank PVA material (without HA) and monolithic material prepared through curing reaction with the HA additive exhibit minor sorption properties of risedronate. Therefore, the mineralization process in preparation of sorption material is necessary. In-needle extraction device filled with polymer-ceramic materials enables to carry out not only the sorption step but also to examine the desorption step. Additionally, the proposed device eliminates the problems that other sorption methods generate e.g. in the case of sorption on loose hydroxyapatite - these studies are affected with human error associated with the weighing out constant and reproducible quantity of hydroxyapatite and additionally with time contact controlling. Furthermore, the presented device can be used repeatedly because the desorption step leads to the elution of the compounds which enables conditioning of the monolithic material for another sorption. The MINE device allows to estimate the affinity of antiresorptive drugs (here RSD) for hydroxyapatite. The complete sorption and desorption process was carried out with the efficiency, about 65% and 80%, respectively. Such in/formation is not negative but it opens up new opportunities. The technique described in this paper will be used to evaluate new compounds with potential antiresorptive properties. 100% efficiency of sorption and desorption steps (in case of RSD) would block the possibility of estimation of new compounds having higher affinity to hydroxyapatite. It opens up the possibility of comparison of the results for RSD with the results for other potential drugs which will be obtained in the future. As a consequence the MINE device will be helpful in evaluation of potential antiresorptive drugs suitability. This work was supported by the