The intrinsic reaction kinetics of the photocatalytic oxidation (PCO) of the herbicides isoproturon, simazine and propazine over irradiated TiO2 (Degussa P25) suspensions was studied in single-component and in multicomponent systems. Experiments were carried out at different photon fluxes and different herbicide concentrations in the range below 1mgL−1. The results were analyzed in terms of a Langmuir–Hinshelwood (L–H) kinetic model previously established for multicomponent solutions of herbicides, but including the explicit effect of photon absorption. This was accomplished by modeling the radiation field in the reactor with the Six-Flux Absorption-Scattering Model (SFM) (i.e., scattered photons follow the route of the six directions of the Cartesian coordinates) using optical parameters averaged across the spectrum of the incident radiation. The intrinsic reaction kinetic constants of isoproturon, simazine and propazine independent of the radiation field in the reactor were determined. The oxidation rate of the herbicides was found to follow half-order dependence with respect to the local volumetric rate of photon absorption (LVRPA), in the range of photon fluxes investigated. The established model was found to be appropriate to predict the time-dependent degradation profiles of the herbicides in single- and multicomponent systems not only at all radiation intensities investigated in this study but also when one or two herbicides were present in excess of the others in the mixture. Using this simple approach, intrinsic kinetic data can be obtained.model parameter SFM, dimensionless model parameter SFM, dimensionless photocatalyst concentration (kg substrate concentration (kg initial substrate concentration (kg length of the reactor (m) radiation intensity (or radiative flux) (W radiation intensity divided wavelength of radiation (W kinetic constant (mol kinetic constant independent of radiation absorbed (mol binding constant (m lamp length (m) local volumetric rate of photon absorption (W order of the reaction with respect to the VRPA, dimensionless number of herbicides is solution probability of scattering in the backward direction, dimensionless probability of scattering in the forward direction, dimensionless probability of scattering in the side direction, dimensionless relative spectral response of radiometer sensor, dimensionless radial coordinate (m) lamp radius (m) rate of the reaction with respect to substrate dimensionless radial coordinate (= external radius of annulus (m) radiation emission of lamp per unit time per unit length (W time (s) total volume of fluid in recirculation system (m reactor volume (m radiant power (W) axial coordinate (m) dimensionless axial coordinate (= geometrical parameter (= kinetic parameter defined in Eq. (5) in Cabrera et al. kinetic parameter defined in Eq. (A.8) in Alfano et al. geometrical parameter (= thickness of the annulus (m) scattering phase function, dimensionless dimensionless parameter SFM, dimensionless ratio of internal radius to external radius of annulus, dimensionless scattering angle specific mass absorption coefficient averaged over the spectrum of the incident radiation (m radiation wavelength (m) specific mass scattering coefficient averaged over the spectrum of the incident radiation (m optical thickness, dimensionless apparent optical thickness, dimensionless scattering albedo (=σ/(σ corrected scattering albedo SFM, dimensionless reaction space radial coordinate (m) dimensionless reaction space radial coordinate (= position at inner wall of annulus substrate at the lamp wall maximum minimum direction along the radial coordinate lamp wall direction along the axial coordinate position at inner wall of annulus wavelength dimensionless variable In our previous study The L–H rate equations were successfully extended to represent the time-dependent degradation profiles of multicomponent systems of herbicides, using the kinetic parameters determined in single-component experiments. The binding constants of the herbicides observed under dark adsorption and under PCO were found to be very similar, therefore it was suggested that the degradation of isoproturon, simazine and propazine and of their mixtures follow a surface or near-surface reaction according to a competitive L–H mechanism. The above findings were observed only at herbicide concentrations less than approximately 1 In general, PCO reaction kinetics equations presented in the literature are strictly applicable only to the photoreactor geometry and the experimental conditions under which they have been established, unless an analysis of the radiation field in the photoreactor has been implemented in the kinetic model. Various forms of these rate laws presented in the literature show Langmuirian dependence on the substrate concentration and either power law dependence on the incident photon flux at the front wall of the photoreactor, or power law dependence on the overall radiation absorbed in the photoreactor. The dependence of the apparent reaction kinetic constants on the radiation absorbed within the photoreactor must be established if the kinetic model is to be made generally applicable to photoreactors of any size. To accomplish this, several methods have been proposed including experimental techniques by radiometric and actinometric measurements The key aspect in the modeling procedure of the radiation field in a photocatalytic reactor is the calculation of the local volumetric rate of photon absorption (LVRPA) at each point of the reaction space, which in the most complex cases requires solving the radiative transfer equation (RTE) in the reaction space Statistical approaches involving Monte Carlo methods have also been proposed for the accurate estimation of the LVRPA, however, just as for the former cases, computational time can also be very demanding In the present study, the kinetic model established in our previous work This study applies to the herbicides isoproturon, simazine and propazine at concentrations less than approximately 1 The rate law and kinetic parameters from Gora et al. Note that the denominator in the L–H rate law in Since dark adsorption studies of the herbicides ( The rate law in In this study, the LVRPA at each point in the reaction space was estimated by using the SFM. This model takes into account both absorption and scattering of photons which occur in the reaction space in which the suspension of photocatalytic particles flows. The principal assumptions of the SFM are as follows: The photocatalytic particles are distributed uniformly within the reaction space. Negligible absorption of radiation by the fluid and by the dissolved species. Photons of energy lower than the band-gap of the semiconductor photocatalyst are ignored. Photons of energy higher than the band-gap of the semiconductor are either absorbed or scattered upon colliding with a photocatalytic particle and scattering follows the route of one of the six directions of the Cartesian coordinates. Geometric optics hold true. For an infinitely long annular photocatalytic reactor ( The apparent optical thickness The model parameters  The cylindrical UV lamp is modeled as a line source. Each point on the line emits radiation in every direction and isotropically (Linear Source Spherical Emission model The radiation emitted by each point of the lamp is constant along the axial length of the lamp. The lamp is located in the centre of the annulus of the photoreactor. There is no radiation absorption, scattering or emission in the space between the lamp and the inner wall of the annulus. The photons emitted by the lamp which reach the inner wall of the annulus can change their travelling direction and enter the reactor perpendicularly to the inner wall. The intensity of the incident radiation The average travelling path length of scattered photons in the axial direction before they are absorbed is always much smaller than the thickness of the annulus. Under the above conditions the incident photon flux entering the inner wall of the reactor is It should be noted that in general, according to Eq. Materials, methods, equipment and analytical procedures were the same as those reported previously The annular photocatalytic reactor system was operated in a recirculation batch mode, whereby reactants continuously passed through the reactor and were fed back to a well-mixed recirculation tank. The total volume ( Experiments at different photon fluxes were carried out by changing the power supplied to the lamp using a variable power supply unit. The axial photon fluxes from the lamp wall were made uniform by eliminating the radiation emission from the terminal ends of the bulb by covering them with Teflon tape. The emission spectrum of the radiation source as supplied by the manufacturer is shown in The experimental photon flux was estimated by Eq. The optical properties of TiO The extinction of radiation in a photocatalytic reactor depends on the degree of catalyst agglomeration which in turn is a complex function of the degree of mixing, fluid-dynamics, pH and other physical parameters of the suspension The extinction coefficient ( To validate this estimation for the extinction coefficient of the suspension further, the agglomerate particle size distribution of TiO Using ( The radial profiles of the LVRPA at different lamp photon fluxes, in the middle of the reactor ( Combining the rate law (Eq. Single-component PCO experiments at different photon fluxes were carried out with isoproturon, simazine and propazine. The initial rates of herbicide degradation were evaluated and the term on the left hand side of Eq. The extended kinetic model in Integrating Eq. One of the main objectives of this work was to demonstrate the fitting of the degradation profiles of multicomponent solutions of herbicides using kinetic constants determined from single-component experiments. To validate the kinetic model further, experiments were carried out with non-equimolar multicomponent solutions of herbicides at a photon flux different from the ones in previous experiments and at herbicide concentration levels different than the ones previously used One possible modeling difficulty that could have arisen in the present reactor system, in the range of photon fluxes investigated, is the situation reported in Cabrera et al. The mathematical condition which allows the determination of the reaction order with respect to the LVRPA is shown in references Although a precise estimation of the parameters In summary, although not proven in the present work, the extended rate laws and kinetic parameters in In this work, a simple method was proposed for decoupling the apparent reaction kinetic constant from the LVRPA with the help of an accurate description of the reaction kinetics and the radiation field in the reactor. The radiation field in an annular photocatalytic reactor was modeled by the SFM using optical parameters averaged across the spectrum of the incident radiation. This method was applied to successfully model the PCO of isoproturon, simazine and propazine in single-component and multicomponent solutions, using the kinetic parameters determined in single-component experiments. The intrinsic reaction rate constants independent from the LVRPA were determined for half-order dependence of the reaction rate on the LVRPA. It was also shown how to estimate the optical properties of the suspension under actual operating conditions which may vary according to given experimental conditions. The method proposed is centred on the calculation of the LVRPA with the SFM and is much more accessible than more rigorous but also more complex methods based on the complete numerical solution of the RTE. The method presented allows the derivation of reaction rate laws and reaction kinetic constants which are independent of the radiation field in the reactor and therefore more universally applicable to the design and scale-up of photocatalytic reactors compared to semi-empirical rate laws based on the incident flux or on the overall radiation absorbed in the photoreactor. Photocatalysis can be a very effective process to purify drinking water from trace organic pollutants including pesticides, as a result, this work is also relevant for the design of domestic water purification modules. The authors are grateful to NATO (Grant SfP-977986) and the EU Socrates-Erasmus Programme for the financial support to produce this work.