This research study was conducted to predict the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of the rocks by applying the adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), and the outcomes were compared with the traditional statistical model of multiple regression (MR) analysis and artificial neural network (ANN). 13 types of rock samples collected from 5 geological horizons in India were tested in the laboratory as per the International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) standards. In developing the predictive models, ultrasonic P-wave velocity, density and slake durability index were considered as model inputs, whereas UCS was the output parameter. The prediction performance of ANFIS model was checked against the MR and the ANN predictive models. It was found that the constructed ANFIS model exhibited relatively high prediction performance of UCS than the MR and the ANN models. The performance capacity of the predictive models were evaluated based on the coefficient of determination (R2), the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), the root mean square error (RMSE) and the variance account for (VAF). The ANFIS predictive model had R2, MAPE, RMSE and VAF equal to 0.978, 10.15%, 6.29 and 97.66%, respectively, superseding the performance of the MR and the ANN models. The performance comparison revealed that soft computing is a good approach for minimizing the uncertainties and inconsistency of correlations in geotechnical engineering.The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of a rock mass is a key geomechanical parameter to estimate its load bearing capacity In recent years, alternative methods have been used for the prediction of UCS. These include simple regression between UCS and index parameters of rocks such as point-load index In the present study, a competent prediction model for UCS of different rocks is presented using ANFIS method. The prediction performance of the developed model was compared with that of the ANN and the MR models. The index properties used in this study are ultrasonic P-wave velocity (V UCS is among the widely used strength evaluating parameters of rocks in geotechnical and mining engineering. Several researchers have worked on the development of models for prediction of UCS using conventional statistical methods as well as soft computing techniques The rock samples for the current study were collected from locations of different geological settings in India ( It is a non-destructive test often used to measure the dynamic properties of rocks and very good technique for the rock quality classification and estimation of degree of weathering. Ultrasonic velocity measurement is one of the most significant tests in geotechnical engineering and commonly used in rock mechanical investigations In geotechnical engineering, density is a basic property of the materials. The density of the rock materials is classified as dry density, bulk density and saturated density. The dry density is the dry mass per unit volume of the rock. Bulk density refers to the mass per unit volume under normal conditions i.e. rock samples may contain fluids in their pores. Saturated density is elucidated as saturated mass of the rock per unit volume. In the present study, density of the rocks was determined after oven drying for 24 Slake durability index (SDI) is also an important rock parameter, widely used in geoengineering characterization of rocks for the application in civil and mining engineering The compressive strength of a rock is one of the most fundamental geomechanical properties used extensively in various geoengineering such as slope stability analysis, construction of dam, embankments stabilization, tunneling investigation and reservoir failure mechanism characterization Sufficient number of high quality data is required for a reliable predictive model. In the present study, 94 data sets were obtained from extensive laboratory tests carried out on samples of 13 rock types, collected from 5 geological horizons in India. Each data set includes the ultrasonic P-wave velocity (V In the first stage of evaluation, a series of simple regression (SR) analyses using linear ( The term multiple regression was used to obtain the best fit equation between several independent or predictor variables and a dependent or criterion variable. A multiple regression analysis equation is generally expressed as: where ‘Y’ is the value of the dependent variable that is to be predicted, ‘a’ is the Y intercept, ‘X In the present study, MR analysis was carried out to predict UCS using Vp, d and SDI. The obtained MR equation for the prediction of UCS is given below: Artificial neural network (ANN) is an artificial intelligence technique based on the analogy of biological neurons. The basic principle behind ANN is to learn the connection between input and output variables directly without preconditioned or arbitrary assumptions In the present study, the artificial neural network computation was performed by using the ANN toolbox of MATLAB computer added software The data sets were scaled between 0 and 1 to get satisfactory performance of the model. The scaling was carried out by using a given formula In this study, total 94 data sets were used such that the first set of 70 data were corresponding to train and test the ANN model and 24 data sets were used to test the accuracy of the developed model. The validation curve for the neural network model indicates that the best validation performance occur at 500 epoch ( Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS), first introduced by Jang To describe the procedure of ANFIS in brief, we assume that the fuzzy inference system has two inputs x and y and one output (f). Two fuzzy if-then rules were developed for a first order Sugeno fuzzy model, which are illustrated below Rule 1: If Rule 2: If A typical ANFIS network architecture comprises of five layers in the inference system. The different layers of the ANFIS have either fixed or adaptive nodes and described below Layer 1: All node Layer 2: Every node in this layer is a fixed node labeled π, whose output is the product of all the incoming signals. This layer involves fuzzy operators; it uses the AND operator to fuzzify the inputs: Each node output represents the fringing strength of a rule. Layer 3: Every node in this layer is a fixed node labeled N. The Thus, the outputs of this layer are called normalized firing strengths. Layer 4: Every node in this layer is an adaptive node. Layer 5: The node in this layer is a fixed node labeled ANFIS uses a hybrid learning algorithm, which is a combination of back-propagation gradient descent and least squares methods. In the forward pass of the hybrid learning algorithm, node outputs go forward until layer 4 and the consequent parameters are determined by the least squares method. In the backward pass, the error signals propagate backward and the premise parameters are updated using gradient descendent. The activities in each pass are summarized in The merit of the hybrid learning approach is that it converges much faster by reducing search space dimensions of the original back propagation method For the prediction of UCS of the rocks using ANFIS, similar to ANN analysis, all the data set were distributed randomly as training (75%) and testing (25%) data. The purpose of the testing data set is to evaluate the generalization capabilities of the developed ANFIS model. The developed ANFIS model for the evaluation of UCS is shown in In this study, the unconfined compressive strength of the rocks collected from 5 geological horizons in India, was predicted and compared using multiple regression, artificial neural network and artificial neuro-fuzzy inference system. The models of MR, ANN and ANFIS for the prediction of UCS were constructed using three inputs, ultrasonic P-wave velocity, density and slake durability index. The graph of predicted UCS using all the developed models against the observed UCS is shown in For the analyses of prediction performance of developed models, the coefficient of determination (R The use of soft computing intelligent systems minimizes the uncertainty and inconsistency of the correlations. The potential benefits of the use of soft computing are its higher performance as its greater degree of robustness and tolerance than the traditional statistical models because there are many more processing neurons. In this study, a total of 13 types of rock samples were collected from 5 geological locations in India and laboratory analyses were carried out to determine the 94 sets of geotechnical properties. Each data set comprises ultrasonic P-wave velocity (V The authors are grateful to anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and to Dr. Thompson Sarkodie-Gyan for his careful editorial handling that led to significant improvement of the paper.