We report a 51-year old woman who suffered 2 atypical subtrochanteric femoral fractures (AFFs). She had a history of several metatarsal fractures. She had a normal bone densitometry. An adult form of hypophosphatasia (HPP) was diagnosed from low serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and tissue nonspecific isoenzyme of ALP (TNSALP) mutation analysis revealing 2 heterozygous mutations: c.299C>T (p. T100M) and c.571G>A (p. E191K). Low ALP is the hallmark of the diagnosis of HPP; which is associated in adults with premature loss of deciduous teeth, recurrent metatarsal stress fractures, and joints and tendons disorders. The incidence of AFFs in the population is 5.9 per 100,000 person-years. Physicians and patients with bone fragility must pay attention to prodromal pain, which require urgent radiographic evaluation of both femurs. Rheumatoid arthritis, use of glucocorticoids, and proton pump inhibitors have been associated with an excess risk of AFFs. Healthy subjects carrying a TNSALP mutation with low ALP value may be exposed to develop AFF spontaneously or while receiving potent anti-resorptive drugs. Low ALP must be checked as a cause of bone fragility.Atypical subtrochanteric femoral fractures (AFFs) have been reported in patients using bisphosphonates or denosumab as anti-resorptive therapy for osteoporosis. AFFs are located below the lesser trochanter to the supracondylar flare, occur with no or low trauma, and have a transverse or short oblique morphology A 51-year-old woman was referred for medical treatment after surgery for a fracture of the left femoral diaphysis, related to a fall from a standing position. Major criteria of diagnosis of AFF, as defined by the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research This was actually the second one, as the patient reported having had a non-trauma fracture of the right femoral diaphysis 3 In view of this medical history, the diagnosis of hypophosphatasia (HPP) was considered and confirmed by low serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity: 8 AFFs have been described in monogenic disorders that cause osteomalacia: hypophosphatasia and X-linked hypophosphatemia, and heritable diseases of low bone turnover: osteopetrosis and pycnodysostosis. Hypophosphatasia is an inborn loss-of-function mutation within the gene ALPL that encodes the cell surface enzyme tissue nonspecific isoenzyme of ALP. As a consequence, there is an accumulation of the substrate, inorganic pyrophosphate, which blocks the mineralization process. It is a rare disorder with an estimated prevalence between 1/100,000 and 1/300,000 in severe forms, and 1/6370 in moderate form As the phenotype varies greatly in severity depending on the degree of residual enzyme activity, the diagnosis of adult form of HPP is a challenge. The severity of the disease is thought to be associated with the early age of onset. Patients could be in good health in early childhood, and, as our patient, considered as unaffected by any skeletal problems. However, attention must be paid on premature loss of deciduous teeth, early loss or extractions of adult teeth, recurrent metatarsal stress fractures, and some joint and tendon diseases (chondrocalcinosis, enthesopathies, calcific periarthritis), which are more frequent in subjects with low serum values of ALP In a report of 22 cases of hypophosphatasia, diagnosed in adults (49 In our case, ALP values were deeply low, although not recognized by the physicians who dealt with the repeated fractures of the patient. The primary clinical utility of ALP assessment is the diagnosis of bone disease with increased ALP value because of a high bone turnover (osteomalacia, Paget's disease…), and little attention is paid to the low values of ALP The clinical lessum from the patient is that low serum alkaline phosphatase must be checked as a cause of bone fragility, even in an adult 50 Esther Maman declares that she has no competing interest. Christian Roux: Research grants and/or honoraria from Alexion, Amgen, Bongrain, MSD, Lilly. K. Briot: Research grants and/or honoraria from Amgen, MSD, Lilly, Pfizer.