Synergistic extraction of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) from hydrochloric acid solution with primary amine N1923 and neutral organophosphorus derivatives Cyanex 923 and Cyanex 925 is the focus of this paper. Extraction mechanisms are discussed as well as how the acidity of the aqueous phase, the composition of the organic phase, and the experimental temperature affect the rates of extraction of metal ions. Differences between synergistic efficiency of Zn(II) and Cd(II) with mixtures of primary amines N1923 and either Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925 are observed. The equilibrium constants, the composition, and the formation constants of the extracted complexes as well as the values of the thermodynamic functions are calculated. According to the synergy coefficient formula, the synergy effect on the extraction of Zn(II) is in the following order:
                        
                           
                              N1923+Cyanex
                              925>N1923+Cyanex
                              923
                        
                     
                  
                  This order is reversed in the case of cadmium(II). For the same synergistic system, the extraction rate follows the order: Zn(II)>Cd(II). Furthermore, the stereochemical structures of the various extractants and their effect on metal ion extraction rate are also investigated.Solvent extraction has played an important role in the development of processes to recover metals from various sources. Taking into account their synergistic effect, extractant mixtures have been used extensively in order to improve metal ion extraction. The interaction of the extracted solute with both the aqueous phase and the organic solvent plays an important role in the solute distribution between the phases. Hence it is important to understand the physical and chemical properties and the extraction mechanisms involved in the two phase. Recently, some phosphorus oxides have been marketed with the commercial names Cyanex 923 and Cyanex 925. Cyanex 923 is a mixture of four alkylphosphorus oxides, the alkyl being Studies using the above two extractants have been carried out extensively. For example, Amines and ammonium salts have been commonly used to separate metal ions for many decades. Primary amine N1923, produced in China, is effective in extracting Th(IV) and rare earth ions(III) from sulfuric acid solution, and zinc(II) and cadmium(II) from hydrochloric acid solution. Primary amine N1923 has been successfully used to separate radioactive element Th(IV) from rare earth ores. The objective of the present work is to study the extraction process of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) from hydrochloric acid solution using the synergistic systems formed by primary amine N1923 with either Cyanex 923 or Cyanex 925. How the acidity of the aqueous phase, the composition of the organic phase, and the experimental temperature affect the extraction of the metal ions is also discussed. The extraction mechanism is suggested, and the composition and the formation constants of the extracted compounds as well as the values of the thermodynamic functions are estimated. All organic extractants were diluted in The extraction of the metal ions was carried out as follows. Equal volumes (5.0 mL each) of the organic solution and aqueous solution were mixed and shaken vigorously at 20±1 °C for 30 min to achieve equilibrium. After centrifugation, the metal concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by titration with an EDTA standard solution and the balance of the mass was calculated in order to estimate the metal concentration in the organic phase. The distribution coefficient   In the following formula:  In general, the Zn(II) extraction is superior to that of Cd(II) with either C923 or C925 used alone and the reverse occurs whenever RNH Since the extracted species cannot be isolated and because the equilibrium shifts during the extraction process, an indirect method based on slope analysis is used for determining the stoichiometry of the extracted species. That is, the concentration of one extractant is made to vary while that of another is maintained at some constant value in the synergistic system so that a series of distribution coefficients can be obtained. One should note that the results obtained by this method are an approximation at best because the solution dynamics are not taken into consideration and the two phases are far from being ideal. Zn(II) and Cd(II) extraction using RNH In our experiments, [Cl The distribution coefficient According to So the synergistic extraction reactions are written as follows: According to Combining this equation with the following three expressions For the RNH So the formation constants  The RNH Using the same method, average logarithmic values of the formation constants are estimated to be 0.65 and 0.52 for RNH Since the experimental temperature plays a significant role in a liquid–liquid extraction process, its effects on the metal ions extraction have been studied and the results are shown in An increase in temperature reduces the metal ion extraction. Values for thermodynamic constants can be obtained according to the following formula:   at 1164 cm at 1176 cm This suggests that the peak generated by PO is subject to changes due to coordination action. On the other hand, the fact that the RNH This paper demonstrates the synergistic extractions of Zn(II) and Cd(II) in hydrochloric acid medium with the primary ammonium salt RNH The authors wish to thank Dr. Donato Nucciarone of Cytec Canada for supplying Cyanex 923 and Cyanex 925. This project was supported by the national program entitled ‘Basic Research of Rare Earths’ (G1998061301), the National Science Foundation of China (29771028, 29801004), and the national “863” program (2002AA647070).