The effect of tensile prestraining on the ductile fracture behaviour of two varieties of Cu-strengthened HSLA steels has been studied. It was observed that for both the HSLA steels the fracture toughness, J
                     C, remained invarient up to 2% prestrain, beyond which it decreased deleteriously. The nature of variation of fracture toughness with prestrain has been explained in terms of variation of the tensile flow properties of the steels with prestrain. A model correlating fracture toughness and the tensile flow properties has been proposed and it is demonstrated that the predictions of the model matched closely with the experimental observations.Low carbon, Cu-strengthened HSLA steels were developed for naval structural applications demanding high strength and toughness together with enhanced weldability The effect of prestrain on fracture toughness was studied by Amouzouvi and Bassim In the present investigation, the effect of tensile prestraining on the fracture toughness of two varieties of Cu-strengthened HSLA steels has been studied. In keeping with the range of cold deformation during structural fabrication, the applied prestrain levels have been limited to within 5%. An attempt has been made to model the variations in fracture toughness in terms of the variations in tensile deformation parameters with tensile prestraining. Two varieties of Cu-strengthened HSLA steels, conforming to the properties of HSLA-80 and HSLA-100 grades of steels, have been studied in this investigation. The chemical compositions of the steels and the heat treatment conditions, in which they were received are given in The steels were available in the form of plates of 20 mm (HSLA-80) and 25 mm (HSLA-100) thick with their rolling directions marked. Tensile specimens of 5 mm gauge diameter, with their loading axes oriented along the rolling direction, and flat blanks of 5×20 mm In order to impose prestrain, both the tensile specimens and the flat blanks were subjected to tensile deformation in a servohydraulic testing machine. Employing an extensometer across a 25 mm gauge length to measure strains, deformation was continued until a pre-determined total strain level was achieved, after which the specimens/blanks were unloaded to zero load. Prestrains of 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5% were imposed through this process. Tensile tests were performed with undeformed as well as prestrained specimens at a displacement rate of 0.003 mm s In the present study, the The The HSLA-80 steel consisted of a ferritic structure with tendencies towards acicularity in local regions as shown in The yielding behaviour of the HSLA steels is shown in The With the application of tensile prestrains, the The variation of critical fracture toughness, It is well established that an inverse relationship exists between strength and fracture toughness The effect of prestraining on the yield strength (YS) of the HSLA steels is shown in The initial retention of ductile fracture toughness with prestrain exhibited by the HSLA-80 steel can be linked to the constancy of YS (or UTS) up to ∼2% prestrain ( The plastic deformation capacity of a material is customarily indicated by its strain hardening exponent In the present investigation, The strong correlation between variation of fracture toughness and that of the tensile properties like YS and The CTOD, Employing In order to ensure fair comparison, the initiation fracture toughness, The fracture toughness of Cu-strengthened HSLA-80 and HSLA-100 steels is shown to be retained on imposition of tensile prestrains up to ∼2%. Further prestraining of the materials result in deleterious deterioration of toughness. The variation of fracture toughness with prestrain in the HSLA-80 steel can be qualitatively explained on the basis of variation of strength properties, which is controlled by the manifestation of substantial yield point elongation in the material, and strain hardening capacity with prestraining. The nature of variation of fracture toughness of the HSLA-100 steel with prestraining has a strong correlation with the trend of variation of its strain hardening behaviour with prestraining. A model for predicting the initiation fracture toughness of ductile materials from tensile flow properties has been derived. The predictions of this model for variation of imposed prestrains on the two HSLA steels have been found to match well with the fracture toughness obtained experimentally. In generalization, it may be postulated that fracture toughness in ductile materials is regulated by the spread of plastic strains at the crack tip. The spread of plastic strains depends mainly on the yield stress, which controls the onset of plasticity, and the strain hardening characteristic, which limits the extent of strain through which the plasticity is spread uniformly. When prestrains are imposed, both these factors are affected, and consequently the fracture toughness is altered. This investigation has been carried out as part of the work for the Office of Naval Research, USA, under Grant No. N00014-95-1-0015.