A neural model for computing the conversion kinetics of SrSO4 to SrCO3 was investigated in sodium carbonate solution, based on the multilayered perceptrons was presented. For this purpose the artificial neural network (ANN) method was used. The effects of stirring speed, temperature, mole ratio Na2CO3:SrSO4 and particle size of the celestite on leaching kinetics were studied. The surface transformation of celestite to strontium carbonate in aqueous carbonate solutions was also supported by FT-IR spectroscopy. The conversion rate of celestite increases systematically with increasing temperature (up to 70°C). Furthermore, the feasibility of replacing the SO4
                     2− ions with CO3
                     2− ions in the structure of the leached solid was also investigated by FT-IR. FT-IR results showed that the replacement of SO4
                     2− ions in celestite by CO3
                     2− ions in leaching conditions was nearly completed at 60°C with a mole ratio Na2CO3:SrSO4
                     =4:1, solid to liquid=5:500, −212+106μm particle size, and 400rpm stirring rate for an interval of 240min. The first (up to 90min) conversion result obtained was trained with an extended delta-bar-delta algorithm (EDBD), which is in the multilayered perceptrons and is a neural model structure. Results of other conversion times (90–240min) results were predicted. Results predicted by the neural model were in very good agreement with the experimental results.Strontium sulfate occurs in nature as mineral celestite (SrSO Strontium carbonate (SrCO Celestite reacts with sodium carbonate, giving solid strontium carbonate and soluble sodium sulfate, according to The reaction of ion replacement in mineral species has been the subject of many studies: Booth and Pollard In the present study, models based on artificial neural networks (ANNs) are presented for computing the conversion kinetics of celestite to SrCO The celestite concentrate used in the study was obtained from Barit Maden T.A.Ş. Concentrator (Sivas, Turkey). The samples were wet sieved to obtain particle sizes in the ranges +212, −212+106, −106+75, −75+53 and −53 According to mineralogical and XRD analysis together with chemical analysis, celestite was the major mineral in the sample with minor gypsum (CaSO The leaching experiments were conducted in a 1-l Pyrex beaker with a rubber cover in a thermostatically controlled water bath equipped with a thermometer. A Heidolph Mark RZR 2021 model mechanical stirrer with propeller was used for stirring. During setup of the experiments, solid content of the solution was held constant at 5:500 (w:v). Stirring speed varied from 200 to 600 The ultrasonic treatment was conducted with Ultrasons-H 3000838 P-Selecta model (J. P. Selecta, Barcelona, Spain) ultrasonic bath, which supplied a constant frequency of 40 Spectroscopic studies were conducted with a Bruker Tensor 27 model FT-IR spectrophotometer. After the leaching treatments, the reaction products were separated from the remaining solution, washed with distilled water, dried, weighed, and analyzed for FT-IR. According to FT-IR analysis, the solid phase is SrCO The general reaction of the direct conversion is given in Eq. The experiments for replacement of SO The effect of stirring speed on the conversion of celestite to strontium carbonate was investigated in the range of 200–600 Sufficient stirring was required to sustain particles in leaching solution with increasing dynamic effects; therefore, the stirring rate was kept constant at 400 Experiments to determine the effect of temperature on the dissolution of celestite were conducted in the temperature range of 40–80 Conversion under leaching conditions of celestite (SrSO Na The effect of the quantity of sodium carbonate on conversion reaction was investigated for 1:1, 1:1.5, 1:2, 1:2.5, and 1:4 mole ratios of strontium sulfate: sodium carbonate at 60 Conversion occurs, dynamically as a result of direct contact between the surface of the celestite and the reaction media. Because of a high concentration of CO  Leaching reactions depend largely on particle size. Effect of particle size on the conversion of celestite to strontium carbonate was investigated by using particle size ranges of +212, −212+106, −106+75, −75+53 and −53 It is clear that the conversion of celestite to SrCO Celestite was also converted to strontium carbonate by using an ultrasonic bath without agitation as a function of reaction time. Ultrasonic waves may be helpful in obtaining a more effective solute transfer by changing solid structures and solvent fluidity. The high frequency (40 Conversion of the celestite surface to strontium carbonate was investigated by spectroscopy. Structural changes in the treated celestite could be observed in IR spectra. The spectroscopic results ( In ANNs are artificial systems, designed to mimic the human brain by extracting the relationships that underlie the data presented to them. They produce results very quickly because of their property of working in parallel to solve a specific problem. Thereby, they are quite effective in real-time problem solving. In the most general sense, ANN can be assumed to be as a complex interconnected system of many neurons in the human brain or of simple processing elements connected artificially and with different impact levels. ANN is created by a means of interconnections of network neurons and usually organized into layers. Various ANN architectures are present Multilayered perceptrons (MLPs) are the simplest and therefore most commonly used neural network architectures Neurons in the input layer act only as buffers for distributing input signals Training a network consists of adjusting weights of the network using various the different learning algorithms such as back propagation, quick prop, genetic algorithm, delta-bar-delta (DBD), extended delta-bar-delta (EDBD), etc. A learning algorithm gives the change Δ The EDBD algorithm is an extension of the DBD and based on decreasing the training time for MLPs In order to take a step further to prevent wild jumps and oscillations in the weight space, ceilings are placed on the individual connection learning and momentum coefficients. For this, Finally, after each epoch presentation of training tuples, the accumulated error is evaluated. If the error In recent years, artificial intelligence applications were applied in several areas. Especially, they have been found in the areas of metallurgy and leaching applications MLP is trained with the use of EDBD algorithm. For the neural model, the inputs are experimental conversion (%), stirring speed (rpm), mole ratio (Na Training an ANN to predict with the use of a learning algorithm (EDBD) involves presenting different sets in sequence (experimental conversion (%), stirring speed (rpm), mole ratio (Na Differences between the target output predicted conversion ratio and the actual output of the ANN are evaluated by the EDBD. Adaptation occurs after the presentation of each set (experimental conversion (%), stirring speed (rpm), mole ratio (Na The training and test datasets used for predicting conversion ratio were obtained from the experimental work and are given in After several trials, it was found that networks of two hidden layers achieved the task with great accuracy. The iteration number was 25 million and numbers of neurons in the hidden layers were 8 and 8. A set of random values distributed uniformly between −0.1 and +0.1 was used to initialize the weights of the networks, whereas tuples were scaled between −1.0 and +1.0 for inputs and −0.8 and +0.8 for outputs before training. Random and sequential training strategies were followed. The parameters of the network are: The experimental conversion ratio results vs. conversion ratio obtained by using the neural model for leaching of celestite in sodium carbonate solution was drawn ( Used for training, “predicted conversion ratio (%)” (training output) approach to the arithmetic average error 0.8581, 0.9114 error rate was calculated as the standard deviation. Used for testing, “predicted conversion ratio (%)” (testing out) approach to error arithmetic average of 3.2209, the error rate of the standard deviation was found to be 2.5827. In the present study, the conversion of celestite in Na The obtained predicted results of the neural model were in very good agreement with the experimental results ( The good agreement between the experimental values and computed conversion ratio values supports the validity of the neural model. A distinct advantage of neural computation is that, after proper training, a neural network completely bypasses the repeated use of complex iterative processes for new cases presented to it. For engineering applications, the simple models are very usable. Thus the neural model given in this work can also be used for many engineering applications and purposes.