Rolling dynamic compaction (RDC), which involves the towing of a noncircular module, is now widespread and accepted among many other soil compaction methods. However, to date, there is no accurate method for reliable prediction of the densification of soil and the extent of ground improvement by means of RDC. This study presents the application of artificial neural networks (ANNs) for a priori prediction of the effectiveness of RDC. The models are trained with in situ dynamic cone penetration (DCP) test data obtained from previous civil projects associated with the 4-sided impact roller. The predictions from the ANN models are in good agreement with the measured field data, as indicated by the model correlation coefficient of approximately 0.8. It is concluded that the ANN models developed in this study can be successfully employed to provide more accurate prediction of the performance of the RDC on a range of soil types.Soil compaction is one of the major activities in geotechnical engineering applications. Among many other soil compaction methods, rolling dynamic compaction (RDC) is now becoming more widespread and accepted internationally. The RDC technology emerged with the first full-sized impact roller from South Africa for the purpose of improving sites underlain by collapsible sands in 1955 ( The 4-sided impact roller module consists of a steel shell filled with concrete to produce a heavy, solid mass (6–12 tonnes), which is towed within its frame by a 4-wheeled tractor ( Moreover, RDC is more efficient since the module traverses the ground at a higher speed, about 9–12 km/h, compared with traditional vibratory rollers which operate at around 4 km/h ( To date, a significant amount of data has been gathered from RDC projects through an extensive number of field and case studies in a variety of ground conditions. However, these data have yet to be examined holistically and there currently exists no method, theoretical or empirical, for determining the improvement in in situ density of the ground at depth as a result of RDC using dynamic cone penetrometer (DCP) test data. The complex nature of the operation of the 4-sided impact roller, as well as the consequent behavior of the ground, has meant that the development of an accurate theoretical model remains elusive. However, recent work by the authors in relation to RDC, as well as by others in the broader geotechnical engineering context ( In a recent and separate study by the authors, ANNs have been applied to predict the effectiveness of RDC using cone penetration test (CPT) data in relation to the 4-sided impact roller. The model, based on a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), incorporates 4 input parameters, the depth of measurement ( This paper aims to develop an accurate tool for predicting the performance of RDC in a range of ground conditions. Specifically, the tool is based on ANNs using DCP test data ( In recent years, ANNs have been extensively used in modeling a wide range of engineering problems associated with nonlinearity and have demonstrated extremely reliable predictive capability. Unlike statistical modeling, ANN is a data-driven approach and hence does not require prior knowledge of the underlying relationships of the variables ( In this study, the ANN models for predicting the effectiveness of RDC are developed using the PC-based software NEUFRAME version 4.0 ( ANN model development is carried out using the process outlined by The most common approach for the selection of data inputs in geotechnical engineering is based on the prior knowledge of the system in question and this is also adopted in the present study. Therefore, the input/output variables of the ANN models are chosen in such a manner that they address the main factors that influence RDC behavior. It is identified that the degree of soil compaction depends upon a number of key parameters, including: the geotechnical properties at the time of compaction, such as ground density, moisture content, and soil type; and the amount of energy imparted to the ground during compaction. As mentioned previously, in this study, the ANN model is based on DCP test results collected from a range of ground improvement projects involving the 4-sided impact roller. The DCP ( Moisture content is not routinely measured in ground improvement projects in practice. Nevertheless, moisture content is considered to be implicitly included in the DCP data, as the number of blows per 300 mm is affected by moisture content. In addition, whilst the natural ground is often characterized as part of site investigations associated with earthworks projects, soil characterization during the process of filling and compacting is not. However, in order to include the soil type in the ANN model, a generalized soil type is defined at each DCP location by adopting primary (dominant) and secondary soil types. The ground improvement projects included in the database can each be characterized into one of 4 distinct soil types: (1) sand–clay, (2) clay–silt, (3) sand–none and (4) sand–gravel. As NEUFRAME requires the allocation of one input node for every parameter, therefore, in this model, the soil type variable represents 4 input nodes. Hence, in summary, the ANN prediction models developed in this study each have a total of 5 input variables consisting of 8 nodes, together representing: (1) soil type: (a) sand–clay, (b) clay–silt, (c) sand–none, and (d) sand–gravel; (2) average depth below the ground surface, In this study, the commonly adopted cross validation technique ( The distribution of data among the 3 subsets may have a significant impact on model performance ( Prior to model calibration, data are pre-processed in the form of scaling which ensures that each model variable receives equal attention during model training. Therefore, the output variables are scaled so that they are commensurate with the limits of the sigmoid transfer function that is used in the output layer. Although scaling of the input variables is not necessarily important, as recommended by The determination of network architecture includes the selection of model geometry and the manner in which information flows through the network. Among many other different types of network architectures, the fully inter-connected, feed-forward type, MLPs are the most common form used in prediction and forecasting applications ( Network geometry requires the determination of the number of hidden layers and the number of nodes incorporated in each layer. The simplest form of MLP, which is used in this study, consists of 3 layers, including a single hidden layer between the input and output layers. It has been shown that single, hidden layer networks with sufficient connection weights are capable of approximating any continuous function ( The number of nodes in the input and output layers is restricted by the number of model input and output variables. As mentioned above, this model consists of 8 nodes in the input layer and a single node in the output layer. Selection of the optimal number of hidden layer nodes is again an iterative process. If too few nodes are adopted, the predictive performance of the model is compromised, whereas, if too many nodes are used, the model may be overfitted and thus lack the ability to generalize. The stepwise approach ( In this study, model optimization, which involves evaluating the optimum weight combination for the ANN, is carried out using the back-propagation algorithm ( The stopping criterion is used to determine when to cease the ANN model training phase. Since overfitting is a possibility during model training, the cross validation technique is used which, as discussed earlier, requires data division into 3 subsets: training, testing and validation. The training data are used in the model training phase where the connection weights are estimated. The models are considered to achieve the optimal generalization ability when the error measure, with respect to the testing set, is a minimum, having ensured that the training and testing sets are representative of the same statistical population. Although the testing set error shows a reduction at the beginning, it starts to increase when overfitting occurs. Therefore, the optimal network is obtained at the onset of the increase in test data error, assuming that the error surface converges at the global minimum. However, model training is continued for some time, even after the testing error starts to increase initially, to ensure that the model is not trapped in a local minimum ( Once the model has been optimized, the network is validated against the independent validation set, which provides a rigorous check of the model's generalization capability. The network is expected to generate nonlinear relationships between the input and output variables rather than simply memorizing the patterns that are contained in the training data ( The measures used in this study in evaluating the networks' predictive performance are the often used root mean squared error ( (1) (2) (3) In the following subsections, the results of data division and model optimization are presented followed by the behavior of the optimal network when assessed for robustness using a parametric study. The SOM size of 25 × 25 is found to be optimal. The statistics of the 3 subsets are presented in In selecting the optimal model, several models with a single hidden layer consisting of different numbers of hidden nodes are compared with respect to With the intention of improving prediction accuracy, networks are examined with an additional hidden layer. Similar to the single hidden layer model optimization, several models with different numbers of nodes in the 2 hidden layers are trained and validated. Consequently, the model with 4 and 6 hidden nodes in the first and second hidden layers, respectively, is deemed to be optimal among the 2 hidden layer ANNs. The performance statistics of the selected optimal networks for single and two hidden layer networks are summarized in The optimal single hidden layer model is compared with the optimal two hidden layer model, in terms of model accuracy and model parsimony. It is evident that the prediction accuracy of the two hidden layer model is only marginally better than that of the network with a single hidden layer, given the error difference with respect to the validation set: As produced by the optimal, single hidden layer ANN model, the plot of predicted versus measured DCP counts with respect to the data in the testing and validation sets is shown in It is essential to conduct a parametric study in order to further confirm the validity, accuracy and generalization ability of the optimal model. It is crucial that the model behavior conforms to the known underlying physical behavior of the system. Therefore, the network's generalization ability is investigated with respect to a set of synthetic input data generated within the limits of the training dataset. Each input variable is varied in succession, with all other input variables remaining constant at a pre-specified value. The post-compaction condition of the ground, represented by the final DCP count, is predicted from the optimal ANN model for a given initial DCP count (i.e. 5, 10, 15, and 20 blows/300 mm) in each of the different soil types (i.e. sand–clay, clay–silt, sand–none and sand–gravel) for several, different numbers of roller passes (i.e. 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, and 40 passes). The resulting model predictions are presented in It is evident that the final DCP count increases with increasing numbers of roller passes, for a given initial DCP in each soil type, which confirms that the ground is significantly improved with RDC. As such, the graphs verify that the optimal ANN model predictions agree well with the expected behavior based on the impact of RDC. In addition, there are no irregularities in behavior, with respect to each of these variables. As a result, it is concluded that the optimal ANN model is robust when predicting the effectiveness of RDC and can be used with confidence. Furthermore, the final DCP count is analyzed over average depths between 0.45 m and 1.95 m for each soil type as a function of the number of roller passes, and the results are summarized in In order to facilitate the dissemination and deployment of the optimal MLP model, a relatively simple equation is developed to predict the level of ground improvement derived from RDC. The optimal model structure is shown in The numerical equation, which relates the input and output variables, can be written as Eq. The variables However, it is noted that the input and output variables are required to be scaled down before using the Eqs. The relative importance of the factors that are significant to ground improvement predictions is identified by carrying out a sensitivity analysis of the selected optimal network. The work presented in this paper investigates the effectiveness of RDC on different soil types and seeks to establish a predictive tool by means of the often applied artificial intelligence technique, i.e. ANNs. The ANN models incorporate a database of ground density data involving DCP test results associated with RDC using the 4-sided, 8-tonne impact roller. ANNs in the form of multi-layer perceptrons are trained with the back-propagation algorithm, where the model input variables are: soil type, average depth, A sensitivity analysis is also carried out where the relative importance of the parameters affecting ground improvement is investigated. It is identified that the soil type and the initial DCP count (blows/300 mm) are the dominant parameters. Subsequently, based on the optimal model characteristics, a simplified numerical equation that defines the functional form of the relationship between the model inputs and output is formulated to assist with hand calculations in practice. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This research was supported under