A new shoulder prosthesis design for proximal humeral fractures has been developed. The rim of the articular component of this prosthesis has several holes to which the bone-tendon junction of the rotator cuff is fixed, to allow an anatomic reconstruction of the glenohumeral unit. The strength of the tuberosity fixation to this prosthesis is investigated in a cadaveric study. Artificial 4-part fractures were created in 18 human, fresh-frozen, paired shoulder joints with intact rotator cuffs. Two methods of tuberosity fixation were used in a matched-pair fashion. In group I the tuberosities were sutured to the rim of the prosthetic head, and in group II the tuberosities were circumferentially tension band–wired. Strength testing was performed on a material-testing machine, and displacement was recorded with an opto-electronic device. Both fixation methods proved to be equally reliable in the forces exerted during activities of daily living without significant displacement of the fracture fragments.The functional outcome of hemiarthroplasty for fracture treatment is variable and mainly determined by the integrity of the rotator cuff mechanism. The new prosthesis is modular with different head diameters (40 to 52 mm) and stems in different sizes (diameter, 6.5 to 13.0 mm; length, 100 mm). The articular component has an enlarged rim with 10 to 14 holes (depending on the head size) equally spaced from the 1-o'clock to the 11-o'clock position of its circumference ( Artificial 4-part fractures were created in 18 human, fresh-frozen, paired shoulder joints with intact rotator cuffs. There were 4 male and 5 female donors. The mean age was 63 years (range, 47-78 years). Bone density measurements of the specimens were not performed, but they appeared clinically normal for age and sex. After thawing in the refrigerator overnight and warming up for 1 hour at room temperature, the humerus with its entire intact rotator cuff was dissected off the scapula. With an oscillating saw, the humeral head was resected at the level of the anatomic neck, and the tuberosities were divided from the shaft at the level of the surgical neck. The tuberosities were then manually fractured, with the fracture line consistently occurring just posterior to the bicipital groove. The head fragment was measured with semicircular templates. The humeral shaft was prepared for the insertion of the stem with the appropriate tools provided by the manufacturer. In all specimens the prosthesis was implanted to match the individual anatomic cephalo-diaphyseal relationship for height and version. The implant did not allow adjustment of offset or neck angle. The shoulders were divided into two groups in a matched-pair fashion. In group I the tuberosities were reconstructed by fixing the bone-tendon junction to the rim of the prosthetic head and by suturing the tuberosities to each other and to the diaphysis ( We reproduced the test setup described by Beutler et al The motion data collected from the Optotrak camera were converted to Cardan displacement data (rotations Z, Y, X; translations X, Y, Z). The relative motion was analyzed with respect to the center of the prosthetic head. The coordinate system ( Of the 9 shoulder pairs tested, 7 were used for the analysis. The first pair was used as a pilot case to assess the overall behavior of the new prosthesis and the fixation method. In two sutured cases, the prosthetic head rotated while testing. In the first case, the head started to rotate at a load below 100 N, so the data from this test could not be used for the analysis. In the second case, the head was stable up to 400 N before it started to rotate. The data for this specimen were included in the analysis. The yield point and maximum load for each test were recorded and are summarized in There were no significant differences between the two groups with regard to the rotation of the tuberosities in any of the three spatial directions ( It is generally accepted that displaced 4-part fractures are best treated with hemiarthroplasty. In this study we measured the strength of this suturing technique and compared it with the fixation strength of wiring. The yield point in the 7 included sutured shoulders varied from 280 to 718 N, averaging 410 N. Although the force a rotator cuff can exert is not known with certainty, it is likely to be much higher than the load at the yield point in most of our specimens. Displacement of the tuberosity under loading followed one of two patterns; some specimens showed a quasi-linear relationship between the applied force and the rotation of the tuberosity, whereas others showed an infinite rotational stiffness in the portion of the loading curve until the yield point was reached. Therefore, it was not possible to calculate a unique representative value for the rotational stiffness of each construct. Rotation around the X-axis, corresponding to the distal opening of the fracture between the tuberosities, appeared to be less in the sutured specimens. The bony sutures are clearly protected by the soft-tissue sutures at the rim. Protrusion of the tuberosity over the edge of the prosthetic head was seen in 5 of the wired specimens but in only 2 of the sutured specimens. Although the yield point is higher and has a lower variance in the wired specimens, there appears to be less disturbance of the anatomy of the glenohumeral unit after loading of the sutured specimens. Furthermore, when the specimens were broken down after testing, contact of the metal wire with the prosthetic stem was observed, which might lead to galvanic corrosion and free metal ions. The wire passing through the prosthetic head may produce metallic wear particles under cyclic loading as well. This could be overcome by using sutures instead of wires through the holes of the prosthetic stem or neck, although the suture holes in the most commonly used prostheses are known to cut sutures in a knife-like fashion and are considered to be responsible for secondary tuberosity displacement. We are aware that suturing the bone-tendon junction of the posterior cuff can be difficult in vivo because of accessibility. In hemiarthroplasty for fracture treatment, however, an extended deltopectoral approach or a clavicular osteotomy A new type of hemiarthroplasty dealing with the difficult tuberosity fixation in complex proximal humeral fractures in the elderly is presented. Because this design uses the bone-tendon junction of the rotator cuff as a landmark, it allows an anatomic reduction in the presence of severely comminuted tuberosities. Attachment of the rotator cuff to the prosthetic rim balances the force couples of the cuff and automatically centers the glenohumeral joint. It may safeguard the containment of bone graft under the tuberosities, and the hollow head allows generous bone grafting without disturbing the anatomy. The fixation strength of the tuberosities to this prosthesis allows early rehabilitation even in the presence of poor bone quality. Clinical trials are being set up to verify its theoretical advantages.