The increasing knowledge in the capabilities of satellite imagery to hazard applications is especially useful in emergency situations where timing and ability to cover large areas are of the essence. For optical imagery, cloud coverage can corrupt an image rendering it unusable for intended emergency analyses. This study proposes the use of Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imagery for burn severity analysis for western United States sites, as an alternative to its optical based counterpart, differenced normalized burn ratio (dNBR). Unlike optical sensors, the radar sensor is an active sensor that is able to penetrate clouds and smoke, an attribute that is crucial in emergency situations where immediate burn severity data are needed to assess the vulnerability of fire affected areas to post-fire hazards. Using C5 decision tree algorithm we developed a SAR-based metric that attempts to classify burn severities of fire affected locations in the western USA. We then compared the performance of this developed metric to that obtained by the existing dNBR metric, to determine if there is any merit to its adoption as an alternative for the western USA landscape. The results showed the SAR approach to produce higher validation metrics in comparison to the dNBR. It had an overall accuracy and kappa of 60% and 0.35, respectively, in comparison to the 35% and 0.1 of the dNBR approach. This shows an improved ability to quickly obtain burn severity data and make better informed decisions in emergency situations.The hazards associated with a wildfire continue even after it is contained. A wildfire’s aftermath usually results in the loss of vegetative cover, leaving the ground exposed and vulnerable to a plethora of post-fire hazards. These hazards include erosion, sediment flows, rock falls, flash floods, debris flows, and release of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere ( Currently, the common approach to determining burn severity of an extensive area is by employing satellite imagery since they provide objective estimates and cover wider investigative areas ( We are therefore proposing an alternate approach in this study: Our study considered 15 fires that occurred across six States in the fire-prone western USA ( The field protocol used in the FIRESEV project was the Composite Burn Index (CBI), which assesses the burn severity of a landscape on a continuous scale by visually examining vegetation conditions of 90-meter diameter plots in the aftermath of a fire with respect to the condition of vegetation before the fire. Values range from 0 (unburned) to 3 (high severity) for any given plot ( Setting CBI thresholds is arguably as much an art as science, so depending on study location and study focus, threshold values could differ for different studies. After doing some preliminary explorations of different thresholds, we decided on the ranges proposed by The dNBR index determines burn severities by harnessing the spectral values of the near infrared (NIR) and short wave infrared (SWIR) wavelengths. NIR records high reflectance values for healthy vegetation and low values for burned vegetation; whereas the converse is true for SWIR; low reflectance in healthy vegetation and high reflectance in burned areas. With these intrinsic signatures, the normalized burn ratio (NBR) (Eq. Cloud-free pre- and post- images were downloaded from Landsat 5 Thematic Mapper (TM). These images were downloaded as Level 1 products (geometrically and radiometrically corrected) from USGS’ Earth Explorer website. Burn severity for each scene was determined using Eqs. (1) and (2) with bands 4 and 7 corresponding to the NIR and SWIR infrared wavelengths, respectively. We then extracted the dNBR values to correspond to each CBI plot location using bilinear interpolation, as a past study showed this approach to give representative values corresponding to the CBI plots ( SAR scattering is sensitive to vegetation structure and biomass. Removal of leaves and branches from trees after wildfires alters the scattering mechanisms causing temporal variations of the backscatter coefficient ( The The ALOS PALSAR data were also downloaded as radiometrically terrain-corrected (RTC) products from ASF. This meant that single look complex (SLC) data had already been converted to radiometrically and terrain geo-coded data by ASF. By this, co-registering was done for scenes obtained from the same sensor and track. Multi-looking had also been performed to obtain representative pixel sizes as well as reduce the characteristic speckle noise associated with SAR data. For images with fully developed speckle noise, further filtering had been done by applying a sensor-suitable adaptive or non-adaptive filter; keeping in mind to the preserve good radiometric as well as spatial resolution ( Next, we developed the following absolute and relative predictors from the HH and HV backscatter data to quantify the landscape changes due to wildfire: Eqs. (3) and (4) to give the absolute changes of the landscape after fires, whereas Eqs. We observed the existence of different vegetation types across the six States that were investigated. Past studies indicate that the differences in the moisture content and individual components of different vegetation types results in unique dielectric constants ( The algorithm used for this study was the C5.0 decision tree (  We then run a predictor selection routine that tested the performance of candidate models with successively fewer predictors ( Using the three final predictors, REL_HV_1, evergreen forest, and Abs_HV, an 80-20 data sampling split was made without replacement. 80% of the data was used to train the model and 20% was used to validate it. This split was done using stratified random sampling to ensure that representative distributions of the response variable were sampled in each set since our class sizes were imbalanced. A leave-one-out cross validation resampling was applied to determine the number of trials needed to achieve optimal model performance. An interval of 1–30 was set as the candidate for this process. The results from the resampling were then aggregated into a performance profile which revealed optimal number of trials to be 6. Setting this as the optimum number of trials, the model was developed a final time using the entire training data. To first establish the baseline to compare our SAR analyses to, we determined a confusion matrix ( From this we determined the Values of the continuous dNBR index ranged from −0.20 to 0.84; these corresponded to continuous CBI values from 0 to 3 across the 15 burned areas. A plot of the continuous values of the CBI confirmed the challenges of the dNBR having difficulty in differentiating between moderate and high severity burns, as there did not seem to be much separation between these two classes ( A baseline confusion matrix between CBI and the BARC-4 data also confirmed this difficulty, as only ∼21% and ∼26% of the moderate and high severity classes, respectively, were correctly identified ( With this baseline established, we developed our SAR model with the three final predictors to check against. The The HH polarization also played an integral role in the developed model, as it was the final determinant in all the six decisions. This was unexpected because past studies showed the cross-polarized HV to be a much better discerner of burn severity classes than the co-polarized HH polarization. The argument was that the strength of the backscatter from the HV polarization was much higher since by virtue of the transmitted waves going in horizontally and received vertically translates to volumetric scattering. However, we see here that the HH polarization, though not as important as the HV polarization, is crucial in discerning between burn classes. Some other observations were that generally a low Abs_HH corresponded to low severity classification whereas higher Abs_HH values corresponded to the higher severity classes. This is intuitive because from Eq. Testing the 20% validation data set that was retained during model development on our final model gave the results presented in Finally to test the importance of the land cover input, the model was tested without the The main focus of this study has been to develop a SAR based metric aimed at classifying the burn severity of locations in the western USA that have experienced wildfires as an alternative to the commonly used dNBR metric. We consequently compared the performance of SAR approach to the accepted dNBR approach to determine if there was any merit to its adoption as an alternative in the western USA landscape. The results showed the SAR approach to produce higher validation metrics in comparison to the dNBR. It had an overall accuracy and kappa of ∼60% and 0.35 respectively in comparison to the ∼35% and 0.1 of the BARC-4 data. Generally, smaller differences in backscatter values for pre- and post- fire data translated to lower burn severities and vice versa. This was intuitive because for low severity, the landscape would not have experienced much change, thereby translating to lower differences in scattering of the radar signals and consequently, lower differences in backscatter values. Another noteworthy discovery was that the presence of evergreen forests seemed to limit the severity of fires. Overall, this developed SAR based metric showed improved results and can therefore be recommended as an alternative to the optical sensor approach of the dNBR. Also, because the radar signals of SAR can penetrate clouds, this will be even more beneficial in emergency situations where burn severity information is needed right away to implement stabilization measures on unstable slopes. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.