Naproxen (Npx) was utilized as an anionic drug and loaded in the deproteinized natural rubber (DPNR) films prepared by the UV irradiation. The in-vitro drug release-permeation from the DPNR films and through the pig skin was investigated under the effects of the plasticizer type and amount, silicone oil (Si) and dibutyl phthalate (DBP), applied electric potential, and used conductive polyazulene as the drug encapsulation host. The drug release-permeation consisted of 2 successive periods: the pore formation period and release-permeation period. In the first period, the scaling exponent n
                     1 values were between 0.5 and 1 indicating the decreasing drug rate with time. In the second stage, the scaling exponent n
                     2 values were higher than 1 indicating the increasing drug rate with time. The Npx release-permeation amount increased with increasing amount of hydrophilic plasticizers. The efficiency of plasticizers on the Npx release-permeation amount was ranked as follows: DBP > Si. The Npx release-permeation amount was drastically enhanced from the applied electrical potential due to the electro-repulsive force between the negatively charged drug and the negatively charged electrode, and the presence of the Npx-doped conductive polyazulene. Other characteristics were also investigated in details namely the matrix morphology, and the pore formation during the two periods.Transdermal drug delivery system (TDDS) illustrates an advanced technology for human health care. A typical medicated adhesive patch can be placed on the skin for the timed-release dose of medication into the bloodstream. The advantages of this method are to reduce the load that the oral route commonly places on the digestive tract and liver, to provide constant blood levels, to avoid the first pass metabolism, and to avoid the dose dumping ( Natural rubber latex (NRL, cis-1,4-polyisoprene) is obtained from In this work, conductive polyazulene (PAz), bicyclic aromatic hydrocarbon containing a five- and a seven-membered combined ring ( 1,3-Dibromoazulene, obtained by reacting azulene (Az; Merck, Hohenbrunm, Germany) with The latex solution was prepared by mixing NaOH (1.5 g, 0.0375 mol), SDS (2 g, 0.0069 mol), and DCNR (100 mL, 0.83 mol). The solution was continuously stirred at 60 °C for 3 h. Then, the distilled water was added into the solution at the DCNR: water volume ratio of 1:5 and stirred at 27 °C for 30 min. Then, the solution was centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 60 min to separate the bottom rubber layer from the top water layer. The rubber layer was extracted as the DPNR latex with the dry rubber content, DRC, of 60%wt ( 1,3-Dibromoazulene monomer was prepared by the reaction of Az (0.5126 g, 0.004 M) with NBS (1.495 g, 0.008 M) in benzene (10 mL). 1,3-polyazulene was synthesized by the dehalogenative polycondensation of 1,3-dibrimoazulene (0.3432 g, 0.0012 M), using Ni(COD) PAz and Npx (at the PAz: Npx weight ratio of 1:5) were added and stirred in a MeOH solution (20 mL). The mixture was precipitated after stirring at 27 °C for 5 days. The product was washed with distilled water and dried in the oven at 70 °C for 24 h. Finally, the Npx-doped PAz powder was obtained in which the Npx content in Npx-doped PAz was 0.7 g per 1 g of PAz. The naproxen-loaded DPNR films (Npx-loaded DPNR) and 70Npx-Doped PAz/DPNR blend films (with the film area of 12.57 cm Npx powder, PAz powder, and Npx-doped PAz were identified for functional groups by using a FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo Nicolet, Nexus 670). Samples were scanned 64 times over the wavenumber range of 550–4000 cm A scanning electron microscope (SEM; Hitachi, S4800) was used to investigate the surface morphology of the Npx-loaded DPNR films with various plasticizer types and amounts before, during and after the release-permeation tests, with and without electric field. Micrographs of the films were obtained using an acceleration voltage of 15 kV at the magnification of 50×. The amounts of nitrogen in the DPNR films were determinde by a CHN analyzer (LECO Company, TruSpec Micro Model). The calibration curve was created by using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). The samples were completely oxidized under oxygen atmosphere at 950 °C. The MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiosol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) tests were carried out to measure the cell viability and generation forms from The Npx-loaded DPNR film (with the area of 12.57 cm A modified Franz diffusion cell was used to study the drug release-permeation ( The nitrogen contents in DCNR and DPNR are directly related to the corresponding protein contents in the natural rubber (   The Korsmeyer-Peppas model (  The pore formation before and after the Npx release-permeation without applied electrical potential is shown in In the second case, the drug release-permeation of the Npx-loaded DPNR film and 70Npx-doped PAz/DPNR blend films was investigated under various applied electrical potentials, as shown in Similar pore formation can be seen for the Npx-loaded DPNR films and the 70Npx-doped PAz/DPNR films under applied electrical potentials as shown in The final pore sizes of the 500Npx-5DPNR-Si films after the release-permeation period at the electrical potentials of 0 and 5 V (electric field strengths of 0 and 1250 V/m) were measured and found to be 33.14 ± 33.93 and 74.55 ± 28.62 μm. The final pore sizes of the 70Npx-doped PAz/DPNR films after the release-permeation period at various electrical potentials of 0 and 5 V (electric field strengths of 0 and 1250 V/m) were measured and found to be 36.72 ± 13.24 and 149.86 ± 73.19 μm, respectively. The presence of the conductive polymer Paz appears to enhance the pore size. The pore area: film area ratio with and without applied electrical potential was also determined as a function of time. A higher pore area: film area ratio can be seen with the applied electric field of 5 V relative to 0 V at any given time, as shown in The insets in From In In the previous work,  When a plasticizer is added, more drug pathways are generated (   The higher electrical potential brings about the higher electro-repulsive force in driving the negatively charged drug away from the negatively charged electrode ( In the previous work, the effect of electrical potential on the release of sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) from poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) hydrogel was investigated by The total amounts of Npx release-permeation from the 70Npx-doped PAz/DPNR blend films, with the initial amount of Npx of 70.68 ± 1.68 mg, at E = 0, 0.1, 1, 3, and 5 V, and at the currents of 0–105 μA, are 8.72, 14.02, 25.19, 40.57, and 44.91 mg, respectively, are shown in The effect of conductive polymer on the amount of drug release-permeation was recently investigated by Thus, it has been shown that the amount of drug release-permeation and its diffusion coefficient depend critically on the hydrophillic pathways, drug concentration gradient, electro-repulsive force, and the reduction reaction of the drug encapsulation host.  The drug release-permeation amount and the diffusion coefficient of the Npx-loaded DPNR films and the 70Npx-doped PAz/DPNR blend films were investigated systematically under the effects of plasticizer type and amount, electrical potential, and conductive polymer. The drug release-permeation characteristics could be separated into 2 periods. In the first period, it was identified as the pore formation period with decreasing drug release-permeation rate. In the second period, the release-permeation period, the drug release-permeation significantly increased with time until reaching an equilibrium with increasing drug release-permeation rate. The amount of Npx release-permeation and the diffusion coefficient depended on the type and amount of plasticizers used. The DBP acting as a plasticizer provided the highest amount of drug release-permeation because the DBP had the higher polarity value than Si, but DBP failed the toxicity test. In addition, the Npx release-permeation and the diffusion coefficient increased with increasing plasticizer amount as the plasticizers provided the larger drug pathways. For the effect of the electric field strength, the drug diffusion coefficient of the Npx-loaded DPNR films was influenced by the strength of applied electric field mainly from the electro-repulsive force between the negatively charged drug and the negatively charged electrode (cathode). Furthermore, the amount of Npx released and permeated from the conductive PAz/DPNR blend films exhibited higher diffusion coefficient values than those of the Npx-loaded DPNR films due to the reduction reaction of the conductive polymer under applied electric field and the enhanced matrix pore formation. Thus, the conductive PAz/DPNR blend film has been shown as a potentially preferred candidate material for the Npx transdermal patch under applied electrical potential. This work is financially supported by the None. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: