The open-air settlement of Revenia-Korinou has yielded the largest Early Neolithic (7th millennium BC) faunal assemblage to date from Greece. The assemblage, recovered from numerous pits, is heavily dominated by domestic sheep, goats, pigs and cattle. Here we focus on the evidence for butchery and consumption of animals, to explore how carcass products were cooked (in the absence of cooking pots) and what if any role they played in commensal politics. Evidence for dismembering and filleting is sparse, implying butchery of domestic animal carcasses into large segments (including more or less complete limbs) for cooking, apparently in ovens or pits rather than on open fires. Subsequently limb bones were intensively smashed to extract marrow and probably grease, perhaps by boiling in organic containers. Dismembering, filleting and marrow extraction were most intensive for cattle, but bone grease was more systematically exploited in the case of sheep/goats, implying differences between taxa in contexts of consumption. Significant differences between pits in taxonomic composition and the incidence of gnawing and burning suggest that each represents short-term and/or localized discard, perhaps by a small residential group. Within individual pits, matching unfused diaphyses and epiphyses and joins between fragments broken in antiquity confirm rapid burial, but bones separated by dismembering seem to have been dispersed across the settlement before discard. The distribution of carcass products, both cooked and uncooked, played a role in shaping relationships between small residential units and the wider community at Early Neolithic Revenia-Korinou.The Early Neolithic (EN) settlements of Greece represent Europe's earliest (7th millennium BC – Revenia-Korinou lies in extensively cultivated lowlands, 30–40 m above sea level and 5 km from the current shoreline. The Neolithic site, first recognized from a 4-ha surface scatter of cockle shells ( From the earlier phase, a few clusters of irregular, shallow hollows were probably created in extracting construction material, but several pits have vertical walls and an oval or rectangular outline. Of these, the larger examples, 4–24 m The eastern part of the excavated area yielded 65 pits in 400 m A significant role for commensality in negotiating these competing scales of solidarity has been inferred from a range of archaeological proxies for storage, preparation and consumption of food and drink (e.g. Recovered by hand under rescue conditions, the faunal assemblage was studied using modern reference collections of the authors, the Department of Archaeology of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, and the Fitch Laboratory of the British School at Athens. Discrimination between fallow and red deer followed Routine recording was restricted to the following relatively robust, identifiable, easily quantified and informative body parts: mandible (cheek-tooth row), scapula, pelvis, long bones (treating proximal and distal halves as distinct anatomical units), proximal ulna, astragalus, calcaneum, and phalanx 1–3. Notes were also taken on certain specimens excluded from quantified taxonomic and anatomical analysis: horn/antler of relevant species; maxillary teeth of rare taxa; carapace segments of tortoise; carpals or tarsals bearing butchery marks or articulating with recorded specimens; and ribs and vertebrae bearing butchery marks (rare overall). Since even small fragments of selected body parts were recorded, total numbers of identified anatomical units (‘MaxAU’, counting The assemblage, excluding excavation units dated on ceramic or stratigraphic grounds as later than EN (or conceivably initial MN – Identified faunal material is very unevenly distributed, so only eight contexts, each comprising between 365 and 843 MinAU and together making up 46% of the assemblage, warrant separate analysis and only for some variables ( In terms of the tripartite subdivision of the Early Neolithic proposed for nearby Paliambela-Kolindrou ( The EN assemblage is heavily dominated by domesticates (98% of MinAU) with minor contributions, in descending order of abundance, from roe deer ( Mortality patterns are not examined in detail here, but postcranial evidence of neonatal deaths is sparse (3.1% of cattle, 3.3% of pig and 2.4% of sheep/goat MinAU) and, thereafter, epiphyseal fusion and mandibular eruption/wear concur that pigs were slaughtered much younger than cattle or sheep/goats – again as usual for the earlier Greek Neolithic (e.g. The assemblage includes numerous small fragments (e.g. sheep/goat phalanx splinters) and bones (e.g. neonatal sheep/goat and pig phalanges), suggesting unusually thorough hand-collection. Nonetheless, the relative abundance of anatomically adjacent large and small skeletal parts of taxa of different sizes (cf. The recovered animal bone is overwhelmingly robust, with no indication of significant degradation during burial. Encrustation has not obscured surface traces (e.g. of gnawing, butchery) and heavy weathering or erosion was observed on only 0.1% of the assemblage (MaxAU, excluding very durable loose teeth and very fragile neonatal specimens). Domestic dogs are represented, however, and 11.4% of the assemblage bears traces of gnawing by dogs (or possibly foxes, pigs or even humans – cf. The combined incidence of gnawing and ingestion of limb bones varies highly significantly between the three principal domestic taxa, from 11.0% in sheep/goats and 13.6% in cattle to 19.8% in pigs ( Compared with modern goat bones subjected to trampling and both canid and human gnawing ( Despite modest attrition, the assemblage is heavily fragmented ( In a few ‘dwelling pits’, a basal occupation layer was more or less securely identifiable ( Fairly rapid burial is also suggested by frequent ‘joins’ between bone specimens within pits ( Some variability in anatomical representation of cattle, pigs and sheep/goats at Revenia-Korinou ( There is no compelling evidence that foot bones were also removed (with or without the hide) during initial butchery: sheep/goat and pig phalanges may be underrepresented because of un-sieved recovery, coupled with intensive fragmentation (above, 4.2), and pig metapodials because, when splintered, they are far less identifiable than those of sheep/goats and cattle. The abundance of meat-rich long bones, mostly late-fusing and relatively fragile, might alternatively be attributed to the lower limbs, especially of cattle and pigs, being discarded off-site. For example, the proximal tibia is Butchery marks, observed on 2.9% of recorded specimens (excluding weathered/eroded fragments and loose teeth), are fewer (using the same methodology) than for north Greek LN Toumba Kremastis-Koiladas (4.1% - Both knife- and axe-marks are sparse and widespread through the assemblage (in 41 and 14 of 78 depositional contexts, respectively), but their frequency varies significantly between taxa. Among the principal domesticates, long-bone shafts are most intensively fragmented in cattle and least so in pigs, while long-bone articulations are more intensively broken in sheep/goats than cattle or pigs (below, 4.5.4), so specimens with cut-marks – other things being equal – should be most frequent in pigs. Both knife- and chop-marks are highly significantly more frequent in cattle (6.9% and 0.9%, respectively), however, than pigs (4.0% and 0.0%) or sheep/goats (1.8% and 0.0%). The larger carcasses of cattle were butchered more intensively, therefore, with greater use of heavy chopping tools, than those of sheep/goats and pigs. Among the rarer taxa, butchery traces are absent or restricted to single examples in dog, red deer, fallow deer, roe deer, fox, badger, bear, hare, hedgehog and tortoise. Seven of only 21 aurochs and three of only 27 boar specimens bore cut-marks, however, so these large game taxa were apparently butchered even more intensively than cattle. Knife-marks were attributed, according to anatomical placement (cf. Differences between taxa are also evident in the anatomical distribution of butchery ( Dismembering was observed in cattle at all the major limb joints: in the forelimb at the shoulder (scapula/proximal humerus), ‘elbow’ (distal humerus/proximal ulna/proximal radius), ‘wrist’ (distal radius/carpals/proximal metacarpal) and mid-foot (distal metacarpal/phalanx 1); and in the hind limb at the hip (pelvis/proximal femur), ‘knee’ (distal femur/proximal tibia), ‘ankle’ (distal tibia/tarsals/proximal metatarsal) and mid-foot (distal metatarsal/phalanx 1). Marks were most frequent at the ankle and secondarily the elbow, consistent with the difficulty of dismembering these joints and probability of cutting bone in the process. In pigs, dismembering traces are lacking at the shoulder and wrist, but again most frequent at the ankle and then elbow. For sheep/goats, dismembering is not documented at the wrist, but is most frequent at the hip, followed by the ankle. Dismembering around the robust elbow joint, normally well represented, is slightly less frequent than around the shoulder, suggesting preparation for consumption of many sheep/goat forelimbs as a single unit; a single dismembering mark at the knee (compared with five among far fewer cattle specimens) implies the same for the hind limb. Six of seven cut aurochs specimens (one chop- and five knife-marks) and two of three cut boar bones indicate dismembering of the elbow, suggesting particularly frequent sectioning of the forelimb of these large game animals – perhaps to facilitate transport from more or less distant kill-sites. Filleting is evident on the mandible and all major meat-rich limb bones of cattle and pigs, and also on one cervical and one lumbar vertebra of cattle, one lumbar vertebra of sheep/goat, and one cattle- and one sheep/goat-sized rib, but not on the numerous mandibles and scapulae of sheep and goats. ‘Filleting’ knife-marks on a few fragmented metacarpal and metatarsal shafts of cattle, (sheep/)goat and roe deer may reflect removal of the periosteum before marrow-cracking (cf. Carcasses were skinned and dismembered mostly with chipped-stone knives, but sometimes with heavier tools. In cattle, a chop through a mandible diastema removed the chin to expedite skinning (or separated left from right mandible), one to the hinge dismembered a second mandible from the cranium, chops to an astragalus and calcaneum perhaps dismembered the ankle, and a chopped lumbar vertebra and cattle-sized rib may reflect portioning for cooking or consumption. Chops to the base of two goat horns may have removed the horn to facilitate skinning, while the anterior crest of a sheep/goat tibia had been chopped off (with the knee flexed) from the proximal articulation, perhaps in removing the patella to facilitate dismembering. A sheep and an indeterminate sheep/goat had been disarticulated at the hip by chopping the proximal femur ball joint and articulating acetabulum from the rest of the femur. The sheep/goat ball joint subsequently passed through the gut, presumably of a dog, and a few further, ingested proximal femur ball joints of sheep/goat perhaps had similar butchery histories of which no trace has survived. No evidence was observed for skinning or dismembering pigs with axes. An aurochs ulna, however, found with (not fused to) its matching proximal radius, had been chopped through longitudinally in a medio-lateral plane, presumably during dismemberment from the (missing) distal humerus. Sparse chop-marks through bone shafts of cattle (humerus, radius, metacarpal, pelvis, femur, tibia, phalanx 1), pigs (mandible, tibia) and sheep/goats (pelvis) might reflect sectioning of some (especially cattle) carcasses with axes rather than knives. A few groups of articulating cattle bones at first sight resemble products of such butchery. The cemented elbow joint, discussed above, from Pit 5β exhibits a chop through the humerus shaft, but also a blunter percussion scar on the radius that enabled removal of an anterior shaft splinter, exposing the marrow cavity ( While cooking ‘on the bone’ may expose bone or tooth protruding from protective flesh to fire or heat, resulting in localized alteration, wholesale burning of skeletal material probably – barring accidents – reflects discard activity. Overall, 5.3% of the assemblage (including loose teeth, but treating lightly ‘scorched’ specimens (cf. Frequent burning in fox (16.2%), hare (11.1%) and badger (100.0%, but of only two specimens) conceivably indicates distinctive methods of cooking for small game. Because different body parts are more or less susceptible to destruction by fire, variation in incidence of burning is further examined between the three principal domestic taxa Localized burning compatible with cooking on the bone is most common in mandibles of pigs, with burnt canine tips or cheek-tooth crowns (8 cases each), but also in burnt cheek-tooth crowns of sheep, cattle and badger (one case each). Just the heads (or mandibles) of pigs were roasted or baked, since similar traces on their lower limbs or feet are lacking, but a complete hare metacarpal with burnt distal articulation might reflect roasting of the whole animal. Conversely, burning of both ends of a sheep pelvis and fox tibia shaft suggest ‘barbecuing’ of small cuts of meat, while a second sheep pelvis with scorched acetabulum only also implies cooking on the bone, following dismembering of the hip (above, 4.5.2). Numerous marrow-bearing elements (mandible, long bones, phalanx 1–2) display localized burning or scorching around an impact scar, suggesting heating of bone shafts to facilitate marrow extraction. Excluding whole bones, unfused epiphyses and neonatal specimens, the combination of burning/scorching and breakage is much commoner in cattle (9 burnt + 17 scorched/929 = 2.8%) than sheep/goats (24 + 14/6095 = 0.6%) or pigs (3 + 2/1045 = 0.5%), paralleling more intensive fragmentation of long-bone shafts in the largest domesticate. Frequent burning of cattle metapodials, first phalanges and perhaps mandibles is thus parsimoniously attributable to direct contact with fire in preparation for marrow extraction, while other long bones were perhaps usually heated during cooking, covered with meat, in an oven or pit (e.g. The diaphyses of four first (two cattle, one pig, one sheep/goat) and two second (cattle) phalanges exhibit piercing of the anterior, posterior or medial face, presumably for marrow. The holes, apparently chipped rather than drilled or cut or punched, resemble far more numerous examples, almost exclusively on cattle first phalanges, at Neolithic Knossos on Crete ( As noted above, long-bone shafts were most intensively fragmented in cattle and least so in (mostly young) pigs, the reverse of expectations based on skeletal robusticity, but compatible with human selection for quantity and quality of marrow, respectively. Conversely, fragmentation (presumably for bone grease) of long-bone articulations ( Sheep and goats, together comprising the majority of the EN Revenia-Korinou assemblage, apparently followed similar pathways of preparation for consumption. The dressed carcass, skinned and without the head, was usually subdivided into large sections (whole/part limbs), that were then cooked on the bone, probably in an oven (of which out-of-context remains were found) or pit. Stripped of meat, long-bone shafts and articulations were then broken for marrow and grease, respectively. The metapodials and phalanges 1–2 were similarly treated, sometimes after preparatory heating on a fire. Some raw meat was also filleted and prepared off the bone, perhaps by a fire given the lack of cooking pots. Cattle and pigs were similarly treated, but more intensively dismembered (especially cattle) and filleted (both taxa). In cattle, at least, this was arguably a practical adjustment to large carcasses, but pigs were of intermediate size and mostly killed young. Alternatively, filleted meat of cattle and pigs was possibly preserved by drying, smoking (cf. Among game animals, small samples of aurochs and boar bones were more frequently cut or chopped than those of domestic cattle and pigs, but perhaps in subdividing their large carcasses for transport from a kill-site rather than in sharing them out. Frequent burning of hare, fox and badger, however, may indicate that small game were ‘barbecued’ whole or as joints on an open fire, rather than cooked in a pit or oven as usual for domesticates. As regards within-bone fats, the cattle long bones in articulating groups from Pit 24 were broken mid-shaft in the manner reported for Nunamiut men at hunting camps, ‘snacking’ on marrow scooped or tapped from its cavity ( Bones yield modest amounts of fat and rendering bone grease particularly is often regarded as a response to scarcity (e.g. While combined splintering of long-bone articulations and shafts may have saved labour, it would also have limited opportunities for particular individuals to snack on the largest concentrations or highest quality of marrow, from upper and lower limbs respectively ( The rarity of weathered/abraded material and frequency (high for such fragmented material) of articulating specimens and old-break joins suggest that most animal bone in pit fills was deposited rapidly in its eventual find spot, or a nearby midden, without prolonged exposure on the surface. Clear differences between pits in density of ceramic, lithic, faunal and molluscan debris ( Given rapid deposition, faunal contents may inform on the use of individual pits. Although some non-residential usage is suspected, and despite stark contrasts in pit contents, individual pits were apparently not associated with different stages of carcass processing. The eight faunally rich pits differ highly significantly in sheep/goat anatomical representation (MinAU, excluding neonatal specimens; χ Indications of short-lived and very localized discard raise the alternative possibility that fills of proposed residential pits contained remains of commensal events commemorating or sponsored by their original occupants. Consistent with this, burnt superstructural fragments in several pits perhaps indicate ceremonial destruction rather than abandonment and decay at end of use-life. While some observed variability in butchery processes arguably reflects practical issues of carcass size, commensal occasions were evidently differentiated by type(s) of animals slaughtered, their degree of partitioning for cooking, how they were cooked (on/off the bone; pit/oven/open fire), and (perhaps after the event) how intensively bones were broken for marrow and grease. To ‘insiders’, such differences probably signaled unambiguous distinctions of cultural context (e.g. marriage or funeral) and social relationships (e.g. eating with close neighbours or distant allies). Crucial to archaeological understanding of such differentiation is the scale of commensal episodes, but it is unclear whether pit fills contain remains of single or multiple events. Nonetheless, differences between species in carcass treatment perhaps imply consumption on separate occasions, while the otherwise puzzlingly intensive exploitation of sheep/goat phalanges is comprehensible if these small domesticates were slaughtered singly/in small numbers at different events, less generously provisioned with animal fat, than cattle. Even if previous occupants or close neighbours discarded bones found in individual pits, carcass parts were apparently distributed more widely. Occurrences, within a pit, of suspected paired body parts are surprisingly rare (one case each for distal tibia and distal metatarsal of cattle), given the evidence for rapid deposition, suggesting that left and right sides of a carcass were usually dispersed before discard of bones. Moreover, none of the numerous matching articulations between anatomically adjacent bones bears cut-marks indicating pre-discard dismemberment and only one of the numerous old-break joins between bone splinters involved the proximal and distal halves of a long bone (a sheep/goat radius from Pit 22). Thus, although intensive fragmentation reduces the likelihood of recognizing matches and joins, bones parted by dismembering (probably while covered in raw flesh) and likewise proximal and distal long bones separated by breakage (probably after cooking/heating) were also normally dispersed across the site. Phalanges too were routinely dispersed: only 3.2% of cattle, 3.5% of pig and 9.2% of the more numerous and intensively splintered sheep/goat specimens (MaxAU) were discounted in estimating MinAU, meaning that both first or both second phalanges from a foot were rarely (if ever) recovered from the same pit. Numerous matches of unfused diaphyses and epiphyses from the same pit confirm that dispersal of dismembered specimens, long-bone halves and paired phalanges did not simply result from post-discard processes. The large, thoroughly retrieved and well preserved Revenia-Korinou faunal assemblage enables more detailed understanding of carcass processing than hitherto possible for EN Greece. First, in contrast with an apparent Bronze Age tendency to cook smaller joints and fillets ( Secondly, Revenia-Korinou exhibits intriguing differences between taxa in butchery and cooking. While whole limbs of sheep and goats were often cooked as single units (perhaps, given unusually modest evidence for dismembering the elbow, even more so than at later Neolithic sites), many cattle and pigs were butchered into smaller joints or their meat was filleted and presumably cooked off the bone. More intensive butchery is consistent in cattle with the practicalities of cooking large carcasses, but less clearly so in pigs. Perhaps cattle and pigs, apparently slaughtered more rarely than sheep/goats, were butchered more intensively for wider sharing. Regardless, practical considerations alone apparently did not shape differential butchery: at LN Toumba Kremastis-Koiladas ( Thirdly, as previously suggested from much smaller assemblages at nearby Paliambela-Kolindrou, Knossos on Crete ( The difficulty of rendering grease without cooking pots offers a tempting rationale for heavy EN articular fragmentation, but begs two questions: why early ceramics (e.g. at Revenia-Korinou and Paliambela-Kolindrou) were Fourthly, the Revenia-Korinou assemblage is overwhelmingly derived from pits, many interpreted on morphological grounds as underground components of dwellings. Pit fills largely postdate any original residential use, but stratigraphic, faunal and ceramic indicators suggest rapid deposition. Coupled with marked taxonomic and taphonomic variation, this suggests derivation of these fills from middens that accumulated during residential use of pits or from post-abandonment commensality commemorating such use. In either case, there is evidence for routine pre-discard dispersal across the site of uncooked joints (dismembering marks were not observed on matching articulating bones from the same pit), portions of rendered marrow and grease (numerous joins between old breaks included only one between proximal and distal long-bone halves), and probably also cooked meat (given the large size of carcass sections dismembered for cooking). Thus, in addition to revealing differential culinary treatment between sheep/goats, cattle and pigs, perhaps representing commensal occasions of variable scale and cultural rationale, Revenia-Korinou strengthens the argument that carcasses were distributed widely across the co-resident community – in this case, beyond the social groups that discarded faunal material found in individual pit fills. The discovery of only parts of even smaller domesticate carcasses in any one pit suggests that discarding social groups, perhaps (previous) occupants and/or immediate neighbours/kin, were only a small fraction of the co-resident community. Given the lack of Fifthly, if the distinguishing characteristic of domestic animals is their belonging to someone ( Detailed comparison between Revenia-Korinou and other assemblages is difficult, given the variety of recording protocols used, and lies beyond the scope of this paper. It is noteworthy, however, that intensive bone breakage, recalling that at Revenia-Korinou and other EN sites in Greece, is reported from early Neolithic Çatalhöyük in central Turkey ( We thank Manthos Besios, excavator (with Adaktylou) of Revenia-Korinou, for granting Isaakidou and Halstead the opportunity to study this exceptional faunal assemblage, and Duskha Urem-Kotsou, for advice on the chronological implications of the ceramic assemblage. The faunal material was studied partly at the Makriyalos study centre, with the assistance of the exceptional staff of the 16th Eforia Proistorikon kai Klasikon Arkhaiotiton (now Eforia Arkhaiotiton Pierias), and partly in the Fitch Laboratory of the British School at Athens, where the director, Evangelia Kiriatzi, generously provided study and storage space. Angelos Gotsinas, Vaso Tzevelekidi and Frank Woodger kindly assisted in transport, sorting and identification of the assemblage. Duskha Urem-Kotsou, Ingrid Mainland, Caroline Jackson and two anonymous reviewers offered valuable comments on interpretation of ceramic and faunal evidence for carcass processing and cooking and on the clarity of draft texts. Fieldwork was funded by: the