A process was developed to produce >99.9% pure cobalt oxalate from spent ammonia cracker catalyst pellets containing ∼20% Co generated at heavy water plants. A pilot plant for producing kilograms of cobalt oxalate of required purity has been set up. The process consists of leaching, oxidation, solvent extraction, ion exchange and oxalate precipitation. The major impurities present in the leach liquor after nitric acid oxidation were Fe3+, Al3+ and Ni2+. Fe3+ and Al3+ were separated from the leach liquor by using a solvent extraction (SX) process employing a mixed extractant system consisting of D2EHPA and TBP. Ni2+ was separated by ion exchange (IX) employing Dowex M4195 resin.Cobalt is a strategic and industrial metal with many applications. However, there are no primary sources of cobalt in India to cater to the large and growing demand. Therefore, the option of import–substitution for this important metal lies in the exploitation of secondary sources like alnico ( To meet the requirement of Co-60 as The cobalt(III) ammine complex was broken by boiling with 25% alkali and dissolving the Co(OH) SACC pellets received from Heavy Water Board, Thal (Maharashtra, India) had the composition in D2EHPA and TBP were used as supplied by the Heavy Water Plant (Talcher, Orissa, India). 98% H The basic set up for the production of cobalt oxalate plant consists of a Teflon lined SS 304 L leaching tank (∼ The spent ammonia cracker catalyst pellets were leached using dilute sulfuric acid and conditions were mainly optimized with respect to requirement of reagents and temperature. The adopted procedure begins with the slow addition of 7.5 L of concentrated sulfuric acid to the leaching tank containing 60 L of demineralised water with continuous stirring. The silica immersion heaters with temperature controller are then switched on to raise the temperature to 80 °C. Fifteen kilograms of SACC pellets are then carefully added (in order to prevent excess frothing) for 2 h with continuous stirring. The contents are kept stirred for another 2 h at the same temperature. After leaching, 3.25 L of concentrated nitric acid is added to the leach liquor slowly for 1 h with constant stirring and allowed to stir at 60 °C for 1 h more. The solid/liquid separation for the leach liquor was carried out by decantation followed by repulps for 2–3 times with acidified water for increasing the recovery and subsequent filtration in a vacuum nutsche filter. A small portion of the leach liquor after oxidation is given a single contact with 85% saponified 0.5 mol/L D2EHPA and 0.7 mol/L TBP to check whether the Fe content in raffinate (pH ∼ Data for extraction isotherm for removal of Fe Data for stripping isotherm was generated, by successive stripping of the loaded organic with 2 mol/L HCl at O/A ratio of 1:1 and analysing the phases. Single contact runs for extraction and stripping were done in duplicate and the standard deviation was 2–3%. The pH measurements were accurate within ± Since the raffinate contained some dissolved and entrapped organic solvent, it was passed through a column packed with activated charcoal. To test the loading of cobalt and nickel by activated charcoal, 250 g of activated charcoal was packed in a glass column of 3 cm diameter and 45 cm height. It was washed with demineralised water and liquid holdup was found to be 150 ml. After draining, 3 L of SX raffinate analysed 17.42 g/L Co and 0.22 g/L Ni was passed at the rate of 50 ml/min and collected in a beaker. The holdup was drained into this lot and the column washed with demineralised water at the rate of 50 ml/min. This solution analysed 17.21 g/L Co and 0.21 g/L Ni. The washings contain 0.67 g of Co and the percentage absorbed is 1.3. This can be recovered at the end of the run by passing water. After purification of the leach liquor with respect to Fe The holdup raffinate in the two columns was drained and added to the next lot of raffinate for the second run of ion exchange operation. The resin was backwashed with pH-3 water. Elution of Co loaded on the resin was performed using 0.25 mol/L H2SO4 whilst Ni elution used 0.5 mol/L H2SO4. The eluted cobalt was added to the filtered leach liquor for quantitative recovery. The nickel solution was discarded. The holdup acid solution in the two columns was drained and the resin backwashed with pH-3 water. Two pairs of ion exchange columns are used alternately for loading and elution. The product solution obtained after IX treatment had pH of ∼ The analysis of leach liquor, SX raffinate, IX product, cobalt oxalate, solvent and strip solution were performed using UV–visible spectrophotometry (Co and Fe) ( A known amount of high purity cobalt oxalate was dissolved in a mixture of H Aluminium was also estimated by UV–visible spectrophotometry using chrome azurol S (CAS) ( The earlier process consisted of leaching, oxidation, decantation and repulping, pH adjustment, single stage solvent extraction for removal of Fe(III) and Al(III), oxidation of Co(II) to Co(III) in the presence of NH The present process consists of leaching, oxidation, decantation and repulping, solvent extraction in mixer settlers for removal of Fe(III) and Al(III), passing through activated charcoal column for removal of entrained/dissolved organic, pH adjustment, IX process for removal of Ni(II), precipitation of Co-oxalate, filtration and drying (11 unit operations). The modified process has four unit operation less and easy to scale up. Fe(II) is oxidized to Fe(III) after leaching with HNO In the earlier reported process, wherein a single contact SX process using 85% saponified 0.5 mol/L D2EHPA was used for separation of Fe In the mixer–settler run, the pH varies across the stages from feed to raffinate end in the range of 1.6–4.9. A log–log McCabe Thiele diagram based on the concentration profile across the different stages in the mixer settlers is shown in For removal of entrapped and dissolved organic solvent from the raffinate it was passed through the activated charcoal column. In the earlier SX process, LIX 84I was used for Co/Ni separation in the form of their amine salts after oxidation of Co In addition, due to ease of stripping, an acid concentration of 2 mol/L HCl is sufficient instead of 6 mol/L HCl required when only D2EHPA is used as the solvent. Though the raffinate pH is in the range 4.5–5.2, due to the typical pH profile across the extraction stages (typically between 1.6–4.9 across the various stages), the cobalt that is extracted at the raffinate end gets scrubbed subsequently which helps in the quantitative recovery of cobalt from the organic phase. When the pH profile across extraction stages is in the range of 3.0–4.0 as in processing of manganese nodules leach liquor for removal of Cu The solution for IX columns was collected in 3 lots of ∼ An examination of the analyses ( Cobalt and nickel can be separated by solvent extraction using D2EHPA, PC-88A or Cyanex-272, the separation factor Activated charcoal was regenerated by washing with water, alkali (5%), water and finally with acetone/alcohol and dried. D2EHPA Dowex M4195 resin has been reported in literature to quite stable and one batch has been used more than 30 times after regeneration without any degradation in performance. D2EHPA and TBP are stable solvents and it has been reported that LIX 84I may undergo oxidation in presence of Co(III), experience has shown that LIX 84I can be reused more than 50 times. The strip product solution in HCl medium contains both Fe(III) and Al(III). If it is titrated with standard alkali, Fe(III) and Al(III) will consume alkali and contribute to error in estimation. Hence we have resorted to dilute to 1000 times to find out the pH and back calculate the acidity within about Effluents generated in processing of spent ammonia cracker catalyst for recovery of high purity cobalt oxalate (15 kilogram batch). Solid effluent dry cake ∼ Liquid effluents About 600 L of ∼ About 60 L each of ∼ About 200 L of filtrate from cobalt oxalate precipitation 0.050–0.060 g/L Co, ∼ About 60 L of IX column washing (pH 3 water) was also collected.  The pH of the strip solution (2a) was adjusted to 4.0 with NaOH to precipitate Fe(III) and Al(III) as their hydroxides. Solution 2b was adjusted to pH 10.0 with alkali to precipitate Ni(II). The filtrate from cobalt oxalate precipitation and washings are adjusted to pH 6–9 with NaOH and discarded. An alternate process for production of high purity cobalt oxalate from spent ammonia cracker catalyst pellets which has fewer unit operations than the earlier reported process and easy to scale up has been presented. The authors are thankful to Shri S P Mhatre, Shri G B Wadekar for their help in the experimental work. They also acknowledge the help of Shri K H Hareendran for the analysis of pure cobalt solution by ICP-AES.