This work investigated the cementation of rhodium from waste chloride solutions using metallic copper powder. The effects on the rhodium precipitation (%) caused by the quantity of copper, reaction temperature and reaction time were explored in detail. In addition, the cementation kinetics of rhodium were studied, and the activation energy was determined to be 64.48kJ/mol, which indicates that the reaction is chemically controlled. It was demonstrated that less than 40% of the rhodium could be precipitated using excessive quantities of copper powder (e.g., stoichiometric ratio of Cu/Rh=40.3) at room temperature for 1h, which resulted in a cementation reaction that was too slow. Increasing the reaction temperature to 55°C resulted in almost 99% cementation after 1h, even using stoichiometric ratio of Cu/Rh=16.1. After a detailed observation of the dissolution behavior of the copper powder during the cementation process, it was demonstrated that most of the copper is preferentially consumed by free acid, a finding corroborated by pH measurements.Rhodium is a member of the platinum group of metals (PGMs) and is hard, highly reflective and very stable to oxidation ( Presently, rhodium is extensively used as a catalyst in automobiles, in plating baths, for chemistry research, in the electrical industry and in the glass industry. Unsurprisingly, there has been a significant market for rhodium coatings. For years, rhodium has been the precious metal most commonly electroplated, usually employing plating baths with sulfuric or phosphoric acid electrolytes. Many commonly used metals and alloys may readily be directly plated with rhodium ( Rhodium is the metal refined with the least efficiency compared to other PGMs, with a significant percentage of the metal value lost due to the inefficiency of the extraction technique ( The purification and recovery of rhodium have always been difficult because of its complex aqueous chemistry in chloride solutions. There are some studies in the literature that focused on the recovery and elective separation of rhodium. The methods capable of removing metal ions from wastewater solutions include solvent extraction ( Solvent extraction methods cannot be directly applied to the recovery of rhodium from RhCl The suitability of the bacterial reduction techniques for a particular metal recovery process depends on the pH, metal concentration and level of impurities. As a result of these parameters, the process needs to be improved. The solvent extraction and bacterial reduction techniques result in medium efficiencies and generally do not ensure a complete recovery, so further treatment is required. The cementation technique has been extensively used in industry for much longer than the solvent extraction and bacterial methods. The advantages of the cementation process include relative simplicity, ease of control and the ability to recover valuable metals ( The standard reduction potentials, E values, ( The overall reaction is expressed in Eq. The potential difference between rhodium and copper is calculated to be 0.4184 As shown in The objectives of this work were the following: 1) to remove rhodium out of a waste chloride solution via cementation with copper powder, 2) to study the dissolution behavior of copper powder and 3) to observe the effects of temperature and pH variation during the cementation process. A seasoned rhodium sulfate plating solution, procured from a rhodium-plating workshop (Savaş Ltd., Istanbul, Turkey), was employed as the rhodium source in this work. Rhodium failed to precipitate from sulfate solution by the addition of copper powder, so rhodium sulfate was first precipitated as rhodium hydroxide (Rh(OH) All of the chemicals used in this study were analytical grade. The following cementation parameters were optimized: time, temperature, quantity of copper powder (particle size A solid/liquid separation was performed following each cementation experiment. For the analyses, 5 To investigate the rhodium cementation behavior from the waste solution, a kinetic study was performed. After the cementation reactions, all of the rhodium black powders were combined, and the excess copper was digested in 0.05 The process outlined in this paper could be used to precipitate almost all of the rhodium present in the waste solution. In the following section, we examine the process parameters in detail.   Approximately 2.481 This calculation suggests that almost all rhodium ions present in the solution could be cemented out by copper powder. It is also worth mentioning that the cementation reaction was relatively slow at room temperature, which resulted in lower cementation percentages. The contact time should be increased to ensure complete precipitation at room temperature or the reaction temperature should be increased. The effects of time and temperature on cementation percentage are discussed in the following sections.  As shown in To observe the effect of time on rhodium cementation, experiments were performed at various time intervals. As shown in These three figures show that copper preferentially reacts with free acid, which results in an incremental increase in pH. The free acid reacts preferentially over rhodium cementation at room temperature. Consequently, copper was partially dissolved into the acidic solution, and then the remaining copper was subjected to the replacement reaction with Rh ions. After the effects of time were observed, we investigated the effects of temperature on the cementation of rhodium. Some authors have suggested that temperature is the most influential parameter on cementation ( As shown in Consideration of the thermodynamics suggests that increasing the temperature promotes the cementation reaction by increasing the reaction potential and decreasing Gibb's free energy (ΔG), as shown in The graph in  As can be seen from After demonstrating the importance of temperature on the cementation reaction, which was also observed in previous studies ( For this purpose, − The activation energy (E Following the production of metallic rhodium powder, the powder was washed with fresh 0.05 To determine the purity of the produced powder, the powder was dissolved in fused sodium bisulfate (NaHSO In the present work, we attempted to precipitate rhodium from a rhodium-containing waste solution that was used in decorative rhodium plating. It was demonstrated that less than 40% of the rhodium metal in the waste solution could be recovered using excessive quantities of copper powder (e.g., 100 The author wishes to thank