This paper explores the possibility of manoeuvring the reactivity of boehmite through mechanical activation (MA) for enhancing the solid/liquid reaction between boehmite and NaOH. Synthetic boehmite, prepared by thermal dehydroxylation of gibbsite, used in this study has been characterised by a large specific surface area (~264m2/g). A planetary mill has been used for MA. Boehmite dissolution during caustic leaching (temperature: 70–90°C, Na2O concentration: 180g/l) has been found to increase with the extent of MA. Energy accumulated in the solid (boehmite) structure makes its dissolution in aqueous phase easy. Significantly high dissolution (~23g of boehmite in 210ml of 180g/l Na2O solution) has been achieved at atmospheric pressure condition (90°C) for 240min milled sample. Kinetic analysis of the leaching data of boehmite milled for different durations (up to 240min) has shown that the value of apparent activation energy for boehmite dissolution decreases with the extent of MA. Analysis of the results shows that MA has larger influence on dissolution than rise in leaching temperature. An attempt has been made to separate the effect MA from that of surface area.Being less reactive, caustic dissolution of boehmite needs more aggressive condition (higher temperature, more caustic concentration, etc.) than that required for its trihydrate polymorph, gibbsite. Typically boehmitic bauxite is digested at temperatures above 200 Details of the preparation and characterization of boehmite used in this study have been reported earlier ( A batch type planetary mill (Pulverisette P6, Fritsch GmbH, Germany) has been used for mechanical activation (MA). Milling chamber and SS milling media (10 Leaching experiments have been carried out in a thermostatically controlled continuously stirred cylindrical glass vessel for a period up to 60 Particle size distributions (PSD) of activated boehmite and residues obtained after leaching for different time intervals have been determined using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Model: Mastersizer, Malvern, UK). Prior to the analysis, the particles are dispersed using a dispersant, sodium hexametaphosphate and ultrasonic vibration. PSD is obtained in terms of volume distribution. BET specific surface area and pore size distributions have been estimated from the amount of high purity N Leaching data, fraction of boehmite dissolved (α) at various time intervals, are used for analysing the process. Physicochemical characteristics of boehmite, viz. d Analysis of the data using Eq. Detailed characterisation of the boehmite used in this study is described earlier ( Leaching of as synthesized (unmilled) boehmite is described earlier ( The α-t plots pertaining to leaching of boehmite milled for 15, 30, 60, 120, and 240 In our earlier publication ( Kinetic analysis of leaching data of milled boehmite is carried out using F2 model. Rate constant and activation energy of boehmite dissolution are used as a measure of reactivity. For reference, corresponding parameters derived for unmilled boehmite are used. Rate constant values are obtained from the slope of the linear fit of the (1-α) Further, the rate constant values, k  Before leaching, all the milled samples are characterised by a multi-modal size distribution. In the 15 It is evident from these observations that the reactivity of particles formed during leaching differs from that of the milled samples before leaching. The difference in reactivity is manifested with progress of leaching, depending on the milling time or the extent of mechanical activation.  During caustic digestion, boehmite dissolves according to Eq. Dissolution of boehmite used in this study (unmilled), however, has been higher than that reported in many studies. This has been attributed to its significantly larger specific surface area (264 To understand the enhanced dissolution behaviour of milled boehmite, it is imperative to have a look at the changes in the particulate and structural characteristics brought about during milling as listed in To understand the correlation between the reactivity and physicochemical parameters, reactivity has been defined as: (a) increase in the ratio of rate constant values, k Leaching kinetic data analysis ( It is observed that dissolution from the mechanically activated boehmite exceeded the reported boehmite dissolution limit in the same leaching media (caustic soda) ( The k Increase in rate constant value for a mechanically activated solid is the manifestation of a decrease in activation energy (ΔE The mechanically induced reactivity, as manifested by an increase in the magnitude of k In order to further advance this analysis and understand what determines the reaction kinetics, specific surface area, structural changes of the milled boehmite or both, the approach adopted by The study carried out to explore the possibility of atmospheric pressure dissolution of boehmite (γ-AlOOH) in alkali solution has led to the following conclusions: High energy milling, as a result of increased reactivity, has enhanced the dissolution of boehmite; 210 Shrinking core model applicable for dissolution of unmilled boehmite changes to second order kinetics for milled one. Increase in the rate constant and a decrease in the value of the apparent activation energy for dissolution with milling time are indications of the enhanced reactivity of milled boehmite. MA has a larger influence on dissolution than rise in leaching temperature. Reactivity has strong correlation with structural parameters like crystallite size and microstrain; anomalous negative correlation observed between reactivity and BET specific surface indicates a limited role of specific surface area in determining the reactivity of MA boehmite.