This chapter presents some fundamentals of the poroplasticity theory for saturated porous materials. The theoretical background of the poroplasticity in anisotropic conditions is first recalled. The concept of effective stress for plasticity is revisited and discussed. Some experimental results from a typical porous rock are presented to check the validity of effective stress concept in plasticity. While different methods available for the description of anisotropic plasticity and failure are shortly resumed, the approach based on the fabric tensor theory is presented. As an example, the class of sedimentary rocks with parallel bedding planes is considered. Some numerical results obtained from a coupled finite element modeling of a gallery excavation are presented. The effects of material anisotropy on the plastic deformation and fluid pressure distribution are discussed. Some experimental data are finally presented showing the effects of temperature on the plastic deformation and failure properties of a sedimentary anisotropic rock. Concerning plastic behaviors of porous materials, efforts have also been undertaken during the last few decades. In order to formulate plastic models for porous materials in saturated and partially saturated conditions, it is necessary to account for effects of interstitial fluid pressures on plastic yield and failure criterion. The basic idea is to extend plastic models developed for dry materials to saturated or partially saturated ones. Various approaches can be considered. Limiting our interest to plastic deformation of saturated materials, one attractive approach is the generalization of elastic effective stress concept to plastic modeling. This is the so-called stress equivalence principle. The plastic deformation of porous materials can be described by using the same plastic models as those for dry materials provided replacing the nominal stress tensor by an effective one. This concept has been used for saturated and partially saturated materials ( On the other hand, many rocks are anisotropic materials. Their mechanical behavior depends on the loading orientation with respect to their material fabric. Such a material anisotropy can also affect the poromechanical coupling and the play an important role in poromechanical analysis of engineering problems. Finally, the plastic deformation and failure strength of rock may also influenced by temperature elevation, which is frequently encountered in different applications. It is, therefore, important to characterized effects of temperature change on mechanical behaviors of anisotropic rocks. In this chapter, the theoretical background of poroplasticity of anisotropic saturated materials is first recalled. The concept of effective stress is revisited and discussed. Some experimental data are presented to study the validity of such a concept on a typical porous rock. Among different methods available for modeling plastic behavior of anisotropic rocks, the approach based on the material fabric tensor is presented and applied to a sedimentary rock. Finally, some typical experimental results are presented to show the effects of temperature variation on the elastic, plastic, and failure properties of a typical shale rock. We recall here the general framework of poroplasticity theory for saturated porous materials with the assumption of small evolutions and isothermal conditions. Consider a representative volume element subjected to a macroscopic stress It is also convenient to introduce the plastic change of porosity as follows: The fourth rank tensor Substituting ( The fourth-order tensor The intrinsic dissipation should verify the following positive condition: The set of variables For most rock-like materials, the assumption of the generalized standard material is generally not verified. The plastic flow rule should be defined with the help of a nonassociated plastic potential The plastic multiplier As shown above, the plastic yield function and potential are both functions of two independent forces, the total stress and interstitial pressure. The determination of such functions requires laboratory tests involving complex loading paths in the space of stress and interstitial pressure. Due to the technical limitation, only a small number of tests can be practically performed. Therefore, it is desired to establish a simplified approach. The basic idea is to extend a plastic model for dry materials to saturated ones by introducing a concept of effective stress. The principle of stress equivalence is then introduced and stipulates that the plastic functions for a saturated porous medium can be expressed in the same forms as those for the dry skeleton material by replacing the total stress tensor by a suitable effective stress tensor ( In the framework of a phenomenological approach, the effective stress concept in poroplasticity has been also discussed, based on some kinematical assumptions. For instance, it is assumed that the rate of plastic porosity is proportional to the rate of plastic volumetric strain ( The components of the second-order tensor Therefore, the quantity In general, the components of However, for most rock-like materials, a nonassociated flow rule is generally needed. The kinematic assumption does not imply that the yield function can be formulated in terms of the effective stress. Therefore, further theoretical and experimental investigations are still needed. In this chapter, we present some experimental data performed in view of checking the validity of effective stress concept in a typical porous rock. However, the isotropic assumption is adopted for this material. The typical porous rock considered here is a white chalk mainly composed of calcite (>98%) and quartz (<2%), with an average porosity of 43% ( The first test is a hydrostatic compression test with a number of stress–pressure cycles. Each cycle is composed of three steps as illustrated in For the same objective as that of the hydrostatic test, a triaxial compression test including a series of stress–pressure cycles. The principle of each cycle is presented in In As another example to check the validity of effective stress for the plastic yield criterion, a series of drained triaxial compression tests are performed, respectively, without and with a constant interstitial pressure. The principle is to choose particular values of confining pressure and interstitial pressure so that their difference is the same as the confining pressure used in a test without interstitial pressure. Then, we compare the yield stress and failure strength between these two tests in order to study the effects of interstitial pressure. In Many rocks exhibit an anisotropic mechanical behavior. Consider here the class of sedimentary rocks, such as shale, siltstone, and claystone. The study of the mechanical behavior of these rocks is of particular interest to the oil exploration industry, to the geological disposal of radioactive waste as well as to civil and mining engineering. These rocks exhibit a strong inherent anisotropy, characterized by a directional dependence of deformation characteristics. The anisotropy is inherently related to the microstructure, in particular the existence of bedding planes. Over the last few decades, an extensive research effort has been devoted to study the mechanical behavior of anisotropic rocks. Comprehensive references on this topic can be found in a number of review papers, for instance In parallel with experimental studies, extensive research has been carried out on formulation of appropriate general failure criteria. An extensive review on this topic, examining different approaches, is provided in Consider first an anisotropic material with an orthotropic symmetry. In order to represent the material anisotropy, a second-order microstructure tensor ( Denote The normalized load vector is then defined as follows: Let now introduce a scalar anisotropy parameter ( In practical geotechnical engineering problems, rocks are generally subjected to in situ initial stresses ( As for any symmetric second-order tensor, the microstructure tensor can be decomposed into a spherical part and deviatoric part: It is obvious that In order to better describe the loading orientation dependency, the above anisotropy parameter can be extended to a more general expression by invoking higher order microstructure tensors: As proposed by As an example, consider the following nonlinear yield function for sedimentary rocks ( The parameters One can see that the parameter ( The comparison between experimental data and theoretical prediction is presented in In order to show effects of material anisotropy on poroplastic coupling, an example of numerical analysis of a coupled hydromechanical problem is now presented. It is the excavation of a circular horizontal gallery in a saturated porous rock formation. The gallery is excavated in the direction of minor principal stress. The cross-section of the gallery and geometrical domain is presented in The initial in situ stresses and pore pressures are For the sake of simplicity, the effect of body force is neglected. The excavation process is classically described by the progressive diminution of radial stress and pore pressure on the gallery wall from their initial values to atmospheric pressure. A series of calculations have been performed respectively assuming an isotropic or anisotropic behavior for the rock. Only some selected results are presented here in order to show the effects of rock anisotropy. In In In this section, we present some experimental results on the effects of temperature on an anisotropic sedimentary rock, the Tournemire shale. A series of hydrostatic and triaxial compression tests have been performed under different temperatures until 250°C ( In In this chapter, we have presented a short review of poroplastic theory for saturated porous materials and discussed the effects of material anisotropy and temperature on the mechanical behavior of a class of sedimentary rocks. The effective stress concept is widely used in numerical modeling of engineering problems. However, its validity is not completely demonstrated neither form theoretical point of view nor from experimental evidences. Further investigations are needed from both micromechanical and phenomenological studies. The rock structural anisotropy may play a crucial role in hydromechanical modeling. Various approaches are available for the description of plasticity a failure in anisotropic rocks. However, relevant experimental data are still needed and essential for a pertinent description of anisotropy effects. The temperature variation can significantly affect the mechanical behavior of rocks, in particular sedimentary rocks. In general, the elastic modulus and failure strength decrease with the temperature increase. Further, the material anisotropy effects may be also influenced by the temperature change. Under a high temperature, the material anisotropy can be attenuated.