A recent variant of time reversal imaging is employed for reconstructing images of a closed crack, based on both the fundamental and the second harmonic components of the longitudinal scattered field due to an incident longitudinal wave. The scattered field data are generated by a finite element model that includes unilateral contact with Coulomb friction between the crack faces to account for the Contact Acoustic Nonlinearity. The closure state of the crack is controlled by specifying a pre-stress between the crack faces. The knowledge of the scattered field at the fundamental (incident) frequency and the second harmonic frequency for multiple incident angles provides the required inputs for the imaging algorithm. It is shown that the image reconstructed from the fundamental harmonic closely matches the image that is obtained from scattering data in the absence of contact, although contact between the crack faces reduces the amplitude of the scattered field in the former case. The fundamental harmonic image is shown to provide very accurate estimates of crack length for low to moderate levels of pre-stress. The second harmonic image is also shown to provide acceptable estimates of crack length and the image is shown to correlate with the source location of second harmonic along the crack, which becomes increasingly localized near the crack tips for decreasing levels of pre-stress. The influence of the number of sensors on the image quality is also discussed in order to identify the minimum sensors number requirement. Finally, multiple frequency imaging is performed over a fixed bandwidth to assess the potential improvement of the imaging algorithm when considering broadband information.Early detection and characterization of structural damage is of prime interest for effective structural integrity management. Nonlinear ultrasonics has attracted considerable attention recently because it offers the possibility of detecting various forms of material and structural damage earlier than can be achieved by conventional linear ultrasonics. The present work is concerned with cases where the source of nonlinearity can be attributed to localized contact within planar defects such as cracks and delaminations, which is referred to as contact acoustic nonlinearity (CAN) Three imaging algorithms were rigorously evaluated and compared in Previous attempts at nonlinear ultrasonic imaging can be divided into two groups depending on whether the image reconstruction process involves (i) a point by point scanning of the ultrasonic response at every point (or pixel) within a prescribed imaging domain, usually (but not necessarily) using a laser vibrometer Several strategies have been proposed for nonlinear ultrasonic imaging within the second group, Theoretical analyses of CAN have often been based on simplified models for the contact dynamics that have nevertheless provided valuable insights for designing and interpreting experimental studies As noted earlier, the objective of this work is to document the imaging performance that can be achieved by using either the fundamental or the second harmonic component of the scattered field as input to the MTR imaging algorithm. The presentation is organized as follows. Section An homogeneous isotropic material is considered in a 2D configuration. This configuration is useful for deriving the imaging algorithm In the FE model described later in Section For a given incident wave, the scattered field consists of longitudinal waves and shear waves as indicated in The objective of this paper is to use either the fundamental or the second harmonic of the scattered field to reconstruct an image of the closed crack by means of time reversal imaging. The scattered field For simplicity, only the longitudinal scattered waves are considered here and the mode converted shear waves are disregarded. This assumes that the longitudinal scattered waves can be separated from the scattered shear waves for sensors At this stage, the displacement field of the longitudinal scattered wave is expressed in the Cartesian coordinate system, with components The problem considered here is to reconstruct the defect based on the knowledge of the scattered field at all receivers for all actuators considered successively: The data collected from   Considering a 2D acoustic model where the time dependence is chosen to be As noted in Section Considering the propagation from the imaging point Rose et al. have derived a general time reversal imaging formula based on the acoustic model and a cross-correlation imaging condition Unlike diffraction tomography, Eq. In practice, there is a discrete distribution of sensors, and the double integral in Eq. As introduced previously, this work intends to image a closed crack using either the fundamental harmonic or the second harmonic contained in the scattered waves. The considered frequency components being different, the wave numbers have to be modified accordingly in the imaging formula. The wavenumber in Eq. In the following, the imaging based on the fundamental harmonic is referred as “fundamental harmonic imaging” whereas the imaging based on the second harmonic is denoted by “second harmonic imaging”. The two corresponding formulae are given by: In this paper, the image intensity at location The MTR imaging formula has been defined, with Green’s functions adjusted to the considered problem. The next section introduces the FE model that enables to treat the nonlinear interaction between an incident plane wave and a closed crack. This section describes firstly the FE model used to model the nonlinear interaction between the incident plane wave and the closed crack and secondly validates the assumptions regarding the scattered longitudinal wave field. A plane strain 2D FE model is set up to tackle the nonlinear interaction between an incident longitudinal plane wave and a closed crack. As done previously in The particular configuration of the FE model is shown in The incident wave interacts with the crack, which is modeled as a contact interface, where a potential compressive pre-stress The two faces of the crack are denoted by Denoting The contact equations The spatial discretization is essential in the FE method. In order to have an accurate solution for the new higher frequency components generated by the CAN, the corresponding wavelengths have to be sufficiently discretized. If An imaging domain of 25×25 mm In the previous sections, it has been explained that various angles of incidence are considered depending on which sensor is chosen to define the excitation. With the current FE model, instead of defining a plane wave coming from different directions, the excitation is always generated on the top face, but the configuration is altered so that the crack is tilted by an angle To make this possible without re-meshing the solid each time, a specific strategy was adopted to define the crack orientation as a simple input parameter of the FE model. Basically, the mesh is divided in two sections, one being a disk of radius The scattered field is defined as the difference between the total field and the incident field (obtained without the crack). Therefore, two simulations have to be run to compute the scattered wave field: with and without the crack. The displacements recorded at the selected output nodes for each simulation are subtracted to obtain the scattered near field solution. Displacements are projected in the polar coordinate system and the longitudinal wave is selected with a Hann window of the same duration as the incident pulse. Only the radial displacement is used in the imaging algorithm. These signals are converted in the frequency domain using the FFT algorithm and the complex values are selected at the fundamental frequency and at the second harmonic. Considering all actuator–receiver pairs, two sets of data are obtained, which enables one to construct the multi-static data matrix for the fundamental harmonic and for the second harmonic, and hence to reconstruct two images in accordance with Eq. The radial displacement created by the scattered longitudinal wave is used to construct the input for the imaging algorithm. As mentioned in Section  However, the scatterer being a crack of finite length, scattered waves do not have circular wave fronts in the near field that matches the curvature of the sensor array. Therefore, the scattered longitudinal waves produce pure radial displacement only at the center of the scattered wave beam, whereas the angle between the radial direction and the displacement increases on going away from the direction of propagation. By contrast, the non-plane wave condition of the scattered longitudinal waves may introduce shear deformation that contributes to the computed radial component without corresponding to longitudinal wave motion. In the following, the radial displacement is compared with the first strain invariant to address these two issues. The first strain invariant is independent of shear deformation by definition, and therefore corresponds only to motion induced by the propagation of scattered longitudinal waves. Moreover, the first strain invariant is independent of the coordinate system. The following general expressions are adopted for displacements, On the other hand, the radial displacement is expressed as a function of Comparing Eqs. For this comparison between the strain invariant and the radial displacement, 12 sensors are selected to capture the scattered longitudinal waves, 6 for the transmitted wave and 6 for the reflected wave, which covers an angular aperture of 30° as shown in  The preceding results confirm that the longitudinal scattered wave can be separated from the shear waves in the time domain. Furthermore, the radial displacement and the first strain invariant computed from the numerical results are close, which confirms that radial displacement can be used for the imaging based on the scattered longitudinal waves in this numerical work. Note that the first strain invariant would be preferred if one considers potential application with Lamb waves since this quantity is actually measured by conventional piezoelectric sensors The FE model and the MTR imaging algorithm are used to reconstruct the defect image based on the longitudinal wave scattering, using either the fundamental frequency or the second harmonic. The corresponding images are referred to as “fundamental harmonic image” and “second harmonic image”. The profile at The MTR algorithm is now used to construct the second harmonic image of the closed crack. The contact parameters are not modified and the reconstructed image is shown in The use of the second harmonic for the imaging offers a potential for a baseline free method for detection and characterization of closed cracks, because the second harmonic is only generated by the nonlinear interaction with the crack and is not present in the incident wave. Thus, the extraction of the second harmonic from the scattered field The MTR imaging algorithm reconstructs the source of the wave scattering. Considering possible experimental application, the method would allow one to perform an The objective in this section is to assess the influence of the pre-stress parameter The linear image is shown in  Scattering by the crack and harmonic generation are directly impacted by the stress state at the crack interface  Regarding the side-lobes along the The same result is observed for the second harmonic images when the compression is equal to −0.5 MPa. By contrast, the reduction of the compressive stress enhances the secondary peaks near the cracks tips, which get greater than the central peak for The MTR algorithm performs well for low compressive stress levels, but when the load increases the crack becomes a weak scatterer and this algorithm is then of limited efficiency whatever harmonic is used. Nevertheless, the main peak of the image provides a very good estimation of the crack location and size. In case of larger compression stress, other methods better suited for weak scatterer, such as the Diffraction Tomography, could provide a better result. Finally, it was found that varying the coefficient of friction had a negligible influence in this case, where longitudinal wave are considered for the incident and scattered waves. The imaging algorithm used in this work supposes that the number of sensors  The two profiles of the reconstructed images are analyzed as done previously, to estimate the crack length and to evaluate the ratio between the main peak and the side-lobes or the secondary peaks in the case of the nonlinear image. This requirement of a higher number of sensors can be attributer to a more directional scattering of the second harmonic due to a shorter wavelength. The enhancement of the directivity of the second harmonic is demonstrated by comparing the The preceding results are based on the single-frequency algorithms given by Eqs.   The above results showed that taking into account the frequency bandwidth information may improve the image quality, mainly as regard the signal-to-noise ratio. But the improvement is not systematic depending on the considered harmonic and comes with potential reduction in accuracy regarding the crack length estimation. However, these results are given for a specific load case and sensors configuration. For completeness, the crack length estimation and the peak amplitude ratio The multi-frequency imaging improves the signal-to-noise ratio Regarding the effect of the number of sensors, side-lobe ratio The multi-frequency imaging approach may improve the robustness of the imaging algorithm when using the fundamental harmonic, but care must be taken when considering the second harmonic. The choice of the bandwidth window may also have an influence on the results and should be investigated. It is recognized that closed cracks are difficult to detect due to their weaker scattering relative to fully open cracks. By contrast CAN may be activated at a closed crack, which generates higher harmonics. In this work, linear and nonlinear scattering responses generated by the propagation of incident plane longitudinal waves have been used to reconstruct images of the crack through the Modified Time Reversal imaging algorithm. It has been shown that a clear image of the defect can be reconstructed from the scattering of the fundamental harmonic, giving an excellent estimation of the crack length. The present work is also the first time that the second harmonic component of the nonlinear scattered field has been used (in conjunction with a rigorous imaging algorithm and the correct theoretical sampling requirement) to reconstruct an One of the main parameters influencing the scattering and the generation of higher harmonic by a closed crack is the applied compressive load. When the load increases, the crack closes and becomes a weak scatterer and the quality of the images degrades, both from fundamental and second harmonic. However, the crack length estimation is still good when considering the main peak of the reconstructed image. Investigating other imaging methods best suited for weak scatterer may be of interest in a future work. For low level of compressive load, the crack tips are highlighted by the nonlinear image. The level of CAN can be closely controlled in the FE model by varying the compressive pre-stress. This forward modeling should prove valuable for implementing and interpreting inverse modeling of CAN for practical cases of structural damage, such as plasticity-induced fatigue crack closure This study was supported in part by an