Lead flotation tailings of Dandy mineral processing plant in north-western Iran contain oxidized zinc minerals. Zinc recovery from the tailing was studied in the presence of different flotation reagents. Microscopic analysis showed that the major phases in the tailing were smithsonite and quartz. A sulfidization–flotation method has been used on a laboratory scale to investigate the effect of various reagents such as sodium sulfide as sulfidizing agent, primary amine as collector, dispersants and flocculants. To reach an optimum zinc recovery, different concentrations of the reagents were also studied. Smithsonite is friable and a large amount of fines and slimes produce. Usually de-sliming is used to prevent slime coating and to increase the recovery of zinc. However, analyses have shown that fine particles in the sample mostly contain zinc, thus de-sliming was not suggested. To enhance zinc recovery an effective disperssing reagent could increase the flotation selectivity of these tailings. Among the dispersants tested, sodium hexametaphosphate gave a higher zinc grade of 40.7% and 70% recovery. Comparing to the dispersants used, it seems that the flocculant is not that effective in increasing the zinc recovery, simply coagulating the fine particles.As the primary source of zinc, natural sulfide ores are steadily getting depleted and for future demand, there is an obvious recognition that the recovery of zinc from tailings is an alternative. Oxidized zinc ores are the main source of zinc metal after sulfides and are generally found in silicate or carbonate forms in different parts of the world. These minerals are friable and produce a large amount of fines and slimes. In practice, the commonly used method for the recovery of oxidized lead and zinc minerals from ores is flotation ( Sulfidization–flotation using sodium sulfide as the sulfidizing agent yields the best performance in most flotation systems (  For oxidized ores, cationic collectors such as amines are used as collectors. The amines are neutralized for easier handling and improved solubility. Amine concentration increases with pH, reaching 50% at pH 10 and approaching 100% at pH 11 ( The major problem in processing the lead flotation tailings is the large amount of fines and slimes increasing reagent consumption, causing the so-called slime coating phenomenon, hindering selectivity and, in some cases, rendering the process unfeasible. To preclude this, de-sliming and using different reagents such as flocculants, coagulants, dispersants and depressants can be applicable ( Effect of depressing agents on the flotation of an oxidized zinc minerals which contained 17% Zn was studied by The current paper reports on the separation of zinc-oxidized minerals from Pb-flotation tailings of Dandy mineral processing plant, using a sulphfidization-flotation method. In this study, the effect of sodium sulfide and amine concentration as well as various dispersing reagents has been investigated on the recovery of zinc. Finally, the effect of a flocculant was also studied and sedimentation tests were conducted to study the effect of the reagents added to the pulp. The dry fine lead flotation tailing from Dandy was passed thorough a ¼ inch sieve, split into approximately 1 The flotation experiments were done in a Denver D-12 machine and the impeller speed was 1200 Sodium suphide, sodium tripolyphosphate, sodium hexametaphosphate and floc N-100 solutions were, 3%w/w, 5%w/w, 0.1 Several sedimentation tests were conducted to observe and monitor the effects of adding reagents to the pulp. The tests were carried out with the exact conditioning stages prior to flotation. Then pulp was fed to a 1-l cylinder. Photos were taken at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90  The microscopic analysis of the polished and thin sections confirmed the existence of the phases detected by XRD but it also provided useful information concerning liberation of the minerals especially quartz as a gangue. Microscopic study illustrated liberated grain of quartz and smithsonite in all fractions; figures for all nine fractions are not shown here. Microscopic analysis (polished and thin sections) was used to calculate the relative amounts of the components of the tailing according to ASTM C 295 norm. Smithsonite (39.8%) was the dominant phase but there was also 36.3% quartz. According to the literature (Section 1), de-sliming could increase selectivity in oxidized zinc minerals flotation, where the sample contains a large amount of slimes and fines. However, the size by size analysis shown in  The adsorption mechanism of amine collectors is proposed to be electrostatic ( The flotation results of the tailing are shown in  The necessary conditioning time studied in the Na Sodium sulfide is considered to render the surface more negative, favoring the electrostatic attraction mechanism between amines and the mineral surface ( At higher conditioning time, Zn It should be mentioned that in the pH range of zinc carbonate flotation, the predominant sodium sulfide species is HS As mentioned in Section 3 and with reference to As shown in Zn grade as a function of sodium hexametaphosphate concentration is also shown in  This phenomenon could be attributed to the adsorption of sodium hexametaphosphate at the cation sites (Zn The results for the dispersants tested show that hexametaphosphate increased the zinc grade and recovery more than the previous two dispersants. The slight difference between the results from hexametaphosphate to tripolyphosphate simply indicates that the more negative charge on the former may affect the amine adsorption on the surface, increasing the zinc recovery more than tripolyphosphate at the same condition. Besides, a high negative charge on the particle surfaces causes electrostatic repulsion, reducing coagulation of fine particles, restricting the slime coating effect. In order to study the effect of flocculant, a non-anionic flocculant, superfloc N-100, 3400 It is worth mentioning that using superfloc N-100 caused adhesion of particles, which is likely to bring the silicate gangue particles to the concentrate, thus reducing the grade. At this stage, sedimentation tests were conducted to study the effect of the reagents added to the pulp. For that different conditioning times of 0, 15, 30, 60, 90  Microscopic analysis (polished and thin sections) confirmed the existence of major phases detected in XRD, smithsonite (39.8%) and quartz (36.3%). It also showed that both gangue and zinc mineral were liberated. The optimum sodium sulfide concentration was 3400 Zinc grade was 26% in the presence of 3400 Zinc recovery was raised to 50%, 62% and 70% by adding sodium silicate, sodium tripolyphosphate and sodium hexametaphosphate, respectively. The best flotation results were obtained with the use of the dispersants. Among the dispersants tested, hexametaphosphate gave a higher zinc grade and recovery. The sedimentation rate in the presence of hexametaphosphate was lower than in the case of sodium silicate. Comparing to dispersants used, it seems that super floc N-100 is not that effective in increasing the zinc recovery. The sedimentation tests confirmed that super floc N-100 could simply coagulate fine particles, decreasing the selectivity.