The 3D approach was employed for investigations of the global stability loss of the hollow circular cylinder made from viscoelastic composite materials. This approach is based on the investigations of the evolution of the initial infinitesimal global imperfection of the cylinder within the scope of 3D geometrically non-linear field equations of the theory of the viscoelasticity for anisotropic bodies. The numerical results of the critical forces and critical time are presented and discussed. To illustrate the importance of the results obtained using the 3D approach, these results are compared with the corresponding ones obtained by employing various approximate beam theories. The viscoelasticity properties of the cylinder material are described by the fractional-exponential operator. The numerical results and their discussion are presented for the case where the cylinder is made of an unidirectional fibrous viscoelastic composite material. In particular, it is established that the difference between the critical times obtained by employing 3D and third order refined beam theories becomes more non-negligible if the values of the external compressive force are close to the critical compressive force which is obtained at t = ∞ (t denotes a time).Investigations into stability loss problems of the elements of construction from composite materials in many cases require the application of the Three-Dimensional Linearized Theory of Stability (TDLTS), the equations and relations of which are obtained from the exact non-linear equations of the deformable solid body mechanics by employing the linearization procedure similarly used by Note that from the historical aspect, the equations of TDLTS were first obtained by During the second half of the 20th century there were major contributions to the development of the TDLTS and its applications to numerous stability problems of elements of construction from composite materials. A detailed review of the corresponding investigations is given by The very reliable and frequently used approach for the investigation of the stability loss of the elements of constructions made from time-dependent materials is the approach proposed by An extension of the foregoing three-dimensional (3D) approach for investigation of the stability loss problems of the elements of constructions made from linear viscoelastic composite materials was the subject of the papers by A rotationally symmetric undulation instability problem for a circular plate of a viscoelastic composite material was investigated in a paper by It should be noted that in the all mentioned above investigations a critical time, which characterizes the stability loss of the element of construction, is determined. This is also an advantage of the approach proposed and developed in these investigations with respect to related approaches developed within the scope of the various types of refined plate theories in papers by  The foregoing completes a brief review of all investigations carried out up to now within the scope of the TDLTS and related to the elements of constructions made from viscoelastic composite materials. It should be noted that in the papers mentioned above the corresponding results obtained by the approximate plate theories hypotheses are also presented. A comparison of the corresponding results shows that for pure elastic stability loss problems, the difference between the results obtained in the framework of the 3D approach and that of the third order refined plate theory by However, as follows from the foregoing discussion, all the studies noted above relate to 3D stability loss of the viscoelastic composite plate. Consequently, there is no investigation related to the three-dimensional stability loss problem of the viscoelastic cylinder which is also used in a lot of elements of constructions. For example, within the scope of the 3D approach, columns, bars and beams fabricated from unidirectional fiber-reinforced composites and used as the primary and secondary compressive load bearing structural members in the design of frames, which are used in high-speed aircraft and aerospace structures, rocket engines etc, can be modeled as cylinders. According to the requirement of high strength/stiffness to weight ratio, for the foregoing purpose, hollow cylinders (or columns, bars and beams) are used. Due to the high temperatures experienced by these cylinders, their constituent materials exhibit time-dependent properties, which in many cases could be modeled within the hereditary linear viscoelastic constitutive law. Consequently, investigation related to the three-dimensional stability loss problem of the viscoelastic cylinder has many real application fields. Therefore, in the present paper, the first attempt in this field is undertaken and the approach proposed by We consider a hollow cylinder which has an initial global imperfection in the natural state and determine the position of the points of this cylinder with the Lagrange coordinates in the cylindrical We assume that the cylinders’ cross section is on the plane which is perpendicular to its middle line tangent vector, is a closed circular ring of the constant inner radius We suppose that the material of the cylinder is viscoelastic transversal isotropic the symmetry axis of which coincides with the This investigation is made within the scope of the following field equations. Here The constitutive relations for the cylinder material in the cylindrical system of coordinates are given as follows: Here, Assume that on the lateral surfaces In the natural state, the upper and lower ends of the cylinder are on the inclined planes with the following unit normal vectors Denote the upper (lower) end cross section of the cylinder through Note that in Thus, formulation of the considered problem has been exhausted and it follows from this formulation that the evolution of the infinitesimal initial global imperfection of the cylinder with time for the fixed value of the initial compressed force Now we consider the method of solution of the problem formulated in the previous section. Note that the method employed below can be briefly summarized as follows. By employing the boundary-form perturbation techniques the considered boundary value problem for the non-linear integro-differential Eqs. Since, according to the procedure summarized above and the problem statement, first we derive the equation for the inner and outer lateral surfaces Using the relations Using the assumption (2) and supposing that the conditions Now we write the equation of the planes on which lay the lower and upper inclined ends of the cylinder as follows. According to Eq. According to the procedures of the boundary perturbation technique, as in the works by Substituting Eq. Moreover, we obtain the following end conditions for the zeroth approximation from (7), (8) and (13). Note that the mathematical procedure, according to which the end condition (17) is obtained, will be given below. Taking the last assumption into account, for the subsequent approximations we obtain the following system of equations. The expressions of the underlined terms Now we write the boundary conditions given on the lateral surface of the cylinder for the first approximation by the physical components of the stress tensor. Consider the satisfaction of the end conditions (8). To simply the discussion we rewrite these conditions in the Cartesian system of coordinates Taking the estimation For the zeroth approximation: For the first approximation Thus, rewriting the condition (23) in the cylindrical system of coordinates According to (15), (16) and (17), the values related the zeroth approximation are determined as follows. It follows from (25) that in the zeroth approximation the components of the displacement vector can be presented as follows Now we consider determination of the values related to the first approximation. Taking the expression The following conditions on the lateral surface of the cylinder are obtained from According to Eqs. Thus, the Eqs. As has been noted above, Eqs. The functions Taking the expressions of the right sides of the conditions Substituting these solutions into relations (33) and (31) we obtain the following expressions for Laplace transform of the sought values. Thus, with the foregoing we determine completely the Laplace transforms of the values related to the first approximation. The Laplace transform of the values of the second and subsequent approximations in (14) can also be determined as the values of the first approximation by taking the obvious changes into account. However, as shown in the works by The original of the south values is determined by employing the method by Now we consider the selection of the stability loss criterion. In the present investigation, the case will be understood under stability loss, where Thus, the values of the critical time or the values of the critical force are determined from the initial imperfection criterion For the case under consideration the approximate stability loss equations for the cylinder-beam can be derived from Eqs. In writing the expression where Taking the relations (42) and (43) into account we obtain the following equation from (31) Using the expressions of the equations in According to foregoing presentations, we obtain the following equations from Multiplying the last Eq. Applying the presentations It is evident that for the real cases the inequality For the solution to the boundary value problem According to the end condition Substituting Employing the Schapery method ( For the cases where the cylinder material is pure elastic we obtain from (52) the following expression According to The following expression follows from (54) and (55) for the critical force which coincide with Euler critical force For the third order refined beam theory we use the modification of the theory by Substituting the expressions for By employing the method From We assume that the cylinder is made from viscoelastic unidirectional fibrous composite material and its fibers lie along the We introduce the dimensionless rheological parameter Here the following notation is used: Thus, within the framework of the foregoing preparation we consider the numerical results and first examine the pure elastic stability loss under We compare the results obtained within the scope of the TDLTS with the corresponding ones obtained within the scope of the Bernoulli beam theory and within the scope of the third order refined beam theory. Through Introduce the parameter The values of Moreover, it follows from these results that the values of differences given in (73) increase with Instead of the Note that the values of It follows from the foregoing results that for pure elastic stability loss problems in the cases where the relations Now we consider the case where the cylinder material is viscoelastic and analyze the critical time. To compare the values of the critical time given by TDLTS with those given by approximate beam theories we must select the values of Thus, we consider data given in The influence of the dimensionless rheological parameter As follows from the observation of the graphs given in Compare the values of Thus, in the present paper within the scope of the three-dimensional geometrically non-linear field equations of the theory for viscoelastic transversal isotropic bodies the approach has been developed for the 3D stability loss analyses of the hollow cylinder made from viscoelastic composite material. It is supposed that the cylinder has an initial infinitesimal global imperfection and as the stability loss criterion, the case for which this imperfection starts to increase indefinitely, is taken. For studying the corresponding non-linear boundary value problem the boundary-form disturbance method and small parameter method are employed simultaneously. As results of these applications the solution to the mentioned non-linear problem is reduced to the solution to the corresponding series linear problems. By direct verification it is proved that the equations and relations related the first and subsequent approximations coincide with the equations and relations of the well known TDLTS. Based on the previous work of the first author it is noted that for investigation of the stability loss problem it is enough to use only the zeroth and first approximations. By the average-integrating procedure the corresponding approximate stability loss equations within the scope of the Bernoulli and third order refined beam theories is derived from the equations and relations of the mentioned first approximations. Final numerical results are obtained by employing Laplace transform and variation separation method for the case where the cylinder is made from the viscoelastic composite consisting of the viscoelastic matrix and unidirectional elastic fibers lying along the cylinder. At first, numerical results related the pure elastic stability loss of the cylinder at Expressions of the physical components of the non-symmetric Kirchhoff stress tensor through the physical components of the ordinary stress tensor and through the physical components The expressions The expressions of the underlined terms in Eq. In similar manner, we can write the following expansions for the physical components We assume that the coefficient of