We would like to thank O'Dowd-Booth et al for the Letter to the Editor concerning our recently published article, “Comparing the coracoclavicular loop technique to a hook plate for the treatment of distal clavicle fractures.” The authors stated that current evidence suggests removal of the hook plate at 3 to 4 months after the operation. We agree that hook plates should not be retained and need to be removed as early as possible. In our study, we demonstrated the union time of the hook plate group is 3.4 ± 1.0 months (range, 3-8 months). Furthermore, an article has described mean union time is 4.2 ± 4.0 months after hook plate fixation. We agree that radiologic evaluation of the union of the distal clavicle has some limitations. However, we are not sure that computed tomography (CT) could define union or not at distal clavicular fractures treated with spanning hook plate because of artifact of metal materials. We found an interesting study that evaluated clavicle motion with CT after hook plate fixation, and they also concluded that metal artifact is not avoidable. We agree that the hook plate is associated with a further removal operation, higher risks and financial cost, and less convenience. Indeed, we included these points in the initial version of this article. The CC loop technique using Mersilene (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) tape is more cost-effective than the hook plate. However, these points were suggested to be deleted because an accurate analysis of total financial cost was not possible in this study. We did not manage our patients according to injury grade. We used the Neer classification to distinguish stable or unstable distal clavicular fractures. Our indications included Neer type II and V unstable fractures. In this study, the corresponding author managed the unstable distal clavicle fractures with CC loop only, and the other trauma surgeons always used the hook plate for unstable fractures. The difference between these 2 groups regarding Neer types was not significant. The pure intra-articular Neer type III fractures are generally stable and treated with nonoperation. Few cases of type II or type V fractures might have significant comminution at distal clavicular fragment with extension into acromioclavicular joint. These injuries can be treated with the CC loop technique or hook plate. Because the numbers of these injuries were very limited in our series, we did not perform further analysis for acromioclavicular joint involvement. We appreciate the interest and points made by O'Dowd-Booth et al regarding our article. We also offer our thanks to them for suggesting references to the readers who are interested in the surgical treatment of distal clavicular fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any institute with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payment or other benefits from any commercial entity related the subject of this article.