Comprehensive characterization of printed circuit board (PCB) of end-of-life electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) is obligatory for prospective profitable beneficiation. In this study, beneficiation oriented comprehensive characterization of two brands of PCBs each of 16 end-of-life EEE was conducted in terms of their physicochemical characteristics with special emphasis on the content of 16 general elements, 2 precious metals and 15 rare earth elements (REEs). General elements and their highest weight percent composition found in different PCBs of the EEEs were Cu (23% in laptop), Al (6% in computer), Pb (15% in DVD player) and Ba (7% in TV). The high abundant of precious metals such as Au (316 g/ton) and Ag (636 g/ton) in mobile phone and laptop, respectively coupled with rapid obsolescence age makes waste PCBs of information technology and telecommunication equipment the most potent resource reservoir. Additionally, most of the waste PCBs were observed to contain REEs in considerable quantity with Sc up to 31 g/ton and Ce up to 13 g/ton being the major constituents. Comprehensive characterization of waste PCBs therefore will systematically help towards better understanding of e-waste recycling processes for beneficiation purpose and sustainable resource circulation and conservation.The consistent advancements in electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) with advent of smart features, designs and technology during the last few decades have led to rapid obsolescence of many electronic items, leading to build up of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) or electronic waste (e-waste). E-waste encompasses a large variety of electrically powered products including large and small domestic devices which are discarded by the owner as waste without the intention of reuse ( EEE are made of a multitude of components among which printed circuit board (PCB) is the core part ( Given the quantum of e-waste generated, complexity of PCBs and tremendous metals content; the physical and chemical characterization of waste PCBs is obligatory for prioritization of metals to be recycled as well as the target end-of-life EEE. Though PCBs are recognized as valuable secondary metals reservoir in end-of-life EEE, the precise information related to their physical and chemical characteristics is sparse in the existing literature ( Thus, the study aims at recycling-oriented comprehensive characterization of waste PCBs from WEEE categories viz., information technology and telecommunication equipment; large household and consumer equipment and lighting equipment encompassing two brands each of 16 end-of-life EEE. The WEEE considered in the study include computer, laptop, mobile phone, calculator, modem, refrigerator, washing machine (WM), air conditioner (AC), inverter, television (TV), radio, DVD player, TV remote control, stereo amplifier, compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) and rechargeable lamp. In this study, waste PCBs were characterized (in terms of their physical characteristics and chemical composition) with special emphasis on the 16 general elements, 2 precious metals and 15 REEs scoping towards prospective profitable beneficiation investigation for prioritization of recovery of elements. A total of sixteen end-of-life EEE under WEEE categories such as information technology and telecommunication equipment, large household equipment, consumer equipment and lighting equipment were selected. Two different brands, referred herein as Brand I and Brand II, of each of the end-of-life EEE were chosen for the purpose. The end-of-life EEE considered in the study includes computer, laptop, mobile phone, calculator, modem, refrigerator, WM, AC, inverter, TV, radio, DVD player, TV remote control, stereo amplifier, CFL and rechargeable lamp. Details of the end-of-life EEE used in the study and their average obsolesce age as collated from the literature are presented in For the purpose of sample preparation, mounted electrical components, viz. capacitors, resistors, batteries etc. were removed from the PCBs by means of tools such as hammer, screw driver and pliers. The PCBs were cleaned by air spray, wiped with acetone and dried to remove dust particles and other possible contaminants. Pliers and stainless steel scissors were also used to cut the PCBs into pieces of dimensions approximately 2 cm × 2 cm for initial size reduction. CFL PCBs were not subjected to initial size reduction due to their smaller sizes. For each of the end-of-life EEE, the pieces of the batch of waste PCBs of respective brands were then subjected to mechanical comminution collectively using the cutting mill (SM200, Retsch GmbH, Germany) for further size reduction to the size range of <0.038 mm to >1 mm and subsequently homogenized. All 32 samples (2 brands each of 16 end-of-life EEEs, PCBs in triplicate for each brand) were prepared in similar manner. Comminuted and homogenized samples in the size range of <0.038 mm to >1 mm were considered for further analyses. A sample obtained through quartering of the comminuted and homogenized PCBs was used for the analysis of particle size distribution. Another quarter of comminuted and homogenized sample was subjected to morphological characterization for selected EEE representative of various WEEE categories. Comprehensive physico-chemical characterization to determine volatile matter content, moisture content, pH and elemental content was conducted using the rest of the comminuted and homogenized quartering sample portions. For the respective brands of each of the end-of-life EEE, the quantitative particle size distribution of comminuted and homogenized PCBs was determined by examining the comminution fines in the size range of <0.038 mm to >1 mm under the optical microscope (BX51, Olympus, Japan). The purpose of the particle size distribution analysis was to assess the different size fractions obtained upon comminution of PCBs for size reduction under mechanical actions. The morphological characterization of another quarter of the comminuted and homogenized PCBs of selected end-of-life EEE representative of various WEEE categories was carried out by scanning electron microscope (SEM) (EVO 18, Zeiss, Germany) at the magnification of 10x and operated at 10 keV. The morphological characterization of comminuted and homogenized PCBs was performed to determine the general morphology of PCBs comminution fines indicative of various shearing, tensile and complex forces under which pulverization was achieved. Physical characteristics such as moisture content and volatile matter of comminuted and homogenized samples in the size range of <0.038 mm to >1 mm were determined for waste PCBs of brands I and II of the 16 end-of-life EEE following standard procedures outlined in the ASTM-D2216-98 ( A microwave digestion system (Ethos Easy, Milestone, Italy) equipped with high-pressure SK-15 rotor capable of holding 15 TFM digestion vessels with a capacity of 100 ml each was used to digest the samples. A representative subset from the quartering sample of the comminuted and homogenized PCBs in the size range of <0.038 mm to >1 mm were subjected to microwave-assisted acid digestion for complete substrate dissolution preceding elemental content analysis for respective brands of each of the end-of-life EEE. Microwave-assisted acid digestion was conducted as per the procedure outlined in the USEPA 3052 ( In the study, proper care was taken from sample collection, preparation to analyses to ensure precision and reproducibility for the purpose of the QA/QC. The accuracy and the reproducibility of the results were assessed using RRM-PE-01 (Rigaku, Japan) as the standard reference material (SRM) with limited elements such as Al, Zn, Cr, etc. doped in polymer matrix similar to those of The analysis of PCBs as weight fraction of end-of-life EEE under the investigation demonstrated a representative overview of the percentage weight of PCBs against total weight of EEE ( The particle size distribution analysis of PCBs comminution fines indicated the different size fractions obtained upon comminution of PCBs for size reduction under mechanical actions. For the respective brands of each of the end-of-life EEE, the comminuted and homogenized PCBs in the size range of <0.038 mm to >1 mm examined under the optical microscope revealed diversity in size and texture of comminuted fines. The comminuted and homogenized PCB samples of representative end-of-life EEE observed under the SEM (see The physicochemical parameters such as moisture content, volatile matter and pH indicated the general composition of PCBs. The general physicochemical characteristics of waste PCBs of various EEE under different categories of WEEE are presented in The pH of comminuted PCBs of end-of-life EEE was observed to be slightly alkaline nature. Laptop was observed to contain the most alkaline PCBs with pH of 7.85 ± 0.03 (mean ± standard deviation) while modem PCBs were analyzed to be the least alkaline with pH of 7.70 ± 0.10 (mean ± standard deviation) ( The elements analyzed in the PCBs of various end-of-life EEE under different categories of WEEE Directive were broadly classified into three elemental groups, viz. general elements, precious metals and REEs. A total of 96 PCBs from 16 EEE of 2 different brands were analyzed for their average composition of 33 elements comprising of 16 general elements constituting of base elements and trace elements (Cu, Zn, Al, Pb, Ni, Cd, Ba, Se, As, Cr, Co, Mn, Be, Mo, Sb, V), 2 precious metals (Au, Ag) and 15 REEs (Tl, Ce, Dy, Er, Eu, Gd, Ho, La, Nd, Pr, Sc, Sm, Tm, Yb, Y). The elemental characterization revealed that major elemental content of waste PCBs in EEE comprised of general elements and precious metals ( The EEE investigated under the information technology and telecommunication equipment category includes computer, laptop, mobile phone, calculator and modem. The elemental content in waste PCBs of each brand of EEE for the WEEE category in comparison with the available literature data is summarized in Apart from the base and trace elements, the precious metals such as Au and Ag were observed to be abundant in waste PCBs of EEE under this category except calculator and modem with the mean content up to 316 g/ton in mobile phone and 636 g/ton in laptop, respectively ( Except Pb in mobile phone PCBs, the content of abundant base metals such as Cu, Zn, Al and Pb observed in computer and mobile phone PCBs in the present study as shown in The high abundant of Cu found in PCBs can be attributed to the lamination of Cu sheets onto the non-conductive substrate making up electric pathways to trace signals ( The content of Au (up to 225 g/ton) and Ag (up to 631 g/ton) observed in computer PCBs in the present study corroborates well with the range reported in the available literature ( It is evident from the present study that the laptop and mobile phone PCBs were observed to contain general elements, precious metals and REEs in abundance. The high abundant of elements observed in both laptop and mobile phone PCBs ( The PCBs of end-of-life EEE characterized for elemental content under the category of large household equipment included refrigerator, WM, AC and inverter. The elemental content in waste PCBs of each brand of EEE under this category in comparison with the available literature data is presented in Except Ni and Cd, the content of base metals found in PCBs ( The elemental content of PCBs of five different end-of-life EEE such as TV, DVD player, radio, stereo amplifier and TV remote control under consumer equipment category showed considerable variation with the brand. Except Cu and Al in DVD player and Pb and Ni in TV, the content of base metals found in PCBs ( The elemental content of waste PCBs from two lighting equipment such as CFL and rechargeable lamp is presented in The content of precious metals such as Au and Ag in PCBs under this category was found to be relatively low as compared to the other categories of WEEE considered in the present study. Comparatively low content of precious metals in PCBs of EEE may render this category less lucrative for recovery of precious metals. In general, the waste PCBs of CFL and rechargeable lamp were found to contain REEs ( It is of interest to comparatively assess the elemental content of PCBs among the different categories of WEEE considered in the present study to explore the appropriate category for beneficiation purpose. Among the elements characterized in the PCBs of the end-of-life EEE under various WEEE categories, general elements comprising of both base and trace elements were found to be the most abundant. The amount of base metals was observed to be the highest in waste PCBs of information technology and telecommunication equipment, followed by large household, consumer and lighting equipment ( Precious metals such as Ag and Au were observed to be abundant in the waste PCBs of information technology and telecommunication equipment with content up to 636 g/ton and 316 g/ton, respectively ( In summary, the high abundant of elements coupled with rapid obsolescence age and higher weight fraction of PCBs against the total weight make the end-of-life information technology and telecommunication equipment as the most lucrative WEEE category for prospective profitable beneficiation purpose. The PCBs of end-of-life equipment of various WEEE categories should be prioritized as secondary elemental resource reserve for beneficiation purpose based on the content and economics involved in recovery. Thus, a complete understanding of analogy between recycling process with corresponding yield and total elemental content of PCBs of end-of-life EEE for each category of WEEE is warranted for beneficiation purpose for secondary resource development and reutilization. Beneficiation-oriented comprehensive characterization of two different brands of PCBs each of 16 end-of-life EEE was conducted. Four WEEE categories such as information technology and telecommunication equipment, large household equipment, consumer equipment and lighting equipment as per the Directive (WEEE Large percent share of waste PCBs of EEE were composed of general elements such as Cu (23% in laptop), Zn (2% in computer), Al (6% in computer), Pb (15% in DVD player) and Ba (7% in TV) which make them potential secondary resource and source of metal pollution. Thus, the recycling of general elements from waste PCBs in eco-friendly manner will not only limit the wastage of these elements and conserve material resources but also avert environmental pollution. Considerable quantities of precious metals, Au and Ag were found to be prevalent in all PCBs except TV remote control. These noble metals in waste PCBs of EEE are the major economic driver for recycling of e-waste. The high abundant of precious metals such as Au (316 g/ton) and Ag (636 g/ton) in PCBs of mobile phone and laptop, respectively considering their higher weight percentage relative to the total equipment weight coupled with rapid average obsolescence age leading to largest constituent in e-waste generated makes them as suitable resource reserve for recycling of precious metals. Most of the waste PCBs were observed to contain 15 REEs as critical components vital to electronic industry. Sc and Ce were found to be the abundant REEs ranged between 6 and 31 g/ton and 0.2–13 g/ton, respectively. Owing to the majority of deposits under trade control of few countries and ever increasing need in electronic industry, recycling of REEs from PCBs of end-of-life EEE can be a prospective secondary source. For beneficiation purpose, information technology and telecommunication equipment were found to contain majority of general elements, precious metals as well as REEs in abundance. Thus, information technology and telecommunication equipment will serve as the most potent resource reservoir followed by other WEEE categories viz., large household equipment, consumer equipment and lighting equipment for recycling of elements. This study for comprehensive characterization of PCBs encompassing a wide variety of end-of-life EEE for extensive range of elements including REEs will help to develop analogy between elemental content of waste PCBs and prioritization of elements for recovery to ensure efficient resource circulation to maintain the worldwide supply. The authors would like to acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India for the fellowship grant for this research work. The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions to improve the quality of the paper. The authors would like to express their deep sense of gratitude to Dr. Atul Thakur, Indian Institute of Technology Patna for painstakingly proofreading and improvising the manuscript.