In conventional flotation flowsheets for treating copper sulphide ores containing small but significant amounts of arsenic, the arsenic is generally concentrated with the copper in final concentrate. Often, a penalty can be imposed by the smelter processing the concentrate, based on the arsenic content. In some cases the arsenic level is such that the smelter will not treat or accept the concentrate.
                  A new approach to address this issue is reported in this paper, which is becoming more significant as the quality of the copper ore bodies currently being mined diminishes. A new flowsheet, based on the early removal of arsenic at the concentrator, has been developed and tested at bench-scale.
                  The proposed flowsheet comprises three key steps: firstly, separation of arsenic and copper minerals using controlled-potential flotation to produce a low-arsenic high-copper concentrate and a high-arsenic low-copper concentrate. The low-arsenic concentrate can be sold without incurring any penalty for arsenic content. In the second stage, the high-arsenic concentrate is subjected to a low temperature roasting, where the arsenic is selectively fumed off into a low-volume stream product. The calcine from the roaster is high in copper and sulphur and can still be smelted directly. In the final stage of the flowsheet, the arsenic in the fume product is immobilised in a low temperature ceramic such that safe disposal back into the ground is possible.
                  The new early removal flowsheet has been sequentially tested in the laboratory at small scale. The technical and economic merits of the flowsheet compared with that of the conventional copper flotation flowsheet show that there is a net benefit.Processing of future copper ores is likely to involve dealing with more complex, fine-grained minerals containing increased levels of toxic and minor elements. Furthermore, the penalties charged by smelters for minor elements in copper concentrates such as arsenic, are increasing because the copper smelters are forced to manage the removal and disposal of the penalty elements, which is difficult and costly ( A collaborative project was established through the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing (CSRP), an Australian Government Co-operative Research Centre, to link the flotation, roasting, and immobilization studies together and also to examine technical and economic merits of the integrated early removal process. Sequential small scale flotation, roasting, and stabilization tests were conducted using a high-arsenic copper ore as the primary feed to validate the process. A preliminary techno-economic evaluation of the overall scheme was also undertaken to identify the additional benefits from the new flowsheet. The new results of this study are presented in this paper. This particular paper mainly focuses on the arsenic stabilization and techno-economic evaluation aspects. Experimental work conducted included preparation and characterisation of the arsenic-bearing copper ore, batch flotation testing to produce high- and low-arsenic copper concentrates, roasting of the high-arsenic concentrate to selectively fume off the arsenic and immobilization studies on synthetic arsenic oxides. A preliminary techno-economic evaluation of the overall integrated flowsheet was also undertaken. The ore selected for this study was from a relatively high-arsenic section of an Australian copper deposit, prepared similarly as reported by Stabilization tests were conducted on synthetic arsenic oxides, As Alkali-bonded (high pH) matrices were prepared by reacting the aluminosilicate raw materials metakaolin (dehydroxylated Al Stabilization products were analysed by qualitative XRD and SEM for phase analysis and by XRF for chemical analysis. Arsenic mobility was determined using the standard Toxicity Characterisation Leaching Protocol (TCLP) test, designed to simulate leaching action expected to occur in landfills ( Solid feeds and products generated in the flotation, roasting, and stabilization tests were assayed for a suite of elements by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) using a standard method. The elements of chief interest included arsenic, copper, sulphur, iron and calcium. Where required, sizing analyses were conducted on sub-samples of feed and test products using standard laboratory wet and dry screening methods. Where sub-sieve sizing was required the modified CSIRO Cyclosizing technique was used ( Selected feed and test products were analysed using qualitative X-ray diffraction (XRD). Patterns were recorded on a Philips PW 1050 goniometer with a PW 1710 diffraction controller using Cu Kα radiation. The phases present were identified by comparison of the peak positions and intensities with data published by the International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD). Detailed mineralogy on flotation test products was done using a Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA). Polished sections of individual bounded size fractions were prepared using a standard method and analysed by the MLA GXMAP technique. This technique uses back-scattered electron images to define the mineral grains in the samples and then uses X-ray spectra to identify the mineral in each grain. By reference to an extensive mineralogical database, the chemical composition information is converted to quantitative mineralogical data. Sub-samples of selected roast feed and products were analysed using SEM. Samples were mounted, polished, and carbon coated prior to be being analysed using a JEOL superprobe fitted with wavelength dispersive detectors. Process modelling of the conventional (base case) flowsheet and the new proposed early removal flowsheet was undertaken using METSIM process simulation software. The mass and energy balances obtained from the simulations were used to estimate the operating costs of both processes. The results are discussed in terms of characterisation of the arsenic-bearing copper ore, controlled-potential flotation to produce high- and low-arsenic copper concentrates, low temperature roasting of the high-arsenic concentrate to selectively fume off the arsenic, immobilization of arsenic in stable low temperature ceramics, and a preliminary techno-economic analysis of the overall integrated flowsheet. The typical laboratory rougher–scavenger and cleaning procedures are shown in The XRD analysis indicated that the major copper minerals present were bornite (Cu Flotation results for the conventional or base case flotation flowsheet incorporating two stages of cleaning are shown in Quantitative mineralogy undertaken on the bulk copper cleaner concentrate, using the MLA system, showed that approximately 46% of the tennantite was contained in liberated particles (90–100% liberation class) with liberation decreasing significantly as the particle size increased. Of the tennantite contained in locked particles approximately 31% was locked with other sulphide minerals and 23% composite with non-sulphide minerals. The high overall recovery of arsenic, combined with the significant proportion of liberated tennantite in the cleaner concentrate, indicates that the tennantite floats quite strongly of its own accord under normal flotation conditions. Therefore, while the inclusion of a regrind stage between roughing and cleaning should improve copper mineral liberation it is not likely, on its own, to affect the relative recovery of the arsenic bearing and non-arsenic-bearing copper minerals. With improved liberation the expectation from conventional cleaning following regrinding of the rougher concentrate would be a higher arsenic level in final concentrate. The best result from the application of the CSIRO controlled potential technique to the bulk copper–arsenic rougher concentrate to separate the arsenic and copper minerals is summarized in  Based on the results shown in The MLA results for the bulk high-As concentrate were similar to those for the bulk rougher concentrate (see Section The best test result in terms of arsenic removal from the concentrate was obtained for the roast in nitrogen at 700 Thermal analysis experiments ( The other important side reaction for the ore type studied relates to the decomposition of dolomite (Ca,Mg(CO None of the roasting treatments produced excessive agglomeration or reduced the sulphur content below that required to form a copper matte when smelting the concentrate. The roasted calcine would be acceptable as feed for a flash furnace. Importantly, it was demonstrated that over 90% the arsenic in the high-arsenic flotation concentrate could be selectively fumed off into a small volume fume stream suitable for subsequent stabilization/immobilization. The fume also contained fine particles of bed material which were entrained from the bed. Since the fume fraction amounted to only approximately 4% of the weight of the bed, the metal values may not be worth recovering and the entrained concentrate could probably be disposed of along with the arsenic. LTC matrices based on metakaolin and flyash formulations were loaded with As LTC matrices based on metakaolin formulations prepared with 85% phosphoric acid were loaded with up to 20% As As P A conventional flowsheet for the treatment of an arsenic-bearing copper ore is given in The additional flotation step, where controlled-potential flotation is used to separate the bulk (copper–arsenic) rougher concentrate into high-arsenic and low-arsenic copper concentrates. A low temperature roasting step, where the high-arsenic concentrate is decomposed into a copper-rich calcine suitable for smelting, and a low volume fume containing the bulk of the arsenic. A stabilization step where arsenic in the toxic fume is immobilised and returned safely to the ground. A preliminary techno-economic analysis of the proposed integrated process was undertaken whereby the conventional (base case) flowsheet and the new proposed early removal flowsheet were compared ( The estimated revenue for both processes is shown in Based on the economic results (and underlying assumptions), the net revenue derived from the new proposed process over the base case conventional process was estimated to be $0.54/t ore. The increased operating cost of the new process over the conventional process was estimated to be $0.46/t ore, giving an overall increase in revenue of $0.08/t ore. However, this analysis does not take into account the increased capital cost (additional flotation cells, roaster and associated equipment). For the assumed base case nominal flowrate of 1000 The arsenic level in the final concentrate product increased by a factor of about three (2388 Based on the technical and economical comparison of the conventional and early removal flowsheets the benefits of the proposed new flowsheet would seemingly include the following: Potential utilisation of underdeveloped copper deposits that contain otherwise unacceptable levels of arsenic. Processing of these ores using the proposed process is likely to be economically viable. The penalty for arsenic content (i.e. US$3 per 0.1% As content above 0.2%, averaged from various sources) in copper concentrates is significantly reduced. If the smelter cannot accept concentrates with arsenic levels above 5000 Removal of arsenic from the flotation circuit during processing with stabilization and safe storage of the arsenic yields additional benefits. The preliminary techno-economic evaluation shows that the yield of concentrate will be slightly higher with the proposed process compared with the conventional (base case) process. This evaluation is based on the premise that the conventional process is capable of producing a final concentrate with an arsenic content low enough to make it acceptable to copper smelters. If no acceptable concentrate can be produced from the ore by conventional processing, meaning a high arsenic orebody cannot be mined and processed, then the economic benefits of the new proposed flowsheet increase dramatically, with potential environmental benefits as a bonus. It should also be noted that smelter limits for arsenic are projected to become more stringent in the future which will further enhance the benefits of this new approach. These first estimates of the economic benefits of the new proposed process are sufficiently encouraging to warrant further larger scale development of the flowsheet. A new flowsheet for the treatment of arsenic-bearing copper ores, based on the early removal of arsenic at the concentrator, has been developed and tested at bench-scale. The proposed flowsheet comprises three key steps. In the first stage controlled-potential flotation is used to separate arsenic and copper minerals to produce a low-arsenic high-copper concentrate and a high-arsenic low-copper concentrate. In the second stage, the high-arsenic concentrate is roasted at low temperature so that the arsenic is selectively fumed off into a low-volume stream product leaving a calcine rich in copper and sulphur. In the final stage, the arsenic in the fume product is immobilised in a low temperature ceramic such that safe disposal back into the ground is possible. The flowsheet has been sequentially tested in the laboratory at small scale. The technical and economic merits of the flowsheet compared with that of the conventional copper flotation flowsheet show that there is a net benefit. This work was carried out with financial support from CSIRO and the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing, which was established and supported under the Australian Government’s Co-operative Research Centres Program. The authors also gratefully acknowledge staff from the CSIRO Minerals Research resources group for conducting many chemical and mineralogical analyses needed in this study and CSIRO researchers Terry Hall, Carmen Calle, Steve Sanetsis and Terry Norgate for their help with the testwork and reporting. Staffs at the JKMRC are thanked for organising the MLA analysis required for the study.