This paper presents the development of a robust process for the fabrication of a low loss FPW device. The transmission loss in the FPW is minimized by enhancing the texture and morphology of sol–gel PZT film through optimized pyrolysis and annealing processes. Reduction of lead loss in PZT coupled with the use of a new bottom electrode stack layer of Pt/TiN/Ti resulted in an eight-fold increase in the perovskite (111) phase, increasing the remanent polarization to 95.7μC/cm2 and coercive field to 56.7kV/cm. This represents 50% improvement in remanent polarization over the previously reported values for this sol–gel PZT. The FPW device was tested by driving the input Inter Digitated Transducers/Electrodes (IDTs) pair differentially out of phase by 180°. A transmission loss of 15dBm was observed for an IDT design of 160μm periodicity.The use of improved ultrasonic microdevices in the development of robust chemical and biological sensors continues to be a field of interest. Major efforts are underway to develop flexural plate wave (FPW) based sensors and actuators PZT based piezoelectrics are widely used in the fields of nanometrology Research studies  Sol–gel PZT (52/48) solution was procured from MMEA Corp., California. Manufacturer's standard recommended process flow incorporates lead titanate as a seed layer on top of the oriented Pt (1 The process modifications incorporated at our laboratory on using this sol–gel solution are highlighted as red blocks in the process flow schematic. The solution was spread on the wafer by spinning at 500 It was also experimentally established that subjecting the PZT wafer comprising of the bottom electrode stack to a MZP and a three stage annealing cycle, minimized crack formation. Next, 0.5 A similar PZT thin film sample was prepared under identical process conditions and fabrication sequence for microstructural investigation. Next, the sample was thinned using a FEI Strata DB-235 Dual Beam Focused Ion Beam System. The PZT–Pt interface was analyzed using a FEI Technai F30 Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). Finally, processing was carried out to pattern the backside of the wafer. The sizes of actuating diaphragms were designed to be 6.6 The FPW to be tested was placed on a shielded probe station. RTV 77 was used as an absorber between the devices to minimize interference from other devices on the same wafer. To ensure integrity of data, the input IDT pair was excited differentially 180° out of phase by a power splitter from a single frequency source with automated frequency drive. The frequency was swept from 1 to 10 When the bottom electrode is annealed in steps, it reduces the stress induced due to thermal mismatch of material layers. Generally, 15% excess lead is added prior to sol preparation to compensate the volatile lead oxide during heat treatment steps. The empirical formula for the PZT solution is Pb The net lead loss was evaluated using quantitative energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (  The   The TEM image (  Analyzing the dielectric dispersion, it was found that the dielectric dissipation of the piezoelectric film was dependent on the drive frequency as seen from the dielectric loss spectrum ( The electromechanical coupling coefficient directly scales with the piezoelectric constant (‘  A low loss flexural plate wave device is successfully fabricated with a robust process sequence. The use of TiN-Pt bottom electrode stack and three zone annealing process reduced Pb loss and improved the remanent polarization of the FPW. The FPW device was tested and showed a transmission loss of 15 The project is supported by US Army Space Missile Deployment Command through contract number DASG60-00-C-0089. The authors would like to thank Dr. John Bumgarner and his technical team at the Star Center (Center for Ocean Technology), Largo for their user facility and guidance.