Biological aerobic treatment of saline wastewater provides the material of this study. A salt-tolerant microorganism (Staphylococcus xylosus) was isolated from a vegetable pickled plant containing about 7.2% salt. Selection, identification and characterization of the microorganism were carried out. The isolated microorganism was used as inoculum for biodegradation. An activated sludge reactor operated in a fed-batch mode was used for the treatment of synthetic saline wastewater using three different microbial cultures namely: activated sludge (100%), a mixture of Staphylococcus supplement by activated sludge (1:1) and pure S. xylosus (100%) at different salt concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 3% NaCl. The results obtained showed that at low NaCl concentration (1%), the removal efficiency of chemical oxygen demand (COD) using different microbial cultures were almost the same (80–90%). However, increasing the NaCl concentration to 2% and using Staphylococcus-supplemented mixture by activated sludge and S. xylosus alone improved the treatment performance as indicated by COD removal rates which reached 91% and 93.4%, respectively, while the system performance started to deteriorate when activated bacterial culture was used alone (74%). Furthermore, the increase in NaCl concentration up to 3% and with the inclusion of Staphylococcus-supplemented mixture by activated sludge increased the COD removal to 93%, while the use of S. xylosus alone further improved the COD removal rate up to 94%. Also, the use of S. xylosus alone proved to be capable for biological treatment of a real case study of a vegetable pickled wastewater containing 7.2% salinity; the removal efficiency of COD reached 88% at this very high concentration of NaCl.Saline impaired water originates from many sources such as sea water, ground water, concentrate from decantation plants, effluent from sewerage treatment plants, brine from natural salt lake or saline effluent storage basins, brine from salt harvesting activities, effluent from farming and irrigation schemes, effluent from pulp and paper, food. It also originates from fertilizers, chemicals, paint, ink, pharmaceuticals, produced water from oil and gas production, effluent from mining and mineral processing industries, pickling processes, meat packing and dyestuff, pesticides, herbicides, polyhydric compounds, organic peroxides, and pharmaceuticals Biological treatment of saline wastewater has not been easy and by far the most popular treatment method However, the utilization of a salt-tolerant organism in biological treatment units seems to be a more reasonable approach for saline wastewater treatment Wastewater produced from a vegetable pickled plant provides the media for isolation and selection of the most salt-tolerant microorganism for biological treatment of high saline wastewater. A small amount of industrial wastewater effluent produced from a pickled manufacturing plant (0.1 Five different morphological colonies with a good growth on a surface mineral medium agar plate were isolated and transferred to sterilized mineral broth containing 10% pickled wastewater. These tubes were incubated at 37% for 24 A batch mode activated sludge treatment was applied for saline wastewater; four Plexiglas laboratory columns were used for this purpose ( Different salt concentrations (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 3.0%) were prepared using NaCl analytical grade as a source of salt to be added to the inlet wastewater. Synthetic wastewater similar to the concentration of natural sewage was prepared. It is composed of diluted molasses (97 Saline wastewater from a vegetable pickled production plant was treated biologically using the isolated culture from the same saline wastewater which was identified by biochemical reactions ( After reaching the steady-state conditions, the physico-chemical analyses investigated covered the following parameters: pH value, COD, BOD, total solids at 105 A salt-tolerant microorganism was isolated from a vegetable pickled wastewater with 7.2% salinity and the pH was adjusted to 7.0 and at optimum detention time of 12 The system reached the steady-state conditions when three consecutive effluent's residual values of both COD and turbidity measurements were approximately the same. The steady-state conditions were reached after acclimatization period that ranged from 20 to 60 After reaching the steady-state conditions, determination of the optimum detention time, which resulted in the best removal values of COD and turbidity with different salt concentrations and different cultures are shown in Aerobic biological degradation for saline wastewater was carried out using three adapted cultures in separate reactors namely: activated sludge culture, salt-tolerant bacteria and a mixture of activated sludge and salt-tolerant bacteria with a ratio (1:1) at different NaCl concentrations namely: 5, 10, 15, 20 and 30 Starting with 5 The COD removal value using only activated sludge culture decreased with increasing the NaCl concentration to 10 Further increase of NaCl concentration to 15 The results obtained in Finally, increasing NaCl concentration to 30 Based on the results obtained with synthetic sewage, the isolated Fed-batch aerobic biological treatment process using synthetic saline wastewater was carried out using different cultures namely: activated sludge culture, mixed culture (activated sludge and isolated The adaptation time increased by increasing the NaCl contents and it was ranged from 20 to 60 The use of adapted activated sludge only as a microbial culture works efficiently up to 1% salinity. Further increase in salinity causes great deterioration of the system performance. The performance of the treatment process using a mixture of By increasing the salinity to 3%, good results were obtained when The use of isolated salt-tolerant microorganism “