Comparative studies of flotation of oleate on diaspore and kaolinite in different particle size fractions (0.075–0.038mm, 0.038–0.01mm, 0–0.01mm) are presented to investigate the influences of particle size. The flotation results show that the kaolinite recovery increases with a decrease in particle size, while the case of diaspore is the opposite. Chemisorptions of anionic oleate collector on the surface Al sites of the negatively charged diaspore and kaolinite are confirmed by zeta potential and FTIR measurements. Anisotropic surface broken bond densities are calculated based on surface crystal chemistry to characterize anisotropic wettability of mineral crystals. The increasing order of broken bond densities (D
                     b) and hydrophobicity for different crystal planes of diaspore and kaolinite correlate well with increasing the number of broken AlO bonds. The anisotropic adsorption of oleate on different crystal planes of diaspore and kaolinite are studied in terms of interaction energies computed by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The oleate is adsorbed more readily on (010) than (001) for diaspore. As for kaolinite, the oleate adsorption is considerably less on (001) as compared to (110). The conclusions drawn from purely theoretical computations are in good agreement with our experimental contact angle results.Diasporic-bauxite is a major source for aluminium oxide production in China, which is characterized by its low mass ratio of Al On the one hand, reverse flotation to remove aluminosilicates from diasporic bauxite may be an effective processing method. Cationic collectors display a superior collecting power for the aluminosilicates (kaolinite, illite and pyrophyllite) to reverse flotation desilication for diasporic bauxites. Thereby various cationic collectors have been extensively studied in recent years. The main collectors cover alkylamines, tertiary amine, quaternary ammonium, acylamide, ether amine, polyamine, amidoamine and so on In diasporic bauxite flotation, the minerals involved all contain broken Al Several researches have been reported on the mechanisms of interaction of oleate with different aluminosilicate minerals, indicating that the oleate complexation with Al at the mineral surface is responsible for their flotation behaviour In the flotation separation technology, comminution is essential to liberate the valuable minerals from its gangue as well as to decrease the size Our previous researches focused on the adsorption of cationic collectors on kaolinite based on its anisotropic surface crystal structure Diaspore and kaolinite were obtained from Xiaoguan of Henan province (China), Xiaoyi of Shanxi province (China), respectively. The samples were hand-picked, crushed and ground in a laboratory porcelain mill. Then, the powder samples were screened to three different size fractions (0.075–0.1 Flotation tests were carried out in a 40 A suspension containing 0.1 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 6700 spectrometer at 25 A range of surface slabs was created from the bulk unit cell of diaspore and kaolinite at its Miller indices by Surface builder module in MS. The density of broken bonds for the creation of a certain surface was calculated according to DSA 30 from KRUSS, Inc., Germany, was used to measure the contact angles on mineral surface in 2 Universal force field (UFF) was chosen to simulate the mineral surface–oleate interactions. Since Pradip and Rai have successfully demonstrated that UFF could be used to simulate aluminosilicate–oleate systems with reasonable accuracy The simulated calculation procedures were the same as the reported by us The effect of particle sizes on diaspore and kaolinte flotation using NaOL as collector is illustrated in Zeta-potentials of diaspore and kaolinite in the absence and presence of NaOL as a function of pH are illustrated in  In order to further determine chemisorption of NaOL on diaspore and kaolinite, the infrared spectrums of these two kinds of mineral treated by 2 The kaolinite (line 5) has characteristic O As indicated in aforementioned section that the surface Al sites are responsible for the chemisorption of the carboxylate functional group of NaOL collector for diaspore and kaolinite systems, thus rendering the minerals hydrophobic. Surface chemistry characteristics of mineral surfaces produced by comminution and grinding in flotation systems mainly depend on the broken bonds of cleavage planes  The foregoing calculations show diaspore and kaolinite are very anisotropic minerals. In order to investigate the anisotropic adsorption behavior of oleate on surfaces of the two minerals, the contact angle measurements and interaction energies computation were carried out for the predominant (0 As shown in As shown in In contrast to the diaspore, for the kaolinite, the anisotropic hydrophobicity difference between (0 Both the zeta potential measurements and FTIR measurements demonstrate that the oleate collector chemisorbs on the surface of diaspore and kaolinite rendering the mineral surface hydrophobic. The calculation of anisotropic surface broken bond density confirms that anisotropic wettability of different crystal planes of diaspore and kaolinite. The anisotropic adsorption of oleate on different crystal planes of diaspore and kaolinite are studied in terms of interaction energies computation by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The conclusions drawn from purely theoretical computations are in good agreement with the contact angle measurement results. The different flotation behaviors of diaspore and kaolinite in the different particle size fractions can be explained based on surface crystal chemistry consideration. It suggests that if the most exposed planes of minerals can be controlled by selective comminution, the wettability and floatability may be modified. For separation diaspore from kaolinite, it is recommended that diaspore should be conditioned in a pH 9 solution. It is also recognized that the diaspore and kaolinite particles keep coarse as far as possible in an appropriate liberation degree, and over-grinding should be avoided. The authors would like to thank the