To utilize synergetic effect of graphene’s higher conductivity and magnetic nanoparticles biocompatibility, an electrochemical nanobiosensor is constructed based on magnetic nanoparticle decorated graphene (MRGO) using Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) for H2O2 sensing. Sensors based on magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) are studied for comparison. MNP, RGO and MRGO were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). XRD studies have confirmed successful synthesis of Fe3O4 MNPs, RGO and MRGO. TEM micrographs revealed uniform decoration of MNPs on graphene. FTIR confirmed the immobilization of HRP on MNP, RGO and MRGO. The MRGO based sensor exhibited higher sensitivity (48.08 μA μM−1 cm−2) compared to MNP (39.08 μA μM−1 cm−2) and RGO (41.08 μA μM−1 cm−2) based biosensors.Hydrogen peroxide (H It is well understood that the modification of electrode materials play a significant role in performance of electrochemical sensor for detecting target molecules. Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) with their unique properties like high surface energy, large surface area and functioning as electron-conducting pathways facilitates electron transfer between redox systems and bulk-electrode materials In this work, magnetic particle decorated graphene (MRGO) is synthesized to combine magnetic nanoparticle’s catalytic activity and larger active surface area along with superior conductivity of graphene. Here we have evaluated and compared performance of electrochemical biosensors constructed by immobilizing HRP on the chitosan coated MNPs, RGO and MRGO for the detection of H Graphite powder and HRP was procured from Sigma Aldrich, India. Ferric chloride (FeCl The details of experiments are given in Supporting Information. The Fe The MNP decorated reduced graphene oxide (MRGO) was synthesized by method reported by Chandra et al., 2010, in which simultaneous reduction of GO and coprecipitation of iron salts has been carried out The 10 mg/ml suspension of MNPs in water was prepared. Chitosan coated MNPs were prepared by stirring MNPs suspension and acylated chitosan in equal proportion for 3 h. Chitosan coated MNPs were then obtained by washing it 2 times by magnetic decantation with double distilled water. HRP and chitosan coated MNPs in equal proportion were gently shaken and incubated for 2 h at room temperature to immobilize HRP on chitosan coated MNPs. HRP immobilized MNPs are denoted as MNP/chit/HRP. Other electrode modifying materials, viz. RGO/chit/HRP and MRGO/chit/HRP are prepared by similar protocols. Prior to modification, platinum electrode was carefully polished with 0.3 μm alumina powder and rinsed thoroughly with pure water. After polishing, sonicated in ethanol and pure water for 5 min respectively and dried with nitrogen. The 10 μl of the HRP complex was casted onto the surface of the platinum electrode. Prepared electrode was dried in vacuum at room temperature. For comparison, Pt/MNP/chit/HRP, Pt/RGO/chit/HRP and Pt/MRGO/chit/HRP electrodes were modified with similar method. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained and analysed for MNPs, RGO and MRGO composites ( Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was used for characterisation of the MNP/chit/HRP, RGO/chit/HRP and MRGO/chit/HRP composites before casting on the Pt electrode ( TEM was used to reveal the microstructure of the magnetic nanoparticle decorated graphene. The low and high magnification TEM images of MRGO are shown in Cyclic voltammetry was used to study the electroanalytical properties of the fabricated hydrogen peroxide biosensor. The cyclic voltammetry has also been obtained for RGO modified electrode for H To evaluate combined effect of MNPs and RGO on the signal transduction, Pt/MRGO/chit/HRP electrode was studied by cyclic voltammetry. The cyclic voltammograms of this modified electrode in 0.1 mol/L deaerated PBS (pH 7.0) at 100 mV/s potential scan rate was recorded for different concentrations of H The apparent Michaelis − Menten constant (K In order to explain the differentiated response of all the three modified electrodes, the cyclic voltammograms of these electrodes along with the bare electrode are plotted in To test the practicability, the MRGO modified electrode was used to determine H Fe None. The authors acknowledges DST, New Delhi for funding through Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: