The extractability of Pd(II) using N,N,N′,N′-tetra-n-octyl-thiodiglycolamide (TOTDGA) diluted with a mixed solution of n-dodecane and 2-ethylhexanol and the durability of TOTDGA against a strong acid solution (0.75M HNO3–2.25M HCl) were investigated by solvent extraction and FT-IR measurements, then compared to those using the conventional extractant, di-n-hexyl sulfide (DHS). The dependence of the extraction percentages of some platinum group and base metal ions (Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), Fe(III), Cu(II), Ni(II) and Zn(II)) on the HCl and TOTDGA concentrations shows that a good selectivity for Pd(II) extraction is obtained at [TOTDGA]⩽0.2M–[HCl]⩽3M. The Pd(II) extraction from 1M HCl with 0.1M TOTDGA is much faster than that with 0.1M DHS. The loading capacity of Pd(II) is about 7g/L using 0.1M TOTDGA, which is comparable to that using DHS. The Pd(II) extracted in the TOTDGA is effectively back-extracted by an ammonia solution, although its efficiency depends on the condition of the forward extraction and metal concentration in the organic phase. In the durability test, the extraction percentage of Pd(II) and the FT-IR spectra were measured using TOTDGA and DHS after stirring with 0.75M HNO3–2.25M HCl solutions. The extraction percentage of Pd(II) with TOTDGA hardly changes after a one-week stirring (∼100%), while that with DHS drops from ∼100% to ∼65%. The FT-IR spectra show sulfoxide formation by the oxidation of the sulfide in DHS after the stirring, but not in TOTDGA, indicating that TOTDGA is more durable than DHS.In recent years, the demand for autocatalysts has been enhanced worldwide with the tightening of regulations regarding the emissions from automobiles ( Solvent extraction is generally used for the separation and purification of the PGM in hydrometallurgical processes (  As for the palladium extraction, dialkyl sulfide compounds (especially, di- The stock solution of each metal ion was prepared by dissolving the metal chlorides (PdCl The TOTDGA diluted by 80 A 5 The solvent extraction using DHS or TOTDGA before and after the stirring with the mixed acid solution was carried out in a manner similar to that mentioned above except for use of the 0.75 The organic solutions before and after the stirring with the mixed acid solution were deposited onto a ST-IR Card TYPE 1 (Thermo Electron Co.). All the IR spectra were collected using a Nicolet Magna 750.  We compared the dependence on shaking time in the TOTDGA system with that in the DHS and MOTDGA systems. The Pd(II) loading capacity was investigated by the change in the Pd(II) concentration in the organic phase (0.1 In the dialkyl sulfide system, the back extraction of Pd(II) in the organic phase is usually performed using an ammonia solution. However, the Pd(II) in the 0.1 The extraction of the metal ions using TOTDGA and DHS after a one-week stirring with 0.75 Since the transformation of sulfide to sulfoxide and sulfone by oxidation yields a decrease in the Pd(II) extractability ( The extraction behavior of the PGM and base metal ions from HCl solutions using TOTDGA and the degradation of TOTDGA and DHS by the stirring with strong acid solutions (0.75 This work was financially supported in part by the Industrial Technology Research Grant Program in ’06 from the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) of Japan.