Reaction-bonded Al2O3 (RBAO) ceramics were fabricated from attrition-milled Al/Al2O3 powder mixtures. Two different Al precursor powders and several contents of Al were used. The raw materials and the RBAO powder mixtures were studied in terms of grain size, oxidation behaviour (TGA/DTA), morphology and microstructure. The influence of the important parameters controlling the RBAO process is first discussed. Secondly, the microstructure of RBAO bodies uniaxially pressed and heat-treated in air, up to 1100 and 1250 °C, is reported and their mechanical strength is evaluated and compared to conventional Al2O3 ceramics.As an alternative to conventional ceramic processing, reaction-bonded ceramics (RBC) offer attractive attributes such as: The oxidation of aluminium, in an Al/Al In the present work, we report the processing of RBAO, sintered at relatively low temperatures. Different raw materials have been studied and milled in several conditions. The relationship of the RBAO processing parameters, microstructure and mechanical strengths of the sintered ceramics was then investigated. In order to investigate the influence of the particle size and morphology of the aluminium powder on the milling and on the reaction-bonding behaviour two types of commercially available Al powders were used in the present study: Al The powder mixtures were attrition milled (Union process, Ohio, USA) in 2-propanol as the milling fluid, using a polymeric vessel filled with 10 wt.% powder mixture and 90 wt.% ZrO The milled powders were characterised in terms of, microstructure (Scanning Electron Microscopy, SEM, LEO DSM 982 Gemini) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA, Setaram, TG92-16). The dilatometric study (DI 20, Adamel Lhomargy, France), was performed in air at temperatures up to 1300 °C, on discs of diameter 12.8 mm and thickness 2 mm, obtained from dried and uniaxially pressed ( To obtain three-point bending samples, the dried powder mixtures were uniaxially pressed at The microstructure of the porous RBAO samples sintered at 1100 °C and 1250 °C was observed by SEM from fracture surfaces of the three point bending samples. Bending strength values of polished samples was measured in the air by the three-point loading method, using rectangular bars with dimensions of 2 mm×4.5 mm×35 mm (using 30 mm measuring span) and a cross-head velocity of 0.3 mm min The important parameters, which determine the quality of the Al/Al The particle-size distributions obtained on the milled powder mixtures are presented in The complexity of the powder mixture morphology is illustrated in The TGA curves, up to 1400 °C, show that the two aluminium raw powders present different oxidation behaviours ( For all the TGA curves of the powder mixtures ( The reaction-bonding stages observed in the present diagrams correspond to the classical stages of the RBAO process, detailed by Claussen et al. Typical dilatometric curves, up to 1300 °C, are given in The selected RBAO heat-treatment to prepare the three-point bending samples consists of several heating rates (0.25–1 °C/min), with four holds for 1 h up to 1100 °C and a final hold for 3 h at 1250 °C. The holds at 500 and 600 °C promote Al to Al The RBAO sample obtained from the batch #2 sintered at 1250 °C shows an homogeneous microstructure, with a fine alumina grain size ( The bending strength of porous RBAO samples (batches #2, 4, 5, 6), together with that of conventional Reaction-bonded Al Among the important processing parameters In the present work, it was demonstrated that RBAO ceramics can be processed, at low temperature (1100–1250 °C) with good mechanical properties: ∼270 MPa at ∼80% TD for the RBAO ceramic, against ∼175 MPa at ∼80% TD for a conventional alumina. The improved mechanical strength observed cannot be justified alone by a flaw size argument because the grain size of the conventional alumina was not the largest. The factors controlling surface energy, as the chemistry of grain boundary, can thus be put forward to account for the improve of the strength in RBAO samples. The authors wish to thank J.F. Justin, A. Vallejo and M.H. Ritti, from ONERA-DMSC, for their help in mechanical tests, TGA/DTA measurements and SEM observations, respectively.