Helically coiled separation channels are applied in size-based particle fractionation in (i) mineral processing, and (ii) microfluidics for the separation of differently-sized cells. In such coiled channels a pressure difference between the inner and outer bent promotes secondary fluid motion, and channels with circular cross sections have been extensively used in the past. Recently, it has been shown that channels with a rectangular or trapezoidal cross section offer an interesting playground for process optimization, since the particles’ equilibrium position is highly sensitive to (i) channel shape, (ii) flow Reynolds number, and (iii) particle size. The present study utilizes detailed simulations of fluid flow and particle motion in such toroidal channels to gain quantitative insight into what causes particles to accumulate at preferential positions. Therefore, we first present details on the speed of secondary fluid motion for different cross sectional shapes. Also, we present results of Euler-Lagrange suspension flow simulations that predict the effect of fluid flow topology on particle trajectories. This allows us to quantify size-based particle separation. This new understanding is key for a future rational design of particle separation processes. In summary, literature clearly shows that particle focusing in coiled channels of non-circular cross section is sensitive to (i) channel shape, (ii) flow Reynolds number, and (iii) particle size. Our present study uses detailed Euler-Lagrange suspension flow simulations to investigate the above described particle focusing phenomena. In analogy to our previous work ( We solve the momentum and mass balance equation for an incompressible Newtonian fluid with viscosity The boundary conditions for the above equation must be specified only at the walls, since periodicity is considered in the main flow direction. Specifically, we choose a no-slip condition for the fluid speed  In the above equations  The steady-state flow field is presented in Particle motion was tracked for 4 flow loops which equals 168 dimensionless time units. The trajectory of the smallest particle ( Analysis of the fluid flow field in toroidal channels with rectangular and trapezoidal cross section revealed larger differences in the secondary flow profile between outer bent and inner bent for trapezoidal shape. Differences for rectangular channels are attributed to curvature changing with the channel aspect ratio for fixed coil radius. It is noteworthy, that for constant particle size, the thickness of the inwards directed secondary motion is comparable smaller for larger aspect ratio channel. Euler-Lagrange simulation show the accumulation of larger particles at the outer bent which agrees with earlier studies of