A novel polymer surfactant, hydroxyethyl cellulose-based copolymer, was prepared via ultraviolet (UV) irradiation by copolymerizing hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC) with hexadecyl acrylate (HDA) and comonomer styrene (St) in aqueous solution. The purified graft copolymer was characterized by FT-IR and 1H NMR, which showed that HDA and St were grafted on HEC chains under UV irradiation. Effects of UV irradiation time, pH value of the reaction solution and monomer volume percent in the feed on the chemical structure and the surface tension of graft copolymer were investigated. The result showed that the grafting of HDA on the HEC was limited by the grafting of St under UV irradiation, and the graft copolymer performed excellent surface activity when the grafting was under an appropriate conditions (i.e. both the volume percent of HDA and St in the feed were 4% (v/v), the pH value of the reaction solution was 7 and the UV irradiation time was 1h).Polymer surfactants are important for a variety of industrial applications in the areas of cosmetics, personal-care, food, pharmaceutics, detergents and mineral processing, and have drawn much attention in the last decades Commonly, those cellulose-based polymer surfactants were synthesized by grafted alkylating agents onto the hydroxyl groups or other functional groups of cellulose and its derivatives In present work, a novel polymer surfactant, hydroxyethyl cellulose-based copolymer, was synthesized by copolymerizing hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC) with hexadecyl acrylate (HDA) and comonomer styrene (St) in aqueous solution under UV irradiation. The effects of the UV irradiation time, the pH value of the reaction solution and the monomer volume percent in the feed on the chemical structure and the surface tension of the graft copolymer were investigated and discussed. Hydroxyethyl cellulose (HEC, Previously, it was found that the side groups of cellulose or its derivatives could be decomposed into free macro-radicals by treatment with UV light and could induced to copolymerize with olefin monomers The graft copolymerization was carried out as the following procedure with some variations of the ultraviolet irradiation time, the pH value of the reaction solution and the monomer volume percent in the feed. In a reaction vessel, appropriate amount of HDA and St (both the volume percent were from 0 to 8% (v/v) with respect to the HEC aqueous solution) were added into the aqueous solution of HEC (1 The The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded with a FT-IR Analect RFX-65A spectrometer. Samples were pressed into discs of variable thickness of potassium bromide and analyzed in transmittance. Thermal treatments of discs were carried out to eliminate the humidity from the samples. The relative contents of HDA ( The surface tension ( Since the side groups of HEC could be decomposed by treatment with UV light into free macro-radicals By using the IR Scaling method, the relative contents of HDA ( Acidic natural and alkaline pH values of 3, 4, 6, 8.5 and 10 were selected to study the effect of pH on the Amphiphilic polymers are constituted of hydrophobic and hydrophilic segments. Their physical properties mainly depend on the chemical composition and the balance between hydrophobic and hydrophilic moieties The effect of monomer percent in the feed on the surface tension and the chemical structure of the graft copolymer are shown in  The UV irradiation was applied in the first time for synthesis of cellulose-based polymer surfactants. HEC may be degraded slightly under UV irradiation and engenders free macro-radicals which could induce HEC to copolymerize with the monomers HDA and the comonomer St. The chemical structure of graft copolymers is strongly influenced by the irradiation time and the two monomers volume percent in the feed. By lengthening the UV irradiation time, the The graft copolymer synthesized by UV irradiation shows excellent surface activity. The surface tension ( The financial support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 50473057, 50521302), National Basic Research Program of China (2005CB221300) and Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. KJCX2-SW-H07) are greatly appreciated.