Advances in technology over the past 30years have drastically increased the frame rate and resolution at which the dynamics of thin film rupture and particle interaction can be imaged.
                  A high speed camera (Phantom V7.1) was used to capture the bridging and rupture of a thin capillary film containing a particle of galena, revisiting work first published by Dippenaar (Dippenaar, A. 1982. The destabilisation of froth by solids. I. The mechanism of film rupture. Int. J. Min. Process., 9, 1–14.). The images were then compared to rendered models generated from simulations of an orthorhombic particle and capillary film under the same conditions, using the Surface Evolver program. These two sets of data are then used to build a more detailed picture of the behaviour of particles with sharp edges and corners as they bridge both sides of a thin liquid film.
                  It has been observed that the liquid–vapour interface is highly distorted around the particle and that under certain conditions it can appear that the particle is drawing the film together to failure, whereas, in fact the film is being forced together behind the particle. The film failure is then due to contact between the opposite liquid–vapour interfaces, not the bridging dewetting mechanism as postulated by Dippenaar (1982).The mechanism through which particles stabilise or destroy films in a flotation froth is difficult to identify due to both the size and speed at which the phenomena occur. The particle-film interaction at the point of film rupture is a hugely important part of a flotation froth’s evolution and has a major impact on its physical properties and rheology as well as the efficiency of the whole process. It has therefore been the focus of much research to aid in the development of bubble film stability models. This paper revisits work published by Previous analyses of the particle–film interaction have focused on the simplified two-dimensional case (2D) using circular particles in a single layer in a film ( It is currently computationally intractable to simulate anything but the simplest of particle shapes attached to a liquid–vapour interface. Whilst it is relatively easy to analyse the shape of the film surrounding spherical particles in an ordered arrangement, when orthorhombic ones are considered the complexity of the LV-interfaces topology greatly increases. The interaction between the particles and the point at which the film fails becomes much more difficult to identify. Dippenaar's analysis of the high speed footage showed that the particle would adopt either a diagonal or horizontal orientation in the film when it bridged only one LV interface. As the film thinned and the lower part of the particle came into contact with the opposite LV interface it would react differently depending on the orientation; if it was horizontal it would move off to the side of the film until it thinned enough to rupture, but if it was diagonal it would either rotate to horizontal and behave as before or adopt a rotated orientation. When the particles adopted a rotated orientation the opposite sides of the LV interface would draw up the sides of the particle and rupture the film. This bridging dewetting phenomenon was proposed by The distortion of the film surrounding non-spherical particles can be quite severe, causing them to exhibit interesting packing phenomena. The rig used to capture the videos of particle film bridging is shown in Liquid was drawn from the capillary, or injected into it, using a manually operated syringe. It was possible to accurately control the thickness of the film by monitoring it in the camera viewer. The film was thinned until the lower point of any attached particle was within 40 The films in the capillary were made with de-ionised water and the galena particles were hand ground in a pestle and mortar with water. The freshly ground particles were then wet sized and mixed in a stirred solution of 100 Contact angle tests on a polished plate of galena treated in the same way showed contact angles of 80° The The model of the particle and film is constructed in The model was run for several capillary pressures corresponding to a film that was just touching both sides of the particle to one which has failed. Three particle positions (centre, 1.5r A series of films were taken of a single galena particle in the capillary, using the camera to film either side-on or vertically. Side on images allow comparison to The speed of the film rupture front for three cases is shown in The speed of the bursting front drops off very quickly as the film gets thicker due to the small radius of curvature of the LV interface (the capillary is either 2 or 3 If the film is videoed from the side it is much harder to identify the exact location of the failure, with or without a particle present as there is no Y-axis information. Therefore if the film bursts behind the particle (from the camera's perspective) and too low a frame rate is used the results can look like the particle has bridged the film. Side on viewing does allow the curvature of the film and the shape of the TPC on the particle to be distinguished though. When a SIBX treated galena particle was added to the film and Dippenaar's experiments were recreated it was found that the particle rarely burst the film directly but was often squeezed out of the thinnest part of the film, where failure eventually occurred. However, it was noted that this behaviour was exacerbated if the capillary was not completely level.  Comparing the analyses from the video shown in To identify the location at which the film fails a At higher capillary pressure the film fails at this point, away from the particle; however, if the system is viewed in the YZ plane it appears as if the film is being drawn together by the particle. When the side on view from So far this work has only referenced the case where the particle has moved away from the thinnest point in the film. If we run a simulation with the particle at the centre of the film, with a contact angle of 80° and in a rotated orientation the expected result would be for the film to rupture at the particle's surface as reported by Dippenaar. Instead due to the highly distorted interfacial curvature around the particle the film actually ruptures away from the particle surface ( Clearly if the particle has a contact angle above 90° it will bridge the film, but below 90° whilst the particle will draw the film together it causes rupture by forcing the LV interfaces together, but at some small distance away from the particle surface. This manuscript presents a discussion of the processes through which a thin liquid film is destroyed by an orthorhombic particle. It compares the results from two sets of experiments using different equipment and viewing angles to re-interpret the findings of The authors would like to thank Rio Tinto and Imperial College London for the support they have provided to do this research as well as the EPSRC Engineering Instrument Pool whose loan of a Phantom 7.1T made the capture of the images used possible.