Probertite (NaCaB5O9·5H2O) and ulexite (NaCaB5O9·8H2O) posses identical chemical formula except for their water content. In this study, the dissolution of probertite in boric acid solution was investigated as a function of temperature and time. As the boric acid concentration increased, the dissolution of probertite also increased. However, the boric acid concentrations above 5 wt.% at 60 °C and 80 °C did not significantly affect the dissolution of probertite. The stirring speed had almost no effect on the dissolution of probertite. The dissolution kinetics of probertite in boric acid solution was controlled by first order pseudo homogeneous reaction. The activation energies for different probertite particle sizes varied from 25.25 kJ/mol K to 28.25 kJ/mol K, indicating that particle size had minor effect on the dissolution of probertite.Although there are more than 200 boron minerals in nature, commercially the important ones are borax (or tincal), kernite, colemanite and ulexite. While borax and kernite contain sodium, colemanite contains calcium and ulexite includes both sodium and calcium. Turkey has more than 72% of the boron reserves in the world and contains the largest reserves of colemanite and borax. Boron minerals are used to produce boron concentrates by removing gangue minerals. Boron concentrates are either directly used in an application area or they are processed into a more refined boron product. For example, colemanite and ulexite are directly used as concentrates in glass fiber production and in agriculture. Some of the refined boron products fabricated from boron minerals are boric acid, borax pentahydrate or decahydrate, anhydrous borax and sodium perborate. Colemanite and ulexite can be used to produce boric acid. In Turkey, while borax is used to produce borax pentahydrate and decahydrate, colemanite is used for boric acid production. During borax penta or decahydrate production, tincal is dissolved in a hot recycled borate solution and the gangue minerals are separated from the solution. The clear solution is used to produce penta or decahydrate crystals in vacuum type crystalliser ( During borax penta and decahydrate production, probertite precipitates from borax solution and accumulates within the equipment such as pipes, heat exchangers and crystalliser. Although the amount of precipitated probertite is low, its amount increases significantly as the process continues. Accumulation of probertite within equipment causes some disadvantages like the decrease in the effective volume of equipment and in heat transfer which causes higher energy consumption. Therefore, probertite needs to be removed from the system whenever it is formed. There are different techniques used to remove probertite such as mechanical cleaning and dissolving probertite using various solutions. In this study, an attempt was made to remove probertite by dissolving with boric acid solution. Using boric acid has also some advantages because it doesn't give any impurity to the system. Dissolution kinetics of different boron minerals in various solutions were studied by different authors. Some of the examples of these studies are summarized in Probertite has the formula of NaCaB The solubility of boric acid in water at room temperature is 5.04% and it rises with temperature reaching to 40.25% at 100 °C ( Probertite samples used in this study provided from Kırka Boron Works, Eskişehir, Turkey. XRD analysis performed on probertite samples gave single phase probertite with impurities of tincal and tincalconite ( The experiments were carried out in 1000 ml glass reactor with a jacket and connected to a cryostat to heat and control the temperature of the mixture. The reactor was equipped with a mechanical stirrer with 4 blade straight vein. In the dissolution experiments, 500 ml of boric acid solution was put into the reactor and it was heated to the desired temperature. After a specific amount of probertite was added to the solution, the solution was stirred at 250 rpm. The dissolution process was carried out for various reaction times and at the end of reaction, the contents were filtered and the amount of sodium, calcium and boron in the solution was determined. While sodium and calcium analyses were made using atomic absorption spectrometer (Varian SpectrA-300), boron content was determined by volumetric (or wet chemical) method. The dissolution of probertite was followed by calcium content of the solid (or raw material) and solution since only the probertite contains the calcium within the solid. In order to determine the effect of particle size on the dissolution of probertite, various particle sizes (0.5–1.0 mm, 1.0–2.0 mm and 2.0–2.8 mm) were employed. Effect of stirring speed was also determined using 100, 400, 600 and 800 rpm. The ionization reactions of probertite and boric acid are given in the following reactions ( The dissolution rate of probertite in boric acid solution at various temperatures was investigated as a function of time at various boric acid concentrations (5 wt.%, 10 wt.%, 15 wt.% and 20 wt.%) using probertite with a particle size of 0.5–1 mm ( In order to observe the effect of particle size on the dissolution properties, dissolution experiments were performed at different temperatures and times using probertite with various particle sizes (0.5–1.0 mm, 1.0–2.0 mm and 2.0–2.8 mm) at 10 wt.% boric acid concentration. As the particle size of probertite increased, the dissolution of probertite decreased ( Effect of stirring speed on the dissolution of probertite was investigated using 10 wt.% of boric acid solution at 60 °C for 30 min of reaction time. The rate of reaction between a solid and a fluid can be expressed by homogeneous and heterogeneous models (  The temperature dependence of the chemical reactions can be given by Arrhenius equation: According to this equation, the slope of the curve between ln Different activation energies were found for boron minerals in different solutions. An activation energy of 19.12 kJ/mol was determined for dissolution of ulexite, which has identical chemical composition with probertite, in perchloric acid ( The dissolution of probertite was studied in the range of 5–20 wt.% boric acid solutions. It was determined that the dissolution rate increased with increasing boric acid concentration, temperature and time. It was observed that the particle size of probertite had more significant effect at high temperatures of 80 °C on the dissolution of probertite and there was no effect of stirring speed on the dissolution of probertite. The dissolution process was described by first order pseudo homogeneous reaction model with activation energies of 25.25–28.25 kJ mol