Membrane distillation (MD) is a thermally-driven separation process that utilizes a difference in vapor pressure across a porous, hydrophobic membrane as the driving force. MD may be applied to aqueous systems at concentrations up to and exceeding saturation of both sparingly soluble salts and soluble salts such as sodium chloride (NaCl), leading to potential application in high-recovery desalination processes that approach Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) operation, or as a concentration strategy for mineral recovery. Scaling and fouling is a significant risk for such processes, and knowledge of the effects of these phenomena on performance is essential to the evaluation of MD as a viable technology for these applications. The present study investigated the scaling and fouling behavior of a hypersaline brine collected from the North Arm of the Great Salt Lake (GSL), which was nearly saturated with respect to NaCl, and also contained high concentrations of dissolved minerals and organic carbon. Effects on water flux, thermal efficiency, and salt rejection were measured, and membranes used were analyzed before and after testing to evaluate potential causes of these effects. Scaling by NaCl crystallization on the membrane surface limited water recovery to approximately 10%, and also caused damage to the internal pore structure of the membrane when the temperature difference (ΔT) between the feed and distillate was higher than 20°C. Analysis of the solution chemistry of the GSL water was effective in predicting the scaling tendency of NaCl, but inadequate in predicting the scaling tendency of other salts. Amorphous scaling structures on the membrane surfaces containing magnesium and oxygen were implied as the dominant factors contributing to performance decline at concentrations below NaCl saturation, and the result of fouling due to interactions between organic matter and magnesium. Operation at a maximum water recovery of 8% combined with intermittent reversal of the temperature gradient were effective strategies to prevent both scaling and fouling and maintain long-term performance.Desalination technologies are becoming increasingly important for the treatment of impaired water for drinking, agriculture, diverse industries, and for environmental protection. Due to increased water demand, technological advancements, and improvements in the cost-competitiveness of desalination, it is currently in a period of rapid growth and is expected to reach a global capacity of 100 Strategies to reduce the volume of brine generated during desalination could greatly reduce the environmental impact of desalination, particularly if they include mineral recovery from brine and approach a zero liquid discharge (ZLD) operation. These brines may contain minerals of economic importance, which could offset the increased cost of desalination. Naturally occurring hypersaline brines such as the water of the Great Salt Lake (GSL) and the Dead Sea Separation processes that can desalinate water containing very high total dissolved solids (TDS) could potentially increase water recovery while serving as the primary concentration process for mineral recovery, which may improve overall process efficiency and reduce the footprint of combined desalination and mineral recovery operations. However, due to both inherent thermodynamic and physical limitations and high mineral scaling potential, high recovery desalination is difficult to achieve with existing technologies. Thermal desalination such as multi-stage flash distillation (MSF) and multiple-effect distillation (MED) are prone to mineral scaling of heat exchanger surfaces due to the high temperatures involved, and therefore they typically operate in the range of 10–30% water recovery for seawater desalination Membrane distillation (MD) is a unique membrane process that utilizes a partial vapor pressure difference across a hydrophobic, microporous membrane to induce vapor transport through the membrane pores The unique capabilities of MD at high salt concentrations have led to interest in its potential for integration with crystallization and mineral recovery in a combined membrane distillation crystallization (MDC) process, and has been effectively demonstrated at the laboratory scale for the recovery of various salts commonly found in natural and industrial brines, including NaCl As in other desalination processes, mineral scaling and organic fouling may be significant problems for MD; and the potential for MDC to become established as a viable treatment strategy is in part dependent on a more comprehensive understanding of crystallization behavior of natural hypersaline brines concentrated with MD. Scaling by sparingly soluble salts such as CaCO In this study we investigated membrane scaling and fouling behavior of the MD process applied to the concentration of hypersaline brine obtained from the North Arm of the GSL, which is nearly saturated with respect to NaCl and contains high concentrations of calcium, magnesium, potassium, sulfate, silica, and natural organic matter. Experiments and analyses were performed to isolate the effects of scaling by the different salts at high concentration factors, to identify dominant scaling and fouling mechanisms, and to characterize the short-term and long-term effects on membrane performance. Strategies for preventing and mitigating these effects were also investigated. Water flux ( The driving force in MD is negatively affected by salinity due to the reduction of vapor pressure caused by the presence of dissolved ions, which reduce the water activity of the solution. The associated reduction of water flux can be substantial; theoretical water flux in pure NaCl solutions approaching saturation concentration may be as little as 50% compared to pure water flux for similar operating conditions Mass transfer in MD is a function of the vapor pressure, and hence the temperature and concentration, at the membrane surface and not the bulk fluid. Heat transfer in the MD process occurs primarily by conduction and by bulk transport as the water vapor carries the energy associated with latent enthalpy of vaporization through the membrane. Both mechanisms of heat transfer contribute to temperature polarization due to the development of a thermal boundary layer between both membrane surfaces and the bulk fluid in each flow channel, resulting in a lower Δ The heat transport associated with mass transport is a necessary consequence of the process; however, the conductive heat transfer does not serve a useful purpose and is considered a loss. Thermal efficiency ( Thermal efficiency is primarily considered a property of the membrane; however, increasing Δ Because mass transfer occurs in the vapor phase, MD provides very high rejection of nonvolatile solutes; however, solute transport can and does still occur if liquid water floods the membrane pores. In this case, it is assumed that the membrane does not selectively reject dissolved solids due to the large pore size; therefore, solute rejection may be calculated using the change in volume and conductivity of the distillate and feed streams over time: Concentration and scaling experiments were performed primarily with brine collected from the North Arm of the GSL as the feed solution, and deionized water as the distillate stream. Additional experiments were performed with synthetic solutions of ACS grade NaCl for comparison with the results from the GSL brine experiments. The raw GSL brine was pre-filtered through a 0.5 OLI Stream Analyzer (OLI systems Inc., Cedar Knolls, NJ) was used to estimate the scaling tendency of the GSL brine at increased concentration. Stream Analyzer utilizes the OLI aqueous thermodynamic engine, and calculates scaling tendency as the ratio of the solution solubility product to the thermodynamic limit based on the thermodynamic equilibrium constant, also known as the saturation ratio. Hydrophobic, microporous membrane acquired from GE Water (Minnetonka, MN) was tested in this study. The membrane used is a symmetric, isotropic membrane made from polypropylene, and have a nominal pore size of 0.22 The physical dimensions of the flow cell channels are summarized in Effective cross-section flow area of the channel is defined as: An automated, closed-loop, bench-scale membrane testing system was used to evaluate the performance of the membranes in the DCMD process. Data acquisition and system controls were accomplished using LabVIEW (National Instruments, Austin, TX) software on a Windows PC using a DAQ device (Model U6, LabJack Corporation, Lakewood, CO). A detailed schematic of the experimental system is presented in The MD system provided heating and cooling to both feed and distillate streams, which were pumped continuously during operation using positive-displacement gear pumps (Micropump Integral Series, IDEX Corp. Vancouver, WA). The feed solution was heated directly using a 1500 Conductivity of both the feed and distillate solutions were continuously monitored and recorded to estimate the concentration of the feed solution and to calculate salt rejection by the membrane. Feed conductivity was monitored using a toroidal sensor (Model TCSMA, Sensorex, Garden Grove, CA) and conductivity of the distillate was monitored using a dip style conductivity probe (Model T-35820-62, Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL) installed in the return line. Water flux was calculated using the measured change in mass of the distillate in a cylindrical acrylic tank, which was equipped with a pressure transducer installed near the bottom of the tank to measure the height of the water column. The distillate tank was also fitted with a solenoid valve connected to a return line to the feed tank, allowing the collected distillate to be periodically drained back to the feed tank during operation. For each set of experiments, a new membrane coupon was cut from dry flat sheets and installed into the membrane cell. The feed and distillate solutions were then pumped through the system at the desired flow rate and adjusted to the desired temperature. During the warm-up period the initial concentration was maintained constant by returning any collected distillate to the feed tank. All experiments were performed using co-current flow to minimize local pressure differential across the membrane at the channel entrances and exits due to pressure drop through the channels. For all experiments, both feed and distillate flow rates were kept constant at 1.6 To establish a reference for comparison with brine concentration, experiments were performed using a dilute solution of NaCl. The NaCl was added at a low concentration to determine salt rejection without substantially affecting water flux. These experiments used 3 Experiments were performed with synthetic solutions to characterize the effects of feed concentration and scaling by pure NaCl on the performance and durability of the membrane in the absence of other fouling agents. These experiments used Cell 1 and 4 Performance and limitations of the MD process for the concentration of North Arm GSL brine were investigated with a series of experiments. Scaling behavior at high concentration, and the effects of scaling and fouling on long-term performance were also investigated. Initial concentration experiments were conducted with Various scaling and fouling behaviors and long-term effects on performance were evaluated by repeated scaling and dilution cycles at different operating temperatures and water recovery. To investigate the effects of scaling of the membrane at high concentration factors, a series of experiments were performed using Cell 1 with constant A recent study found that intermittent reversal of the temperature gradient is an effective method to mitigate gradual flux decline in a DCMD process for the concentration of South Arm GSL brine Upon completion of scaling experiments, the membranes were removed from the flow cells, air dried, and stored for further analysis. Characterization of the surface scale layer morphology and composition were accomplished using low-vacuum scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Quanta 600, FEI Corp., Hillsboro, OR). The effects of the process on membrane structure and salt penetration were also investigated by observing the membrane cross-section at various locations. To ensure that the cutting process did not damage the internal structure of the membrane, an ethanol cryofracture procedure was utilized to produce the membrane samples for cross-section analysis. The membranes were first submerged in ethanol until the membrane and pores were completely flooded. The samples were then submerged in liquid nitrogen and cut with a razor blade, then removed from the liquid nitrogen and dried. All samples analyzed with the SEM were prepared with a gold sputtering using ionized argon gas. Contact angle was measured after experiments were completed to investigate the effects on membrane hydrophobicity using the sessile drop method. Each membrane sample was prepared by taping flat to a microscope slide and analyzed using a Standard Goniometer (Model 200-00, Ramé-Hart Instrument, CO, Succasunna, NJ). Five 100 The water of the GSL is a concentrated brine containing primarily sodium, potassium, magnesium, chloride, and sulfate ions with low alkalinity The water collected for use in the present study was found to contain dissolved inorganic constituents typical of North Arm GSL brine and was also high in organic matter ( Water flux and thermal efficiency as a function of the difference between the bulk feed and distillate temperature (Δ The differences in performance between the two flow cells may be a result of reduced temperature polarization effects in Cell 2 at the experimental flow rate, due to its smaller flow area and increased crossflow velocity. Reynolds numbers were substantially larger at increased temperatures due to the reduced viscosity of the feed water, and were 600–1100 for Cell 1 and 1000–1800 for Cell 2. The lower thermal efficiencies in Cell 2 for similar conditions were unexpected because thermal efficiency generally increases with flow velocity To characterize the effects of NaCl scaling on the membrane used in this study, a solution of 200 Both water flux and thermal efficiency were very consistent over multiple concentration cycles for experiments performed with Curiously, thermal efficiency was not strongly affected by the increased concentration, and the measured thermal efficiency of ∼54% at 200 Performance at increased Δ For both conditions tested the scale layer formed during concentration was observed to dissolve upon dilution of the feed solution to its original concentration. Cross-section SEM micrographs of both membranes revealed enlarged pores in the membrane structure ( These results suggest that the liquid-vapor interface likely penetrated the membrane in both cases, leading to salt crystallization inside the membrane itself, but that the resulting changes in surface hydrophobicity or membrane pore structure does not necessarily affect performance. Complete pore flooding was only a significant factor for experiments conducted with The performance and limitations of the MD process applied to the GSL brine was initially determined by concentrating the brine at The scale layer observed using optical microscopy appeared as a continuous sheet with cubic morphology characteristic of NaCl, and no additional nucleation sites on the membrane surface were visible within the field of view ( To investigate the effects of concentration and scaling on long term performance, repeated concentration and dilution cycles were performed using the GSL brine. Feed temperature for these experiments were constant at 50 Initial water flux with The membranes were analyzed using SEM and EDS to investigate scaling morphology and composition. Several distinct crystalline structures formed on the surface of the membrane used for the experiments performed with The surfaces of the membranes used for the experiments performed with Compared to the effects of scaling with pure NaCl, there appear to be several factors that contribute to a decline in water flux and thermal efficiency for the MD process when used to concentrate the GSL water. These include reversible effects that recover when the concentration is decreased with all other conditions being the same, and irreversible effects that do not recover when the concentration decreases. Moreover, the irreversible effects are much more significant at higher Δ Unlike the pure NaCl experiments, which saw steady performance decline in the first concentration cycle up until NaCl saturation due to increased concentration, performance decline in the North Arm GSL experiments experienced a progressive decline in flux almost immediately, and was especially rapid in the experiments performed with Another possible explanation for the irreversible effects may be fouling by colloid-sized particles present in the water. Whereas water flux for pure NaCl experiments was mostly independent of total water recovered at both low and high Δ EDS analysis did not indicate presence of calcium in the scaling or fouling layer of any of the membranes tested, despite the fact that calcium is also known to form complexes with NOM, and the OLI simulation predicted high scaling tendency for both CaCO To investigate long-term scaling and fouling behavior while limiting potential damage to the membrane caused by NaCl scaling, additional concentration and dilution experiments were performed with the total water recovery limited to 8%. These experiments were performed using SEM analysis of the membranes used in these experiments indicated a fouling layer similar to that observed in the concentration experiments with Limiting the extent of concentration to prevent scaling by NaCl was successful at preventing damage to the membrane itself; however, fouling still occurred and resulted in loss of performance and salt rejection. Temporary operation with Repeating the concentration and dilution experiments with 5 The efficacy of reversing the temperature gradient to mitigate the performance loss due to scaling/fouling suggests that organic fouling was more substantial than scaling by magnesium salts. Operation in this mode reverses the temperature and concentration polarization, creating conditions that should easily dissolve salts of the composition identified by EDS analysis such as MgCl This study investigated the effects of scaling and fouling on performance and durability of DCMD for the concentration of a hypersaline brine collected from the North Arm of the Great Salt Lake containing sparingly soluble salts and natural organic matter. Impacts on water flux, thermal efficiency, and salt rejection were observed that resulted from reversible effects occurring only at high concentration factors, and irreversible effects that were independent of concentration. At the highest concentration factors, NaCl crystallization on the membrane surface caused rapid decline in performance and termination of the process. However, the NaCl crystal layer easily dissolved and performance was fully restored upon dilution when the difference between the feed and distillate temperature (Δ Theoretical calculation of the scaling tendencies of various salts present in the GSL brine was an effective method for predicting the concentration limit imposed by NaCl crystallization. This approach was ineffective for predicting scaling behavior of sparingly soluble salts, which did not precipitate on the membrane surface in a manner expected based on theoretical solubility in the bulk solution. The effects of NaCl crystallization on performance and salt rejection were similar for both pure NaCl solutions and the GSL brine. However, additional effects were observed during concentration of the GSL brine that caused a progressive decline in water flux, thermal efficiency, and salt rejection that were not restored upon dilution to the original concentration. These effects were determined to be predominantly a result of fouling by NOM-Mg Operation at reduced water recovery to keep the NaCl concentration below saturation was effective at preventing NaCl crystallization and damage to internal pore structure during GSL brine concentration. Performance decline and loss of salt rejection resulting from other effects were mitigated by periodic operation with higher distillate temperature than feed temperature, reversing the direction of the driving force of the DCMD process and direction of water flow. However, the approach was time and energy intensive, requiring 20–40 The authors would like to thank the