In this paper, we study the Debye screening length (DSL) in ultrathin films of optoelectronic materials in the presence of light waves. The solution of the Boltzmann transport equation on the basis of the newly formulated electron dispersion laws will introduce new physical ideas and experimental findings under different external conditions. It has been found, taking ultrathin films of n-Hg1−
                     
                        x
                     Cd
                        x
                     Te, as an example, that the respective two-dimensional (2D) DSL in the aforementioned materials exhibits decreasing quantum step dependence with the increasing film thickness, surface electron concentration, light intensity and wavelength, respectively, with different numerical values. The nature of the variations is totally band structure dependent which is influenced by the presence of the different energy band constants. The strong dependence of the 2D DSL on both the light intensity and the wavelength reflects the direct signature of the light waves. The well-known result for the 2D DSL for nondegenerate wide gap materials in the absence of any field has been obtained as a special case of the present analysis under certain limiting conditions and this compatibility is the indirect test of our generalized formalism. Besides, we have suggested an experimental method of determining the 2D DSL in ultrathin materials in the presence of light waves having arbitrary dispersion laws.It is well known that the Debye screening length (DSL) of the carriers in semiconductors is a very important quantity characterizing the screening of the Coulomb field of the ionized impurity centers by the free carriers The DSL depends on the density-of-states (DOS) function which, in turn, significantly affects the different physical properties of optoelectronic and related compounds having various band structures the DSL decreases with increasing electron concentration and such variations are significantly influenced by constants of the energy band spectra; the DSL decreases with the magnitude of the quantizing electric field as in inversion layers; the DSL oscillates with the inverse quantizing magnetic field under magnetic quantization due to the SdH effect; and the DSL exhibits composite oscillations with the various controlled parameters as in superlattices of non-parabolic compounds with graded interfaces. The above information has been obtained through theoretical analyses and no experimental results are available to the knowledge of the authors in support of the predictions for ultrathin films having arbitrary dispersion relations in the presence of light waves. In this paper, we have studied the two-dimensional (2D) DSL for ultrathin films of optoelectronic compounds in the presence of light waves in addition to the suggestion of the experimental determination of the same. In this context, it may be noted that with the advent of fine lithographical methods In The Hamiltonian ( Eq. The perturbed Hamiltonian The vector potential Using Eqs. The first matrix element of Eq. The functions Therefore, we can write Eq. The delta function expresses the conservation of wave vector in the absorption of light wave and From Eqs. Therefore, we can write When a photon interacts with a semiconductor, the carriers (i.e., electrons) are generated in the bands which are followed by the interband transitions. For example, when the carriers are generated in the valence band, the carriers then make interband transition to the conduction band (CB). The transition of the electrons within the same band i.e., Therefore, With For the three-band model of Kane, we can write The doubly degenerate wave functions We can, therefore, write the expression for the OME as Since the photon vector has no interaction in the same band for the study of interband optical transition, we can therefore write There are finite interactions between the CB and the VB, and we can obtain It is well known that Besides, the spin vector can be written as From above, we can write Using above relations, we get From Eq. From the above relations, for Thus, Similarly, we obtain Thus, Thus, Now since We can write Similarly, we get So that Thus, Similarly, we can write Therefore, we obtain Also, we can write Combining Eqs. From the above relations, we obtain Therefore Therefore, But we know from above that Thus, from Eq. Similarly, we obtain Therefore, Similarly, we can write Using the above results and following Eq. Thus, We can write that Thus, For a plane polarized light wave, we have the polarization vector Then, from Eq. Thus, So, the average value of We shall express Substituting Substituting Thus After tedious algebra, one can show that Similarly, from Eq. So that, finally we get Using Eqs. Following Nag Thus, under the limiting condition  For the two-band model of Kane, we have   In the case of relatively wide band gap semiconductor, we can write, Thus, from Eq. The 2D DSL (L The 2D electron energy spectrum in ultrathin films of III–V, ternary and quaternary materials, whose unperturbed band structure is defined by the three-band model of Kane, in the presence of light waves can be expressed from Eq. The sub-band energies  The DOS function is given by Combining Eq. The use of Eqs.  Using Eq.     The use of Eqs.  Using Eq. The use of Eqs.  The expressions for the 2D dispersion relation, the sub-band energies, the DOS function and the surface electron concentration for ultrathin films of optoelectronic materials, whose unperturbed band structure is defined by the three-band model of Kane, can respectively be written in the absence of photo-excitation as       The use of Eqs.  The expressions for the 2D dispersion relation, the sub-band energies, the DOS function and the surface electron concentration for ultrathin films of optoelectronic materials, whose unperturbed band structure is defined by the two-band model of Kane, can respectively be written in the absence of photo-excitation as     The use of Eqs.  Under the condition Under the condition of non-degeneracy, Eqs. Using Eqs. The classical 2D DSL equation of wide gap non-degenerate materials has been obtained in Eq. It is well known that the thermoelectric power of the electrons in materials in the presence of a classically large magnetic field is independent of the scattering mechanism and is determined only by the dispersion law The use of Eqs. Thus, the 2D DSL for degenerate materials can be determined by knowing the experimental values of From the suggestion for the experimental determination of the DSL for degenerate materials having arbitrary dispersion laws as given by Eq.  It is well known that the Einstein relation for the DMR is an important quantity for studying the transport properties of modern semiconductor devices since the diffusion constant (a quantity very useful for device analysis but whose exact experimental determination is rather difficult) can be derived from this ratio if one knows the experimental values of the mobility  Using Eqs.  Therefore, we can experimentally determine the 2D DMR for any materials having arbitrary dispersion laws by knowing the experimental values of The knowledge of the carrier contribution to the elastic constants is very important in studying the mechanical properties of the nanomaterials and has been relatively been less investigated in the literature  Thus, the experimental graph of Thus, we can summarize the whole mathematical background in the following way: in this paper, we have investigated the 2D DSL in ultrathin films of optoelectronic materials in the presence of photo-excitation on the basis of a newly formulated electron dispersion law whose unperturbed conduction electrons obey the three- and two-band models of Kane together with parabolic energy bands. Under certain special conditions, we have also obtained the results for materials whose unperturbed electron energy spectra are defined by the two-band model of Kane and that of the parabolic energy bands. We have also investigated the 2D DSL both in the presence and absence of photo-excitation in bulk specimens of the aforementioned materials. The classical 2D DSL equation of wide gap non-degenerate materials has been obtained in Eq. Using the appropriate equations, we have plotted the 2D DSL as a function of film thickness at It should be noted that the 2D DSL decreases from the light-off case to the light-on case, since the value of the Fermi energy in the presence of light waves becomes larger due to the increase in the carrier concentration as compared with the same in the absence of photo-excitation. Therefore, the numerical magnitude of the 2D DSL in the presence of light is smaller as compared with the same in the light-off case in the whole range of the appropriate variables as considered, although the 2D DSL decreases with increase in said variables. The combined influence of the energy band constants on the 2D DSL for all the said compounds can easily be assessed from all the figures. From The influence of quantum confinement on the aforementioned materials is immediately apparent from all the figures, since the 2D DSL depends strongly on the thickness of the size-quantized materials, which is in direct contrast with their respective bulk specimens. Moreover, the 2D DSL for ultrathin films can become several orders of magnitude larger than of their bulk specimens, which is also a direct signature of quantum confinement. It appears from the said figures that the 2D DSL decreases with the increasing film thickness in a step-like manner, both in the presence and absence of photo-excitation for all types of materials as considered here, although, the numerical values vary widely and determined by the constants of the energy spectra. The oscillatory dependence is due to the crossing over of the Fermi level by the size-quantized levels. For each coincidence of a size-quantized level with the Fermi level, there would be a discontinuity in the DOS function resulting in a peak of oscillations. With large values of film thickness, the height of the steps decreases and the 2D DSL will decrease with increasing film thickness in non-oscillatory manner and exhibit monotonic decreasing dependence. The height of step size and the rate of decrement are totally dependent on the band structure. The influence of light is immediately apparent from the plots in It appears from In this paper, we have suggested the experimental determinations of the 2D DSL, the Einstein relation for the diffusivity-to-mobility ratio and the carrier contribution to the elastic constants and our suggestions are valid for ultrathin films having arbitrary dispersion relations. Since the experimental curves of Thus, we can conclude that the influence of the presence of an external photo-excitation is to change radically the original band structure of the material. Our method is not at all related to the DOS technique as used in the literature The numerical results presented in this paper would be different for other materials but the nature of variation would be unaltered. The theoretical results as given here would be useful in analyzing various other experimental data related to this phenomenon. Finally, we can write that this theory can be used to investigate the Burstien Moss shift, the effective electron mass, the specific heat and other different transport coefficients of modern ultrathin film semiconductor devices operated under the influence of external photon field. The authors K. P. Ghatak and D. De are grateful to All Indian Council for Technical Education for granting the project having the reference number 8023/BOR/RID/RPS-95/2007-08 under research promotion scheme 2008 under which this research paper has been completed.