Stevenson and Evans take exception to ‘bound’ water accompanying a bubble in the presence of frother (surfactant). Initially I was puzzled by this. That the water structure near a bubble surface (or any surface) is different from the bulk is not new and that it is further modified by frother through H-bonding is not new either. I think the clue to the objection lies in their item 3 where they refer to ‘bound layer fixed to a bubble’. We did not intend to imply it is fixed. Indeed had we so thought it would suggest the bubble blown in air (the experiment which provided some of the ideas expressed in the paper) would be indefinitely stable, which is clearly not the case. In fact in related experiments we have followed the thinning of the ‘bound’ layer till rupture. The term ‘bound’ derived from H-bonding; perhaps we should have left it as ‘H-bonded water’. We used other terms, such as ‘stabilized’ and ‘organized’ (but not ‘fixed’) with inverted commas in the paper which was a clue to the fact that the nature of the water structure near the bubble boundary is not well understood. We are not alone: there is a flurry of papers on water and its structure which is entering the ‘popular’ press (e.g., science section of our local paper noted in a recent article: “few understand its [water’s] amazing properties” ( Our interest, as stated at the outset of the paper, was to provoke thoughts on how frothers help make small bubbles. This important function (I would go as far as saying the most important function ( Our interest was not, therefore, on water transport particularly, which seems the focus of the objections to ‘bound’ water. I accept that if the layer is ‘fixed’ this is problematic in that regard. In the case of a bubble moving in water the ‘layer’ is dynamic as I see it, with H-bonds forming and breaking constantly and water molecules exchanging between the ‘layer’ and the bulk. And, of course, water is also transported in the wake (depending on bubble Re). We did make the observation that the thickness of the layer measured on the bubble blown in air depended on frother type in the same way as the water carrying rate measurements (our Fig. 5 and Table 1); for example, as the thickness increased from pentanol to F150 so did the water carrying rate. We did not try to link more formally (I won’t say we were not tempted), partly because it is a jump to go from bubbles in air to ones in water, and because the thickness measured (∼1 Stevenson and Evans suggest the ‘bound’ layer is an artefact of the experiment. To be fair they refer to the IR spectra and interpretation for water is controversial (as noted in the paper). A film on a bubble blown in air is real, essentially defining what such a bubble is and the UV/Vis technique for film thickness determination is less controversial. This does give an opportunity to comment further on our results, however. The interpretation of ‘bound’ and ‘free’ water layers was considered to correspond to UV/Vis spectra which showed both broad and narrow fringes. The broad fringes were associated with ‘bound’ layer and carried all the useful information. The narrow fringes were associated with the ‘free’ layer. These showed no variation with time and little variation, we noted later ( Our thinking on bubble formation continues to evolve. Stevenson and Evans may note with some satisfaction that in a subsequent paper using the UV/Vis technique we avoided the term ‘bound’ as it did divert attention from the use to which we were putting the technique ( As often the case I have written more than I intended and probably have opened more avenues of debate than I have closed. To summarize, my objective in the paper was to stimulate debate on how frothers produce small bubbles, for me the key to why frothers are employed, and we did not intend that ‘bound’ be a synonym for ‘fixed’. I suppose what we can take from this to be careful how we define things, and how much we read into things.