Relationships of ultimate and proximate analysis of 4540 US coal samples from 25 states with gross calorific value (GCV) have been investigated by regression and artificial neural networks (ANNs) methods. Three set of inputs: (a) volatile matter, ash and moisture (b) C, H, N, O, S and ash (c) C, H exclusive of moisture, N, O exclusive of moisture, S, moisture and ash were used for the prediction of GCV by regression and ANNs. The multivariable regression studies have shown that the model (c) is the most suitable estimator of GCV. Running of the best arranged ANNs structures for the models (a) to (c) and assessment of errors have shown that the ANNs are not better or much different from regression, as a common and understood technique, in the prediction of uncomplicated relationships between proximate and ultimate analysis and coal GCV.Calorific value is an important property, indicating the useful energy content of coal and, thereby, its value as fuel. Heating value is a rank parameter, but is also dependant on the maceral and mineral composition ( A number of equations have been developed for the prediction of gross calorific value (GCV) based on proximate and / or ultimate analyses ( Based on data from US coals,  Neural network, as a new mathematical method, has been widely used in research areas of industrial processes ( Recently The aim of the present work is the assessment of properties of 4540 US coal samples from 25 states with reference to the GCV and possible variations with respect to ultimate and proximate analysis using multivariable regression, SPSS software package, and ANNs, MATLAB software package. This work is an attempt to solve the following important questions: Is it possible to generate relationship between ultimate and proximate analysis parameters and GCV for different US coal samples, with a wide range of calorific value from 4.82 to 34.85 (MJ/kg)? Is it possible to improving prediction accuracy with separating of “total hydrogen and oxygen in coal (H and O)” to “H The ability of neural networks to identify highly complex relationships from input–output data has been shown previously in different fields; Is ANN a better tool than regression to improving accuracy and decreasing of errors in the estimation of coal calorific value? Data used to test the proposed approaches are from U.S. Geological Survey Coal Quality (COALQUAL) database, open file report 97-134 ( The procedures of sampling and analytical chemical methods can be found on the Neural networks are categorized by their architecture (number of layers), topology (connective pattern, feed-forward or recurrent, etc.) and learning regime. Most of the applications have used multi-layered feed-forward networks and use error back propagation (EBP) learning. Feed-forward network usually consist of a hierarchical structure of three layers described as Back propagation refers to the way the training is implemented and involves using a generalized delta rule. A 'learning' rate parameter influences the rate of weight adjustment and is the basis of back-propagation algorithm ( In order to build an optimal ANN model with good accuracy (low prediction error) and generalization ability, it is necessary that the data used for building the ANN model is statistically well distributed and devoid of instrumental noise and measurement errors ( The ranges of proximate and ultimate analysis of coal samples are shown in The best-correlated multivariable equations, using stepwise procedure, between the various mentioned parameters and GCV can be presented as following equations: Ash, Moisture and Volatile matter inputs Carbon, Hydrogen, Nitrogen, Oxygen, Sulfur and Ash input Carbon, Hydrogen For preparing the regression equations, a stepwise variable selection procedure was used. The variables are sequentially entered into the model (by SPSS software). The first variable considered for reflecting into the equation is the one with largest positive or negative correlation with the dependent variable. This variable is entered into the equation only if it satisfies the criterion for entry. The next variable, with the largest partial correlation, is considered as the second equation input. The procedure stops when there are no variables that meet the entry criterion ( GCV estimation results by Eqs. For the evaluation of correlation coefficient increasing and decreasing of errors by ANN, the (a) to (c) input sets were used for developing ANN-based models which are listed in In all ANN models, the logistic sigmoid transfer function was used for computing the outputs of the hidden and output layer nodes. It may be noted that the nonlinear function approximation capability of ANNs stems from the usage of nonlinear transfer function such as the logistic sigmoid ( Prediction and generalization performances of ANN models (a) to (c) in the test stage that were compared with results in the validation stage are shown in GCV estimation results by the models (a) to (c) in testing stage are shown in According to the Eqs. According to the Although neural networks have been successfully applied by many coal studies (  Single-variable regression studies arranged the correlation coefficients of ultimate and proximate analysis parameters with GCV in the order of C Acceptable multivariable equations were achieved between some combinations of ultimate analysis parameters and GCV for 25 states of US coals on as-received basis: With the use of C, H, N, O, sulfur and ash as predictors (Eq. Multivariable regression based on C, H The mean square errors and deviations from experimentally calculated GCV could be decreased by considering of “total hydrogen and oxygen in coal (H and O)” in the separated form of “H The ANN models which were selected with the best arrangements for the prediction of GCV with proximate and ultimate analysis inputs are not better or much different from the multivariable regression equations. As a comparison between regression and ANN, it can be concluded that for the problems with the straightforward relationships between inputs and outputs, it is better to use from common and understood techniques as regression instead of more complicated methods as ANN. To the achievement a high correlation coefficient and accuracy by regression, the suitable inputs, as were used in this work, should be selected as predictor.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at