It is known that the presence of sulphidic minerals in the cyanidation of gold ores may cause significant consumption of oxygen supplied in the injected air. This may result in dissolved oxygen starvation for the oxidative leaching of the gold, and ultimately it will reduce the maximum attainable recovery of gold from the ore. In addition, the presence of sulphides leads to extra consumption of the cyanide-leaching agent, NaCN, due to the formation of thiocyanate, therefore increasing costs. These types of gold sulphidic ores may be pre-treated prior to cyanidation by means of an oxidation step, converting the sulphides into oxides or sulphates. This treatment leads to a reduction in the consumption of dissolved oxygen and of cyanide in the cyanidation step and to an improvement in the metallurgical recovery. In the current work we present the results of a five month full-scale trial carried out in a gold extraction plant in Brazil, which normally operated with three tanks in series carrying out an alkaline pre-oxidation step using compressed air only, followed by a train of fourteen aerated and mechanically-agitated tanks for the cyanidation. The ore feeding the leaching circuit averages 1.70gAu/t, with about 2.5% of pyrrhotite (FeS) as the main sulphide constituent. The addition of 60L/h of concentrated hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, 50%w/w (density=1.19g/mL) for pre-oxidation of a slurry of 60% solids at a rate of 150t/h (dry ore) resulted in a marked increase in dissolved oxygen (DO). This addition corresponds to a dosing rate of 0.24kg 100%H2O2 per ton of dry ore and increased the dissolved oxygen level from an average of about 1.0 to 7.2mg/L in the pre-oxidation tanks. It also led to an overall reduction of NaCN consumption from an average of 0.52 to 0.40kg/t of ore, and an increase in metallurgical Au recovery from an average of 91.3% to 92.5%.For several years the performance of the hydrometallurgical circuit at AngloGold Ashanti's Serra Grande's gold extraction plant in the state of Goiás, Brazil, indicated that improvements could occur in the recovery of gold, associated with the leaching kinetics. Additional tanks were installed in 2009 to expand the circuit. But in some of the ores to be leached the residence time in the circuit was not yet sufficiently long to recover all leachable gold from the ore on a regular basis. In previous internal studies it was found that up to 30% of gold reporting in the tailings was still leachable and wasn't being recovered due to process kinetics, specifically due to low concentration of dissolved oxygen in the slurry in the initial tanks of the cyanidation train. The leaching circuit comprises an initial three-tanks-in-series alkaline pre-oxidation step using only compressed air and lime, followed by a train of fourteen aerated and mechanically-agitated tanks for cyanidation. The ore feeding the leaching circuit averages 1.70 Usually the kind of gold ores containing sulphidic minerals – depending on the sulphide content and mineralogy – can be pre-treated by oxidation steps prior to cyanidation, converting the sulphides to oxides or sulphates, in some cases enhancing the opening up of the ore. Experts in the field propose that pre-oxidation is used for two reasons: (i) to oxidize and breakdown sulphide minerals to expose encapsulated gold; and (ii) to passivate the sulphide minerals by oxidizing the surface and thus making them less reactive in the cyanidation process. Pre-oxidation generally comprises the alternatives ( Previous experience in other gold extraction plants indicated the possibility of the use of hydrogen peroxide (H The strategy for developing the work began with preliminary lab trials (not reported here) with the aim of determining the rate of H The present work describes the conditions employed and reports the results obtained from the cyanidation, following the pre-oxidation of the gold ore slurry with hydrogen peroxide. Hydrogen peroxide (H H It is an aqueous liquid oxidant with a standard redox potential (E As an oxidant, it is able to oxidize sulphides to form oxides or sulphates, as exemplified in reactions  It is a non-persistent chemical in water, wastewater and process solutions – it decomposes spontaneously into water and oxygen:  Decomposition reaction For the possible use on pre-oxidation of ore containing sulphides, both the direct oxidation of the sulphides and the reaction driven by the O For a period of 5 Analytical measurements before and during the trial were performed as follows: DO was determined using a Metrohm dissolved oxygen probe; pH was measured by a Hanna pH-meter; Oxygen uptake measurements (for the calculation of the hydrogen peroxide equivalent doses) were carried out with a modified, portable O The results of these analyses led to setting the operating range of the H During the five day monitoring of the cyanidation plant parameters, measurements of DO and of the concentration of free cyanide (expressed as NaCN) in each of the tanks of the leaching train were performed. Tanks 1, 2 and 3 are pre-oxidation only tanks, and tanks 4–14 are for cyanidation (with NaCN introduced only in Tank 4). The results indicated that the DO profile could be described as “very low” (fluctuating around 0.5–1.0 The method of H A schedule was set up for the monitoring of the following parameters, for each shift: flow rate of hydrogen peroxide 50% The industrial trial with peroxide injection began with an initial feed of 45 Measurements of DO concentration were carried out every 2 After evaluating results and costs for the first 32 The hydrogen peroxide and the consequent higher level of dissolved oxygen in the alkaline pre-oxidation tanks promoted faster and more effective oxidation of cyanide-consuming sulphidic species. These species, which used cyanide as complexing agent, were inactivated in the first tanks of the circuit. As a consequence, the NaCN specific consumption in the cyanidation circuit was considerably reduced, reaching the lowest value by comparison to the previous 3  The injection of 60 Increase of the average concentration of dissolved oxygen in the three tanks of pre-oxidation from 1 to 7.2 Reduced consumption of NaCN in the cyanidation circuit from an average of 0.52 Increase in the metallurgical recovery of Au from an average of 91.3 to 92.5%