“Technology decisions for reprocessing must take into account technology and policy decisions for the entire fuel cycle” – Chairwoman Biggert before the House Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Energy. How will these decisions be enabled to take both technology and policy into account? This paper presents a set of alternatives for selecting a Light Water Reactor legacy fuel reprocessing technology for the United States based on policy values and technological attributes. Seven example policy value scenarios are modeled showing how dependent technology selection is to values. While four of the scenarios result in the COEX process being selected, the results demonstrate that different technologies could be selected with changes in policy values.Reprocessing of used nuclear fuel will be necessary to continue nuclear power into the future. There are a multitude of possible methods to employ in a future fuel cycle. Several instances in the literature focus on the expectation of operation of a future fuel cycle, be it a combination of fast and thermal reactors, a fully fast reactor fuel cycle, a continuation of open fuel cycle practices, or some other idea, like the DUPIC process where used light water reactor (LWR) fuel would be directly input to heavy water reactors ( In this paper, reprocessing methods which can separate components of used light water reactor fuel are compared over several attributes. Accepting a set of attributes of concern before debating the merits of one technology over another could minimize problematic political disagreements from interfering with future fuel cycles and allow continued nuclear power operations. As with any technically intensive policy decision, there is a problem for lawmakers when the technical experts are not in agreement, “How can politicians tell the public which experts to believe?” ( Reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel refers to a separations process with the function of fractionation and safe waste management. Separation processes can be broadly described as “any set of operations that separate solutions of two or more components into two or more products that differ in composition”, and separation is “achieved by exploiting chemical and physical property differences between the substances through the use of [one or more] separating agent[s]” ( This analysis uses several overarching issues, related to reprocessing of used nuclear fuel, to compare the ten different technologies shown in The solvent extraction methods currently considered are all of the liquid–liquid type: PUREX, COEX, Supercritical CO The URanium EXtraction, UREX, technology basically uses the same process as PUREX, nitric acid solution with TBP and dodecane solvent, with the addition of acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) as a complexant in the scrub stage. AHA prevents the extraction of plutonium and neptunium and decomposes gaseously during evaporation (so addition of AHA does not contribute additional solid waste) ( Supercritical CO The non-aqueous processes include fluoride volatility, FLUOREX and pyroprocessing. The fluoride volatility process is classified as a physical separation; whereas, pyroprocesses are classified as chemical extractions. Fluoride volatility takes advantage of the volatility of hexafluorides of uranium, neptunium, and plutonium in order to separate them from other materials as well as each other ( Research in pyroprocessing has focused on the partitioning of metal fuels, such as would be found in a fast reactor. The oxide fuel of a light water reactor does not behave in the same way as metal fuel when immersed in the metal salt eutectic and will not work well directly; however, oxide-reduction to metal or a conversion to chloride can prepare oxide fuels for input pyroprocesses ( The UREX+1, UREX+2, and FLUOREX processes are not separate technologies like the others; rather, they are collections of technologies which are considered as one process. Any separations technology could be followed by additional extraction processes such as those already included as a part of these. For a brief but clear description of some additional extraction processes, which include TRUEX, DIAMEX ( The goal of this paper is to present a method of weighting attributes of reprocessing technologies in order to facilitate the discussion of the merits of different technologies based on different values. A simple weighted summation, as presented in Eq. An attempt to focus on attributes of reprocessing technologies is not novel; Several overarching issues are addressed, and their lowest-level technical attributes are considered and scored (to allow for equivalent ranges) for each technology. An overall score is determined by performing a weighted summation of the scores. Two of the overarching issues, Economics and Stage of Development, which are noted here are not part of the present analysis since they are a function of the other issues or vice-versa. Each attribute is levelized to a score between 0 and 1 to facilitate comparison, with 1 being the best conceivable for each attribute. Technological advances could require reconsideration of the ‘best conceivable’ value which could affect different scores for the technologies under consideration. For a summary of reprocessing technology attributes and attribute scores, see The degree of technical complexity in a process is necessarily considered in a comparison of technologies. Studies which attempt to estimate costs before a complete design is prepared often consider these factors. All processes involving irradiated nuclear fuel are technically complex, but there are aspects which affect the degree of complexity; for the purposes of comparison, the attributes considered are: number of steps (unit operations) in the process, operating temperatures, operating pressures, and use of corrosive chemicals. Other conditions may additionally need to be considered in this fashion in future work, including other energy inputs or requirements for special atmospheric chemistry (i.e. argon atmosphere). A process which achieves the desired outcome in fewer steps provides several advantages over a greater-step process (Note: For the purposes of this paper, “steps” refers to “unit operations” of a process). These advantages can include: decreased risk of failure, ease of duplication, decrease in maintenance requirements, and reduced costs. The steps counted do not include cladding removal or chop processes or any treatment following the main separation process, except for UREX+1, UREX+2, and FLUOREX which are defined by their additional steps. To be specific, the first step counted is the one following fuel chopping, and the last step counted is decontamination of the selected element(s); parallel separations are counted separately (i.e. decontamination of U and decontamination of Pu would be two steps). Additionally, multiple stages within a solvent extraction process are not counted; solvent extraction steps are counted in broader terms of extraction, scrub, and strip. The ‘best’ possible number of steps would be one step. The score for number of steps, ‘NS’, for each technology, ‘ Recognizable differences in complexity exist dependent upon the degree to which the process conditions must deviate from ambient conditions ( Much like the discussion for temperature, above, deviation from ambient pressure, either to extremely high pressures or to vacuum conditions, leads to increased complexity. Thus, the calculation will consider the deviation from standard pressure at 1 A process which has corrosive products as part of its operation will be more likely to be in need of preventative or corrective maintenance. Maintenance poses a particular problem for facilities which are processing irradiated nuclear fuel due to shielding requirements, risk to staff, and additional organizational burdens to operate over maintenance periods. For this attribute, the scaling method used in the ‘quality factor’ for the previous comparison's maintenance rating is extended ( The concept of “safety” can include a broad range of considerations; for this analysis, the consideration for "safety" has been limited to low probability/high stakes risks that potentially affect the general population. There are many scenarios which could be drawn up (and sometimes have been) in regards to safety of a reprocessing plant; however, most scenarios, like the possibility of a high-speed aircraft collision to a sensitive plant section, are conceivably applicable to all reprocessing facilities equally. Risk analysis calculations have suggested that other non-nuclear facilities pose a greater risk in such events, Liquid Natural Gas facilities, for instance ( For some of these processes, accident studies have not yet been conducted; however, the nature of the process allows for determination of a characterization of the possible materials included in an accident. The attribute ascribed is based on the maximum total toxicity related to the MCA; the risk of the MCA is expected to be similarly low for all processes due to imposed standards. Therefore, the danger that is considered for the general population is based on one MCA occurring with the same probability for all technologies.  There is also the possibility of explosion for some materials which are utilized in reprocessing. Explosions of this nature are highly operations and maintenance related; a well-operated facility should not face the risk of explosion, but the risk remains with human error. For this reason, the presence of explosive materials will be an additional attribute. The explosion risk included here is not that of possible criticality explosion; engineering methods exist for preventing criticality, including geometric and chemical considerations. Rather the consideration is of an accidental chemical explosion somewhere within the process. This attribute, ‘EX’, is ascribed a true (0) or false (1) score for the employment of explosive materials. The likelihood of explosion presented here is dealing only with the presence of explosive chemicals. There exists the possibility of heat related ‘explosive release’ of radioactivity due to dry out of highly active waste tanks. While these tanks have been shown to be more vulnerable than other areas of reprocessing for release in the event of loss of cooling, engineers have determined that it is inconceivable, without sabotage, that some way of restoring cooling could not be accomplished in the time it would take for the release to be imminent (around 5–6 days) ( The bulk of the arguments for reprocessing address either resource management or waste minimization directly. Thus, it would be contrary to the purpose, excepting the condition where resource reuse is the only purpose for reprocessing, trumping other considerations, to generate additional amounts of waste. Regardless of intent to reduce waste, secondary wastes will be generated, and their relative amounts could be important to decision makers. The attribute for secondary waste generation assumes that each process will necessarily emit the same amount of gaseous waste because the gaseous fission products are present in the same quantities and are not shown to undergo phase change to remain in liquid or solids in these processes. The current method still penalizes liquid wastes because they are more difficult to contain. First, the total volume of waste, liquid and solid, per kg HM of processed fuel is summed and ranked from 0 (most secondary waste generated) to 1 (no secondary waste generated); then, the percent of the total volume that is liquid is calculated. The attribute for secondary waste, ‘SW’, is the average of these two numbers; to be clear, the score is the average of the relative total amount of waste and the percent of that total that is liquid waste. When summing the volumes, all liquid wastes are assumed to have the density of water; although all liquids do not have the same density as water, it is expected that the composition of liquid wastes for each technology will be similar enough to not induce great errors into the score. Proliferation is an overarching concern which has found its way into mainstream conversations. Clearly, there is a concern that nuclear materials will become weapon fodder for those who would do harm. Unfortunately, the ideas surrounding proliferation have changed since the first discussions of this term. Proliferation concerns used to involve sovereign rogue nations which openly or clandestinely developed nuclear weapons. For the most part, national programs can be monitored with satellites and intelligence due to the extensive chemical processing required to develop weapons grade materials; evidence to this is provided by the recent chain of actions toward Iran and North Korea. Now, proliferation concerns are more focused on the threat of sub(or multi)-national terrorist groups. The most likely method of obtaining nuclear materials for these groups is through takeover of materials during transportation or through siphoning materials from a facility. Thus, it could be postulated that locally operated reprocessing would be preferable, from a non-proliferation standpoint, to one which requires transport. However, the risk of a hostile taking are not isolated to one technology or another, and security is likely to be at the same level regardless of technology; additionally, siting is not technology specific. Due to these leveling characteristics of the majority of the proliferation concerns, the risk is only evaluated on the ease of weapons creation from the output streams of a technology over the input stream of used nuclear fuel (SNF), as such, some measure of critical mass and output could be utilized. Regardless, the use of traditional analysis of proliferation resistance is not applicable when ‘dirty bombs’ are taken into consideration. ‘Dirty bombs’ are a combination of conventional explosives with some radioactive material. While these devices are NOT nuclear weapons, and they do not possess the extreme destructive capability of nuclear weapons, they are still dangerous (  The attribute for separation of a plutonium stream, ‘SP’, is true (0) or false (1) logic. The idea that separation of plutonium results in a zero for this score should not incite those who believe separating plutonium is desirable. In fact, such persons could state such preferences and define The decontamination factor (DF) is the degree of purification, defined as “ratio of a stated impurity to desired component … divided by the equivalent ratio in the product” ( Despite the possibility that impure plutonium may not be appreciably less risky to proliferation, the decontamination factor attribute, ‘DF’, will be scored from 0 to 1, based on the ratio of the power of the decontamination factor with 1 being no separation of plutonium. Suppose the power of the decontamination factor is ‘ The number of effluent streams is included due to the increased likelihood of diversion. Obviously, a nuclear fuel processing plant is expected to have stringent accountability standards, but more streams increase the chance of error. Additional streams might also imply additional labor, which could increase the chance of diversion by a worker. The attribute for number of effluent streams, ‘ES’, is determined by the ratio of the number of effluent streams in the technology to 1, which would imply the best possible number of streams for this measure The economics of reprocessing are usually argued in a fashion as reprocessing vs. open fuel cycle (  To see how these attribute scores could correspond with selection of a technology, a serious of scenarios, based on different values, was run. The results of which are shown with each scenario in a separate column of In the absence of preferences, or in the face of equal preferences ( If a decision maker has a preference for low operating temperatures, but is not concerned at all with number of steps involved; the weights would be set Another example is a decision maker with a strong preference for proliferation resistance who thinks that a low Decontamination Factor and few Effluent Streams would be best for minimizing risk, such that In contrast, there are advantages to separating more streams for different effects on waste management and possible reuse of fuel. Assume a decision maker has a strong preference for more effluent streams, such that There also can be perceived advantages to simplicity. The framework for the attributes presented in this paper presumes that simplicity is “best”. However, decision makers may not value simplicity; therefore, they may not choose to put weight on the related factors. In this scenario, the decision maker does value simplicity by setting A historical example (for the only time this decision was actually made in the U.S.) could assume that a decision maker needs to separate plutonium with a high decontamination factor and is not concerned greatly with other attributes. To construct the output, A final example considers a decision maker who is concerned about safety attributes but doesn't care how many steps or how many output streams there are; as such, the While the overall scores can show which technology would be the best fit for a given set of weights, they also demonstrate that some decision makers will be more satisfied with reprocessing technology in general. For example, in the sixth column (representing the historical case) the top two choices have overall scores of 0.829 and 0.825, both over 80% of “best” for that particular set of weights, or decision maker preferences; in the third column (representing preference to high proliferation resistance) the top two choices have overall scores of 0.394 and 0.353, both less than 40% of “best” for that set of decision maker preferences. In some cases, decision makers have a set of preferences that cannot be satisfied completely by any of the available alternatives, but they still could choose the one that is most like their preferences. Sensitivity analysis is very important when making decisions with uncertainty. If changing a value causes a different outcome, it is imperative that the true value, or best approximation, of that value be known. Sensitivity analysis can also inform the decision maker when a variable could be ignored. Variables which do not alter the outcome, when changed within reasonable limits, can be ignored to simplify the decision. Caution is urged when considering sensitivity analysis for this case because the assumption in the analysis is that all the variables are included at their default value of 0.1 while the variable in question is varied from 0.0 to 1.0. This is not actually the case. Sensitivities for the decision of reprocessing technologies are shown in a tornado diagram ( This paper presents a weighted scheme for scoring reprocessing technologies to allow for honest debate over their merits based on social and political values by persons without extensive chemical or nuclear engineering knowledge. Ten attributes were presented as an initial set; policy makers must agree upon the attributes to be considered in order for this weighting method to work, but they are then free to disagree on the importance or direction (positive or negative) of any attribute. Attributes are scored relative to each other, and each can be assigned a particular weight, The authors wish to acknowledge Ratib Karam, Steve Piet, Guna Selvaduray, David Shropshire, and Dan Tedder for their support and review of the work leading to this article. In addition, we appreciate the helpful comments of an anonymous reviewer. Any remaining errors rest on the authors alone.