Introduction
                  In distal radial fractures in adults, factors affecting instability have been investigated in many studies in an effort to shorten the preoperative waiting period for the fractures requiring surgery. Numerous factors, aside from the alignment-related indices, have been searched to predict redisplacement. Unlike as in paediatric counterparts, the casting technique and casting-related indices have not been appropriately considered in adults. The aim of this study was to determine the impact of the various previously investigated factors in addition to casting technique-related indices such as three-point index, cast index, padding index and gap index, in predicting the risk of redisplacement of extra-articular distal radial fractures in adults and the presence of the ulnar deviation of the cast.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Seventy-five patients over 18 years who were treated with a cast in our emergency department within 24h after a displaced distal radial fracture, were recruited into the study. Age, alignment-related indices, cast-related indices, extent of the ulnar deviation of the cast, having a non-anatomical reduction, co-existing ulnar fracture, dorsal comminution and obliquity of the fracture line were investigated. Casting technique according to three-point index, obliquity of the fracture line, degree of the ulnar deviation of the cast, and reduction accuracy were the significant factors affecting redisplacement.
               
                  Results
                  The three-point index had a sensitivity of 95.8%, specificity of 96.1%, positive predictive value of 92%, and negative predictive value of 98% in predicting redisplacement. Logistic regression revealed that having an inadequate cast according to the three-point index (p
                     <0.001), degree of obliquity of the fracture line (p
                     =0.018), decreased ulnar deviation of the cast (p
                     =0.002), and having a non-anatomical reduction (p
                     =0.029) were the significant predictive factors in redisplacement.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our results suggest that the casting technique plays a major role in the success of conservative treatment, which can best be examined with the three-point index. Ulnar deviation of the cast and fracture obliquity are the other dominant factors affecting redisplacement.Distal radial fractures are among the most common injuries, constituting about 20% of all fractures treated in emergency departments by orthopaedic surgeons. These have a bimodal age distribution, with the adolescent and elderly populations being the most commonly affected. Studies in paediatric counterparts have equally focussed on both the risk factors and radiological indices considering the adequacy of casting to predict redisplacement. These indices were cast index, Our hypothesis was that the casting technique should be one of the main factors that affect the redisplacement rate, as in the children. Our clinical question was if cast-related indices, particularly the three-point index, could predict the cases where redisplacement would occur or not. The second question was if the extent of ulnar deviation of the cast could affect the redisplacement rate. Accordingly, our aim was to prospectively analyse the impact of possible risk factors, such as age, initial displacement or non-anatomical reduction (in means of radial inclination, volar/dorsal tilt, radial height and ulnar variance), co-existing ulnar fracture, dorsal comminution, radio-ulnar joint involvement, extent of the ulnar deviation of the cast and obliquity of the fracture line in predicting redisplacement in extra-articular distal radial fractures in adults. The study was performed prospectively with the approval of the institutional review board. Informed consent was obtained from the patients. Patients older than 18 years of age with displaced extra-articular distal radial fractures, who had no history of previous wrist fractures, were included. Patients, who had intra-articular displacement, non-displaced or minimally displaced extra-articular fractures or pathological fractures, were not included. Eighty-two consecutive patients attending our department between February 2008 and February 2009 were eligible for inclusion into the study; two patients, who were lost to follow-up, and five, who lacked a full set of required radiographs, were excluded. The remaining 75 fractures of 75 patients, who were treated with a cast in our emergency department within 24 The initial closed reduction was performed by senior orthopaedic residents with the patient under conscious sedation and a short-arm cast was applied in the emergency room. One assistant and one cast technician helped the surgeon during the closed reduction and casting. Plaster of Paris was used as the cast material and cotton was used for padding in the entire group. With each roll of the cast material, attention was paid to the thickness of the padding and moulding of the distal and proximal parts of the cast as well as the fracture site. The wrist was positioned in 10–15° of flexion; the degree of ulnar deviation was left to the surgeon's preference, but limited to be within 0–30° to investigate the impact of ulnar deviation of the cast on redisplacement. The amount of the ulnar deviation of the cast was measured on anteroposterior (A-P) radiograph by measuring the diaphyseal angles between the radius and the third metacarpal bone. The degree of obliquity was analysed on the basis of the maximum fracture-line angle in either the transverse or the sagittal plane. Accordingly, the lines between the fractured medial and lateral cortices were examined on the A-P radiograph and those between the fractured dorsal and volar cortices were examined on the lateral radiograph, and the larger angle was selected as the obliquity angle. Dorsal comminution was assessed as evident when the integrity of the dorsal cortices of the two main fragments was absent due to one or more separate butterfly fragments. The quality of the initial reduction was assessed to be non-anatomical if one of the following alignment failures was evident: (1) radial inclination was ≤17°, (2) volar tilt was ≤5° or (3) there was translation of more than 2 The patients were followed up weekly with radiographs until it was decided that union occurred and the cast was removed. The extent was noted at each visit. The follow-up was continued monthly until satisfactory motion of the wrist and fingers was achieved. Mean follow-up was 9 months (range, 6–14) after cast removal. Redisplacement was considered to have occurred during follow-up when there was (1) increase of 10° of dorsal or volar angulation, or (2) loss of The injured arm was routinely checked for circulatory problems 24 Three of the authors (K.B.A., C.Y.K and F.S.), who were blinded to the existence of redisplacement, performed all measurements simultaneously on the first radiographs made after each reduction. The formulae for calculating the cast index, gap index, padding index, Canterbury index and three-point index are given in The formula of the three-point index is: ([ Uni-variable logistic regression was used to assess overall factors that may have an impact on redisplacement. The odds ratio and 95% confidence interval were calculated. Sensitivity, specificity and positive and negative predictive values were assessed for the previously given cut-off points Redisplacement occurred in 24 (32%) of 75 fractures. Redisplacements were combined radial and dorsal angulation >5° to both directions in 15 patients, isolated radial angulation in six patients and isolated dorsal angulation in three patients. Redisplacements were in combination with an increase in ulnar variance as a rule. There was a >2 Results of logistic regression revealed that having an inadequate cast according to the three-point index, degree of obliquity of the fracture line, decreased ulnar deviation of the cast and having a non-anatomical reduction were the significant predictive factors in redisplacement ( The three-point index had a sensitivity of 95.8%, a specificity of 96.1%, a positive predictive value of 92% and a negative predictive value of 98% in predicting redisplacement. These were quite superior to the cast index, pad index, gap index and Canterbury index ( The inter-observer reliability of the three-point index was 0.852 (95% confidence interval, 0.775–0.905) and the intra-observer reliability was 0.948 (95% confidence interval, 0.919–0.967). Based on the Mackenney formula for early instability, early displaced fractures ( Final active wrist range of motion (ROM) and subjective pain status of the patients are shown in Ulnar impingement was encountered in only one patient who had ulnar variance of 6 Fifty of 51 (98%) patients in non-redisplaced and 84% (19 of 22 who continued conservative treatment) in redisplaced groups were satisfied with their conservative treatment. Other than two who underwent surgical fixation, three patients were not satisfied with the treatment in the redisplaced group. Three patients, one of whom who had stiffness (flexion–extension ROM: 125°, total radial–ulnar motion: 35°, pronation–supination motion: 120° and VAS There has been a trend to divide distal radial fractures in adults as stable or unstable and to treat them conservatively or surgically, accordingly. However, the current study clearly indicates that instability is strongly related with the manner of the conservative treatment itself. Inadequate casting according to the three-point index was the most significant risk factor in the instability of the fracture in the cast. This confirms that a reduction can be maintained in the initial reduction position with a well-moulded cast that assures the basic principles of a three-point fixation. Although the role of a good casting technique seems to be intuitive, there are no studies in the literature that have reported the importance of casting technique with objective findings in distal radial fractures in adults. Our results also indicate that excessively low three-point index values (<0.25) should not be the goal, since low values indicate casting that is too tight and generally warrants splitting of the cast due to swelling or median nerve compression symptoms. Lack of ulnar deviation of the cast is a common error in the conservative treatment of Colles fractures. We have previously shown the importance of fracture obliquity as a risk factor for the redisplacement of distal radial fractures in children. Previous alignment-related indices used volar/dorsal tilt, radial inclination, radial height or ulnar variance on pre-reduction or reduction radiographs to predict redisplacement. Initial displacement is an accepted risk factor for redisplacement, according to many authors. Age has been found as an important factor in stability in adult Colles fractures. Dorsal comminution has attracted interest in many studies. A limitation of this study might be the fact that some authors of the current study are the inventors of the three-point index. Taking the second cast within 5 days of the fracture as the initial treatment in calculations for the split casts may also be criticised. However, these patients actually have a better chance in the maintenance of reduction in this second cast as the subsidence of some part of the swelling was completed in that time interval. Moreover, we found no difference between these eight patients and the others in the possibility of redisplacement. In this study, rather than attempting to document the outcome by DASH or wrist scores, we opted to document directly active ROM of the wrist in detail and used VAS to verify the pain during activity. Although this method might be criticised, in our opinion, separately documenting active ROM and subjective severity of pain may provide a better estimate for assessing the outcome to the readers than many complex scoring systems. Our criteria of redisplacement were stricter with respect to radial inclination loss (only >5°) than the dorsal angulation (>10°), as the former has been well documented in the literature to have a higher impact on functional loss. Conservative treatment of extra-articular distal radial metaphyseal fractures should be the first choice in treatment. It would be easy to predict the risk of redisplacement in the cast by using the three-point index, while preventing redisplacement due to technical errors in casting style. In future, studies using the three-point index in certain types of intra-articular fractures may be beneficial in individuals who are not good candidates for surgery. This study states that most of the redisplacements of displaced extra-articular distal radial fractures are caused by loose or inadequate casting techniques. The three-point index provides good teaching tools for the identification of a well-applied cast, contributes to the understanding of the casting style that should be used and is a reliable formula for prediction of redisplacement. In addition, lack of ulnar deviation of the cast, increased obliquity of the fracture line and a non-anatomical reduction are risk factors for redisplacement. Greater than 15° of ulnar deviation has better success in terms of alignment and wrist motion. None.