In this paper, solvent extraction of Pr (III) and Nd (III) using 8-hydroxyquinoline in chloride-acetate medium has been systematically investigated. The effect of various parameters, such as equilibrium time, aqueous pH, extractant concentration, acetate ion concentration, chloride ion concentration, and organic solvent, on the extraction has been discussed. The synergistic effect in the mixtures of 8-hydroxyquinoline (HQ) and 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (P507) has been explored, and the largest synergistic enhancement factor has been calculated. The separations of Pr (III), Nd (III) and La (III) by 8-hydroquiloline alone and by mixtures of HQ and P507 have been studied, and the results demonstrate that it is possible to separate Pr (III), Nd (III) and La (III) with the mixtures of HQ and P507. At last, the stripping of Pr, Nd and La (III) has been performed.Lanthanide elements have gained a great attention in the last few decades, owing to their unique properties and wide range of application s, especially in metallurgy, ceramic industry, and nuclear fuel control ( Solvent extraction is employed to separate and purify rare earth elements on an industrial scale. Acidic organophosphorous extractants, such as di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid P204 and P507 (2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester), are widely used for this purpose ( 8-Hydroquiloline is a strong ligand, widely used in separation and enrichment of metal ions through various methods, such as solid phase extraction ( 8-Hydorquinoline (HQ) and P507 (99%) without further purified were used by dissolving appropriate amount into heptane solution. Stock solutions of rare earths were prepared from their oxides by dissolution in concentrated hydrochloric acid and standardized by EDTA titration with xylenol orange as the indicator. All the other reagents were of analytical grade. A Shimadzu Model UV-365 spectrophotometer was used for measuring absorbance. A Model pHs-3C pH meter calibrated daily with 4.01 and 6.86 standard buffer solution was employed for measuring pH value in aqueous phase. Liquid–liquid extraction was carried out by shaking equal volumes (5.0 ml) of aqueous and organic phases in equilibrium tubes using a mechanical shaker at 303 Seven aqueous solutions containing 0.7 mM lanthanide ion (III) and 0.10 M NaCl were prepared in term of the uniform compositions. After the same forward extraction procedure, 0.7 mM of lanthanide ion (III) was entirely transferred to the organic phase, composed of 0.012 M HQ and 0.028 M P507, at equilibrium pH of 3.5, 3.5 and 5.0 for Pr, Nd and La (III) respectively. After removing aqueous solution, seven portions fresh aqueous solution containing different concentrations mineral acid (HCl, HNO The apparent distribution coefficient, Pr (III) and Nd (III) ions in the aqueous phase for med a variety of comp lexes in the presence of acetate ions. However, under the experimental conditions, it was sufficient to consider only the first complex as defined by Then the total metal in the aqueous phase ( The values of the stability constant ( The extraction equilibriums of Pr (III) and Nd (III) from chloride solutions with HQ could be expressed as, where Then the distribution ratio, For confirming the above mechanism, the extraction of Pr and Nd (III) from 0.1 M NaCl with HQ alone in heptane as a function of extractant concentration (0.02–0.10 M) and pH (at constant HQ  According to the above results, the extraction mechanisms of Pr and Nd (III) could be expressed as, and the values of extraction equilibrium constants calculated for Pr and Nd (III) under the different conditions were collected in 2-Ethylhexyl phosphoric acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (P507), was a kind of typical acid organic phosphonic acid extractant, widely used for the rare earth separation because of its higher extraction efficiency. Unfortunately, the needed high stripping acidity made it restricted with the industrial application (  The stripping efficiency versus concentration of HCl, HNO The effects of diluent on the extraction were investigated at pH 5.40 with 0.04 M HQ alone and with the mixtures of 0.012 M HQ and 0.028 M P507 ( From the above mentioned, this stud y comes to the conclusions as follows: The extraction mechanisms of Pr and Nd(III) with HQ can be expressed as, When pH value of aqueous phase is more than 3.0, there is an obvious synergistic effect in the mixtures of HQ and P 507. The largest synergistic enhancement factor can be calculated to be 5.47, 3.37 and 2.86 for Pr, Nd and La (III), respectively, when the concentration ratio of HQ to P507 is equal to 3:7 at pH 3.6. It is nearly impossible to separate Pr and Nd with HQ alone, however, by adulterating P507 into HQ, it becomes quite easy, especially under the lower pH value condition. Furthermore, the needed lower stripping acidity make the mixed HQ and P507 system more potential to industrial application. The study on the effect of diluent on the extraction efficiency indicates that with increasing dielectric constant, the extraction efficiency decreases, and heptane should be a good candidate for Pr, Nd and La (III) extraction. On the contrary, the diluent with the higher dielectric constant would be consider ed to be a fit medium for separating Pr, Nd and La (III). The present work has been supported by Program for Young Excellent Talents in Tongji University.