The motivation for this work was to investigate the relationship between the fractal characteristics of the acoustic emission (AE) correlation and the mechanical damage of different ratios of tantalum–niobium tailings CPB materials. The AE parameters of the tailings CPB materials under uniaxial compression were obtained by an AE test. On this basis, the fractal dimensions of the AE parameters were derived, and the change rule of the fractal parameters during the entire specimen damage was obtained by analysis. The results showed that the minimum value of the fractal dimension was generally within a stress-level range of 70% to 90%. While approaching the peak value of the stress, the amplitude fractal dimension displayed an increasing trend. The AE amplitude, event rate, energy rate, and spatial distribution exhibited fractal characteristics. In the investigation of the AE fractal, the fractal dimension of the amplitude was more concentrated, which exhibited that it was more accurate to determine the failure of a cemented paste backfill (CPB). Therefore, the study focused on using the amplitude fractal dimension value to monitor the failure of the CPB. This feature provides a reference for the control of the stability of the surrounding rock by backfilling the goaf with CPB.Mine tailings can be efficiently used for underground backfilling (as a cemented paste backfill (CPB)) and surface paste disposal, instead of conventional tailings dams or impoundments The concept of fractals originated in the last century. Following years of rapid development, fractal theory has gradually been improved and is now widely used in various fields An AE event is an elastic wave released when microcracking (or propagation) occurs in a material. It represents the microcracks found in a material. In particular, AE events can reflect the internal deformation and failure of a CPB The novelty of this study is a comprehensive evaluation of the influence of both the AE fractal characteristics and the mechanical damage on the mechanical properties and strength behavior of CPB samples. Therefore, the main objective of this study was to evaluate how these factors influence the quality and performance of a CPB formed of ordinary Portland cement (OPC). To achieve this goal, tantalum–niobium tailings were adopted to prepare various CPB mixtures with different cement–tailings ratios. Uniaxial compression and AE tests at predetermined curing times were conducted to evaluate the influence of different cement–tailings ratios and different fractal characteristic parameters of the AE on the strength performance of the CPB samples. In the test, the tailings used for the CPB samples were from unclassified tantalum–niobium ore tailings in the Jiangxi province. After the tailings were transported from the mine to the backfilling laboratory, their moisture content was measured, and then the water consumption required for mixing was calculated based on the measured data. Finally, the amounts of tailings, cement, and other materials were calculated by the specific ratio and the concentration of the cement–tailings ratio. The cement was P.O. 32.5 OPC, which has excellent properties such as high early strength, high hydration heat, good frost resistance and small dry shrinkage. And the CPB samples was formed of a cylinder mold with a size of h 100 mm × Ф 50 mm ( An RMT-150C hydraulic servo control system was used in the test ( The commonly used fractal dimensions are the Hausdroff, information, and correlation dimensions. In this study, the correlation dimension was used to calculate and analyze the AE parameters. The specific calculation steps are as follows Second, by selecting any reference point Third, the correlation integral function can be obtained by calculating other In the formula, When Finally, the correlation dimension of subset In this study, we used 50 AE time series data as the sampling unit to calculate the AE correlation dimension. If The above equation is used to take an integer for the According to Equation Furthermore, in accordance with Equation Using the calculation of the AE parameters obtained during the failure of CPB samples process under uniaxial compression, a curve between correlation dimension Using the AE data of the CPBs with different cement–tailings ratios under uniaxial compression, we calculate their AE correlation dimension and determine whether the AE amplitudes of the CPBs with different cement–tailings ratios possess fractal characteristics during uniaxial compression instability. As shown in In this study, the data of the AE parameters collected from 50 experiments are taken as a unit to calculate the fractal dimension of the AE amplitude correlation. The decrease in the correlation fractal dimension demonstrates that the order degree of the AE process of the CPB is gradually increasing, and the large-scale failure is the main internal failure of the CPB. The upward trend of the correlation fractal dimension value shows that the AE process of the backfilling specimen is evolving toward a “chaotic” state. Simultaneously, the inner part of the specimen is dominated by small-scale microcracks. The following graph of the correlation fractal dimension value, time, and stress relationship depicts that some CPB samples are “dense and miscellaneous” before the peak value of the correlation fractal dimension curve is achieved. The change rule is also difficult to distinguish. Therefore, the correlation fractal dimension of this type of CPB should be averaged. Particularly, averaging the correlation fractal dimension value within every 10% of the stress level is critical to draw the relationship curve with the stress level on the abscissa and the average fractal dimension value on the ordinate. The amplitude-related fractal dimensional curves and the mean fractal dimensional numerical curves for each cement–tailings ratio have similar characteristics. Due to the limitations of the paper's length, As presented in the correlation fractal dimension value–time stress curve and average fractal dimension value–stress percentage curve in As depicted in From 60% to the peak value of the stress level, the fractal dimension values of the AE of G1 and G2 exhibit a sharp downward trend and reach the minimum value. This finding suggests that the microcracks in the specimens continue to develop, penetrate, and form macrocracks. Once the fractal dimension value of G3 reaches the minimum value, it continuously presents an upward trend. The AE signal of the specimen changes from being ordered to disordered, and its self-similarity gradually weakens. The microcracks in the CPB continue to expand, extend, and penetrate, resulting in the final complete destruction of the CPB ( As presented in According to the analysis of the fractal characteristics of the AE amplitude under uniaxial compression of the specimens with different cement–tailings ratios, it can be found that: Prior to the stress level of 30%, the AE fractal dimensional values of the specimen cement–tailings ratios of 1:4, 1:6, and 1:8 are basically in a slow decreasing trend. While the AE fractal dimensional values of the specimen cement–tailings ratio of 1:10 are in a slow increasing trend. The values of the AE fractal dimension fluctuate considerably in the range of 30% to 90% of the stress level, but still show an overall decreasing trend. The cement–tailings ratios is 1:6, the minimum amplitude fractal dimension of the 1:8 specimen is concentrated in the stress level range of 70%–90%, while the minimum amplitude fractal dimension of the 1:4 specimen is not concentrated in a fixed stress level range. This may be due to the higher compressive strength of the 1:4 specimen than the other proportional specimens. The specimen with a 1:10 ratio of cement–tailings showed repeated fluctuations in the “down-rise” of the fractal dimension value at a stress level of 30% to 70%, with large fluctuations. This may be because the 1:10 specimen decreases in strength as the gray sand ratio increases and the microcracking increases more rapidly, which would be detrimental to subsurface backfilling. Therefore, the author believes that the 1:6, 1:8 specimen will be more conducive to subsurface backfill than the other two proportional specimens. In this paper, the theoretical knowledge involved is extensive, and a uniaxial compressive AE test has been conducted on four samples of tantalum–niobium CPB materials with different cement–tailings ratios, and the amplitude and AE characteristics of the CPB materials have been studied. A new research path of the future may be to examine less cement–tailings ratios, such as 1:12 and 1:16. A study of the effect of the AE energy characteristics on the mechanical damage mechanism of a CPB also needs to be conducted. In this paper, only the fractal dimensions associated with the AE of the CPB are discussed in more detail. And for other algorithmic means such as AE r–values are not covered in this paper, and are not really comprehensive in terms of data analysis and need further exploration. In this study, the fractal characteristics of AE of tantalum–niobium tailings samples with cement–tailings ratios of 1:4, 1:6, 1:8, and 1:10 are analyzed. Compared with the results of other types of CPB studies, the most important finding of this study is the emphasis on the effects of different AE fractal characteristic parameters on the strength performance and damage of the CPB. The The recommendations to other researchers are to attempt to examine new technologies to improve the workability of cement backfill, and help to optimize the CPB mixtures to save time and money. These efforts will be of tremendous significance in understanding the tailings problem while further improving the sustainability of the entire mining industry. The insights gained from multidisciplinary knowledge exchanges provide major potential for progress in other related research areas.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The study has been supported by the