A thin spray-on liner (TSL) is defined as a chemical-based layer or coating (2–5mm) that is sprayed onto the rock surface to support the mining excavations. Besides ground support, TSLs can potentially be used as a gas management tool for underground coal mining. However, the permeability characteristics and effectiveness of TSLs at in-situ gas pressure are the key considerations in application of TSLs for gas management.
                  This paper presents an experimental study to investigate the potential use of TSLs for gas management in underground coal mines. The coal samples were collected from an underground coal mine in New South Wales, Australia. The selected bituminous coal samples were initially characterised using petrographic and uniaxial compression strength (UCS) tests. Single phase gas permeability tests were then conducted on the coal samples. Methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) were used for the tests as they are the gases of main concern in underground coal mines, and Helium (He) was used as a control gas to investigate the effect of gas adsorption on the coal permeability. Permeability tests were first conducted on coal samples before the TSL application. The coal samples were then coated with two types of TSL materials with a thickness of 5mm and the permeability tests were repeated. The experimental observations show that both TSLs are very effective in reducing the coal permeability, with the permeability values in the range of nanodarcies.
                  High injection pressure gas flow tests were also conducted to investigate the amount of pressure that the TSLs can resist. The injection pressure was increased until the TSLs failed. The failure of TSLs was demonstrated by a sudden increase in the permeability. The test results show that the failure pressure of the TSLs is directly related to their adhesion strength on coal.Coal seam gas (CSG) is typically composed of more than 90% CH Ventilation has been the first recourse for gas management in underground coal mines ( Thin spray-on liners (TSLs) are relatively thin (2–5 Besides being used for surface support, TSLs also show potentials to be used as a gas management tool for underground coal mining due to their relatively low permeability, ease of application, low volume required, high tensile strength and elongation properties. Over the years, some research has been conducted to investigate the permeability characteristics of different TSL materials.  In this study, laboratory permeability tests were conducted on well-characterised coal samples coated with two different TSLs to investigate the potential use of TSLs for gas management in underground coal mines. A systematic experimental approach is presented which considers the effect of gas adsorption and bedding directions on the permeability. High injection pressure gas flow tests were also conducted to study the influence of high gas pressure on the behaviour of TSLs. TSL materials from two leading manufacturers were used in this study. Due to confidentiality agreement, the product and company names are not disclosed in this paper; instead they are named as TSL-1 and TSL-2. The mixing procedure for the TSLs used depends on their compositions. The handling and mixing of the TSL materials were undertaken according to the manufacturer's guidelines. TSL-1 is a water/powder mixture and the mixing ratio is 45% water to 55% powder by weight. TSL-2 is a latex/powder mixture and the mix ratio is two parts latex to one part powder by weight. One problem during the TSL mixing in the laboratory was the introduction of air bubbles due to the viscous nature of TSLs, which may slightly alter their characteristics. It was noted by The experiments were performed on bituminous coal collected from an underground coal mine in the Southern Coalfields in New South Wales, Australia. The coal blocks were cast in plaster and cored using a 26 The experiments were conducted under dry conditions. The coal samples were firstly placed in an oven at 50 Permeability tests were first performed on the resin-coated coal samples. Then, the outlet face of the samples was covered with two TSLs. Samples CP 1-3 and CN 1-3 were covered with TSL-1, while samples CP 4-6 and CN 4-6 were covered with TSL-2 ( The apparatus used in the experiments is shown schematically in CH CSG is mainly composed of CH Coal permeability is dependent on the type of the flowing gas because of the different adsorption characteristics associated with the type of gas ( The following testing procedure was followed: The coal sample was put in the core holder and the confining pressure was applied. The confining pressure was set to be 0.69 Helium was injected through the coal sample with an injection pressure of 1 Once the injection pressure and flow rate were stabilised, the values were recorded and the injection was stopped. Using the following Darcy's equation modified for compressible gas flow, the permeability of the coal sample was calculated: Note that the Klinkenberg slippage correction to the permeability was not applied in this study. To apply the Klinkenberg slippage correction, the permeability tests are required to be carried out under different pressures. Nevertheless, coal permeability is significantly pressure dependant due to different degrees of gas adsorption and stress effects under different pressures ( Then the outlet valve was closed and the core holder was pressurised with CO Then the sample was vacuumed for 12 Helium injection was performed the second time. If all of the CO CH Afterwards the sample was removed from the core holder and TSL material was applied on the outlet face of the sample. After 28 For each test, He was injected three times and the He permeability results were not reproducible after CO To quantitatively investigate the influence of gas adsorption on the permeability, a term called “permeability drop” was applied for the test results. The “permeability drop” is defined as: Based on the above equation, the average “permeability drop” results are calculated by considering the bedding directions and the results are shown in The results show that gas adsorption has higher effect in reducing permeability for samples normal to bedding planes compared with samples parallel to bedding planes. For instance, the average permeability for samples normal to bedding planes is only about 69% of the original permeability after CO Homogeneous, non-fractured coal is relatively impermeable to gas. The permeability of larger coal masses is predominantly a result of the presence of cleats ( The average permeability results for samples parallel and normal to bedding planes are shown in Although the permeability of CH The permeability results of coal samples to CO Before TSL applications, the permeability results showed substantial variations from sample to sample. The permeability measured by CO After TSL applications, the permeability of coal samples was significantly reduced and the degree of decrease in permeability also varied from sample to sample. Specifically, the permeability of coal samples treated by TSL-1 was decreased from two to four orders of magnitude, while the permeability of coal samples treated by TSL-2 was decreased by one to five orders of magnitude. It is important to point out that after TSL applications, the permeability results for all the coal samples are in the range of nanodarcies regardless of the original permeabilities. The results have shown that the TSLs are very effective in reducing gas permeability of coal with different permeability values. A schematic of the coal permeability test is shown in Assuming According to Boyle's law for isothermal flow, the left hand sides for the three equations are the same. The equations can be simplified as Eq. The high The high injection pressure test is a destructive test, as the final stage of this test would be a detachment of the liner from the coal substrate. Therefore, it is not feasible to use different gas phases for this test. As CH A systematic procedure was followed for this test. The initial injection pressure was set as 1.03 As shown in The adhesion strength results are also presented in  After the high injection pressure tests, the liner material was removed from the failed sample to analyse the failure mode. As can be seen from In order to use TSLs for gas management in underground coal mines, the TSL materials should have adequate bond strength on coal. For laboratory tests, TSL materials were applied on coal samples that were dry, clean and intact. However, for field applications, many factors may influence the adhesion strength on coal, such as moisture, surface contaminations (dust) or coal integrity ( For gas management in underground coal mines, TSLs can be used for three purposes: reducing irregular gas emissions during roadway excavations, sealing the goaf areas and sealing the gas drainage holes to reduce dilution of the drained gas. When using TSLs to seal the irregular gas emission area during roadway development, the In field applications, there is a concern that gas may build-up behind the TSLs and this may increase the risk of coal and gas outburst in stressed areas. Based on the high injection pressure tests, TSLs will detach from the coal ribs if the pressure behind the TSLs are higher than the adhesion strength. This pressure build-up may also pose some potential risk, which needs further investigation. Besides, it is recommended TSLs be applied together with effective gas drainage system, which will not only reduce the gas emission but also enhance the gas recovery. Single phase gas permeability tests were conducted on TSL-coated coal samples to investigate the efficiency of using TSLs as a gas management tool in underground coal mines. This pilot research considers the effects of gas adsorption and coal bedding plane directions. The effect of The injection of CO Bedding directions have a significant effect on the coal permeability. The permeability of coal samples parallel to bedding planes is much higher than that for coal samples normal to bedding planes. This is due to the nature of cleat systems inside coal: face cleats are more permeable than butt cleats. After the application of TSLs with a thickness of 5 High injection pressure tests reveal that the TSL material may fail due to the high pressure under the TSL skin. The results are in good agreement with the adhesion strength. However, the relationship between the failure pressure and the adhesion strength should be further investigated. TSLs may also fail due to the gas pressure when using them to reduce the irregular gas emissions, and extra care needs to be taken for this type of applications. However, the gas pressure would not be a problem when using TSLs for sealing the gas drainage holes and goafs, as the TSL application areas have already been degassed for these conditions and gas pressure cannot build up behind the TSLs. It is recommended TSLs be applied with effective gas drainage system for the purpose of reducing gas emission rate and increasing the gas recovery rate. There has been limited research in this area. It is obvious that further research needs to be conducted to consider more realistic conditions, such as the effects of The authors would like to thank Mr. Kanchana Gamage from School of Mining Engineering UNSW Australia for helping with the preparation of the coal cores. The authors would also like to thank Dr. Yu Jing from School of Petroleum Engineering UNSW Australia for the help with the preparation and execution of the permeability tests. Constructive suggestions from Mr. Duncan Chalmers are also acknowledged.