The chapter, arranged in three sections, discusses the working of pumps and compressors and piping arrangements. Typical process pump types are introduced. Pertinent variables, namely, head, capacity, efficiency and power are defined. Pump and system characteristic curves relating pertinent flow variables and associated working equations for pump sizing are elaborated. Concepts like cavitation and NPSH are discussed. NPSH for different liquid and pump types are detailed to assist the process engineer. The next section elaborates the size of a multistage compressor with inter-stage coolers with inter-stage pressure drop for a polytropic compression process. The criteria for selection of pump and compressor type for different applications and the affinity and fan laws to adjust the performance of the centrifugal pumps and compressors are discussed in the respective sections, which conclude with a brief outline of capacity control. The steps for the sizing of a pump and multistage compressor along with the design of a hydraulic circuit involving a pump are enumerated and illustrated by solved problems at the end of the chapter. The last section elaborates on piping for process, utility, vent, drainage systems and piping codes and services. Different valve types and pipe fittings are discussed along with pressure drop calculations using equivalent length and velocity head concepts. The section concludes with some typical process piping systems and good piping layout practices.Same size as main line for gas release at an emergency Sized for 50% normal gas flow rate for only start-up and shutdown purpose Same size as vessel vents for only purging 1″ for small venting volume, e.g., LPG service pump vent, compressor vent, vent for on-stream maintenance of equipment handling LPG/flammable gas Process requirements, e.g.,vent/drain for pumps, control valve, level instruments, miscellaneous piping parts, on-stream maintenance Equipment and piping with dead ends, e.g., shell cover of S&T HE of floating head type 1″ for on-stream maintenance  Almost all process industries handle fluids, which commonly, are water and aqueous solutions, hydrocarbons and organic liquids, inorganic liquids, gases and vapours. This calls for a working knowledge of the various types of pumps, compressors, pipes and pipe fittings, as well as their usage. One newly initiated to the industry will come across the use of two terms ‘pressure’ and ‘head’ interchangeably in a qualitative sense. Due to the use of different codes, one may also find a mix up of units during discussions, particularly for the pipe and pipe fitting dimensions (mm, as well as inch), as well as their pressure ratings (psi, kPa, kg/cm Pumps are bought out items. Engineering around the pump includes piping, pipe fittings and instrumentation directly related to the process liquid it pumps. It should also include special requirements of certain applications like: flushing of the mechanical seal using an external fluid cooling of mechanical seal or gland cooling arrangements for ‘hot’ pumps (for hot fluids) for its bearing, seal/gland/pedestal/casing.  In industry, often, pumps are provided with a spare. Industrial installations have the following typical features: isolation (gate) valves upstream and downstream of the pump–essential to isolate and drain the pump casing before handing over for maintenance. suction strainer–arrests particulates in the incoming liquid and prevents pump damage; during commissioning and start-up, the strainers require more frequent cleaning. pressure gauge on suction and discharge line to monitor the hydraulic health of the flow circuit, e.g., clogging of lines, incorrect line up of piping, etc. The discharge pressure gauge of a centrifugal pump showing that the pump is unable to develop pressure often points to cavitation (discussed later). Unusual fall in pump suction pressure may suggest suction line choking–often in the suction strainer. non–return valve in the centrifugal pump discharge prevents backflow through the pump when either idle or on tripping due to some mal-operation; such backflow may turn the impeller in the reverse direction and loosen it from the shaft. valve and piping arrangements for changing over from running to standby or spare pump. The reader is encouraged to decide on the step by step procedure to change over from the running pump to the spare one. drain and vent arrangements - Draining the process liquid (hazardous or otherwise) is an essential step before handing over the pump and associated piping to maintenance. Venting is required to ensure that the pump casing is filled with liquid during priming. globe valve for flow regulation on the discharge line in case of a centrifugal pump–this is not shown in valve in the suction–discharge bypass line–this is provided only for positive displacement pumps, where, in some cases, the capacity control is effected with a globe valve fitted in this line. A globe valve parallel to a restriction orifice may also be used to ensure a minimum bypass flow in installations of a positive displacement pump. Sometimes a spare may have arrangements for auto-start. It is also common to find a common spare pump for two services, i.e., two pumps for different services with a common spare that can be lined up for either of the services by operating the appropriate valves. As shown in Common pump types are centrifugal and positive displacement. This is the most common pump in industry as it can handle liquids up to a reasonably high viscosity (600 In its simplest form, it consists of an impeller rotating within a casing ( Impellers and stages The impeller consists of a number of blades/vanes mounted on a shaft that projects inside the casing. Pumps where the impeller rotates in the vertical plane are more common than vertical pumps. Liquid entry to the impeller eye may be from one side (single suction), as shown in Centrifugal pumps can also be classified based on the manner of fluid flow through it. In radial flow pumps, the liquid enters at the centre of the impeller and discharges along the impeller blades at right angles to pump shaft while in the axial flow pumps (also called propeller pumps), the discharge is in a direction parallel to the pump shaft. Mixed flow pumps combine the characteristics of radial and axial flow types. A small clearance is necessary between the impeller and the casing to allow free rotation of the impeller within the pump casing. Recirculation of pressurised liquid from the periphery of the impeller to its eye through this clearance is minimised by fitting wear ring(s) that reduces the clearance to a practical low value. Wear rings are replaceable items. Wear ring The rotating shaft enters through the casing and requires a sealing arrangement to prevent leakage of the pumping liquid through the clearance between the shaft and the casing. This would happen when the pressure inside is above atmospheric. In pumps operating under vacuum, air may get sucked in and lead to cavitation. Either a ‘gland seal’ or a ‘mechanical seal’ is used to provide this sealing. Pump seals The positive displacement pumps can be classified as reciprocating pumps, rotary pumps and diaphragm pumps. These pumps operate in a cycle and deliver liquid in discrete volumes. The discharge is approximately constant irrespective of the head at a fixed speed as long as the capacity of the power unit or strength of pump components is not exceeded. The maximum head developed depends on drive power for negligible slippage and the mechanical strength of parts. Continuous delivery can be ensured by using several chambers with overlapping delivery periods. Typical P&ID for a reciprocating and a rotary pump is shown in Reciprocating pumps are used for: Low flow rates as in metering pumps High discharge pressure Clean liquid not containing any solid particles In a reciprocating pump, a cylindrical piston, bucket or round diaphragm moves to and fro in a chamber. Valves at inlet and discharge are usually operated by pressure difference. The pumps can be single acting or double acting with one, two or more cylinders. They are powered by steam cylinders, compressed air (usually for small pumps) or electric motors with a suitable arrangement. The reciprocating pump in Pulsation dampener or an accumulator (not shown in flow pulsation cannot be allowed when it causes piping vibration Pulsation dampening acceleration/frictional loss by pulsation significantly increases pumping power peak pulsation pressure exceeds external relief valve set pressure A back pressure regulator is provided if the difference between the discharge and suction pressure is below 2 Prevent spillage by reverse pressure differential, e.g., feeding to vacuum pump or pumping from a higher-pressure drum Back Pressure Regulator Overfeeding due to acceleration head The suction piping needs to be as short as possible and sized considering the acceleration head for Suction Line Arrangement In rotary pumps, one/more rotating members (vane or screw or gear) displaces the liquid from the suction to the discharge side within a stationary housing. Based on the rotating member, these are classified as gear pumps ( Since the gear pump has no valves or impellers, the frictional loss in gear pumps is much less as compared to reciprocating and centrifugal pumps. This makes gear pumps suitable for pumping viscous liquids like lubricating oil, fuel oil, etc. This is also a positive displacement pump as the diaphragm acts as the piston, which is forced into motion by mechanical linkage, compressed air or fluid from an external pulsating source. Chances of a process fluid leakage are negligible as there is no contact between the liquid and the prime mover shaft, and hence, no seal is required. As the leakage is low, these are useful for handling toxic or expensive liquids. Although slurry transportation is mostly handled by open impeller type centrifugal pumps, a diaphragm pump is used for specific applications like feeding to a jig in the mineral processing industries. It can handle higher solid concentration as compared to other pumps but has low discharge pressure and poor efficiency. It also requires check valves in the suction and discharge nozzle. The rate of energy transmitted to the liquid being pumped is the product of mass flow rate Pump Head and Capacity In pump calculations, the pressure is conventionally expressed as the equivalent height (head) of liquid column If the inlet and outlet nozzles are of the same diameter and located at the same elevation, The pump vendor requires the maximum suction pressure for deciding its seal design pressure. A conservative estimate (on the larger size) of the maximum suction pressure is the design pressure of suction vessel plus the static head due to level difference between the pump suction and suction vessel. Hydraulic calculations are done using the normal flow rate ( The minimum flow rate Power transmitted to the fluid is the Fluid Horse Power, Power input to pump shaft The power output of the pump motor is the same as Power Motor Power (kW) The drive motor can be single-phase or 3-phase. The use of single-phase is recommended up to 75 The motor supply voltage is selected from the suggestions in  The power factor (  Efficiency    Values for motor efficiency shown in Cavitation is characterised by the presence of vapour inside a pump during its operation. In noise and vibration fluctuating discharge pressure/abnormally low discharge pressure/no pressure shown by the discharge pressure gauge fluctuating motor current The only way to avoid cavitation is to ensure that the pressure at all points inside the pump is above the vapour pressure ( In centrifugal pumps, the impeller eye is the lowest pressure location inside the pump. The pressure difference ( ISO 9906 defines the procedure for obtaining In absence of the manufacturer’s characteristics, For hot/boiling liquids where the pressure in the suction tank is the vapour pressure at the tank temperature, Suggested margins to prevent cavitation at rated flow rate are. Pumping of liquid at the boiling point: Pumping of subcooled liquid: Boiler feedwater pumps: The absolute vapour pressure of the liquid For estimating If upstream vessel temperature is above ambient, then If upstream vessel temperature is below ambient (cryogenic services), For boiling liquids and also for slightly subcooled liquids or liquid saturated with inert gas/entrained gas, For completely subcooled liquids/liquids free of inert gas If the liquid is water from an oil-water separator, the vapour pressure of separated oil should be used   The acceleration head    Characteristics of a centrifugal pump refer to the following relationships at constant impeller speed: flow rate and the corresponding head: ( power input to the pump shaft ( variation of pump efficiency variation of The pump manufacturer provides these characteristic graphs. Since a range of impeller diameter can be fitted to the same casing, a family of curves is presented, as can be seen in These characteristics are determined experimentally with water as the pumped liquid. Correction is only required if the pumping liquid viscosity is above 50 The Shut-off and run-out At a given speed, the pump operates along a particular curve only, and the head developed is uniquely determined for a given flow rate by impeller rotation speed. If a process requires a flow rate lower than that specified by the characteristic curve at a particular head, the pump discharge is throttled to bring the head to the value indicated in the characteristic curve. Variable speed drivers change characteristic pump curves by changing the impeller speed. In the absence of viscosity correction, the head developed for all liquids is the same, and the Depending on the impeller design, the pump Curve types The typical For two pumps in Pumps connected in parallel are used when Required flow is higher than the maximum discharge from a single pump For a more efficient operation by locating the operating point of each pump close to maximum efficiency. System has variable flow requirements, which can be met by switching parallel pumps on and off. In this arrangement, non-return valves (not shown in   The system characteristic curve describes the In practical situations, the piping and equipment are often connected in series and/or parallel. The effect of the same components connected in series and parallel are presented in The designer prefers the operating point on the  Effect of changing impeller diameter and rpm can be easily estimated using affinity laws that relate System Affinity laws System characteristics and pump efficiency does not change with change in impeller speed. However, in practice, a reduction in speed results in a slight decrease in efficiency, which can be estimated up to 50% reduction in speed as The characteristic curve of a reciprocating and a rotary pump are presented in These pumps are designed with the minimum tolerance possible to obtain the highest possible efficiency and suction. Tolerances provided are more when the pumps handle highly viscous liquids, hot liquids and liquids containing particulate matter. Since positive displacement pumps deliver a fixed volume of liquid in each cycle of operation, ideally, the capacity is not affected by the head against which it delivers. The only factor affecting its performance is the speed of operation, unlike centrifugal pumps, where the flow changes considerably (as discussed above) with pressure differential. In reality, some amount of fluid leakage occurs from discharge to suction side as the pressure differential increases, and this reduces the effective flow rate of the pump. Pump selection is usually an integral part of complete hydraulic design. Selection for a particular service is based on: liquid flow rate required suction head which includes the total head in the pipeline system and suction and discharge pressure liquid properties (specific gravity, viscosity, vapour pressure at operating temperature, presence of solids, etc.) reliability availability of utilities to run the pump operating cost and investment cost It is also important to ensure that the selected pump size allows sufficient pressure drop across the control valve(s) to operate satisfactorily over the full range of flow. The range of operation of the three most widely used pumps is presented in Among the positive displacement pumps, the choice is usually rotary and then reciprocating except for low viscosity liquids, as the suction-discharge leakage flow increases at lower viscosity. Rotary pump is preferred for liquids with a viscosity above 22 presence of abrasive solids in the liquid being pumped. Due to small clearance, this causes severe erosion of parts. The information available in Designer’s steps for finalising a hydraulic circuit (Piping and Pump) Inputs: P&ID and Isometric drawing of a plant Consolidate information on liquid flow rate: Normal liquid properties: composition, density, viscosity, corrosive nature, presence of solid, vapour pressure at pumping temperature Select material of construction for pipe and fittings, nominal size and schedule no based on a preliminary estimate of operating velocity (say ∼2 Estimate straight pipe length, add the equivalent length of all fittings, include ∼0.8 Generate data for the system characteristic ( If In case, two pumps are considered, the piping around the pump bay has to be appropriate. Check characteristic curve for parallel connection of centrifugal pumps ( Estimate pump suction and discharge pressure and Make a preliminary selection of pump type based on Consult pump vendor to finalise pump selection. In the case of centrifugal pump, consider cases of ‘drooping towards shut-off,’ ‘steep’ or ‘flat’ characteristic curve, as discussed in On the pump Check from lowering the pump elevation to gain a static height advantage increasing the liquid level in the upstream vessel/tower supplying the liquid or in case of a closed vessel, increasing the vessel pressure, if possible Reducing head losses in pump suction piping by opting for a larger diameter pipe, minimising the number of fittings shortening pipe length, whichever is feasible. Decreasing the temperature of the liquid being pumped Reducing the impeller speed of a variable speed centrifugal pump/opting for a different pump, which requires lower The first four methods remedy cavitation by increasing Reducing the flow rate through the pump also reduces the pressure drop in the suction line and increases suction pressure. In operating plants, this may be a temporary solution but is mostly unacceptable while designing. Once pump can deliver run-out flow is beyond Check maximum shut-off pressure for the pump–this must be below the discharge piping and attached system design pressure and also below the pressure setting of the pressure safety valve fitted thereon. Or else the following may be adopted Increase design pressure of pump discharge system Provide safety valve Select a pump with lower shut off pressure Calculate pump BHP and decide on motor ratings using information in Compressors are used for pressurising gases, ensure flow through a process, say for separate heavy hydrocarbon mixtures or to obtain supercooled gases. These are usually used for flows ranging from 1700 to 170,000 These are also bought out items similar to pumps and are finally selected in consultation with the vendor. The following steps are followed by the process designer before approaching the vendor: Selection of compressor type – reciprocating/rotary and its subtype Arriving at the gross specification (of the potential types), e.g., single/multistage, pressure ratio of the stages, efficiency, BHP, temperature rise, provision of intercooler, etc. Since the overall characteristics and types of compressors are similar to pumps, the equipment description is kept to a minimum. Only the characteristics of centrifugal compressors are elaborated in this text. Reciprocating compressors are usually of smaller capacity and often selected/sized in consultation with vendors like M/s Ingersoll Rand. Compressor type is selected based on the following, arranged in the approximate order of importance Capacity, suction volumetric flow rate temperature limitations method of sealing, method of lubrication power consumption serviceability cost molecular weight and gas density at suction Centrifugal compressors are suitable for handling large volumes of gas at moderate pressure and are usually selected if it can handle the required flow with a reasonable efficiency. It is suitable for flows A reciprocating compressor is preferred when the required flow is low, or the required head is so high that a centrifugal compressor would require an undesirably large number of stages. A full capacity spare is generally required for reciprocating compressors since they require high maintenance and cannot be operated uninterrupted for a long period (more than 2 years). An alternative arrangement can be three compressors of half capacity with two running in parallel and the third as a spare. Rotary compressors are provided only when there are definite advantages over a reciprocating compressor, or there is the proven experience of acceptable performance. Axial compressors are used for handling larger volumes of gas, and these are more efficient than centrifugal compressors but should be used only for non-corrosive gases like air or sweet natural gas. Their major disadvantages include limited operating range, more prone to corrosion and erosion and susceptibility to deposits.  Centrifugal compressors exhibit several similarities with centrifugal pumps. Both have vaned impellers mounted on a shaft rotating at high speed to impart kinetic energy that gets converted to pressure head and adds to the static head. The fluid entering from one end of the impeller is directed through a diffuser to a volute from which, it is discharged to the process. A single-stage compressor can handle inlet flow rates from 175 to 255,000 m For higher head requirements (>4.5 kNm/kg), which corresponds to pressure ratios above 1.6 for air and inlet flow rate ranging from 850 to 340,000 Multi-stage compressor   lower energy requirement lower final discharge temperature (when inter-stage cooling is used) smaller size of subsequent stages as the volume decreases progressively lower pressure ratio (and inter-stage cooling) in each stage can produce compressors with substantially high overall pressure ratio. Using a lower pressure ratio in the stages limits the maximum temperature in the compression process and saves on costlier metallurgy otherwise warranted.   multi-stage machines are more elaborate and complex facility for inter-stage cooling is common, and this may be integrated or external to the compressor Centrifugal compressor installations typically have two critical speed – one for the machine itself and the other for its driver that may be a turbine. Safe and stable operation is ensured by the operating speed range being well above the higher critical speed. During start-up, the rpm is increased quickly to ensure the minimum duration of operation close to the critical speeds. In the basic arrangement (straight through compressor), the compressor is provided with an inlet and a discharge nozzle at the two ends. Gas entering through the inlet nozzle passes through the inlet channel into the casing and then through the diffuser of the first impeller. Return bends guide the gas into the return channels and into the next impeller. From the last diffuser, the gas enters the discharge volute and is directed through the discharge nozzle (at the other end) into the pipeline system. Each compressor stage thus includes the return bend, return channel, impeller and diffuser. Stage efficiency is governed by the impeller design; the flow pattern at the impeller entry and the gradual flow area increase downstream. Sleeves installed between adjacent impellers hold them in position on the shaft. They also act as wearing surfaces for inter-stage seals and isolate the shaft from the process gas. Impeller and sleeve constitute the rotor assembly. A balancing drum and a thrust disc are often provided to equalise the rotor axial thrust. Usually, impellers are closed type with vanes enclosed inside discs, which confine the gas and act as a stiffener to prevent vane distortion. Often for very large flow and low-pressure requirements, two inlet nozzles at two ends and a central common discharge nozzle are adopted to reduce the casing size. The arrangement is like two compressors connected in parallel, with a common outlet. This arrangement doubles the compressor capacity for the same casing size. These compressors have a maximum of four stages. Casings can be either horizontally or vertically split. Vertically split casings are used above 35 Multi-stage compressors are usually provided with inter-stage cooling in order to mimic an isothermal process that has higher efficiency. Compressors handling high molecular weight gases require more cooling. Usually, external heat exchangers between two compressor bodies are used as inter-stage coolers. Practically, not more than two intercoolers are used. Heavier components may condense in the intercooler that needs to be separated using knockout drum following the inter-stage cooler. Since condensation reduces the molecular weight of the gas entering the next stage and power requirement is inversely proportional to molecular weight, the power required for the stage following a liquid knock out in the intercooler must be estimated based on the corrected molecular weight, or else the value is underestimated. Inter-stage cooling Similar to centrifugal pumps, a centrifugal compressor displays a characteristic curve corresponding to each impeller capacity. By varying the impeller speed, it can deliver constant capacity at variable pressure, variable capacity at constant pressure, and a combination of variable capacity and variable pressure. Thus, they can be used to meet a range of capacity-pressure conditions within the operating limit of compressor and its driver. The process parameters are the suction and discharge pressure and compressor capacity. If two variables are known, the third can be obtained from the characteristic curve ( Each curve in Stonewalling and Surging The performance of centrifugal compressors at speeds other than the design speed can be predicted from affinity laws (commonly known as fan laws) relating speed, capacity, BHP and density. The affinity laws applicable for fans as well as centrifugal compressors can be stated as Fan laws Capacity varies directly with speed ratio Pressure varies directly with the square of speed ratio Horsepower varies directly with the cube of speed ratio Horsepower and pressure vary inversely with absolute temperature at constant speed and capacity Horsepower and pressure vary directly with density at constant speed and capacity Although the fan laws suggest an improved performance with faster impeller speed, there is a practical limit to the maximum rotational speed that is decided by the yield stress of the impeller material, rotor critical speed and the proximity of gas velocity corresponding to Mach number of unity. A typical datasheet format for a centrifugal compressor is shown in Compressor characteristics refer to the relationship between capacity and suction and discharge pressure. The suction and discharge pressures ( Due to the compressibility of the gas phase, one of the most confusing aspects of sizing compressors and blowers is a proper specification of capacity that has to be derived from the process requirements. In addition, a compressor is often required to serve a variety of conditions resulting in a wide range of capacities. Common ways of specifying capacity in terms of flow rate are inlet cubic meter per hour, actual cubic meter per hour, standard cubic meter per hour and normal cubic meter per hour. The reference conditions for each flow rate definition are mentioned in Compressor sizing is always based on inlet cubic meter per hour (ICMH), which is the flow rate at the suction condition/inlet flange. Other flow rates are expressed as the equivalent  Compression Process The basic relationship obeyed by isothermal, isentropic and polytropic processes are – Thus the power consumption for compression, is the product of the head developed For multistage compression, the power consumption in the This gives the total Where, Inter-stage pressure drop, For centrifugal compressors, To estimate Reciprocating compressors can be approximated to perform an isentropic compression since the heat generated by friction due to piston movement is removed by cooling of the cylinder. For most water cooled jacket cylinders, The brake horse power for the  The total The head developed for stage where   Polytropic head for individual stages can be added to obtain total head. However, this is not true for an isentropic head. For stage Discharge temperature  From the estimation of discharge temperature For appreciable condensate formation and removal in the intercoolers, the variation in flow rate and physical properties need to be considered in the sizing equations. In a reciprocating compressor, it is important to ensure that the coolant temperature is above the dew point of the gas. Otherwise, vapour may condense at the compressor inner surface, which is at the lowest cooling temperature under the highest discharge pressure. Even if the formed liquid fraction is small, it can damage the piston rings. An optimum compressor design assumes equal temperature distribution in each stage which ensures equal Number of compression stages For negligible interstage pressure drop, this gives the number of compression stages The maximum compression ratio per stage is also restricted by the maximum discharge temperature at each stage ( For the centrifugal compressor, in general, the polytropic head is maximum 3500 A guideline for selecting the number of stages for a reciprocating compressor is suggested in It is important to note that for compressor sizing and preparation of compressor data sheets, the inlet compressibility Use of average properties However, the head equation is relatively insensitive to Based on the discussions in Fluid Name Inlet Conditions Capacity/Flow Rate:Normal Suction Temperature Suction Pressure RH(%) Atmospheric Pressure/Site Elevation Fluctuations in Inlet Condition Due to the compressibility of fluid, fluctuations in inlet conditions have a large effect on compressor performance. Therefore, all conceivable condition fluctuations need to be considered at the design stage. If a compressor is required for several cases of operation, the inlet condition for each case needs to be specified individually. Conditions in special cases, e.g., regeneration, start-up, N Pressure at Discharge Gas Physical Properties Gas Density at Molecular weight For some gases (say, for example, natural gas), the data on molecular weight may not be available and the specific gravity Polytropic exponent Compressibility factor at suction Corrosive nature Composition (volume or weight basis) Mechanical Design Data Driver Type (Motor/Turbine, etc.) Material of construction (if specified from experience) Set Pressure of safety valve (Reciprocating Compressor) It may be noted that the proposed design is a simplified version good enough for estimation, but for a detailed design, the different value of compressibility factor at constant temperature and constant pressure needs to be considered. One such technique, the Schultz method, is referred to in ASME-PTC-10 (Performance Test Code) due to its accuracy. Compressor capacity is controlled by any of the following arrangements:    Piping, an essential component in any process, is not just an assembly of pipes, fittings, valves, etc. for transportation of fluids but an integral part of the process and constitutes a considerable part of the plant cost. Process piping includes any piping system outside the scope of plumbing codes, including piping for the transport of corrosive or toxic fluids and piping present under severe conditions. Utility piping (e.g., air, steam, water, compressed air, fuels, etc.) and drainage piping system are also a part of process piping. A thorough knowledge of piping system around various equipment, good practices of layout, applicable codes and standard, are essential for a safe and economical design of a plant that is easier to operate and also easier to upgrade. The terms ‘pipes’ and ‘tubes’ are often used interchangeably. Although there is no clear cut difference between the two terms, the following considerations in Industrial piping is also often classified as small bore (up to 50 Piping is manufactured and installed as per ASME B 31 code series in the United States, BS in the United Kingdom and IS code in India. There are a number of similarities in each Code, such as the calculation of minimum wall thickness, inspection and testing. However, the exact rules are different, depending on the type of facility. Allowable stresses are also different in each code, reflecting a different factor of safety based on the expected use and operation of the facility. Typically piping codes address the following design requirements: Allowable stress and stress limits Allowable dead loads and load limits Allowable live loads and load limits Material of construction Minimum wall thickness Maximum deflection Seismic load Thermal expansion The piping codes do not include fittings, valves, flanges and meters but define their design requirements by reference to standards that provide specific design criteria and rules for these components. Standards apply to (i) dimensions (dimensional standards), which ensure interchangeability between similar components manufactured by different designers and (ii) performance of system components (pressure integrity standards), which ensure equivalent functioning of components designed and manufactured to the same standard. Industrial piping are colour coded, and in India, the applicable code is IS 2379 (1990). Pipe sizes are documented by a number of standards, including API 5L, ANSI/ASME B36.10M in the US, BS 1600 and BS 1387 in the United Kingdom and IS 1239 in India. Each code designates pipe sizes by diameter and thickness where The outside diameter for liquid flow in gas processing facilities, In two-phase flow, In gas producing facilities, piping segments are short, and pressure drop is low while in gas gathering pipelines, transmission, relief or vertical pipelines, longer segments result in a higher pressure drop. Pipe wall thickness In most cases, the designer chooses the material and then the size of the piping and its pressure rating from the standards. In some cases, the designer may be required to check the safe pressure limit and the dimensional allowance actually present for specific operating conditions. Interchangeability of the pipe and fittings is often a consideration while deciding upon the pipe size. An example of this is the use of 40 schedule 1 inch lines for all sampling lines in a particular type of plant. Such standardisation reduces cost right from the design office to the field and even helps to reduce inventory carrying cost. BIS (IS 1239: 2004) uses millimetres for normal size. BIS and its equivalent BS specifications are shown in Nominal pipe size (NPS) is used in the United States. It specifies the inside diameter In general, no piping less than Schedule Number refers to the pipe wall thickness, and thereby its pressure rating. As the schedule number increases, the wall thickness increases and the inside diameter decreases. A simple rule of thumb to calculate Schedule Number is Schedule Number Carbon Steel Pipes have schedule nos.: 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120, 140, and 160. For pipes less than Nominal Bore (NB), along with Schedule number is used in British Standards. The European equivalent to NPS is DN (Diamètre Nominal/nominal diameter). The pipe sizes are specified in millimetres. The equivalence of NPS (in inches) and DN (in mm) is listed in European designation Steel tubes are designated by nominal bore and wall thickness in IS 1239(2004) and are classified as (i) light, medium and heavy depending on wall thickness; (ii) screwed, socketed or plain end, bevel end to denote end condition and (iii) black or galvanised to denote surface condition. Indian designation Another way of specifying the rating of pipes and fittings is by the maximum allowable working pressure. This is mostly specified in psi and marked as  Specific piping services have their characteristic features: Water pipes: Carbon steel pipe with screwed fittings is used for general water service. Demineralised water or other high purity water use alloy steel material. Small-bore pipes ( Steam piping: Condensation is unavoidable in any steam pipe. The flow of condensate, along with steam in two-phase flow, creates abnormal vibration (steam hammering). For avoiding this, steam lines are always inclined (100 Hazardous and hydrocarbon services use only welded or flanged joints. Screwed connections are avoided to prevent leakages. Slurry pipes: Choking is a perennial problem with slurry lines. Dismountable joints are provided at strategic locations for easy cleaning of choked sections. Blind flanges (see fittings) at line ends may be used to clear choking and also to introduce a flushing liquid. Dedicated stubs at appropriate locations in the pipeline system are usually provided for introducing flushing liquid. The lines are flushed and kept filled with flushing liquid when not in use for longer durations. For example, to prevent solidification of bitumen in pipelines, the lines are flushed and left filled with gas oil when not in use. Insulation: Both hot (above 60°C) and cold (−180 to 20°C) piping services require insulation. Even if the surface temperature is around 60°C, insulation may be provided for safety against scalds and burns on contact. For higher (and low) temperatures, insulation is desirable from economic considerations as it reduces heat loss (ingress) and saves energy. The most common insulation material in the industry is glass wool. Hotline insulation encloses it in aluminium sheet casing. Minimum insulation thickness is 15 Cold insulation is more critical, and in this case, the glass wool is protected by a cement cover that prevents entry and condensation of atmospheric moisture. In small plants and for small equipment and small diameter pipes, say instrumentation lines, sampling pipes, etc., asbestos rope is a common insulating material. In many cases, the asbestos rope layer is covered with a coating of Plaster of Paris. Steam Tracing: When the hot liquid has a tendency to congeal on cooling, simple insulation may not suffice. Low-pressure steam pipes usually Plant piping normally runs on elevated racks in the plant battery area. This allows movement of personnel and equipment like crane, tractor, etc. on the plant floor. Pipes supported on racks rest on pipe shoes that allow free expansion by sliding. In some cases, a pipe may be anchored at one end and free to expand by sliding on the shoes while it is placed between guides. Allowing free expansion of pipe is the prime consideration apart from supporting and holding the pipe in place. Under no circumstance is a piping designed to transmit any load (force or moment) on the vessel or equipment to which it is connected. A thorough flexibility analysis of piping layouts in the design stage is required to ensure this. Columns and brackets supporting pipe racks may also support cable trays associated with electrical power distribution and also the instrument cable trays. Pipe joint selection is based on (i) criticality of service, i.e., the resulting potential hazard from any leakage and (ii) pressure rating. Common pipe joints with their usage and typical features are listed in Common pipe fittings may be classified as those involved in flow regulation, e.g., different valve types and those not involved in flow regulation, namely bends, elbows, T, reducer, expander, union, nipple, short piece, etc. Each of these is manufactured according to standards. In addition, orifice plates are fitted in pipes to limit maximum downstream pressure. These are called restriction orifice. A minimum flow in pump suction-discharge bypass lines may also be ensured by fitting an orifice plate in it. Blinds are fitted to ensure ‘no flow’ through the pipe and are used to isolate process plant sections and individual equipment for maintenance, inspection or other purposes. Valves are classified based on their primary function, as shown in Valves Like any other fitting, valves are rated for the maximum allowable pressure of the interconnecting piping systems.       Safety valves guard against any overpressure (exceeding the maximum allowable pressure) in the pipe and vessel. Ideally, the pressure relief valve is directly mounted on a nozzle connected to the pipe/vessel to be protected. Safety valves ‘pop’ at pressure preset by its spring tension. Some safety valves may have a handle to manually ‘pop’ and release the overpressure. The discharge material from the safety valve is safely disposed to a vent or flare or a blowdown vessel. Once the overpressure is relieved, the safety valve stops popping and sits back. However, this is rarely the case, and the valve sits back only after its upstream pressure falls reasonably below the popping pressure. Safety valves and Relief valves differ in their release rate characteristics. Similar to control valves, these are also available in a variety of configurations and materials and are rated in accordance with the ANSI and API pressure classes, flange ratings, and end connection. Depending on the nature of fluid discharged during popping, downstream of the valve may discharge to atmosphere, flare header, or another column or vessel. The exact disposal option is decided based on safety considerations. Safety valves Rupture disk performs the same function as the safety valve. The only difference arises from the fact that the disk ruptures allowing material flow and release of overpressure. This necessitates the replacement of disk after every rupture. Similar to the safety valve, the safe disposal of the discharged fluid has to be ensured. Rupture Disc Flanges connect two pieces of pipe or a pipe with a vessel nozzle. These are available in various construction options, namely slip-on, threaded, socket weld or weld neck. Slip-on, socket-weld and threaded-neck flanges should not be used in most high-pressure applications, especially for pipe above 3 or 4-inch nominal size. Weld-neck flanges are preferred for higher pressure applications. Flanges The flange face, or the part of the flange that makes the physical connection may be a flat face, raised face (RF) or ring-type joint (RTJ). Flat-face is used only in low-pressure ANSI 150 flanges and not in high-pressure applications. RF and RTJ flanges are commonly used in the oil and gas pipeline applications. RF flanges are less expensive and easier to use, where tight clearances make it difficult to separate the flanges apart for insertion of the ring. RTJ flanges tend to seal better at higher pressures. Typically, Threaded pipe: Small diameter threaded pipe should have a minimum 6 Blind flanges are used to ensure definite closure of flow in a line or nozzle. It is usually a circular disc that is placed between two flanges with gasket, and the flange pair assembly is then bolted. These have an integral ‘tail’ attached that protrudes out from the flange joint so that one knows that a blind flange is ‘in place’ and ‘no-flow’ is confirmed. The tail of a blind flange Blind Flanges End blinds are used for closing pipe, or nozzle ends. These have bolt holes for fixing with the line/nozzle flange and may not have a tail as one can locate it easily. In some installations, it is difficult to create space between the pair of flanges to insert the blind. In such cases, ‘spectacle bind’ is used. These have a circular disc, and attached to its tail is another disc with a hole that matches the pipe opening size. The arrangement looks like a pair of spectacles with one being a solid circular disc and the other having a large hole. When the blind is ‘in,’ it shuts the flow, and one can see the disc with hole protruding outside that confirms the presence of the blind. The position of the discs is simply reversed when the isolation is to be removed and the flow to be restored. Since both the discs have the same thickness, the movement of the flanges required for ‘reversing the blind’ is minimum. Feed and product run down lines at the battery limit of a plant ( Some flange connections require frequent changeover between ‘positive isolation’ and ‘flow allowed’ conditions. Proprietary spectacle blinds with a support/fulcrum are available to reverse the blind quickly. They are quite expensive. Pipes with operating temperatures reasonably higher or lower than the ambient temperature are provided with expansion loops or expansion bellows to accommodate thermal expansion. Typically, piping systems subjected to temperature changes greater than 30–45°C require an expansion loop or bellows when the pipe length between turns exceeds 12m. Such loops/bellows may require drainage provisions. Piping systems are designed such that it does not transmit/receive any load to/from the vessel/equipment (pump, etc.) to which it is connected. This ensures the vessel design to be performed without considering any force from the upstream and downstream connections. Flexibility analysis of piping is required to be done to check the expansion provision requirement. Expansion loops and Bellows Frictional pressure drop in the straight section of pipeline Typical fluid velocity and allowable pressure drop that can be used for pipe sizing are provided in The frictional, pressure drop across pipe fittings (bends, tees, elbows, contractions, expansions, valves etc.) are estimated by the designer either as (i) Bends with a minimum radius of 3 times the nominal diameter are used in slurry lines. In the absence of data on valve characteristics, the pressure drop across the control valve is assumed to be 50 A large diameter pipe is more costly but offers a lower pressure drop. ‘Economic pipe diameter’ is therefore an optimum based on the balance between the incremental costs for energy spent on pumping and the cost of the pipe. A detailed evaluation is not necessary for individual piping sections in a plant, and the sizing is done based on the practice of economic velocity range ( Economic pipe diameter In addition to the main piping topics covered earlier, the designer needs to know about arrangements for some specific functions and facilities. A few of these are discussed here. This is necessary to remove hazardous materials from equipment and pipelines before man entry for inspection, handing over of lines and equipment for maintenance, etc. In plants that handle flammable materials, prior to commissioning, purging is done to bring down oxygen to a safe level (typically 0.5 to one volume %). Purging is done through supply connections for steam, nitrogen gas, fuel gas and evacuation line. Evacuation lines, if used, are connected to steam ejectors that suck out gases/vapour.  Steamout is carried out under slight positive pressure that is often checked by observing a small fluff of steam through a top vent. Stopping the steam supply tends to immediately create a vacuum due to condensation in the confined space that may draw in air. This may be handled by pressurising the space with nitrogen and maintaining the space pressurised with it. During hydrocarbon plant start-up after steaming out the oxygen/air, fuel gas may be let in to keep the system pressure just above atmospheric pressure.    Steamout (SO) connections are provided at tower bottom, feed surge pump, feed vessel, overhead receiver vessel side, feed and light hydrocarbon pump discharge. These are also provided in the pipelines at the battery limit. N Vent and drain connections are provided on equipment, instruments and lines to remove hazardous materials from plants at shutdown, start-up and on-stream maintenance. The following are the typical features of vent/drain systems High point vents are essential on lines and equipment required to be hydrostatically tested. The minimum vent size is Low point drains are provided in piping or equipment to drain any trapped water, condensate or process liquid. The minimum drain size is Drains provided at low points of control valve stations are on the upstream side of the control valve. Vents/drains for LPG, hydrogen and high-pressure service (≥60 Differential pressure type flow meters, namely orifice, venturi and flow nozzle, require separate drain arrangements for upstream and downstream tapping lines. The most frequently used systems in the actual plant, along with their basic features, are presented in Flushing arrangement with a suitable liquid is necessary for services handling fluids with pour point higher than ambient temperature or fluids containing solids to avoid solidification or line plugging. A light oil, typically gas oil, is usually chosen for flushing lines in heavy hydrocarbon services, such as bitumen or heavy fuel oil. Facility for instrument purge and flushing of equipment during on-stream maintenance and shut down are necessary when congealing liquids are involved. The minimum line size is A typical arrangement of piping around the control valve is shown in The bypass arrangement is provided only when it is required for process safety and operability during maintenance of the control valve. Control valves with hand wheel for manual control of valve opening do not require a bypass as the flow can be regulated manually during control loop failure. Steam traps allow only the condensate to flow out of it. A trap operates to let out all the condensate reaching it, and shuts off the flow when the upstream is free of condensate. These are fitted on steam lines to avoid two-phase flow that leads to steam hammering. A steam trap fitted to the outlet of a steam heater holds the steam upstream. This ensures condensation in the exchanger, and only condensate leaves through the trap. Steam trap types differ in construction and the principle on which it is based. The choice of type and size primarily depends on the condensate load that the trap has to handle. Normally, the selection is from a range of traps from several manufacturers. The trap is sized for normal condensate load and higher warming up load where the time of warming is typically 20–30 Good plant layout practices allow room for equipment, machinery and worker movement to enable operation, maintenance and handling of emergency without disturbing other equipment. The following guidelines during pipeline layout are suggested Sufficient clearance between piping for maintenance, flange attachments, heat insulation, etc. Larger clearance for high-temperature piping with a 90° turn Minimum 2.2 Piping to equipment should allow removal of equipment without requiring to support the dismantled pipe(s). In this regard, special attention to the layout of cable racks, instrument piping, etc is required. If handling equipment, e.g., crane, lifting winch, etc., are required for maintenance of pumps and other machinery, a minimum clear headroom space of 4.5m is required for the handling equipment to move. Pipe routing needs to consider this. Pipe blinds (Spectacle Blind) are provided at inlet and outlet connections of equipment that need to be periodically taken out of service for maintenance or inspection without interfering with the operation of the unit, e.g., parallel heat exchangers, pumps with spares, etc. at battery limits of units connected to other plant piping, which may be in use during shut-down of the unit. for safety during inspection and repair during maintenance all drains not used during normal operation Permanent spectacle blind is used for vessel connection diameter ≥10″ and also for difficult to access locations, e.g., high elevation. Manholes and other access openings require a minimum clearance of 0.75m in front of vessel face/equipment flange (cover plates require larger clearance) and a minimum clearance of 0.3 Usually, the lowest part of any line is provided with a drain line. The bottom of the pipe is typically at an elevation of 400 Pumps, compressors, pipe and pipe fittings are all bought out items and are to be sized by the designer. The related calculations can, therefore, be for (A) preparation of inputs for sending to the vendor for the desired facility, (B) checking the technical correctness and adequacy of the quote from the vendor and (C) verifying the adequacy of an existing facility for a different function/application. The following industrial problem is chosen as an illustration. M/s XYZ Petrochemicals at Haldia, West Bengal manufactures polyethylene terephthalate, for which di-ethylene glycol (DEG) is a raw material. They plan to receive industrial-grade DEG in barges in batches of ∼3000 Specify the pumping system to be installed ( Specify the air compressor for pushing the pipeline content to the receiving tank using compressed air (   The barge may or may not have a pump of its own to feed DEG to the jetty pump. The design, therefore, considers no assistance from the barge pump. Jetty pump suction piping (equivalent) length of 150 The flow temperature (ambient) considered is 30°C. DEG properties at 30°C:  Piping: Internal diameter, Design is for uniform pumping rate, Based on Flow temperature (ambient) considered is 30°C; DEG properties at 30°C: as mentioned above. Piping and fitting details considered Elevation: Tank entry nozzle at +1.4 Tank safe filling height Internal diameter, The pipe ends at tank entry where there will be expansion loss, for which we assume Le/d  Total length to be considered for pressure drop, For steel pipe, roughness, Darcy’s friction factor,  As stated earlier, 150 Pressure loss for the suction end equivalent piping length and the 2  Fluid Horse Power, The power required is in the range that calls for The Motor power  Pressure head at the pump suction.   NPSH available  Service: Diethylene glycol at 30°C, 1115 Operating capacity: 375 Operating head: 95 FHP NPSH available Estimated motor power  Flushing of the DEG filled line is started after the pumping operation and lining up of the compressor to push air from the dock end. As flushing proceeds, there is a plug of air pushing the plug of DEG in the line. A neoprene ball called ‘pig’ may be introduced in the line before pressurising the line with air. The ‘pig’ is launched and unloaded with special arrangements for the same at both ends. When the operation ends, an arrangement to close the tank inlet valve and simultaneously divert the flow to another small vessel with adequate venting is necessary. Under no circumstance, compressed air is allowed to enter the tank. This would simply blow off the tank roof. Engineering around the receiving end, including this vessel, is not within the present scope. The process of flushing is an unsteady state process as the hold up in the pipe, and other parameters change with time. The following assumptions are used: Power required to push the pig is small compared to that required for the DEG plug. The process is isothermal at 30°C. Pressure gradient within the air plug is negligible Initially, about 1 The compressor operates all through at a constant rate (inlet m DEG plug movement starts after the air pressure (gauge) exceeds the static head (1.4 At any point of time t secs, the air plug length is Formulation of the unsteady state problem – Force on DEG plug due to static head of 9.9 Frictional pressure drop in DEG plug Mass balance: air plug Nm  i.e., i.e.,  Mathematical model: Initial conditions @    The solution of the coupled non-linear ODE The solution is shown in The specification of the compressor to be sent out for tendering. This is based on the solution presented in Air compressor: 1800 MW Compressor type: reciprocating, based on Expected no. of stages Say,    Two intercoolers with pressure drop of 50 Assuming equal compression ratio in each stage By trial, In each stage discharge temperature is now below 135°C (408K). Estimation of compressor power Polytropic head developed in stage Estimation of power loss From Cooler load. The BHP estimate is absurdly high for the facility and an alternative is to be found out. The maximum pressure required will be for the first 60–70 Running a lower capacity compressor for a few hours and storing compressed air at around 15 The reader may arrive at the specifications of these two compressors. Increasing the duration of air pushing of the DEG plug from the present value of 1