With the increasing use of hybrid and electrical cars comes an increasing demand for rare earth elements (RREs) needed for the production of car batteries. Currently NiMH batteries contain approximately 3kg of REEs, 11kg of nickel and 1.5kg of cobalt. Leaching with HCl and solvent extraction using Cyanex 923 have been applied to recover metals from this waste. Process has been developed for NiMH car batteries, which can be dismantled manually or mechanically. Depending on the way of dismantling, three different materials can be obtained (cathode plates, anode plates or mixed material). Developed technologies have been designed to recover metals either from cathodic and anodic material or from mixed (cathodic and anodic) material. Hydrochloric acid (8M) is used as a leaching agent at a temperature of 30°C. The extraction system consists of the solvating extractant trialkylphosphine oxide mixture (Cyanex 923) and tributyl phosphate (TBP) diluted in kerosene. A pre-main extraction (8% Cyanex 923, 10% TBP, 82% kerosene) is used to remove Fe and Zn from cathode and mixed material leachates. Zn and Fe are extracted in four extraction stages followed by three scrubbing stages to remove co-extracted metal ions and four stripping stages to remove extracted Zn and Fe (99.9%). Aluminium and REEs are separated from Ni, K, and Mg in three main extraction stages (70% Cyanex 923, 10% TBP, 10% kerosene, 10% 1-Decanol). High purity Ni (>99.9%) in a raffinate is obtained after main extraction. Loaded organic phase is stripped with mixture of 0.9M NaNO3 and 0.1MHNO3 to remove co-extracted Co, Mn and Ni. Aluminium and REEs are recovered by stripping step using 1M HCl after previous scrubbing of organic phase with 1M NaNO3 to remove residual Co and Mn. To determine required parameters McCabe-Thiele diagrams were constructed. Obtained parameters were tested in a counter-current system using pilot plant scale mixer-settlers and all three processes were optimized.Many electronic products are powered by rechargeable batteries. The main use of NiMH batteries is in rechargeable AA, AAA batteries, power tools and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) ( In general 7% of a typical NiMH battery is made up of rare earth elements (REEs); this equates to around 1 The positive electrode of the battery is nickel oxyhydroxide (NiOOH) powder coated on a porous nickel substrate. The cathode and anode are separated by an inert separator made of nylon (polyamide) or polypropylene while the electrolyte is made of potassium hydroxide or sodium hydroxide solution. With the increasing use of HEVs follows a higher demand for more effective recycling methods. Spent portable NiMH batteries have been pyrometallurgically recycled for the Ni and Co content. REEs have not been recovered from the slag, where their concentration is much lower than in the starting material ( Several hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to recycle metal ions from spent portable NiMH batteries in a laboratory scale. Inorganic acids such as hydrochloric ( Depending on the general composition of batteries, the presence of the metals such as Al, Fe, Ni, Co, REEs (Ce, La, Nd, Pr), Mn, Zn etc., can be expected in the leachates. To recover and separate those metal ions, solvent extraction and precipitation were applied in several studies ( Mostly acidic extractants such as Cyanex 272, D2EHPA, PC-88A, Acorga M5640 but also solvating extractants such as Cyanex 923 and TBP were used. Precipitation was applied in the metal ion separation, but solvent extraction was preferred due to possibilities to obtain products with higher purity. A comparison study ( Only a few processes have been tested in the counter-current way. In a study by Wu and co-workers, ( Another process developed in our research group, used mixture of solvating extractant Cyanex 923 and TBP to recover and separate metal (Al, Ce, Co, Fe, K, La, Mg, Mn, Nd, Ni, Pr, Y, Zn) from the hydrochloric media ( The present paper describes the optimization of the process proposed by Larsson and co-workers ( The technology was tested and further developed in the mixer-settlers equipment for the counter-current process. Parameters proposed by Larsson et al. are given in As it is shown in the The main goals of the optimization were: To determine the parameters for the particular steps (stripping of Fe and Zn from the loaded organic phase in the pre-main extraction, scrubbing of Co and Mn from the loaded organic phase by 1 To test the optimized steps in the larger mixer-settler equipment. To fulfill the first goal, McCabe-Thiele diagrams were constructed and mixer-settlers with the volume 120/unit were used. Mixer-settlers with volume 500 A discharged Panasonic battery (the 1st generation) for Toyota Prius HEV was manually dismantled. After dismantling, battery modules were opened and electrode material was removed. Anodes and cathodes were manually separated. For the mixed sample (cathodes and anodes) no separation was needed. The electrodes were washed with ultra-pure water (MilliQ Millipore, > Metal content of the cathodic and anodic material was determined by dissolution of the samples of cathodic and anodic active material (0.2 Leaching experiments were performed in a glass reactors (Lasilaite). Thermostat (Julabo F12) was used to sustain the required temperature. Leaching temperature was 30 In the previous research ( A mixture of trialkyl-phosphine oxides: 14% trioctylphosphine oxide, 42% dioctylmonohexylphosphine oxide, 31% dihexylmonooctylphosphine oxide and 8% trihexylphosphine oxide commercially known as Cyanex 923 (Cytec Inc.) with purity 93% and Tributyl phosphate (Sigma Aldrich) with a purity 96% were used. A counter-current process was tested using mixer-settler equipment described in the Batch experiments were carried out to get data for the construction of McCabe-Thiele diagrams for the optimization of the scrubbing and stripping steps. The experiments were performed by varying O:A ratio, which was 0.05, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10. Organic respectively aqueous samples were mixed in glass tubes using a shaking machine (IKA - Vibrax). The contacting time was 5 Leaching experiments were performed in 2 and 5 For the study, two sets of mixer-settlers with volume 120 The battery contained 38 battery modules. Each battery module consisted of 6 battery cells. One battery cell contained 12 cathode plates (+ separators) and 13 anode plates. The material balance of the battery was following: 74.6 The weight of one battery module was 1040 In general mixtures of rare-earth element (REE) alloys, the so-called mischmetals, designated as AB The chemical analysis confirmed that the majority of the cathodic sample is based on Ni, Co and Mn. There are also Fe, Al, Mg, Y, and Zn present in a lower concentration. Anodic material contains, except previously mentioned metals, REEs originating from the misch-metal. The metal content of cathodic and anodic material is given in the The leaching method in the previous research done by Larsson et al. ( The kinetic study showed that the leaching efficiency of Ni increased very slowly ( Based on the results presented above, large scale leaching of all three materials was performed in the presence of air. Metal concentrations in the leachates are shown in the The resulting solution from leaching of the cathodic material does contain some traces of rare earth elements due to cross-contamination during the dismantling and mechanical separation process. Parameters for several steps of the technologies were not determined in the work of Larsson et al. ( Pre-main extraction developed to extract Fe and Zn from the leachates. Parameters for a stripping were not determined in the proposed technology. Loaded organic phase was prepared by the preforming the extraction and scrubbing steps according to the original technology ( Sample of loaded organic phase was then stripped at different O:A ratio with 5 The concentration of Fe in the loaded organic phases was 0.57 The construction of McCabe-Thiele diagrams for the stripping of Fe and Zn from the loaded organic phase ( Obtained data were tested in a counter current way. Loaded organic phase was stripped with 5 Pre—main extraction for cathodic and mixed material was tested in mixer-settlers (120 Raffinate after pre-main extraction was used as a feed for main extraction, where Al, Co, Mn and REEs are separated from Ni, Mg and K. Approximately 97–99% of Ni is not extracted in the main extraction. To remove entrapped Ni ( When water washing was introduced in the system, the extracted acid was stripped from the loaded organic phase and caused partial stripping of REEs. In the case of anodic material 34% of extracted REEs was stripped out. To eliminate decreases of REEs concentration in the loaded organic phase, washing step was excluded from the process. Ni was completely stripped out in the following step – stripping with a solution containing 0.9 Another step, which has been not optimized in the method proposed by Larsson was the scrubbing of residual Co and Mn from the loaded organic phase, after previously stripping Co, Mn, and Ni with the solution containing 0.9 The McCabe-Thiele diagrams indicate that two scrubbing stages are required to scrub out Mn from the loaded organic phase from mixed and anodic material. The concentration of Mn in the loaded organic phase of cathodic material was very low (0.2 The results have indicated that four scrubbing stages are enough to scrub out Co and Mn at O:A ratio 3:1. However the experimental performance has shown that the phase separation is faster at lower O:A ratios while the same time less REEs are scrubbed out from the loaded organic phase. Cyanex 923 as a solvating extractants extracts free mineral acids from the aqueous solutions ( This step was originally designed using an O:A ratio of 10:1, however, the construction of the mixer-settlers does not allow for such high ratios. The McCabe-Thiele diagrams were designed to determine the proper O:A ratio for stripping of REEs and Al by 1 The organic phase samples for McCabe-Thiele diagram construction were obtained after the stripping and scrubbing steps. There are McCabe –Thiele diagrams for Al and La shown in The McCabe-Thiele diagrams for Al and La stripping has shown that five stripping stages are needed to strip out Al and seven stripping stages are required to strip out La. At higher O:A ratios 5:1 and 10:1 La was extracted back to the organic phase due to extraction of hydrochloric acid and a substencial increase in pH of the aqueous phase was also observed in a similar study ( The McCabe-Thiele diagrams for REEs stripping show that to strip out Ce, Pr, Y and Nd, 4, 3 and 2 stages are needed respectively. Due to back-extraction of REEs and slow phase separation an O:A ratio 1:1 was selected for testing the process in the mixer-settlers equipment. This O:A ratio was also selected to decrease the possibility of extraction of acid into the organic phase. If a higher O:A ratio were selected for the testing hydrochloric acid with higher concentration should be used for stripping (e.g. 2 Optimized processes were scaled up using mixer-settlers with volumes of 500 Approximately 99.9% Zn and 99.9% Fe were extracted in the pre-main extraction at O:A ratio 1:2 after four stages. Co-extracted impurities (9% Co, 6% Y, and 2% Mn) were scrubbed out using 3 To sustain the required O:A ratio and considering the time needed for separation of organic and aqueous phase, by testing the system in mixer-settler equipment, flow-rates were determined as following: 1200 Ni, K and Mg in the Raffinate I·C (aqueous product after extraction step) were subsequently separated from Al, Co, Mn and Y in the main extraction process using a mixture of 70% Cyanex 923 10%TBP, 10% 1-Decanol and 10% kerosene at O:A ratio 2:1 and three extraction stages. In the main extraction process, around 97% Ni, 99% K and 99.4% Mg was not extracted (Raffinate II·C). Only 3% of Ni was co-extracted in the extraction step. Subsequently the majority of extracted Co (83%) and Mn (91%) was stripped out by 0.1 Residual Ni, which was not completely stripped out in the previous nitrate stripping, was scrubbed out in this step. Washing product based on 1 Pre-main extraction process and main extraction process for recovery of metal ions from cathodic material resulted in four main product solutions. Stripping solution containing Fe and Zn. The concentration of Zn and Fe in the solution is too low to be efficiently utilized as a product. Pre-concentration step is thus required not only to increase the concentration of metals but also to regenerate HNO Raffinate II. C is a high purity nickel solution (99.9%) and Ni can be recovered directly by applying precipitation or electrowinning processes. Co, Mn, and Ni present in the stripping product have to be separated and recovered using solvent extraction process. Y can be recovered from a stripping product after the final step. HCl can then be re-used in either leaching or in the stripping step. From the leachate obtained after leaching mixed material, 99.9% Zn and 99.9% Fe were extracted in the pre-main extraction process at O:A ratio 1:2 after four stages. Approximately 8% Co, 5% Y, 1% Mn and 2% of REEs was co-extracted. Impurities were removed from the loaded organic phase using 3 Raffinate I.M (aqueous product after extraction step) was subsequently treated in the main extraction to separate Ni, K and Mg from Al, Co, Mn, and REEs using mixture of 70% Cyanex 923 10%TBP, 10% 1-Decanol and 10% kerosene at O:A ratio 2.5:1 and three extraction stages. Approximately 98% Ni, 99.8% K, and 99.5% Mg stayed in the aqueous phase (Raffinate II.M). Co-extracted Co and Mn was stripped out by 0.1 It was confirmed that seven stages were sufficient to strip out Al and REEs. Based on the results obtained after batch testing and mixer-settler testing (120 Four main products result out of the processes. The procedure of possible metal recovery is same as described in the end of the Raffinate II. M contains only Ni (99.9%) and low amount of Mg. Such solution is suitable for Ni recovery directly without any further purification steps. Stripping product (after nitrate stripping) contains Co, Mn, and Ni but also low amounts of REEs. This stripping product has to be treated with additional purification steps to separate present metals. Final stripping product (after stripping with 1 Leachate after leaching of anodic material was treated in the main extraction directly. Anodic material does not contain Fe or Zn so pre-main extraction is not needed. Main extraction was performed at O:A ratio 3:1 using three extraction stages. Approximately 97% Ni, 99.9% K and 99.5% Mg stayed in the aqueous phase (Raffinate A). Subsequently Co, Mn, and Ni was stripped out from loaded organic phase by 0.1 Seven stages were adequate to strip out Al and REEs. To sustain the required O:A ratio flow-rates were set to: 400 Metal concentration of aqueous products resulting from the processes is shown in Raffinate A is a product containing only Ni (99.9%) and low amount of Mg. Stripping products after nitrate stripping and stripping with 1 There are the parameters determined by the optimization of three processes summarized in the In the main extraction, the parameters for the extraction step and stripping with mixture 0.1 The optimization also provided several data usable for the evaluation of the feasibility of the recycling process. Due to battery construction it is possible to assume, that the dismantling can be automatized. Such dismantling could enable selective mechanical separation of the cathodes and the anodes. Due to lack of the binder between active anode material and steel grids, those can be completely separated by the washing with a water. Steel grids can be recovered before the leaching. This will increase material recovery rate, simplified the leaching process and decrease the risk of the potential contamination of the feed with iron from steel. Active anode material is completely dissolved in the leaching process and thus the filtration step is not needed. Separated processing of cathodic and anodic materials can be considered to be more economically feasible due to use of lower amount of chemical reagents and obtaining final products with higher metal concentration. This optimization improved the technical feasibility of metal recovery from such material, but further investigation involving economic feasibility study is needed to fully evaluate developed processes for the industrial scaling up. The proposed technologies allow for separation of metals present in the leachates into four main groups. Pre-main extraction process (8% Cyanex 923, 10% TBP, 82% kerosene) is used to remove Fe and Zn from cathode and mixed material leachates. Approximately 99.9% of Zn and 99.9% of Fe are removed from the aqueous phase after pre-main extraction. Rare earth elements are separated from Ni, K, and Mg in 3 main extraction stages (70% Cyanex 923, 10% TBP, 10% kerosene, 10% 1-Decanol). High purity Ni (> 99.9%) in a raffinate can be obtained after main extraction. Loaded organic phase is stripped with 0.9 The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of