Hematite ore selective flocculation-dispersion process water is a complex system of ions and reagents working together to produce a concentrated iron oxide product. The purpose of this study was to determine the process water concentrations of the important ionic species in a selective flocculation–dispersion hematite ore concentrating plant while process conditions were stable. This information was used to provide a detailed water chemistry analysis and to further understand how water quality affects the process. An analysis of the water chemistry of an operating selective flocculation-dispersion iron ore concentration plant has never before been published. The pH of the process water was the most important factor in the selective flocculation and dispersion process because, according to prior studies, it has a direct relationship with the surface chemistry of the particles (Carlson, 2010). The pH also had a direct relationship with the solubilities of both calcium and magnesium in the process. Water hardness was significantly increased with the addition of calcite/dolomite flux which may cause issues in pelletization and in the reuse water. Soluble iron was removed in the flotation circuit suggesting that it may have been oxidized during flotation or it may have been absorbed by the collector.Selective flocculation and dispersion is a method of concentrating the valuable constituents of hematite ore bodies. This is accomplished by adding reagents that either flocculate or disperse the particles in a slurry of ground ore by altering the surface chemistry of the ore particles. This methodology has been used sparingly in the mineral processing industry due to difficulties in controlling the surface chemistry characteristics that affect selectivity and high reagent costs ( A Lake Superior district hematite ore concentrating facility has been effectively using selective flocculation and dispersion for concentrating hematite ore bodies since 1974. Selective flocculation is the process of choice because of the relatively non-magnetic nature and small liberation size (< Many years ago there were studies carried out on comminution in this hematite concentrator to determine the effectiveness of grinding aids. During this study, the flotation froth became ineffective for an unknown reason ( There have been many publications on how water chemistry impacts the efficacy of the hematite ore selective flocculation dispersion process on a laboratory scale. These publications demonstrate the abilities of common dispersants and flocculants in ideally prepared water samples of known chemistry. The detailed water chemistry of an operating selective flocculation-dispersion hematite ore concentrating facility has never been reported. The purpose of this study was to determine the process water concentration of a selective flocculation-dispersion hematite ore concentrating plant while process conditions were stable to provide a detailed water chemistry analysis and further understand the effects of the flocculants and dispersants used throughout the process. The selective flocculation dispersion process for hematite ore concentration begins with crushing and grinding the hematite ore to the liberation size of the hematite particles. The process flow sheet for the hematite concentrator is shown in The most important step in hematite ore concentration is the deslime process in which fine particles are removed from the ground feed. In the best selective flocculation-dispersion conditions, 15 to 30% of the feed weight can be removed in the deslime thickeners with only a 5% loss in iron concentration ( Sodium hydroxide (Caustic soda) is added during grinding to increase the alkalinity (pH between 10.5 and 11) ( Glass-H® is added to the process after primary comminution to precipitate calcium metaphosphates and magnesium metaphosphates. The (Ca, Mg)OH Starch is added to the deslime thickener feed as a selective flocculant for hematite. The starch forms hydrogen bonds with the oxide surfaces of hematite particles and selectively flocculates the hematite particles ( The deslime thickener overflow is sent for treatment in one of the tailings thickeners. The underflow, which has been increased to 35 to 40% iron in the desliming process, is sent to a conditioner where it is once again mixed with starch that coats the hematite particles ( The flotation concentrate is pumped to the concentrate thickener where it is thickened and fed into a slurry tank. Pressurized carbon dioxide is mixed with the slurry at one of 6 injection points to lower the pH of the slurry and prepare the slurry for filtration ( Samples were taken at 11 sampling locations throughout the hematite concentrator. The samples were taken in 1 Tests were conducted on each sample to determine the concentrations of cations (calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, and iron), anions (chloride, sulfate, fluoride, nitrate, nitrite, carbonate and bicarbonate), hardness, total organic carbon (TOC), Kjeldahl nitrogen, and grease/oil. pH was also re-tested at the certified laboratory to confirm the results obtained at Michigan Technological University and to determine if there is potential for pH drift over time. Test results were received from the laboratory detailing the water chemistry of the hematite ore concentrating facility.  Most of the remaining silica particles were removed in the flotation process. This was kept at a pH of 11 to maintain the negative surface charge of silica and maximize the effectiveness of the cationic amine collector. After flotation, the concentrate entered the concentrate thickener, where it was thickened prior to filtration. The concentrate thickener underflow was sparged with CO A pH drift was noticed for these samples over the course of several days. The pH of each sample tended to decrease slowly with time as shown by the higher pH results obtained while the samples were at Michigan Technological University prior to shipment to the certified laboratory.  Calcium concentration after primary comminution was found to be 4.47 Calcium concentrations above 25 The calcium concentration remained low until the addition of the limestone/dolomite flux. The flux addition increased the calcium concentration to 71 Magnesium, like calcium, is a multivalent cation that plays a significant role in the dispersion of hematite from silica. The entering concentration of magnesium into the concentrator was 2.67  The concentrate thickener seemed to concentrate the sodium as well by increasing the concentration by 27 Monovalent ionic species such as potassium are less likely to cause harmful effects on flocculation-dispersion processes; however potassium fluoride has been shown to inhibit the activation of quartz particles in selective flocculation–dispersion processes of hematite (   Fluorides present in the water can be attributed to the grinding of a fluorapatite. These fluorides are readily precipitated as calcium fluoride and were not prevalent in the concentrator water chemistry analysis.     As seen in Literature states that the solubilities of both limestone and dolomite increase with a decrease in pH (  A sample of the process water at the concentrate thickener underflow was sparged with CO  Kjeldahl nitrogen refers to a testing method used for determining the organic nitrogen, amine, and ammonium concentration of a solution.  The pH of the process water was shown to be the most important factor in the selective flocculation and dispersion of hematite ores because it has a direct effect on the surface chemistry of the particles in the slurry. This water analysis has shown that the pH is maintained above 10.5 during deslime and flotation where dispersion of silica and hematite is critical. The adjustment of pH to neutral conditions prior to filtration caused several phenomena in the water quality; most stemming from the introduction of limestone and dolomite fluxes. The pH has a direct relationship with the solubilities of both calcium and magnesium in the process, both of which are very detrimental ionic components of the slurry. Water hardness was a good indicator of the calcium and magnesium content of the water. Water hardness is significantly increased with the addition of flux which may cause issues in pelletization and in the reuse water. This may be avoided if the flux could be added with the pelletization binder after filtration. The effectiveness of the cationic collector may have been hindered by the amount of soluble iron in the flotation circuit feed. The results from the soluble iron and Kjeldahl nitrogen tests suggest that there may have been a link between organic nitrogen concentration and soluble iron concentration due to the ether amine collector. This drop in soluble iron concentration could also have been due to oxidation within the flotation circuit. This research has shown how the reagents and process conditions affected the water quality in an operating hematite ore selective flocculation-dispersion process. These findings agree with prior research on a laboratory scale and reveal topics of interest for future research.