Despite recent repairs, a heated municipal swimming pool had major leaks. To determine the possible position of the leak or leaks, a full scale falling-head permeability test was performed. All the valves for circulating hot and cold water were closed for monitoring the variation with time of the water level in the pool. The velocity graph, which represents the conservation equation in variable-head tests, helped to determine the positions of leaks. Subsequent excavations found broken pipes and connections, their failure being related to high differential settlement caused by poor compaction of pipe foundations.In the Montreal area, most outside non-heated swimming pools are operated only for two summer months. Using preheated water may extend significantly the operation period. This paper presents the case history of a municipal swimming pool, for which the author was recently authorized to publish. Major repairs and improvements had been done about 20 The major questions can be summarized as follows. Was it possible to determine the location(s) of the leak(s)? Was it possible to re-open trenches of limited extent to check the condition of pipes and connections, and then repair them to stop the leak(s)? What had caused the leak(s)? To determine the elevation of the leak(s), the swimming pool was used to perform a variable-head permeability test, measuring the leakage rate as a function of the water level. The paper describes the test, the interpretation of data, the observations of pipes and couplings in the trenches, and documents the reasons for having major leaks. After the repairs, a test was performed to verify whether all pipes were watertight, before infilling the pool: the test was successful. A simplified cross-section of the swimming pool appears in The data of variable-head field permeability tests can be interpreted using different methods. Here, the pool leakage corresponds to water seeping into an aquifer material, namely the crushed stone around the leaking pipes, which explains the high flow rates. Consequently, the group 2 methods are irrelevant. And, the group 3 methods can be ruled out because the underlying theories have been shown to be wrong for variable-head (slug) tests ( Therefore, this paper considers only interpretation methods of group 1, including the velocity graph method which is retained in standards (e.g., When the soil stays fully saturated and its solid matrix strain has a negligible influence, the local groundwater mass conservation equation yields the Laplace equation, ∇ In Eq. The minus sign results from the physics. A decrease of Its integration yields the classical equation of Several equations are available for the shape factor In Eq. Ignoring what is the actual PL around the injection zone is frequent. When a MW is installed in an aquitard, the apparently static water level in the MW pipe may differ from the real PL due to a lengthy time lag effect ( Then, Eq. Plotting the field data as ln ( However, the mass conservation Eq. It is worth noting that the velocity graph does not depend on the assumed piezometric level because d The The plot of Eq. The velocity graph appears as a straight line as predicted by theory. The straight line intersects the null velocity axis close to Thus, the velocity graph ( We examine here the case of leaky pipes located at two elevations. For the next equations, the water elevation in the pool is called The velocity graph becomes a set of two straight lines as shown in The straight portion for the low The shape of the velocity graph is thus different for leaks at one and two levels. For the experimental data ( Excavation revealed four major leaks, and several minor ones. Several pipe connections that were initially glued together were found to be sheared ( Sagging portions of the pipes indicated some differential settlement issue. Several factors could explain it: static weight of backfill, static weight of material stored on the ground surface, dynamic weight of circulating trucks during construction, freeze–thaw effects in the soil below the trenches, and potential internal erosion of the 0–20 During excavation, the dry density of the crushed stone was measured. Three modified Proctor Tests were performed and the optimum (OPM) was used as the reference for field dry density data. In most contracts dealing with buried pipes, the usual reference is a minimum compaction of either 90% OPM or 95% OPM. For this project, the trenches revealed that the 0–20 Therefore, the lack of compaction was a major problem. In the trenches, the pipes rested on a 60-cm layer of crushed stone. To illustrate how much this layer could have settled, an increase in its dry density from 66% to 80% OPM would yield a settlement of 107 The freeze–thaw effects in the underlying soils were not found to be an issue, because the soils were not frost sensitive and the water table had a low position. Therefore, the crushed stone had settled due to the lack of initial compaction, and the damage to the pipes and connections could also be related to this settlement. Large immediate settlement would have been due to static and dynamic loads. In addition to large immediate settlement, some delayed settlement could have been due to an internal erosion of the 0–20 A full scale falling-head permeability test was performed with the swimming pool as the variable-head reservoir. The data of this large-scale test were used to plot the water level downward velocity during a time interval versus the mean water elevation during this time interval. It was shown how the resulting velocity graph was used to determine the position of leaks. Excavations confirmed this position by finding broken pipes and connections. The damage and resulting leaks were due to high differential settlement caused by poor compaction of pipe foundations. The author thanks the owner and engineer who authorized publication of data for this case history, with the request that all names and legal issues be kept confidential.