Scandium extraction by Levextrel-type material (TVEX) containing di-isooctyl methyl phosphonate (DIOMP) was studied in 2–8 M HCl and in comparison with solvent extraction by liquid DIOMP and TVEX resins based on other organo-phosphorus extractants. Significant extraction was only achieved from solutions with >4 M HCl. Based on 31P and 45Sc NMR data it was determined that scandium is extracted as chlor-aqua complexes [ScCl
                        n
                     (DIOMP)
                        m
                     (H2O)6−
                        n
                        −
                        m
                     ](3−
                        n)+, where n
                     =1–2, m
                     =2–4 depending on the scandium concentration and acidity of the aqueous phase.Since scandium does not have own mineral sources suitable for industrial processing, the search for new scandium sources (including industrial wastes) is a topical problem—as well as the development of advanced materials and processes for scandium recovery. Solvent extraction, the most common method for scandium recovery ( Scandium extraction by TVEX containing tri-butyl phosphate and di-(2-ethyl hexyl) phosphoric acid was studied in detail in a number of papers ( Initial scandium solutions were prepared by dissolving Sc Scandium extraction was carried out by contacting the aqueous solutions for 1 h with undiluted DIOMP and for 24 h with TVEX-TBP, TVEX-DIOMP and TVEX-POR resins at 25 °C with an organic-to-aqueous phase ratio 1:20. Before scandium extraction, the extractants were contacted with hydrochloric acid of corresponding acidity for 1 h. The scandium concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by spectrophotometry with xylenol orange indicator and the scandium content in the organic phase was calculated from the difference before and after extraction. Acidity of aqueous media was established by alkali titration.  The effect of aqueous phase acidity on scandium extraction by TVEX-DIOMP was studied in comparison with extraction by DIOMP and TVEX-TBP and TVEX-POR ( Comparing scandium extraction by TVEX based on different extractants, it was found that the scandium distribution coefficient ( To define mechanism of scandium extraction, The value of average solvate number (ASN), which characterizes the number of extractant molecules bonded directly with scandium ion was calculated using Sc/DIOMP mole ratio and relative intensity from the signal of extractant coordinated with scandium. ASN values show that scandium is coordinated by two extractant molecules during extraction from 4 M HCl and by three DIOMP molecules for 6 M and 8 M HCl. The Based on the data obtained, it appears that scandium is extracted by TVEX-DIOMP as [ScCl(DIOMP) The increase of hydrochloric acid concentration in the aqueous phase promotes substitution of water molecules by Cl To estimate the effect of scandium concentration on the mechanism of scandium extraction, Scandium extraction from hydrochloric solutions by solvent extractant DIOMP and by TVEX(Levextrel)-DIOMP resin increases with increasing acidity. The extraction ability of DIOMP supported on TVEX matrix is higher compared with the liquid extractant itself. The distribution coefficient increases within the sequence TVEX-TBP