Purpose
                  To compare treatment outcome of screw proximal femoral nail (PFN) system with that of a helical PFN.
               
                  Methods
                  The study included 77 patients with closed unstable intertrochanteric fracture classified as AO 31A2 & 31A3, between June 2008 to August 2011. Inclusion criteria were: all mature skeletons above 50 years of age; closed unstable trochanteric fracture classified as AO 31A2 & A3. Exclusion criteria were: immature skeleton, pathological fracture of any cause other than osteoporosis, inability to walk independently prior to injury. Patients were randomized to 2 treatment groups based on admission sequence. Forty patients were treated with screw PFN and thirty seven were treated with helical PFN.
               
                  Results
                  Both groups were similar in respect of time of surgery, blood loss and functional assessment and duration of hospitalization. In screw PFN group 2 patients had superficial wound infection, 1 patient had persistent hip pain and 1 patient had shortening >1 cm but <2 cm, while in helical PFN group 1 patient had superficial wound infection.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Both screw and helical PFN are very effective implants in osteoporotic and unstable trochanteric fractures even in Indian patients where the bones are narrow and neck diameter is small. It is an implant of choice for osteoporotic and unstable trochanteric fractures.Population of senior citizens is increasing as longevity increases day by day. Biomechanical studies have shown that intramedullary nail devices are more stable underload applied using a shorter lever arm and that excessive sliding is controllable. Thus, the goal of this study was to compare treatment outcomes achieved by a proximal femoral nail (PFN) screw system with those obtained using a PFN with a helical blade, and to determine the effectiveness of helical PFN in the treatment of intertrochanteric fractures. The prospective study include 77 patients with closed unstable intertrochanteric fracture classified as AO 31A2 & 31A3 was conducted in our institute, over a period of 24 months between June 2008 to August 2011 in patients having unstable trochanteric fractures of femur with minimum follow-up of 24 weeks and maximum follow-up of 2 year. Inclusion criteria were: all mature skeleton above 50 years of age; new mobility score of 9 (palmer and parker 1993); closed unstable trochanteric fracture classified as AO 31A2 & A3. Patients were included in the study after obtaining informed written consent. This study was approved by ethics committee at our hospital. Patients were randomized to 2 treatment groups based on admission sequence. Forty patients were treated with screw PFN (mean patients age, 69.1 years; men to female ratio, 1:2), and thirty seven were treated with helical PFN (mean patients age, 71.2 years; men to female ratio 9:28). There were 28 patients with 31A2 and 12 patients with 31A3 type in group treated with screw PFN and 27 patients with 31A2 and 10 patients with 31A3 type in group treated with helical PFN. Operation was performed on fracture table in supine position under general anesthesia. Closed reduction of fracture was confirmed by image intensifier. For both implants, the desired position of the lag screw was in the central femoral neck on the lateral view and in the central inferior femoral neck on the anteroposterior view, with the tip between 5 and 10 mm from the subchondral bone. Postoperatively patient was assessed for any postoperative complications. Crutch walking with partial weight bearing was allowed after 48 h/drain removal. Suture was removed on 12th day. Patient was followed up at month 6, 12, 18 and 24. They were assessed clinically and radiologically. Functional assessment was done after 18 months as per Harris Hip Score. All continuous data are expressed as mean and ranges. Independent sample A total of 77 patients were included in this study. The operation time was defined from incision to skin closure and the two groups were similar in operation time (screw PFN, 85.91 min; helical blade PFN group 83.91 min; The functional assessment was done after fracture union which was statistically similar (helical PFN group 3.51 months, Complication rate in both groups were not serious: 2 patients in screw proximal group had superficial wound infection which was managed with antibiotics; 1 patient in screw proximal nail group had persistent hip pain and was managed with analgesics and 1 patient in screw proximal nail group had shortening >1 cm but <2 cm (1 cm–1.8 cm); 1 patient in helical PFN group had superficial wound infection which was managed with antibiotics after culture and sensitivity. Intertrochanteric fractures is one of the most common fractures of the hip especially in the elderly with porotic bone, usually due to low-energy trauma like simple falls. The incidence of intertrochanteric fracture is rising because of increasing number of senior citizens with osteoporosis. Surgery is the treatment of choice for early mobilization and prompt return to prefracture functional level, as well as for reducing mortality and morbidity. Treatment of unstable trochanteric fracture with cephalomedullary implant or with extramedullary implant has been the topic of discussion for years together. Kim et al The rate of cut-out of the screw from the superior part of the femoral head and all those cases required revision surgery because of pain; the worst complication was 11% incidence of femoral shaft fractures which occurred with the Gamma nail. In 1996, the AO/ASIF developed the PFN as an intramedullary device. The PFN was designed to overcome some difficulties encountered with earlier design of intramedullary proximal nails. The main design difference PFN and other such devices are the introduction of an antirotation 6.5 mm neck screw, fluting of the nail tip which is said to decrease stress and finally the positioning of the distal locking screws more proximal than in some other devices hence avoiding abrupt changes in stiffness of the construct. It creates biomechanically stable construct allowing early weight bearing. With cephomedullary implant it has advantage of shorter lever arm for the fixation device, and has less potential for the fracture collapse and limb shortening when used for unstable intertrochanteric fracture. In the present study, postoperatively 2 (5%) patients had superficial wound infection in screw PFN group. Tyllianakis et al Gadegone and Salphale Helical blade PFN has been introduced as an intramedullary option in recent years. Helical PFN is more suitable implant for unstable trochanteric fractures in elderly, osteoporotic patients population. In our study, complications like avascular necrosis, shaft fracture at tip of nail as mentioned by other authors were not found, as our follow-up was of short duration and it needs to be evaluated for longer duration but large enough to be statistically meaningful; despite 1 reported mild persistent hip pain and 1 reported superficial infection. Our study indicates that both screw and helical blade PFN are very effective implants in osteoporotic and unstable trochanteric fractures even in Indian patients where the bones are narrow and neck diameter is small. Good reduction of the fracture, and optimal positioning and length of the hip pin and lag screw are crucial to avoid mechanical complication. Most important is to educate patients where patients are not enough educated in rural areas in developing countries. Results were same for both the groups and a long-term studies and a larger cohort are required to fully evaluate the performance of helical blade PFN, which is also costly as compared to screw PFN. It is an implant of choice for osteoporotic and unstable trochanteric fractures. Though this study is not big and it needs a longer and multicentre study to reach final conclusion, it is just an attempt to show how I experienced it in our set up.