 An important novel feature of this book is the unified treatment of the friction factor information that is used to calculate the flow of all types of fluid in round pipes. For each of the fluid types that are studied, the friction factor is presented graphically in terms of the appropriate Reynolds number, the dimensionless pipe diameter, the dimensionless flowrate and the dimensionless flow velocity. Each of these graphical representations leads to the most The presentation of material is somewhat different to that found in most textbooks in this field in that it is acknowledged that modern students of engineering are computer literate. These students are accustomed to using spreadsheets and other well-organized computational aids to tackle technical problems. They do not rely only on calculators and almost never plot graphs using pencil and paper. Few students submit handwritten reports. Consequently, computer-oriented methods are emphasized throughout, and, where appropriate, time-consuming or tedious computational processes are preprogrammed and made available in the computational toolbox that accompanies this text. This toolbox has been designed with care to ensure that it does not provide point-and-click solutions to problems. Rather the student is encouraged to formulate a solution method for every specific problem, but the tools in the toolbox make it feasible to tackle realistic problems that would be simply too time consuming using manual computational methods or if the student were required to generate the appropriate computer code. In any case, students of process engineering are becoming less fluent in the traditional computational languages Fortran, C, Basic, and Pascal that almost all could use with some degree of proficiency during the last three decades of the twentieth century. Now, engineering students are far more likely to be fluent in computer languages such as Java and HTML and are more likely to be able to create a website on the Internet than to be able to quickly and correctly integrate a couple of differential equations numerically. Nevertheless, they are well-attuned to using solution methods that are preprogrammed and ready to be used. Students and instructors are encouraged to install the toolbox and to explore its constituent tools before tackling any material in this book. No specific programming skills are required of the student or the instructor. The use of this modern problem-solving methodology makes it possible to extend the treatment from a purely superficial level to a more in-depth treatment and so equip the student to tackle, and successfully solve, realistic engineering problems. The quantitative models that are described in this text will surely change and evolve over the years ahead as a result of continuing research and investigational effort. However, the basic approach should be sufficiently general to accommodate these developments. Because the computational toolbox has an open-ended design, new models can be inserted with ease at any time and it is intended that the toolbox should continue to expand well into the future. This book can be used as a reading text to support Internet-based course delivery. This method has been used with success at the University Professor R.P. Chabbra and Professor Raj Rajamani made several useful suggestions for improving the first draft of this book. These are gratefully acknowledged.