An important goal of the European Commission-funded ECOGEN project is to develop a computer-based decision support system (DSS) for the assessment of economic and ecological impacts of using genetically modified crops. In ecological impact assessment, special emphasis is put on soil biology and estimating soil quality from the observed biological parameters. Methodologically, we have addressed this goal using model-based DSS, taking the approach of qualitative multi-attribute modelling. The approach is based on developing various hierarchical multi-attribute models that consist of qualitative attributes and utility (aggregation) functions, represented by decision rules. The model presented in this paper assesses the impact of cropping systems on soil quality and can subsequently be used to assess crop management options. It was developed as a collaboration between ECOGEN soil experts and decision analysts, and consists of 34 attributes, hierarchically structured into eight levels. There are 21 input attributes, most of which measure the richness and biomass of representative soil organisms. The assessment of soil quality is based on two main indicators: (1) soil diversity (assessed through microfauna, mesofauna and macrofauna richness) and (2) soil functioning (in terms of leaching, comminution, mineralisation and plant growth). In the paper, we address the methodological aspects of the model and its development, and describe the components of the model (attributes, value scales, decision rules and weights). We present initial results of its application to the assessment of crop management on soil quality in the case of using conventional and Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)-maize at three field sites in France and Denmark. Our finding was that soil quality was unaffected even though several input attributes had changed. We also analyse the sensitivity of the model and discuss its current and potential contribution to soil quality management. The model is operational (available through a web page) and can be used for the assessment, comparison and analysis of realistic management scenarios. Furthermore, it provides an effective means of synthesising a lot of data, encoding knowledge about soil-quality factors, supporting communication among experts, answering ‘what-if’ and ‘so-what’ questions, and supporting the evaluation of new agricultural practices.One of the challenges of farming is to maintain or increase soil sustainability. A practical consequence of the introduction of genetically modified (GM) crops, or other new practices, is the likely modification of the cropping system to maximise the benefits associated with the technology. Thus, for GM plants expressing insecticidal proteins, such as that from An important goal of ECOGEN was to develop computer-based decision support systems (DSSs) for the assessment of economic and ecological impacts of using GM crops. In the evaluation of ecological impacts, special emphasis was put on soil biology and thus a model was developed to predict soil quality from the observed biological parameters ( Methodologically, we have addressed this goal using model-based DSS by taking the approach of qualitative multi-attribute modelling ( In this paper, we describe a model for the assessment of the impact of GM and non-GM cropping systems on soil quality. The model has been developed in collaboration between ECOGEN soil ecology experts and decision analysts. A set of measurements was first made in the field and then assembled by the experts involved in ECOGEN to arrive at a description of soil quality. We address the methodological aspects of the model and its development, describe the components of the model (attributes and decision rules) and present the initial results of its application to the assessment of impacts to soil in the case of using conventional and The model has the following characteristics ( the model consists of all the attributes in the model are the aggregation of values in the model is defined by The hierarchical structure of attributes ( Soil quality is assessed on the basis of soil diversity and soil functioning. In the model, this is reflected so that the hierarchy of attributes is split into two main parts (   There are four types of qualitative value scales used in the model ( In addition to basic attributes, the same The attributes describing soil decomposition processes ( The third scale type is used by five, high-level attributes: Finally, the attribute Notice that in The aggregation of attributes in the model is defined through decision rules. For each aggregate attribute in the model, there is a set of  Another example of decision rules is shown in In total, there are 13 such tables defined in the soil quality model, one for each aggregate attribute. In conventional multi-attribute models (  We tested the model using ECOGEN data collected in 2003 from eight cropping systems in three locations: Foulum in Denmark, and Varois and Narbons in France (for site details see Foulum c CT (reference) Foulum c RT Foulum Bt CT Foulum Bt RT Varois c (reference) Varois Bt Narbons c (reference) Narbons Bt Here, ‘c’ denotes a conventional system with non-GM maize, ‘Bt’ a system involving For each of the three reference systems, all the input attributes were assigned their mid-point value (see the column ‘reference’ in The evaluation results in Methodologically, it is interesting to draw attention to the asterisk ‘*’ that appears in To determine how sensitive the model was to changes in attributes we determined the fewest changes required to increase or decrease the soil quality score. Soil quality could be improved (i.e., move the score from Originally, the soil quality model was implemented in the DEXi software. There are two differences between DEXi and the ESQI web page. To avoid confusion and misinterpretation, the web page disallows the use of unknown values (such as the ‘*’ in Sensitivity analysis of the model (i.e., what is needed to get the final evaluation of soil quality to We can identify why the effects occur. For instance, in ‘Foulum Bt CT’ soil functioning was increased to The model as used does not give an absolute but rather a relative measure (relative to a reference plot or treatment). This was seen as most useful for our particular application, in which the question of whether altered crop management affects soil quality required comparison with the reference treatment. The model is flexible enough to be used in other ways, although the use of qualitative terms such as The biodiversity side of the model has fewest attributes because species identification is more time consuming than biomass determinations and a much higher level of scientific expertise is required; there are no determinations of protozoan richness, for example. There is potential for improving this aspect of the model but that would require more data (i.e., either direct quantitative data, qualitative values or values obtained from the literature). Like any model, the soil quality model could be refined (some might say improved but like with the definition of soil quality we believe that this iteration of the model is ‘fit for purpose’), expanded or contracted according to the objectives of future studies or the expertise available. Changing the model in this way would be rather simple and intuitive using the user-friendly DEXi interface, which requires no programming expertise. The model is flexible regarding missing values. For example, The model is an effective way of synthezising a lot of data (see individual papers on microfauna, microarthropods, earthworms for detailed specific interactions: So far, the model has undergone little ‘conventional’ testing, that is, validation against other methods and measurements, and other cropping systems. Such validation is necessary to determine whether the model properly evaluates the relationship between management and soil quality on a wider scale. Thus, to increase its power, we suggest further testing against a variety of soils and cropping systems (not just GM versus non-GM, but also comparing other management options) for which there are sufficient soil data under a wide variety of soil/environmental conditions to provide robust inputs for the model. Statistical analyses of the results can then give an estimation of whether soil quality is properly related to the management option. For any external assessment, the model is available through the ESQI web page ( Overall, the contribution of developing such a model is threefold. First, by drawing from various disciplines, the model encodes knowledge about the relevant soil quality factors, their interrelationships and how they are influenced by environmental conditions. The model, consisting of attributes and decision rules, can be easily communicated and discussed among experts. Second, the model is operational in the sense it can be used for the assessment, comparison, and ‘what-if’ analysis of realistic scenarios. Third, the model can be used in a way to generate and propose desirable characteristics of management options, thus possibly contributing to the development of new agricultural practices. We have successfully produced a soil quality score based on biological diversity and function, tailored to determine the effects of different cropping systems. Although soil physical effects and effects through the addition of organic matter are excluded at present, the model could be expanded to include other parameters. As such, the model could be considered a biological sub-model for more global soil quality scores. ECOGEN is funded by contract QLK5-CT-2002-01666 from the European Commission. The work of JSI is supported by the Slovenian Research Agency Programme Knowledge Technologies (2004–2008). SCRI receives grant-in-aid from the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department.