Apart from being a resource for iron/steel production, the iron oxide minerals, goethite and hematite, are used in the paint, cosmetics, and other industries as pigments. Surface characteristics of these minerals have been studied extensively both in resource recovery by flotation and in the preparation of colloidal dispersions. In this current research, the wetting characteristics of goethite (FeOOH) and hematite (Fe2O3) have been analyzed by means of contact angle, bubble attachment time, and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) measurements as well as by Molecular Dynamics Simulation (MDS). Goethite is naturally hydroxylated and wetted by water at all pH values. In contrast, the anhydrous hematite surface (001) was found to be slightly hydrophobic at natural pH values with a contact angle of about 50°. At alkaline pH hydroxylation of the hematite surface occurs rapidly and the hematite becomes hydrophilic. The wetting characteristics of the hematite surface then vary between the hydrophobic anhydrous hematite and the completely hydrophilic hydroxylated hematite, similar to goethite. The hydrophobicity can be restored by heating of the hydroxylated hematite surface at 60°C. The hydrophobic character of the anhydrous hematite (001) surface is confirmed by MDS which also reveals that after hydrolysis the hematite (001) surface can be wetted by water, similar to the goethite (001) surface.Iron oxide minerals are among the most abundant minerals in the earth’s crust. Commonly available iron oxide minerals are magnetite (Fe According to authors’ best knowledge, measurement of captive bubble contact angles for a natural hematite crystal have not been reported, but contact angle measurements on iron ore samples containing varying amounts of hematite, goethite, clay and quartz have been reported using the capillary method In the present work, contact angle measurements were performed at different pH values for hematite and goethite to reveal the effect of pH on wettability. Molecular Dynamics Simulation (MDS) has been used to determine water sessile drop contact angles at various mineral surfaces Due to the marked increase in computational capabilities in recent years, MDS can be used to explore water/mineral interactions at the molecular-level The significance of the results is important in the understanding of existing flotation processes and in the design of new flotation separations The specular hematite crystals for contact angle measurements and AFM surface force measurements were obtained from “The Iron Quadrangle,” Brazil. The quality of the high purity single crystals was confirmed by XRD and EDAX analysis. Presence of peaks at 2θ angles of 84.48° and 39.26° signify that the crystal surface represents the (001) plane of hematite as described in the literature Pulverized hematite samples used for bubble attachment time measurements were obtained from Orrisa, India, and the particle size used for bubble attachment time measurements was 106 Samples for zeta potential measurements were obtained by crushing and pulverizing the Brazilian crystals and the particle size used was minus 65 The goethite “needle ore” crystal sample used for contact angle measurements was obtained from Cary Mine, Ironwood, Gogebic County, Michigan. The crystal was polished by the same method used for hematite. The ground goethite samples for bubble attachment time measurements and zeta potential measurements were obtained by crushing and pulverization. The quality of the crystals was confirmed by XRD and EDAX analysis. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) obtained from Sigma-Aldrich were used to adjust the pH. Potassium chloride (KCl), also obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, was used as the electrolyte background in force measurements. DI water was obtained from a Millipore system in the laboratory with specific conductance of 18 Both hematite and goethite samples were cleaned with acetone, ethanol, ample amounts of DI water and dried with ultra-pure nitrogen before measurements. The hematite sample was oven dried at 60 Bubble attachment time measurements were done using an MCT 100 electronic induction timer instrument. The particle bed was prepared in a cuvette of 1 The electrophoresis method was used for zeta potential measurements for goethite and hematite particles and was performed as a function of pH using PALS Zeta Potential Analyzer from Brookhaven Instrument Corp. For each experiment 80 The AFM system used for surface force measurements was a Nanoscope V controller, a PF scanner from Veeco and a liquid cell obtained from Bruker Corporation, Santa Barbara, CA. The colloidal probe technique was used for surface force measurements. Tipless silicon cantilevers were obtained from Mikromasch. Hematite particles of around 15 Scanning electron microscopy was used to make sure that there was no contamination of glue on the attached hematite probe particle surface. The hematite probe particle size was also measured from the scanning electron microscope image. Both particles had an approximate size of 15 In order to correlate force curves between the hematite crystal (001) surface and the hematite probe with a reference, force measurements at the hematite crystal (001) surface were also performed using a Diamond-Like Carbon (DLC) tip, which is naturally hydrophobic. The DLC cantilevers were obtained from Budget Sensors, sold under the name “ContDLC.” The point of zero charge for DLC tips has been reported to be at pH Amber, an MDS program, was used to simulate water drop spreading at the hematite (001) and goethite (001) surfaces. In the Amber program, this total energy is expected to include the Coulombic (electrostatic) interactions, the short-range interactions (van der Waals energy term), and the bonded interactions. The bonded terms include the bond stretch and angle bend energy terms that are represented in the water models as harmonic terms. The Coulombic energy is represented by Eq. The van der Waals energy term, represented by the conventional Lennard-Jones (12-6) function, includes the short-range repulsion associated with the increase in energy as two atoms approach each other and the attractive dispersion energy. The term The interaction parameters between unlike atoms are calculated according to the arithmetic mean rule for the distance parameter, The rigid SPC/E water model has the closest average configurational energy to the experimental value (−41.5 To measure the MDS sessile drop contact angle of water at the hematite (001) and goethite (001) surfaces, a water drop containing 1270 water molecules was put on the surface at the bottom of a simulation periodic box. According to a previous MDS study A relatively small hydroxylated hematite (001) surface unit (10 Because of the large number of atoms (about 50,000) in these simulations, we used a total simulation time of 1 A Hitachi S-4800 high resolution field emission scanning electron microscope was used to analyze the hematite probe. Comparing the crystal structure of the hematite and the probes used for force measurements it is expected that one probe represents the (001) crystal face of hematite and the other probe represents the (100) face of hematite. As expected, the surface of the hematite crystal was found to be the (001) surface as established by X-ray diffraction results. The horizontal as well as vertical images of the tip suggest that there is no contamination from glue on the hematite colloidal probe particle. Oxide minerals are generally thought to be hydrophilic and well wetted by water. However, complete wetting, as shown from recent studies, depends on hydroxylation of the mineral surface in order to provide H-bonding sites for interfacial water molecules. In some cases, it seems that hydroxylation is rapid and the oxide surfaces are wetted by water within minutes. In other cases, the reaction with water is slow and the time for hydroxylation/wetting is extended to days Contact angle measurements for the specular hematite and goethite surfaces were done in 0.001 As mentioned in the experimental section, the hematite (001) surface can be organized to conform to a surface state revealed by STM results reported in the literature Snapshots of the nanoscale water drop spreading at the hematite (001) surface, hydroxylated hematite (001) surface, and goethite (001) surface are shown in Qualitative analysis of bubble attachment time measurements for hematite particles of size 106 The electrophoresis technique was used to measure the zeta potential for hematite as well as for goethite. The point of zero charge (PZC) for hematite was found to be ∼pH 6.2 and for goethite the PZC was found to be ∼pH 5 ( Results from surface force measurements between the hematite probes (both orientations) and the hematite crystal (001) surface at different pH values are presented in this section to further understand the surface characteristics of hematite. Two different colloidal probes were prepared with two different orientations of the hematite particle on the cantilever. One of the particles was glued in a way that the hematite particle could touch the surface with its (001) crystal face, while the other colloidal probe hematite particle approached the hematite crystal (001) surface with the (100) surface as shown earlier in the experimental section ( Force curves between the hematite probe (001) and the hematite crystal (001) surface ( Force curves between the hematite probe (001) and the hematite crystal (001) surface are presented in As suggested earlier, hydroxylation of the hematite surface is reversible and the initial hydrophobic state can be restored by washing and heating the sample in an oven at 60° for 25 The variation in polarity and the degree of hydrophobicity of the hematite crystal (001) surface was also confirmed by doing force measurements using a hydrophobic Diamond-Like Carbon (DLC) tip. The charging behavior of the DLC tip was found to have an iso electronic point at pH 4 Our results have provided important information not previously reported and define conditions for wetting of the hematite surface. Improved understanding of the wetting characteristics of hematite has been contributed. First, the research demonstrates the utility of MDS and AFM in the wetting analysis of hematite surfaces. Second, the significance of hydroxylation in the wetting of the hematite surface has been established. Third, sensitivity to pH and hydration/hydroxylation time has been described for hematite with respect to reversibility and the sensitive nature of the hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance of the hematite surface state. The AFM colloidal probe technique for surface force measurements has been used to help explain the wetting characteristics of hematite and represents a unique application of AFM for advances in colloid chemistry. In conclusion, results from this research have helped to describe the surface properties of hematite. It has been found that the (001) hematite surface is hydrophobic at natural pH (θ Nanoscale MDS sessile drop contact angles confirm the experimental captive bubble contact angle measurements. The lack of H bonding of interfacial water molecules at the anhydrous (001) hematite surface accounts for its hydrophobicity. In contrast, relatively strong H bonding interactions between the interfacial water molecules and both the hydroxylated hematite (001) surface and the goethite (001) surface account for their hydrophilic character. Based on zeta potential measurements, the charging behavior of hematite and goethite has little effect on the wetting characteristics of the surfaces. AFM results also demonstrate the same trend as experimental captive bubble contact angle measurements. Strong long range attractive hydrophobic forces at pH 5.5 and pH 2.7 reveal that the surface is hydrophobic at acidic and natural pH values. In contrast, presence of only repulsive forces at alkaline pH values suggests that surface hydroxylation takes place at this pH making the surface hydrophilic and well wetted by water. Evidence has been provided indicating that hematite retains its hydrophilicity even after removal from the alkaline medium, and that the initial hydrophobic surface state could only be restored by drying at a modest temperature which leads to dehydroxylation of the surface. These results are of significant importance to the mining, pigment, paint and battery industries. In reverse flotation of iron ore, quartz, the major impurity, is floated using ether amines and the iron oxide minerals are depressed, typically using polysaccharides such as starch. Reverse flotation of iron ore is usually carried out at pH 10.5. In this regard, the role of polysaccharides in reverse flotation is considered since hematite is already hydrophilic at the alkaline pH in which reverse flotation is usually carried out. This surface chemistry study is a step forward in understanding reverse flotation in the processing of iron ore The surface properties of hematite established in our paper can help in deriving better chemistry for dispersion of hematite based pigments at different pH values This work was funded by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Basic Energy through Grant No. DE-FG03-93ER14315. We want to thank Dr. Shivakumar Angadi for research assistance and providing the hematite samples from Orissa, India. Thanks to Mr. Venkata Atluri for help with the research. Also we want to thank Professor P.R.G. Brandao for hematite samples from Brazil and the information which initiated this research. Finally, we thank Ms. Dorrie Spurlock for her assistance in the preparation of the manuscript.