High-chain fatty acid esters have not been investigated for their thermal properties as phase change materials (PCMs) in thermal energy storage. A series of high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol (1-tetradecanol) were synthesized via esterification of lauric, myristic, palmitic, stearic and arachidic acids under vacuum and in the absence of any catalyst. The esterification reactions were studied by FT-IR spectroscopy. A differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) and a thermo-gravimetric analyzer (TGA) were intensively used to determine the thermal properties of the introduced thermal storage materials. The thermal properties were given in terms of phase change temperature, enthalpy, specific heat (C
                     
                        p
                     ) and thermal decomposition temperature with related statistical data. The thermal reliability of the novel organic PCMs was investigated by thermal cycling with 1000 thermal cycles with respect to the thermal properties of the original synthesized PCMs. In addition to the synthesized esters, one commercial product was also investigated. The DSC analyses indicated that the melting points of the novel organic PCMs were between 38 and 53°C with phase change enthalpy above 200kJ/kg. The effect of chemical structure of the materials on thermal properties was also discussed. The results showed that these materials were favorable for low temperature heat transfer applications with superior thermal properties and reliability.The increase in fuel prices and level of greenhouse gas emissions lead scientists to search for utilization of renewable energy sources with enhanced energy efficiency to cut down the dependency on the countries supplying fossil fuels and to reduce the carbon dioxide emissions. More efficient utilization of various sources of energy makes the systems more cost-effective by reducing the loss of energy with the help of energy storage. Thermal energy storage systems provide the potential to attain energy savings, which in turn reduce the environmental impact, related to energy use. In fact, there is increasing interest related to thermal applications such as space and water heating, waste heat utilization, cooling and air-conditioning The PCMs, which are effective thermal storage media, can be summarized in two main groups as inorganics and organics. Among the organic materials, fatty acids and paraffins mostly attract the attention of researchers. The major advantages of these materials against the inorganics are their chemical stability after extended thermal cycling and non-corrosiveness. Fatty acids are preferred due to their high latent heat, the characteristic of constant temperature in the course of absorbing and releasing energy and low cost for energy storage. Fatty acids have superior properties over many PCMs such as melting congruency, good chemical stability and nontoxicity Fatty acid esters are a rather new material class of organic PCMs and limited thermal data is available in literature. Today, researches are mostly focused on low-chain fatty acid esters of stearic and palmitic acids. The melting temperature and latent heat of these new materials cover the range from 20 to 40 The high-chain fatty acid esters are new materials for thermal energy storage other than the given low-chain fatty acid esters. They can be synthesized under vacuum and in the absence of catalyst according to the given procedure in literature Besides the fundamental thermal properties of PCMs, the thermal reliability of the materials is very important for utilization. The change in the thermal properties after thermal cycling determines the service life of the storage systems. Inorganic PCMs, such as salt hydrates, have disadvantages due to their instability, following dehydration in the process of thermal cycling with a high degree of super-cooling and corrosiveness. The main limitation of salt hydrates is their chemical instability. On the other hand, organics, such as paraffins, are more stable and show no corrosive behavior to the surrounding container. Gibbs and Hasnain In addition to the thermal stability of the materials, another important criterion that has limited the use of latent heat thermal energy storage systems is the useful life of the PCM–container systems with the number of cycles that materials can reach without significant change in their thermal and chemical properties. In this sense, development of efficient and reliable thermal storage solutions for solar energy is important. Great efforts have been made by researchers to develop solar heater units with efficient thermal storage systems The aim of this paper is to introduce five high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol (1-tetradecanol) with even carbon number and one commercial product as novel organic phase change materials to be used in low temperature heat transfer applications. In addition to the given detailed thermo-physical properties of the materials, including phase change temperature, enthalpy, specific heat of the solid and liquid phases, thermal reliability and degradation of the materials, the effect of the ester bond in the backbone of the chemical structure on the thermal properties and behavior of the materials is also discussed in detail. The high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol with even carbon number were prepared and purified according to the published literature procedure FT-IR spectra of the synthesized high-chain fatty acid esters were recorded on a Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrum 100 spectrometer with universal ATR accessory between 4000 and 380 GC–MS analyses were conducted with a Thermo Finnigan Trace Ultra GC and a Trace DSQ MS with a HP 5 MS (30 A Perkin Elmer Jade DSC was used for the calorimeter analyses of the novel PCMs. The measurements were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 DSC analyses were conducted according to the ASTM standard test methods with designation numbers E 792-06 and D 2766-95, explaining the determination of enthalpies of fusion and freezing and specific heat of liquids and solids, respectively A Perkin Elmer STA-6000 was used for the thermo-gravimetric decomposition of the novel PCMs with temperature, including the decomposition behavior, onset and 5% weight loss temperatures of the materials. The analyses were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 The analyses were conducted according to the general principles given in BS EN ISO 11358:1997 In this research, Bio-Rad MJ Mini DNA thermal cycler was used to provide automated 1000 thermal heating and cooling cycles in order to observe the thermal performance of each PCM. Each PCM was cycled in the temperature interval of 25 The high-chain fatty acid esters were prepared according to the given procedure in literature The high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-tetradecanol that were synthesized in this research are listed in The purity of the high-chain fatty acid esters was studied by FT-IR spectra of the materials after crystallizations with acetone and ether. The starting materials contain hydroxyl groups, which give significant absorptions. Fatty acids show very broad trough of bonded oxygen–hydrogen stretching vibrations between 2500 and 2700 The absence of hydroxyl stretching vibrations of alcohol and the bonded hydrogen–oxygen stretching of fatty acids on the spectra show that the final crystallized products are free of any unreacted alcohol or fatty acid impurities. The carbonyl stretching vibrations of acyclic saturated esters are seen around 1735 GC–MS analyses were performed in order to determine the impurity level of the commercial product and to clarify the relation between the differences in thermal properties and chemical structures. According to the GC–MS chromatograms Cetiol MM consists of not only myristyl myristate but also some other chemicals, including mostly lower chain fatty acid esters. However, it is clearly seen that the synthesized ester is pure and the given thermal data represents the properties of the chemical itself. The chromatograms are given in It has been stated in the literature that a suitable PCM should have small super-cooling degree According to the measured temperatures of melting and freezing, it can be concluded that these organic PCMs do not show significant super-cooling. The temperature differences between melting and freezing are in the range of 0.5–1.90 Besides the low super-cooling degree and melting temperature range of 38–53 The commercial product, Cetiol MM, has around 10 Thermal values above 200 Even though Cetiol MM has one phase change peak, which is not as sharp as the one of 14–14, this commercial product is composed of several lower chain fatty acid esters other than myristyl myristate. According to the DSC curve of Cetiol MM it can be concluded that the impurity level is at optimum to prevent any secondary phase change peak formations, which results in shift of phase change temperatures and change of curve slopes. The overlapped heat flow graphs of Cetiol MM and 14–14 are given in The enthalpy of the high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol increases with increasing carbon chain length of the fatty acids. The climax of the increase is observed in the 14–18 ester at 221.80 Specific heat has an indirect effect on thermal energy storage when latent heat storage is considered. Although the amount of heat absorbed during temperature rise is limited compared to the latent heat absorption, specific heat capacity of solid and liquid phases is another thermal property of PCMs that should be determined. It has been stated in literature that no measurements were performed in most of the papers to determine the temperature dependence of heat capacity The change in specific heat values of solid and liquid phases with temperature is presented in this paper as equations with respect to temperature and the reliability of the presented data is ±3%. The equations are generated with the measured data between 10 and 85 A suitable PCM must have good thermal reliability depending on the number of thermal cycles. Minimum changes in phase change enthalpy and temperature after several thermal cycles are required for a useful PCM. Therefore, thermal reliability of the new chemicals should be determined before introducing them to the literature as novel PCMs. In this study the thermal reliability of the PCMs was determined by 1000 automated thermal cycles, which were conducted with the help of a DNA thermal cycler. Then, the DSC results of the aged samples were compared with the originals to clarify the reliability of the materials. According to the DSC analyses of the aged samples, it has been found that the introduced materials do not show any significant changes in thermal properties after 1000 thermal cycles. The changes in the phase change enthalpies and temperatures are lower than 1% and there are no phase segregation or decomposition peaks in the heat flow graphs of the novel PCMs. The changes in the thermal properties are given in The overlapped heat flow graphs clarify that the aged samples show the same thermal behavior as the originals do during heating and cooling. The slope of the peaks and the onset temperatures are significantly similar and there are no secondary peaks on the graphs of the aged samples, i.e. they are chemically and thermally stable after 1000 thermal cycles. Overlapped heat flow graphs of some of the PCMs are given in TGA data is important to determine the temperature the material can withstand without chemical decomposition. The onset decomposition temperatures should be taken into consideration in choosing the encapsulation type and application area for utilization of PCMs. The onset decomposition and 5% weight loss temperatures of all the presented high-chain esters of myristyl alcohol are above 270 and 240 It is definite that the chemical structure of the materials has distinct effect on the thermal behaviors and properties. High-chain fatty acid esters are structurally composed of linear carbon backbone with ester linkage at the joint points of fatty acids and alcohols. The structural difference between these materials and saturated n-alkanes is the ester bond in the carbon chain. Therefore, the contribution of the ester bond to the thermal properties can be determined with comparison of two materials with the same carbon number. In this study, n-hexacosane and n-triacontane have been chosen to analyze the thermal differences with the help of a DSC and a TGA. They have the same carbon number as those of the 14–12 and 14–16 esters, respectively. The DSC analyses show that both of the n-alkanes undergo two distinguishable phase changes. The first sharp peak represents solid–solid phase change of crystal structure re-organization and the second one is the solid–liquid phase change in the heating step, and vice versa during cooling. According to Briard et al. The most significant and important effect of the ester bond is the modification it makes on the thermal behaviors of the n-alkanes. A chemical with thermal behavior similar to that of n-alkanes is not suitable for thermal applications because the response of the material to the ambient temperature change is interrupted by sequential phase changes and the total amount of transferable heat is divided into sub-groups in a broader temperature interval. However the bond provides one step heat transfer during phase changes of high-chain fatty acid esters, i.e. the heat is stored or released at one particular temperature to a large extent and this modification makes the esters useful for utilization. In addition to the thermal behavior difference of saturated hydrocarbons, the total phase change enthalpies and phase change temperatures of n-hexacosane and n-triacontane are also different. They have higher phase change temperature and enthalpy than the corresponding esters. However, the single phase change provided by the ester bond makes the energy useful even if it is lower than those of n-alkanes. The comparison of the materials is tabulated in It is important to point out that the decrease in phase change temperature and enthalpy is particular for 14–12 and 14–16 esters. The degree and sign of change might be different for other high-chain fatty acid esters with the same number of carbon atoms, but with different fatty acid and alcohol orders. In addition to determination of the differences between the thermal properties of the organics, the thermo-gravimetric decomposition behavior has also been investigated. Unlike the DSC analyses, the results show that the effect of the ester bond is not so significant on the decomposition behavior of the organics. The characteristics of the overlapped graphs are very similar and the calculated onset temperatures are very close to each other with a slight difference of 1%. The overlapped graphs are given in However, even if no significant difference can be seen on the overlapped graphs, it is possible to mention that the effect of the ester bond can be more intense on high-chain esters with the same number of carbon atoms, but with different fatty acid and alcohol orders. The effect cannot be clearly seen between the 14–12 and 14–16 esters and the corresponding n-alkanes. The energy consumption of the world's population increased drastically during the last decades with increased fossil fuel consumption and carbon dioxide emissions. However, world's limited crude oil reserves and rise in barrel prices triggered the researches on utilization of renewable energy sources and energy efficiency. Concerning the energy efficiency issue, “thermal energy storage” plays an important role in energy conservation and today, PCMs are important tools of energy storage. The melting temperatures of the introduced materials vary between 38 and 53 The reliability of the thermal properties of the materials after several phase change cycles is very important for the sustainability of the designed systems in practice. The thermal reliability of the introduced materials is quiet good. They preserve their thermal performances after 1000 thermal cycles. Moreover, the PCMs are found to be stable up to high temperatures according to the TGA data. Therefore, these materials are suitable for exothermic micro- and macro-encapsulations. Based on the presented results, it can be concluded that the introduced high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol with even carbon number are promising PCMs for low temperature thermal energy storage. This research was supported by the