In elderly patients, distal radius fractures are often associated with osteoporotic bone. Under these conditions, anatomic resurfacing implants may provide satisfactory results in terms of range of motion, pain and function. Between July 2009 and January 2012, eight elderly patients were treated with the SOPHIA™ implant at our hand surgery department. Inclusion criteria were isolated comminuted distal radius AO type C2 fractures in patients greater than 70years of age. All patients were reviewed in February 2013 by an independent surgeon. Clinical, functional and radiographic assessments were performed. Mean follow-up was 25months (range 17–36months). Mean ROM was 45° (range 40–50°) in flexion and 44° (range 40–50°) in extension. Mean pronation-supination range was 160°. Mean grip strength was 18kgf. Mean Quick DASH was 18.2/100 (range 6.82–29.55) and mean pain on VAS was 2.33 (range 0–4). X-rays did not reveal any implant loosening or ulnar translation of the carpus. Use of a wrist resurfacing implant led to rapid recovery of autonomy in elderly patients with comminuted distal radius fractures. It parallels the use of shoulder or elbow prostheses for complex joint fractures in the elderly.Displaced distal radius fractures are becoming more frequent and remain a public health problem In this study, we assessed the results of treatment with a resurfacing prosthesis for comminuted distal radius fractures in elderly patients. This new treatment concept was first described by Roux in 2009 From 2009 to 2012, 284 elderly patients (70 The procedure was performed under regional anesthesia (axillary block). A 5–6 All patients were reviewed by an independent surgeon in February 2013. Wrist mobility and grip strength were measured with a Jamar dynamometer. Subjective and objective outcomes were captured using Herzberg score system Clinical and radiological results were recorded at the last follow-up. The mean and standard deviation were calculated for the variables measured. The last follow-up visit occurred an average of 25 Clinical results are summarized in X-rays revealed one case of periprosthetic ossification ( The optimal treatment of complex distal radius fractures in elderly patients remains controversial Many studies have reported good functional results after surgical treatment of displaced articular radius fractures in elderly patients. Despite substantial technological advances in the design of palmar plates, anatomical reduction is very difficult to obtain in elderly patients with complex articular and metaphyseal fractures Surgical treatment for complex distal radius fractures in elderly patients has been previously evaluated. Several studies have reported using distraction plating as an internal fixator Our clinical results are similar to those obtained by Roux with six patients receiving a resurfacing prosthesis We used a wrist resurfacing implant that provided rapid recovery of autonomy in elderly patients with comminuted distal radius fracture. It parallels the use of shoulder, elbow, hip and knee arthroplasty for complex joint fractures in the elderly. The current results are encouraging relative to those from other studies where the same implant or internal distraction plating were used. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.