Gas–solid flows involving wet particles are very frequently encountered in a variety of applications in industries, which includes live problems in the field of spray granulation, coking, gas phase polymerization, etc. These processes can be studied with discrete element models. The predictive capabilities of these models depend on the accuracy of the particle–particle contact dynamics. Although this dynamics is well understood for dry particles, this is not the case for wet particles. The current study focuses on a particle colliding with a thin liquid film to mimic the wet particle collisions and understand the effect of system parameters on the (apparent) restitution coefficient. Our model combines the VOF model developed by van Sint Annaland et al. (2005) and the Immersed Boundary (IB) model reported by van der Hoef et al. (2006). The Volume of Fluid (VOF) part features (i) an interface reconstruction technique based on piecewise linear interface representation (ii) a three-dimensional version of the continuum surface force (CSF) model of Brackbill et al. (1992). The Immersed Boundary (IB) part incorporates the particle–fluid interaction via a Direct Forcing Method (DFM). The hybrid VOF-IB model results are demonstrated and verified for a wide spectrum of parameters, from the experimental findings presented by Antonyuk et al. (2009).Many applications in industries involve gas–solid flows with wet particles. These include applications in the field of spray granulation, coking and gas phase polymerization to name just a few. Though these processes are in use for more than decades, not much of the basic physics is well understood till now. Such multiphase flows pose a big challenge to model with confidence due to the complex underlying phenomenon. Roughly three approaches (see The current study focuses on particle impact on thin liquid films to mimic wet particle collisions and understand the effect of physical properties of liquid on the apparent restitution coefficient. The simulation results can be used in large scale models with Euler–Euler approach, where a localized apparent restitution coefficient can be adopted, which account for the sub-grid phenomenon related to “wet collisions”. Several authors have performed experiments to study the impact of particles on the target with a thin liquid layer. Knowledge on the impact characteristics is necessary to describe particle collisions in the presence of solid or liquid layers that occur in some processes such as wet comminution, fluidized bed spray granulation, filtration, etc. The main emphasis in this paper is on the most fundamental level of modeling (see Volume of Fluid (VOF) methods ( Immersed Boundary (IB) methods ( The organisation of this paper is as follows: first the description of the model and the numerical solution method is given. Subsequently, the verification of the method, where the test cases will be examined against the experimental findings from Our model consists of two main parts: one part deals with the presence of deformable interfaces (VOF model) whereas the other part accounts for the presence of the solid particles taking into account the possible non-ideal collisions between the particles themselves and/or confining walls (IB-DP model). First, the main conservation equations will be presented along with the incorporation of surface tension and the advection of the deformable interfaces. The fluid–solid coupling and the particle motion and (possible) collision interaction will subsequently be described. For incompressible multi-material flows the Navier–Stokes equations can be combined into a single equation for the fluid velocity This equation expresses that the interface property is advected with the local fluid velocity. For the local average density Similarly, the local average dynamic viscosity can also be obtained via linear averaging of the dynamic viscosities. As an alternative, more fundamental approach recently proposed by In all computations reported in this paper Eq. The Navier–Stokes equations are solved with a standard finite volume technique on a staggered rectangular 3D grid using a two-step projection–correction method with an implicit treatment of the pressure gradient and explicit treatment of the convection terms. A second-order flux delimited Barton-scheme ( In the continuum surface force (CSF) model ( The normal to the interface is computed from the gradient of the smoothed colour function. The smoothing technique used in this paper will be discussed later. The integration of the hyperbolic The number of possible interface configurations can be minimised from sixty four to five generic ones, which are schematically shown in For the computation of the fluxes through the cell faces the equation for the planar interface segment cutting through the Eulerian cell needs to be considered. This equation is given by Once the aforementioned steps have been taken, finally the amount of liquid fluxed through each of the faces of the Eulerian cells during a time step Δ As indicated before the interface orientation (i.e. the normal to the interface) is computed from the gradient of the color function We typically use The momentum source term The Eulerian momentum density is subsequently mapped to the Lagrangian force point It should be added here that, due to the staggered grid used for the flow computation, the mapping given by Eq. Finally the Eulerian force density is obtained by mapping the Lagrangian force density At this point we have at our disposal the spatial distribution of the Eulerian force density and we turn to the calculation of a tentative velocity field, which accounts for the convective and diffusive momentum transport and all source terms excluding the pressure gradient Eq. Since The translational and rotational motion of the suspended solid particles is given by the Newtonian equations of motion, respectively, given by: The source terms appearing in the Newtonian equations of motion are treated as known (explicit) terms and; therefore, the integration of these equations can be conducted in principle with any integration technique for ordinary differential equations. For the simulations reported in this paper we have used a second order trapezoidal rule producing translational and rotational velocities at the new time level computed respectively as follows: Once these new velocities are obtained an event driven hard sphere collision model is invoked. In this model it is assumed that the interaction forces are impulsive and; therefore, all other finite forces are negligible during collision. The closure of this collision model involves three micro-mechanical parameters: the coefficients for normal and tangential restitution and the tangential friction coefficient, which in principle can be obtained from separate impact experiments for dry particles.  In this section the technique described in the previous section is used to study the microscopic phenomena relevant for fluid bed granulation. In this paper we report a number of test cases for impact of a particle on a thin liquid film, in which substantial changes in interface topology prevail.  As a reference, the study performed by While validating the model with the experimental results obtained and presented by A grid sensitivity study for the Eulerian mesh for three different grid sizes was carried out. Test cases comprising of coarse grids are discarded due to lack of desired level of accuracy captured in the larger grid sizes. Also, finer grids were not considered, as they introduce excessive computational load on the system. The time step is decided based on the grid size constraints inherited from the explicit treatment of convection and surface tension. The initial particle velocity was taken the same, 2.36 Results obtained for the vertical particle position, velocity and energy profiles are plotted versus time in The restitution coefficient ( Comparison of the experimental and simulation results has been conducted through the, (i) nature of velocity–displacement curves (see The impact of particles on shallow liquid surfaces has been studied experimentally by various researchers and constitutes a challenging test case for our hybrid VOF-IB method because, depending on the physical properties (viscosity and surface tension) of the liquid, rather complex changes in interface topology can prevail. In Snapshots at different times of the impact of a spherical particle (blue) of 1.75 Through the collisions with the liquid layer and the wall, the kinetic energy of the particle gradually decreases. This phenomenon is studied in detail in the current study and is also compared with the previous model as presented in the work of In In this paper a simulation model is presented for the Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) of complex multi-fluid flows. The presented study focuses on the collision of a dry particle with a thin liquid film to mimic the wet particle collisions and understand the effect of system parameters on the (apparent) restitution coefficient. Our model combines the VOF model developed by  plane constant for interface segment cutting through Eulerian cell (dimensionless) distribution or smoothing function (dimensionless) fractional amount of liquid (dimensionless) smoothed colour function (dimensionless) smoothing function stencil width (m) measure for Eulerian grid size (m) moment of inertia (kg/m particle mass (kg) number of force points per particle (dimensionless)  pressure (N/m particle radius (m) time (s)       curvature (m dynamic viscosity (kg/(m density (kg/m grid spacing in dimensionless distance in surface tension (N/m) time step (s) volume of range of influence of force point  volumetric surface tension force (N/m Eulerian force density (N/m total force exerted by the fluid on the particle (N) Lagrangian force density (N/m gravitational acceleration (m/s normal vector unit normal vector position vector (m) torque exerted by fluid on the particle (N fluid velocity (m/s) particle translational velocity (m/s) velocity at Lagrangian force point m (m/s) particle rotational velocity (s  phase number marker/force point      partial time derivative (s substantial derivative (s gradient operator (m divergence operator (m transpose of a tensor cross vector product In this appendix we explain in more detail how the force density function appearing in the momentum equation is computed and additionally give the expressions for the number of Lagrangian force points For a sphere the region of influence of all Lagrangian force points is confined by two concentric spheres with inner radius Let The total number of force points can be estimated from The relation between the Eulerian force density and the Lagrangian force density to be distributed to the Eulerian mesh is given by the following expression: In this appendix we explain about the force balance model used by The equation of translational motion of a spherical particle impacting on the wall with a liquid layer is expressed in a general form as follows: The vertical component of the surface tension force is given as The drag force The expression for viscous force is given by The elastic deformation force, The damping force F