Rock mass classification systems are the very important part for underground projects and rock mass rating (RMR) is one of the most commonly applied classification systems in numerous civil and mining projects. The type of rock mass consisting of an interbedding of strong and weak layers poses difficulties and uncertainties for determining the RMR. For this, the present paper uses the concept of rock bolt supporting factor (RSF) for modification of RMR system to be used in such rock mass types. The proposed method also demonstrates the importance of rock bolting practice in such rock masses. The geological parameters of the Shemshak Formation of the Alborz Tunnel in Iran are used as case examples for development of the theoretical approach.The very first attempt for rock mass classification utilized in tunnel design was made by Rock mass rating (RMR) system also known as geomechanics classification as one of the most commonly used classification systems consists of six components, i.e. uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock material, spacing of discontinuities, RQD, condition of discontinuities, groundwater condition and joint orientation favorability. Joint orientation favorability is dependent on the engineering application of the structure such as mine, tunnel, slope or foundation. The other five parameters are intrinsic characteristics of rock mass ( The fine-grained sediments which contained high percentage of phyllosilicate minerals were classified by Slope mass rating (SMR) system as the most commonly used classification system for slopes based on RMR system was introduced by Fuzzy set theory was applied for classification of rock mass by RMR system has been extended by many researchers in different branches. Some of these extensions or applications, as mentioned by The engineering geological conditions of the Alborz Mountains of Northern Iran are outlined and specific attention is given to the problems related to reservoir construction in varied geological condition, reservoir siltation, tunnels and earthquake activity ( Concept of RSF or rock bolting capability of rock mass was introduced by The excavation of Alborz Twin Tunnels with a length of approximately 6.4 km, as the longest tunnels of Tehran-Shomal Freeway Project in Iran, has been going on where the twin tunnels are supported by an exploratory service tunnel in between ( As indicated in The main problem here is the movement of sandstone blocks having weak layers of argillite in between which lead to low shear strength of discontinuity surfaces. This is the reason for some problems encountered in such rock mass types. As previously mentioned, some of these problems were discussed by As discussed previously, the RSF is an indicator of rock bolting capability of a given rock mass, showing the rock bolting efficiency in different rock mass conditions. Its value ranges from 0% to 100%, where the value of 100% denotes the highest capability of rock mass to be reinforced by rock bolting. Here, in order to employ the concept of RSF for rock mass classification, a brief introduction to joint condition rating in the RMR system is presented. The joint condition parameter in the RMR system has five components, i.e. discontinuity length (persistence), separation (aperture), roughness, infilling material and weathering condition. The ratings for these components are shown in As the thickness of weaker rock layer (argillite in Alborz Tunnel) is very low with regard to the strong rock layer (sandstone in Alborz Tunnel), it is possible to assume the weaker rock to be an infilling material. This simple assumption is the base of new proposed method for classification of such rock mass types. Assuming the weaker layer as infilling material, the rating for joint condition must be carried out directly from The important feature in The difference between RMR values obtained through conventional and proposed methods can be discussed in three states, i.e. State 1: If we assume State 2: In this case, State 3: Hence, Only in State 3, the proposed method yields RMR values more than that of conventional method. However, in practical cases as shown about the Alborz Tunnel in As mentioned previously, Eq. The difficulties of using rock mass classification systems where rock mass consists of an alternation of strong and weak layers such as the Shemshak Formation of Alborz Tunnel in Iran are shown and then using RSF, a new methodology is proposed for such rock masses classification. The proposed methodology can cope with discrepancies in results of rock mass classification systems in such rock mass types as well as demonstrating the importance of rock bolting practice. The geological parameters of Alborz tunnel are used as case examples while developing the theory. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.