A systematic study on the comminution of a soft (coal) and a hard (iron ore) material is carried out to investigate the bulk comminution features of the hammer mill. The effect of the feed rate and the rotor speed on the mill efficiency in terms of reduction ratio, energy expenditure, fines produced and median size is investigated. High reduction ratios are obtained under all conditions. The hammer mill products are observed to exhibit Rosin–Rammler type size distribution and are invariably self preserving. A high rotor speed with a low to moderate feed rate is found to give better performance of the mill. An exponential dependence of the median size on the quantity of fines generated is established for the mill product. The data indicated that the reduction ratio and the specific energy expenditure are linearly related, the slope of which is inversely related to the Bond Index of the material. The energy expenditure goes into creating new surfaces and overcoming the elastic strain energy of the cracked surface. The quantity of fines generated in the mill can reflect the degree of attrition in the mill which is an indirect measure of the mill wear. It is established that good performance of the mill can be achieved even for the hard materials by keeping the wear at a low level. It is suggested that an impact hammer mill can be used for the comminution of harder materials under controlled conditions.Comminution or size reduction is the most energy intensive unit operation in mineral processing. Size reduction in the coarse range (crushing) requires comparatively less energy than that in the finer range (grinding). Consequently, the grinding process attracted tremendous attention from the researchers and is extensively investigated with a view to reduce energy consumption When the feed material is introduced inside the crusher chamber of a hammer mill it is shattered by the impact with the rotating hammers first and then by striking against the inner surface/breaker plate of the shell. Shatter is the primary mode of fracture in the impact hammer mills. The fractures along and across the grain boundaries help in producing a fairly uniform size distribution which is much finer than the feed size distribution. This is what actually helps in achieving a very high reduction ratio in the hammer mill. In view of these two major advantages, crushing operation in the hammer mill is studied in greater details. Two different materials with different hardness values are studied in this work. Breakage patterns of iron ore (hard) and coal (soft) in the hammer mill were taken up for investigation. It may be recalled that the grate opening allows the finer material to be discharged while retaining coarser material for further breakage. The retention of the oversize materials leads to significant degree of inter-particle, particle–hammer and particle–wall shear producing substantial amount of fines leading to the wear of the mill. In other words, the fines produced may be considered a measure of the wear of the mill interior. In order to study this aspect breakage pattern was also investigated after removing the grate in the hammer mill. Comminution experiments were carried out with and without the grate at various rotor speeds and feed rates for both the raw materials. The product particle size distribution in each case was studied and important inferences were made by investigating the resulting distributions carefully. Hematite iron ore from Chiriya mines and semi-coking coal from Kuju Mines in Eastern India were used as the raw materials in this investigation. The run of mines (ROM) ore/coal was first crushed to a top size of 100 The impact hammer mill supplied by Subhadra Engineering Works, India, was used in the present study. The mill is equipped with an electromagnetic vibratory feeder and a PLC based control system. It has the provisions to control the feed rate and the rotor speed through the control panel. In the hammer mill setup, as shown in The − Reproducibility tests were undertaken with iron ore under no-grate condition and with coal keeping the grate in place. A total of five tests were carried out at 1200 The product size distributions obtained in all experiments are examined to establish the type of distribution that the hammer mill generates. Interestingly, it is observed that in all the cases the size analysis data indicated a Rosin–Rammler distribution for the product of the hammer mill. It may be recalled that the Rosin–Rammler distribution is given by: The median size (d The design of impact hammer mill, a secondary crusher, may be done using the classical energy law which is stated in terms of a characteristic size of the distribution. The 80-percent passing size (d It may be recalled that shatter fracture generates much less fines while attrition contributes significantly towards the generation of fines. The quantity of fines generated depends on a number of parameters including the rotor speed, the feed size, the grate opening, the hardness of the material, etc. The volume of the fines also gives an idea of the degree of attrition occurring inside the mill and hence, the extent of wear of the hammers and the shell/breaker plate. The quantity of fines (< It is observed that comminution in the hammer mill produced self-preserving size spectrum and, therefore, the size distribution is essentially defined by the median size alone which signifies the relative fineness or the coarseness of the size distribution. Consequently, the median size is related to the fines generated in a definite manner. The following simple relationship between the two is reported to hold good for self-similar distributions The quantum of specific energy expenditure plays an important role in determining the reduction ratio and therefore, has a definite relationship with the latter. In order to explore this, the reduction ratio values were plotted against the energy expenditure for comminution of coal and iron ore in the impact hammer mill. Interestingly, in both cases a linear relationship was obtained as seen in A plot of product d50 and energy expenditure when the grate is in place is also shown in The attrition within the holdup volume inside the hammer mill is responsible for the generation of fines which gives an indication of the wear of the hammers as well as the breaker plate/shell. Of course, some fines are generated by the shatter fracture of the particles. An estimation of this is made by running the hammer mill after removing the grate. Under this condition the comminuted material is allowed to discharge freely. Of course, comminution is poor under this condition and substantial amount of material reports to the product stream without undergoing much fracture. However, some particles undergo substantial fracture and generate some fines. Now, the difference in the generation of fines with and without grate in place does give an idea of the additional breakage of material taking place inside the mill due to the presence of the grate. This difference in the generation of fines has two components — one, fines appearing due to the fracture of additional material and two, fines generated due to the attrition inside the mill. Although, both will contribute to the wear of the hammer and the shell, the later will have a dominating role in this regard. In this work, it is assumed that this difference in the generation of percentage of fines (< It may be seen from A few interesting inferences may be drawn from the above considerations. In terms of the energy utilization, the reduction ratio achievable and the fines generated, the hammer mill is expectedly quite effective for the breakage of softer materials. However, this study establishes that it is also quite effective for comminuting harder materials if operated under controlled conditions. The mill product size distribution exhibits a Rosin–Rammler type of distribution and retains its self-similar feature with different master curves for different materials. Higher rotor speed facilitates breakage while low to moderate feed rate is required for good comminution performance in the mill. An exponential relationship exists between the median size and the percentage of fines generated in the mill. On the other hand, the reduction ratio and the energy expended for breakage are linearly related. The nature of this relationship depends on the hardness of the material as well as its elastic strain energy. The quantity of fines generated in the mill is a measure of the attrition level and therefore, an indirect measure of the degree of the wear of the hammers and the mill interior. Comminution is better when the reduction ratio is higher. A higher reduction ratio is associated with higher energy expenditure. Although from an industrial standpoint a lower energy requirement is desirable, a higher reduction ratio implies a finer product size for a given feed which in turn is associated with greater surface area and therefore, greater surface energy. Since this surface energy must come from the energy spent in comminution, higher reduction ratio implies a higher energy expenditure which also results in an increase in the generation of fines and consequently increases the wear. However, the wear may be kept at a low level by setting optimum operating conditions for the mill to exploit the two most important characteristics of the mill, namely, the ability to give a high reduction ratio and producing uniform size distribution. The mill is generally used for softer materials. But, with the optimum setting it can actually be employed for the comminution of the harder materials too to reap the benefits.