Self-propelled micromotors have previously shown to enhance pollutant removal compared to non-motile nano-micro particles. However, these systems are expensive, difficult to scale-up and require surfactant for efficient work. Efficient and inexpensive micromotors are desirable for their practical applications in water treatment technologies. We describe cobalt-ferrite based micromotors (CFO micromotors) fabricated by a facile and scalable synthesis, that produce hydroxyl radicals via Fenton-like reaction and take advantage of oxygen gas generated during this reaction for self-propulsion. Once the reaction is complete, the CFO micromotors can be easily separated and collected due to their magnetic nature. The CFO micromotors are demonstrated for highly efficient advanced oxidative removal of tetracycline antibiotic from the water. Furthermore, the effects of different concentrations of micromotors and hydrogen peroxide on the antibiotic degradation were studied, as well as the generation of the highly reactive hydroxyl radicals responsible for the oxidation reaction.Self-propelled micro/nano motors have gained considerable attention because of their attractive practical applications and importance for understanding motion at low Reynolds number Iron and other transition metals based react with hydrogen peroxide (H Here, we present platinum and surfactant free cobalt ferrite-based bubble propelled micromotors (CFO micromotors) for oxidation of tetracycline (TC) antibiotic, as pharmaceutical model pollutant, via Fenton-like reaction. Tetracycline is one of most widely used antibiotic for human and veterinary healthcare CFO micromotors were fabricated from cobalt ferrite nanoparticles. Cobalt ferrite nanoparticles were synthesized by solvothermal method using cobalt acetate (CoAc, sigma 403024) and Iron(III) chloride hexahydrate (FeCl A diluted suspension of the cobalt ferrite nanoparticles was dried overnight at room temperature on a copper grid to prepare samples for the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. JEOL Centurio model was used to obtain images of nanoparticles. Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) (Gatan GIF ERS electron energy-loss spectrometer) coupled with TEM was used to quantify ratio of Co and Fe present in the nanoparticles. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of CFO micromotors were obtained using a FEI NOVA NanoSEM 230 system. The crystalline structure of micromotors were further characterized by using the Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer equipped with a Cu Kα radiation (1.5417 Swimming behavior of the CFO micromotors was analyzed using an inverted optical microscope Leica DMI 3000 B equipped with a camera Leica DFC 3000 G. A custom-made 3D printed sample holder was prepared to position the glassware under the microscope for observing the swimming of the micromotors in situ. Tetracycline (TC, sigma T7660) was selected as target antibiotic. TC degradation experiments were carried out in a glass beaker containing CFO micromotors in 50 The effect of surfactant was studied by using the optimized concentration of 0.1 In all the degradation experiments, aliquots of the different samples were taken at timed intervals. The concentration of TC in each sample was measured by reading the absorbance value of the sample at 358 Terephthalic acid was used as a probe molecule to investigate the hydroxyl radical generation during the Fenton-like reaction of CFO micromotors. A solution containing terephthalic acid (0.5 CFO micromotors were fabricated from the cobalt ferrite nanoparticles, which were synthesized by using cobalt(II) acetate and iron(III) chloride (molar ratio Co The synthesized cobalt ferrite nanoparticles were dried to obtain agglomerated micrometer-sized CFO micromotors as depicted in CFO micromotors were characterized by TEM and SEM ( The composition and crystalline structure of the CFO micromotors was analyzed by electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) method and XRD respectively ( The motion of cobalt ferrite nanoparticles and micromotors was investigated by optical microscopy. We observed that the nanoparticles do not exhibit bubble propulsion in H The CFO micromotors were studied for their efficiency toward TC degradation via Fenton-like reaction. First, the micromotors concentration was optimized by using different amounts of CFO micromotors from 0.05 to 0.2 Generally, surfactants are added to the solution to improve the overall swimming behavior of the micromotors regarding directionality and speed. Surfactants stabilize the interface of bubbles therefore facilitating their detachment from the micromotors surface, which smoothens the swimming and decreases the drift in the liquid due to fusion and bursting of bubbles The degradation efficiency of TC by the CFO micromotors was compared with control experiments using only H The degradation pathway of TC was previously studied by other researchers giving a general idea of its possible mineralization pathways Fenton reaction mechanism, proposed by Haber and Weiss, can explain both the production of hydroxyl radicals for organic degradation (Eq. Presence of cobalt in the catalyst structure can also activate hydrogen peroxide for increased production of hydroxyl radicals, thus increasing the efficiency of the catalyst (Eq. Co We have fabricated inexpensive CFO based micromotors by nanoparticle drying process, using easily scalable synthesis methods. The CFO micromotors can swim without the addition of surfactants in the system and efficiently degrade antibiotics from wastewater. Furthermore, we observed that the presence of the surfactants decreases the efficiency of CFO micromotors. We have also verified the production of hydroxyl radicals to support the oxidation mechanism of TC by CFO micromotors. Since the hydroxyl radicals are non-selective oxidants, these micromotors can potentially be used for wide range of pharmaceutical and other organic pollutants. We believe that CFO micromotors do not only demonstrate the usability of self-propelled micromotors for wastewater cleaning, but also show an improvement of previously reported systems, since they are composed of cheap materials and do not require the addition of surfactants. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. The research leading to these results has received funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: