Background
                  Proposed benefits of intramedullary techniques include limited soft tissue dissection while affording sufficient stability to allow early wrist motion. The primary null hypothesis of this randomized trial was that there is no significant difference with respect to functional outcome, pain and disability between patients treated with either 2.4-mm volar locking plate fixation or intramedullary nail fixation of intra-articular fractures of the distal radius.
               
                  Methods
                  We conducted a single-centre, prospective randomized matched-pairs trial. Patients with intraarticular distal radius fractures with metaphyseal comminution and a sagittal fracture line (AO 23 C2.1) were randomized to receive volar locking plate fixation (n = 14) or intramedullary nailing (n = 14). The outcome was measured on the basis of the Gartland and Werley and Castaing score; the pain level; the range of wrist motion; the rate of complications; and radiographic measurements including volar tilt and ulnar variance. Clinical and radiographic assessment was performed at 8 weeks and 2 years after the operation.
               
                  Results
                  There were no significant differences between groups in terms of range of motion, grip strength or the level of pain at eight weeks. At the final follow up, patients in the nail group had regained more extension than in the plate group (98% of the unaffected side vs. 94%, this however, did not reach significance). Reduction was maintained in both groups; however volar tilt and ulnar variance were significantly better in the plate group. There was no significant difference in the complication rate between groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The present study suggests that intramedullary nail fixation is a reasonable alternative to volar plate fixation for the treatment of intra-articular distal radius fractures and both techniques can yield reliably good results.The goal of treatment for distal radius fractures is to obtain sufficient pain-free motion, allowing return to activities while minimizing the risk for future degenerative changes or disability [ Intraarticular distal radius fractures with metaphyseal comminution and a sagittal fracture line (AO 23 C2.1) are often amenable to closed reduction and less invasive treatment, e.g. non-bridging external fixation [ Less invasive intramedullary fixation with diverging screws that allow for fragment specific fixation might be a reasonable alternative in this specific fracture type. We therefore hypothesized that there is no significant difference in functional and radiological outcome of AO type C2.1 intraarticular fractures of the distal radius treated with either 2.4-mm volar locking plate fixation or intramedullary nail fixation (Targon DR). This was a single-centre prospective randomized matched pair trial. Eligible participants were all adults aged 18 or over with AO type C2.1 intraarticular fractures of the distal radius. All patients were recruited at one single Level I trauma centre from September 2005 to June 2008. Institutional Review Board approval was granted before initiation of this study, and strict confidentiality guidelines were followed. All patients provided written informed consent at the time of enrolment. We paired participants by sex and age and randomly assigned them (computerized random numbers) to receive either plate fixation or intramedullary nailing. Patients were assigned sequentially numbered opaque, sealed and stapled envelopes to conceal allocation from the enrolling researcher. The researcher was not involved in patient treatment. The treating physicians opened corresponding envelopes at the preoperative visit only after the enrolled participants completed all baseline assessments. According to our hospital's policies, all operations were performed as inpatient procedures in the operating room with the patient under regional or general anaesthesia. Targon Fixation was performed according to manufacturer guidelines A 4-cm skin incision was made from the tip of the radial styloid. Care was taken to identify and gently retract the radial sensory branches that cross the compartment obliquely by using gentle, blunt longitudinal dissection as soon as the deepest dermal layer of skin had been incised. The interval between the first and second dorsal compartments was developed subperiosteally. The fracture was reduced by insertion of a Kapandji wire under fluoroscopic control. Using the Kapandji wire as a guidewire, the intramedullary canal was opened with a cannulated reamer, followed by broaching of the medullary cavity, using the designated profilers. Once broaching and sizing were completed, the actual implant and insertion jig were assembled on the back table and inserted into the distal radius. After correct placement was confirmed, four 1.8 mm drilling wires were inserted through the insertion jig and replaced by fixation screws. Length, tilt and rotation were confirmed prior to insertion of the proximal bicortical locking screws. Final images were taken to confirm reduction and fixation of the fracture ( Volar plate fixation was performed through a standard Henry approach [ We recorded operative time, fluoroscopy time and duration of hospital stay. Patients were not immobilized and were allowed immediate forearm, wrist, and finger motion. Formal therapy was individualized. Strenuous tasks, sports activity, and weight bearing were allowed once radiographs confirmed fracture union. Follow-up was performed at 8 weeks, 6 months, 1 year and 2 years after the operation. All patients were evaluated by an independent investigator not involved in the patients’ treatment. Blinding of the investigator was not possible due to obvious differences in incision placement. Functional assessment included measurement of active range of wrist motion, using a goniometer. Grip power was measured with a dynamometer (Jamar; JA Preston Corp., Jackson, MI) at position 3, and an average of three trials. All clinical data were compared with the non-involved side. Wrist pain was evaluated using the visual analogue scale (VAS) (VAS 0 = no pain, VAS 10 = severe pain). Subjective and objective data were summarized in the Gartland and Werley Score (0–2 = excellent to > 20 = poor) [ Standard posterior-anterior and lateral wrist radiographs were obtained at each follow up visit. On lateral radiographs of the symptomatic wrist in the neutral position, volar tilt (number of degrees from the neutral position) of the articular surface of the distal radius was measured. On posteroanterior radiographs ulnar variance was measured as described by Medoff [ Fracture union was defined as bone bridging of the radial, ulnar, and dorsal cortical aspect of the distal radius as seen in anteroposterior and lateral projections within three months after surgery. Patients with incomplete callous bridging four months after surgery were considered to have delayed healing, and patients with limited radiographic evidence six months after surgery or initial injury were considered to have fracture nonunion [ Descriptive statistics were computed for variables of interest. After testing for normality, non-parametric Mann-Whitney Test was chosen to assess differences between groups concerning the investigated continuous variables. Fisher's exact test was used to assess differences for categorical variables. We used Bonferroni-correction, so the significance level of statistical tests was set at  The mean time from injury to surgery was eight days (range, 1–24). Fractures were classified according to the AO/ASIF classification system by a single experienced orthopaedic surgeon. The primary analysis was on-treatment and involved all patients who completed the final follow up. One patient did not attend the final follow up evaluation. Two patients died of unrelated conditions and were excluded. A total of 25 patients were available at the final follow up. Median operative time was longer for plate fixation, whereas fluoroscopy time was higher for intramedullary nailing. Both differences were not significant ( Patients in both groups achieved 82% of wrist motion and grip strength of the unaffected side. After eight weeks, patients in the nail group presented with greater range of motion and lower Castaing scores, however this difference was not significant ( More than 96% of patients in both groups showed perfect or good results according to the Castaing Score and excellent or good results according to the Gartland and Werley score. Patients in both group reported no or very mild pain ( All fractures united within three months after surgery. Reduction was maintained in all patients. Palmar tilt and ulnar variance were significantly better in the plate group (  Complications were noted in three patients. One patient in each group reported persistent discomfort at the wrist and have had their implants removed. Implant removal was not performed routinely, but only at the patient's request. Implant removal due to screw penetration into the distal radioulnar joint was performed in one case in the nail group. One patient in the volar plate group developed symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome and received implant removal and carpal tunnel release. Transient paraesthesia of the superficial radial nerve occurred in one patient in the nail group. Chronic or deep soft-tissue infections or tendon irritations were not detected in either group. Stabilization of distal radius fractures constitute an important component of the daily work load of a trauma surgeon [ The present study prospectively evaluated the differences between 2.4-mm volar locking plate fixation and intramedullary nail fixation for a certain subtype (AO type C2.1) of intra-articular fracture of the distal radius. Our null hypothesis was that there would be no significant differences in any outcome between the two groups at eight weeks and two years after the operation. However, in the early recovery period, ulnar abduction seemed to be less compromised in the nailing group and patients had lower Castaing scores. At the time of the final follow up, active wrist extension recovery averaged 97% in the nail group and was greater than in the plate group, but did not reach a level of significance. Patients in both groups had regained more than 82% of wrist motion and grip strength compared to the unaffected side and reported no or only minimal pain. Comparison of the initial postoperative radiographs with those taken at the last follow-up showed only minimal loss of reduction during fracture healing in both groups. Ulnar variance and volar tilt were significantly worse in the nail group, however, this did not seem to affect functional outcome. Despite the fact that we selected only dorsally displaced fractures, there was only one case of late dorsal displacement and this occurred in both groups. The intramedullary device seems to provide sufficient stability to prevent secondary displacement as has been demonstrated in clinical and biomechanical studies [ Comparison of the initial postoperative radiographs with those taken at the last follow-up showed no loss of reduction during fracture healing [ Ilyas and Thoder presented their preliminary experience with an intramedullary Nail (Micronail) for displaced extraarticular and simple intraarticular distal radius fractures (AO type A and C1) [ Grip strength was 91% of the uninjured side and the mean DASH score was 2.7 points. They experienced three cases of screw penetration into the DRUJ on final follow-up radiographs, one of which was symptomatic and presented with DRUJ arthritis. Loss of reduction at final follow up as determined by a difference of greater than 5° between immediate postoperative and final radiographs occurred in two patients. Interestingly enough, both cases represented AO type A3 fractures. The authors specifically avoided use of the Micronail for all AO type B and C2 or C3 fractures in their study and concluded good outcomes could be obtained with intramedullary fixation of extra-articular and simple intraarticular fracture patterns. In a prospective study, Tan et al. [ Nishiwaki et al. [ They reported loss of reduction in two cases, and transient radial sensory nerve neuritis in one case. The intramedullary implant appeared to avoid some of the soft tissue injuries, such as tendon irritation or rupture that can result with traditional plating. However, there is considerable risk of articular surface screw penetration, as evidenced in one of our cases, specifically of the DRUJ. One patient had temporary minor radial sensory nerve disturbance that resolved within 2 months of surgery. Insertion of the nail through the radial styloid places the superficial radial sensory nerve at risk and diligent identification and protection of the radial sensory nerve is required. Arora et al. reported a 27% complication rate in their study on 141 patients with distal radius fractures treated with volar plating. The most frequent problems were flexor and extensor tendon irritation (57%) followed by complex regional pain syndrome and carpal tunnel syndrome [ Due to the less direct exposure and indirect reduction technique, requiring frequent fluoroscopic controls, higher fluoroscopy times were needed to position the Targon DR nail. Median operative time however was shorter than in the plate group. A prospective randomized pilot study reported experience and early results with an intramedullary wrist pin in the treatment of extraarticular and simple intra-articular distal radius fractures. At the time of the final follow up the authors found no significant differences between groups with regard to wrist motion and radiographic parameters. Mean operative time was significantly shorter in the nail group. The authors concluded that intramedullary fixation is reliable and effective and prevents complications that are related to extensive soft tissue dissection [ There are several limitations to our study. First, functional and radiographic assessment could not be blinded due to obvious placement of surgical incisions and implants visible on radiographs. Second, a relatively small number of patients were enrolled in this study due to the limited inclusion criteria (specific fracture type). Third, we did not use any patient reported outcome measures and did not address the patients’ perspective. Despite these shortcomings, the present study suggests that intramedullary nail fixation is a reasonable alternative to volar plate fixation for the treatment of displaced intraarticular distal radius fractures. Extraarticular and simple intraarticular fractures however might yield more reliable results in terms of maintenance of reduction. None