Objectives
                  Dental glass ceramic components are always loaded by residual stresses because of the manufacturing process. For a reliable mechanical characterization, residual stress-free specimens are needed. Residual stresses can be removed by an annealing process. The hypothesis of this work was, that the annealing temperature must be individually chosen to reliably remove possible residual stresses without changing the characteristics of the glass ceramic material.
               
                  Methods
                  Knoop-indented specimens made of the glass ceramic materials Duceram Opaker (Degudent, Hanau, Germany, formerly Ducera, Rosbach, FRG), Empress 1 (Ivoclar Vivadent, Schaan, Liechtenstein), In-Ceram Alumina (Vita Zahnfabrik, Bad Säckingen, Germany), Optec OPC (Jeneric Pentron, Wellingford, USA), and Vita Omega Opaker (Vita Zahnfabrik, Bad Säckingen, Germany) were annealed at various temperatures below and above the respective glass transition temperature. The Weibull strength parameters and the lengths of the indentations before and after annealing were determined.
               
                  Results
                  A strength increase caused by relaxation of residual stresses was found after annealing at elevated temperatures. A local maximum of increased strength was determined after annealing at a temperature of 100K below the glass transition temperature. After annealing at temperatures above the glass transition temperature, microplasticity was observed.
               
                  Significance
                  It is recommended to anneal glass ceramic components that are intended to be mechanically characterized at a temperature 100K below the respective glass transition temperature before testing to determine ‘true’ mechanical values that are not influenced by possible residual stresses.Ceramic components are always loaded by residual stresses because of the manufacturing process The controlled induction of compressive residual stresses can help to strengthen a ceramic component. This is done, for example, when a core material is ceramically veneered To overcome this problem, test specimens should be free of residual stresses. To relax residual stresses the ceramic component has to be annealed at a suitable temperature for some hours. Annealing of polycrystalline ceramic materials such as dense alumina (Al The experiments were performed on the following five dental glass ceramic materials: Duceram Opaker (feldspathic porcelain, Degudent, Hanau, Germany, formerly Ducera, Rosbach, FRG), Empress 1 (leucite reinforced glass, Ivoclar Vivadent, Schaan, Liechtenstein), In-Ceram Alumina (porous alumina infiltrated by a La-glass, Vita Zahnfabrik, Bad Säckingen, Germany), Optec OPC (leucite reinforced glass, Jeneric Pentron, Wellingford, USA), and Vita Omega Opaker (feldspathic porcelain, Vita Zahnfabrik, Bad Säckingen, Germany). Seventy standard specimens (1.5×3.0×30.0 Subsequent to the indentation procedure the specimens of each material were divided into seven batches ( The characteristic strengths of all five tested glass ceramic materials were increased by the annealing process ( Residual stress in ceramic components affects mechanical properties, especially strength, as a measure used to judge the value of a ceramic material. Therefore it is of importance for the characterization of a ceramic material to determine the true strength value, i.e. uninfluenced by residual stress. The results of this study confirm that a well-chosen annealing process is suitable to relax residual stresses of glass ceramic components. The initial increase in strength after annealing with increasing temperature is caused by the relaxation of residual stress ( Note that the strength of the indented ceramic specimens determined here are of course much lower than the reported strengths of unindented specimens. An example is the characteristic strength (88.7 It is possible to relate the indenter load used for the indentation procedure with the failure stress of an indented specimen It is recommended to anneal glass ceramic components that are intended to be mechanically characterized at a temperature 100 We thank the companies Degudent (formerly Ducera, Rosbach, FRG), Ivoclar (Schaan, Liechtenstein), Jeneric Pentron (Wellingford, USA), and Vita Zahnfabrik (Bad Säckingen, Germany) for providing the glass ceramic raw materials.