Apart from traditional application of nondestructive eddy current technique for detection of discontinuities, the method has been recently used to determine physical and metallurgical properties of steel parts. In the present research the application of eddy current method for determination of surface carbon of steel parts in gas carburizing process has been studied. The relation between the surface carbon content and various parameters such as impedance, phase angle and voltage has been established. Besides the effect of carbon content of the impedance plain has been investigated. The study shows that the best relation (R
                     2=0.91) can be achieved using phase angle.In the recent years, a number of researches have been conducted using EC method. These researches have been mainly focused on two major fields: detection of defects and prediction of physical and metallurgical properties of materials. Restivo With the growing demands for nondestructive measuring of physical and mechanical properties of materials in mass production lines, there is a strong potential for research on the new applications for the nondestructive eddy current method. Carburizing has long been used in industry to improve surface hardness and fatigue resistance of steel parts while maintaining the toughness of the core. In modern carburizing processes, low-carbon steel is exposed to a carbon-enriched atmosphere at temperatures between 875–925 A standard carburizing low-carbon low-alloy steel (AISI 4118) has been used in this study. The chemical composition of the steel is given in Sixteen rod specimens of 15 Surface carbon contents of all samples were determined using quantometry method. The results for carbon content at the surface of each sample are given in A coil of 2.3 For each sample, certain current and voltage signals were used and impendence and phase angle as well as real ( Two main variables in all heat treatment cycles are time and temperature. By fixing these two factors as well as chemical composition of the steel, the only variable affecting surface carbon content of the parts in the gas carburizing cycle process is furnace carbon potential. To avoid any unwanted microstructure irregularities at the surface of the carburized samples, all samples were subsequently normalized, using induction heating technique ( The response of eddy current testing is affected by two major parameters of the sample. These two parameters are microstructure and residual stress In each frequency, regression analysis was applied between percentage of surface carbon content and any parameter that was measured or calculated in eddy current system .The measured parameter is induced voltage and the calculated parameters are impendence of coil and phase angle. Eventually the correlation coefficient ( The maximum  The calculated impedance (  To have a better understanding of carbon content effect on EC response, especially phase angle ( To calculate the normalized Eventually, Eqs The result of the calculation is presented in Finally, to improve the accuracy of the results and make the presented method more applicable to industrial applications, one should bear in mind that fine adjustment of the readings could be made regarding the general factors affecting accuracy of EC responds of the materials. The most important parameters affecting EC responds are temperature of the samples, edge effect and fill factor In this study, eddy current method was used to determine the surface carbon content in AISI 4118 steel in gas carburizing process. It was shown, any measured (