Dry ground Bangladeshi zircon (44–53µm) is found completely inert in 6M HCl, 6M HNO3, 6M HClO4, 3M H2SO4 and 6M HCl+2M HNO3 during leaching at their boiling point temperatures under reflux for 4h. In the 6M HF and 6M NaOH solution, only ∼5% zircon is dissolved under similar conditions. The mechanical activation of zircon with NaOH at ambient temperature, by grinding in a ball mill for 300h, is also ineffective with only 2% Zr(IV) dissolved. However, up to 86% zircon can be dissolved on leaching a sodium carbonate baked mass with 6M HCl under reflux for 1h. The optimum conditions of baking were found to be 1273°K for 2.5h with a Na2CO3:zircon wt. ratio of 0.6. Higher Na2CO3:zircon wt. ratios and longer baking times decreased the recovery percentage.
                  The investigation has found for the first time that zircon is completely and rapidly decomposed by fusion with 8mol NaOH to give a semi-crystalline fused mass. The rate of fusion was monitored by leaching Zr(IV) from the fused mass with 5M HCl under reflux for 30min. The optimized fusion conditions were 973°K for 15min with a NaOH:zircon wt. ratio of 1.8, or mole ratio of 8:1, which gives the following reaction for fusion: ZrSiO4
                     +8NaOH→Na4ZrO4
                     +Na4SiO4
                     +4H2O. The rate of dissolution of zircon in molten NaOH was found to follow the law: 1−(1−
                     R)1/3
                     =(k
                     /
                     ρr
                     o) [NaOH/zircon]
                        a
                      
                     t. The calculated value of ‘k’ was 10−4.00±0.04
                     gmin−1
                     cm−2 (for ρ
                     =4.7gcm−3 and r
                     o
                     =26.5µm) at 973°K and a
                     =1.0. The calculated activation energy for fusion is 125kJmol−1 which is indicative of a chemically controlled reaction with the slow step being the first reaction of NaOH with zircon.Zirconium is a hard, malleable, ductile and lustrous metal having similar properties to titanium and hafnium but possessing heat and corrosion resistances resembling stainless steel ( Zirconium does not occur free in nature and its ores always contain 1–2% hafnium. Its average concentration in the earth's crust is ∼ Zircon undergoes metamorphosis during crystal growth allowing the incorporation of radioactive elements (U, Th). The terms ‘amorphization’, ‘radiation damage’, ‘weathering’ and ‘α-decay event damage’ of zircon are used to describe the metamorphosis of zircon ( A considerable reserve of heavy minerals has been discovered in the beach and sand dunes of south-east Bangladesh ( There are no reports on the treatment of Bangladeshi zircon except for two studies by High temperature mechanical activation, involving the grinding of zircon with either NaOH, MgO, Ca(OH) This study investigates the dissolution of Bangladeshi zircon by various techniques such as direct acid leaching; baking and subsequent leaching; salt-water vapor roasting followed by acid leaching; mechanical activation at room temperature and sodium hydroxide fusion followed by HCl leaching. In a thorough study of the fusion of zircon using a high stoichiometric ratio of NaOH, Zircon was collected in a single lot from the Beach Sand Exploitation Centre of BAEC. Its median grain size and specific gravity were 100–140 The XRD spectra of zircon were recorded using a Philips PW 3040 X′ part PRO XRD system with nickel filtered CuK In baking, 5 With the fusion method, a weighed amount of NaOH and zircon was placed in two separate platinum crucibles and pre-heated to the required temperature in a muffle furnace. After 5 For salt-water vapor roasting, 1 With mechanical activation, 50 In order to monitor the progress in fusion, baking, salt-water vapor roasting and mechanical activation, the respective masses were subjected to leaching under reflux for 1 The melting and boiling points of NaOH are 323 Assuming zircon particles are spherical, the following rate equation can be derived for a particular constant fusion temperature ( At a constant NaOH:zircon mole ratio, Eq. When the mole ratio of NaOH:zircon is varied, then the following equation can be obtained: This equation indicates that a plot of log The rate data at different temperatures can be treated by Arrhenius equation as follows: A plot of log The XRD spectra of the ground zircon sample used in this study are shown in The chemical analysis of the sample after fusion with KHSO Studies on the direct leaching of 1 Roasting with NaCl, NaNO The pre-baking of zircon involving the heating of a mixture of zircon and sodium carbonate at around 1000 It can be concluded that the baking temperature of 1273 However, since the melting point of Na During leaching of Na For large scale operations, the separation of gelatinous H The fusion of zircon with NaOH was investigated as functions of fusion temperature, time and NaOH/zircon wt. ratio. The effect of temperature on the extent of fusion after 1 The effects of fusion time at various constant fusion temperatures are shown in Consequently, there are two alternative ways for fusion, viz: Fusion at 973 Fusion at 1023  At NaOH/zircon wt. ratios of ∼ The fused mass obtained under the optimum conditions after water-washing and drying was found to contain 36.52% Na and 34.4% Zr ( at NaOH/zircon mole ratio at NaOH/zircon mole ratio at NaOH/zircon mole ratio Therefore, it is concluded that under optimized conditions, the fusion occurs via Eq. From a comparison of the fusion process with the baking process, it is evident that the fusion process is more acceptable because it needs lower temperature and less time to give 100% Zr(IV) dissolution. Considering fusion as the dissolution of zircon in molten NaOH, the kinetics of fusion was studied at a constant fusion temperature. In all cases, plots of 1 For fusion at 973 The temperature dependence of the rate of fusion is presented as an Arrhenius plot in Although the progress of fusion in this work has been monitored by the extent of Zr(IV) – dissolution in 5  Direct leaching of zircon with 6 Baking zircon with equimolar Na Fusion of zircon with 8 The rate of fusion of zircon in molten NaOH at 973 The activation energy of fusion is 125 On the comparison of the baking process with the NaOH-fusion process, it appears that the fusion process is more attractive because it needs lower temperatures and less time to give 100% Zr(IV) dissolution. One of the authors (R. K. Biswas) thanks