SE Asia is an assembly of Gondwana-derived crustal blocks, and an important piece for the geodynamic understanding of the Asian continent. Since the Phanerozoic, this area experienced several significant geodynamic events. The separation of many continents and microcontinents from Gondwana through rifting lead to the opening of oceanic domains. The closure of these oceanic basins and the subsequent continental collision is attested by subduction related magmatism, accretionary complexes, high-pressure and high-temperature metamorphisms, crustal melting and magmatism including volcanism and plutonism. The Mesozoic tectono-magmatism, the Cenozoic intracontinental tectonics related to the India-Eurasia collision, and the recent magmatism and tectonics are also significant events recognized in SE Asia. These geodynamic events represent the general framework for the numerous ore deposits recognized in the area. Since several years, the geological knowledge of SE Asia underwent significant advances in many fields of Earth Sciences, including detailed mapping, magmatic and metamorphic petrology, geochronology, structural analysis. This Special Issue of the Journal of Asian Earth Sciences aims at providing some of the new results in stratigraphy, paleogeographic reconstructions, magmatic and metamorphic petrology, geochronology, geochemistry, mineral resources, tectonics, geophysics, and geodynamic reconstructions. Most of these contributions were firstly presented during the GeoSEA XV International congress held in Hanoi in October 2018. Both detailed contributions and large syntheses dealing with the Indochina block, and its relationships with neighboring blocks such as South China, Sibumasu and Philippines Mobile Belt are provided in this volume (  The geology and metallogeny of the Sibumasu block are addressed in the Singapore area by It is also well acknowledged that after its Mesozoic integration to Asia, Indochina, and more widely Sundaland, experienced an important reworking as a consequence of the India-Asia collision. From Kamchatka to East Indonesia, the Eurasian margin is bounded by several island arcs. The Philippines archipelago exposes many ophiolitic belts. The Pujada ophiolite, in SE Mindanao, provides a unique opportunity to elucidate the tectono-magmatic evolution of the Molucca sea Collision Complex. The editors are very grateful to all authors for their contribution to this Special Issue, and for their patience in keeping the time to improve their papers. All reviewers are deeply thanked for their time and efforts providing thorough and constructive comments and suggestions that greatly helped the authors and editors to prepare this Special Issue.