Cobalt-rich ferromanganese crust and nodule ores from seamount areas contain volcanic and sedimentary rocks as substrate or nuclei. During mining operations, these rocks should be separated as unfavorable waste rocks with the ferromanganese minerals. The cobalt-rich ferromanganese crust and nodule ores require mineral processing to remove the substrate/nuclei rock before the smelting. Deep-sea manganese nodule ores in contrast contain vanishingly small rocks, and can be directly treated with a metallurgical process without mineral processing treatment. This study is a physical and chemical description of the ores for the purpose of mineral processing, and reports estimates of the degree of liberation in a coarse crushed product of ores and its gravity separation results. From the obtained results a process flow-sheet for the beneficiation of cobalt-rich ferromanganese crust and nodules is proposed.Cobalt-rich ferromanganese crust/nodules, manganese nodules, and sea-floor hydrothermal deposits are underwater minerals and they are unused resources where the commercial potential will depend on trends in mining and treatment costs of onshore mines. Manganese nodules were discovered in 1873 and attracted attention around 1960 as a source of nickel for stainless steel. They are chiefly composed of ferromanganese oxide and contain Cu and Ni. They are found in areas such as southeast of the Hawaiian Islands from 4000 to 6000 m below sea level. There are many reports of metallurgy and processing of manganese nodules (e.g. Cobalt-rich ferromanganese crust/nodules (CRFCN) were discovered in 1980 by the cooperative sea-floor research of Germany and the U.S. at sea mounts of the Central Pacific Ocean. They attracted attention since the cobalt content exceeded 1%. They exist at sea mount slopes and summits 800 to 2400 m below sea level. Presently, the international Seabed Authority is considering a mining code for the CRFCN. Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation, is undertaking information gathering and research concerning reserve estimates, mining methods, mineral processing methods, and metallurgical treatment methods for mine concession acquisitions of CRFCN. The CRFCN are composed chiefly of ferromanganese oxide and contain Co, Ni, Cu, Pt, and rare earth elements. This ore contains volcanic and sedimentary rocks as substrate or nuclei. During the mining operation, these rocks may be dredged as unfavorable waste rocks with the ferromanganese components ( This paper describes the results of an investigation to establish a suitable process flow-sheet. Macroscopic and microscopic observations of ores, chemical composition analysis, and measurements of degree of liberation in a coarse crushed product of ores were carried out. With the results, an optimum crushing size for an economical and efficient treatment was determined. The coarse fraction, + This study is a joint project with Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation, and it evaluated the mineral processing coupled with the pyrometallurgical treatment. A total of 10 samples, N1 to N5 and P1 to P5, collected from the deep sea off the Minami-Torishima Islands and Marshall Islands were used; N1 to N5 were nodular and P1 to P5 were crust like. Some metallurgical treatment methods such as a hydrometallurgical extraction and pyrometallurgical treatment have been proposed for the recovery of valuable metals from CRFCN. This study evaluated the mineral processing coupled with the pyrometallurgical treatment. The beneficiated product was treated with a reducing smelting method, one of the pyrometallurgical methods used in industry. In this pyrometallurgical process a given amount of rock as a source of SiO As described later CRFCN ore can be classified into two parts, a cobalt-rich ferromanganese layer part and rocks composed of nuclei and substrate rocks. This paper refers to the cobalt-rich ferromanganese layer component with the acronym CRFLC. The CRFLC and rock were recovered from the ore by hand picking and elemental compositions of the CRFLC and of the rock were determined by X-ray fluorescence analysis, JEOL JSX-3201. The CRFLC purities of products are calculated by the followings equation since the rock does not contain elemental manganese. Rock purities are presented as one minus the value of the CRFLC purity. Measurements of the degree of liberation were carried out. The numbers of liberated and locked particles were counted and the weight ratio was calculated, here the “degree of liberation” indicates the ratio of liberated particle weight to the total, and the “degree of locked particle” is the rest, one minus the value of the degree of liberation. A locked particle means that the gangue is attached to valuable components. The jig equipment used in this study is a desktop type TACUB jig. In the laboratory this has been used for different kinds of plastic particle separation and an excellent separation performance is a feature of this jig because precise control of the operation is possible. After the jig treatment a sample box was ejected from the jig equipment and products were recovered. The products were collected from the top of the box in increments of 1 cm per layer. This paper terms the various layer products from the top layer as layer one, layer two, layer three, and so on. The elemental composition of the product of each layer was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence, and purity of the CRFLC in each layer was calculated. Air table equipment, Nagata engineering Co., LTD, was used in this study and the apparatus was installed in the Department of Earth Resources Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. This apparatus can control the side slope degree, end slope degree, frequency of shaking, and air velocity. Sample was fed from a hopper and heavier product and lighter product were recovered in separate collection boxes after the process reached a steady state. The elemental composition of the products was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence, and the purities of the CRFLC in products were calculated.  An elemental analysis of the samples was carried out to evaluate the rock removal efficiency. The CRFLC and rock parts were obtained by handpicking of ores from different localities. In this paper, the term “rock” represents the nuclei rock and substrate rock, and this “rock” does not contain fine rock fragments or other settled components which exists in CRFLC.  It is considered that fine grinding is not necessary to obtain liberated rock particles such as substrate/nuclei and liberated particles of the CRFLC. In general, fine particle separation is difficult since entrainment of gangue particles in concentrate easily occurs. The result is that the separation efficiency is low and the treatment cost higher than with coarse particles. Studies of mineral processing of CRFCN ores are few and previous papers have reported fine product ( The measurements of degree of liberation were carried out and the results are shown in  The minimum size of particles that can be treated with the jig is 0.5 mm and the crushed and classified 0.5 to 4 mm sample fraction was used in the jig experiments. The results indicated size segregation in the samples ( The jig test was carried out to separate the CRFLC, as a lighter product, and substrate/nuclei rock, as a heavier product. Jig tests of the 1 to 4 mm size fraction were carried out with various amplitudes, frequencies, and treatment times. A batch type jig installation has been used in this study and continuously operating equipment is used in actual operation. With the continuous treatment, the particles which locate at the boundary between the CRFLC particle layer and the rock particle layer were not exhausted until they moved to the upper or bottom layer. Thus calculations are required to estimate the separation efficiencies of the continuous treatment from the results of the batch type treatment and the calculation method is described in the following. The layer containing the boundary is determined from a purity change curve such as The calculation results are shown in An optimum operating condition for the 0.5 to 1 mm size fraction is shown in The air table test was carried out to separate the CRFLC, as a lighter product, and substrate/nuclei rock, as a heavier product. An air table is a dry gravity separation instrument and has the feature that it does not generate waste water. However a dust collection facility is required to suppress dust. Air table treatment of the 0.5 to 1 mm and 1 to 4 mm samples was carried out like the jig test. In an air table, air is supplied from the bottom of the porous deck to decrease the friction between the deck and the particles on the deck. The difference in friction between heavier and lighter particles and the deck is the basis for the specific gravity separation here. The frictional forces on heavier particles are larger than those on lighter particles, and the lighter particles float with the air and jump by the shaking. Feed forms a layer between the rifles and is shaken from side to side with the deck vibration. The stratification, with heavier particles forming the bottom layer and lighter particles in the top layer, occurs as a result of the shaking. The lighter particles of the upper layer pass over rifles and slip down and are recovered in the collection box for lighter product. The heavier particles of the bottom layer ascend to the end slope of the deck due to the reciprocating motion and are recovered in the collection box for the heavier product. The 0.5 to 1 mm sample was too fine for the air table separation. With the 1 to 4 mm sample, rock particles were recovered as heavier product and coarse sized CRFLC was recovered as middling and fine CRFLC and fine rocks were recovered as lighter product. This showed that further classification was required and the 1 to 4 mm sample was divided at 2 mm. The side slope inclination, 5°, was constant and air velocities of 0.1 m/s, 0.75 m/s, and 1.35 m/s, end slopes of 6, 10, 14°, and frequencies of 400, 500, 600 rpm, were tested. When the air velocity and the end slope maintained constant values all products were exhausted through the lighter or heavier product collection boxes if the frequency was too small or too large.   It is expected that an increase in separation efficiency can be achieved by improving the flotation performance. The locked particle ratios of the + Specific gravities of the cobalt-rich ferromanganese layer component were lighter than those of the nuclei or substrate rock. Jig tests of the 1 to 4 mm, and 0.5 to 1 mm size fractions were carried. Except the one sample, purities of cobalt-rich ferromanganese layer component were higher than 0.8 when the recovery values are about 0.9. Air table tests of 1 to 2 mm, and 2 to 4 mm size fraction were carried out. The overall separation efficiencies of the 2 to 4 mm fraction were larger than 0.4 and they were higher than those of 1 to 2 mm. From the obtained results a process flow-sheet for the beneficiation of cobalt-rich ferromanganese crust and nodules ore including jig separation was proposed. The predicted recovery of concentrate product was 0.93 and the purity was 0.86. We express gratitude to Mr. Takashi Oooka and Hiroshi Shibasaki of Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation and Mr. Tomoyuki Yoshida of Mitsui Mining & Smelting Co., Ltd for the advice in carrying out the experiments.