The oxidation resistance of Mg-9Al-1Zn alloy (AZ91) was significantly improved through microalloying with 60 ppm Be. Be reinforced the initially formed oxide layer on the alloy surface by (i) the formation of a (Mg,Be)O solid solution due to the Be enrichment; and (ii) the refined gains of the (Mg,Be)O. During high-temperature oxidation, the reinforced (Mg,Be)O layer provided sufficient strength to withstand the internal stresses and the Mg vaporisation, and therefore delayed the oxide layer cracking and debonding from the substrate. In addition, the initial oxidation rates of AZ91 and Be-containing AZ91 were closely related to surface roughness.Magnesium (Mg) and its alloys have attracted increasing interests in automotive and aerospace industries due to their low density and high specific strength [ Microalloying with beryllium (Be) has been shown to improve the oxidation resistance of Mg alloys [ However, the mechanism is still unclear of how Be improves the oxidation resistance. Because Be is surface active in molten Mg, and because BeO has a high P-B ratio of 1.70 [ Microalloying AZ91 with 60 ppm Be was shown in our previous work [ The present work aimed to test this hypothesis through (i) nanostructural characterisation of the oxide layer using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and (ii) characterisation of the mechanical properties of the oxide layer using nanoindentation and nanoscratch techniques. The measured oxidation kinetics in this present study indicated overall weight gains lower than in our previous work [ In order to clarify the influence of surface roughness on the initial oxidation rate of Mg alloys, the present work also studied the oxidation kinetics of AZ91 and Be-containing AZ91 with different surface finishes. The Mg alloy AZ91, and AZ91 containing Be, were produced by melting Mg, Al and Zn of commercial purity, and a commercially available Al-5 wt.% Be alloy, in a steel crucible in an electric resistance furnace, under the protection of a shielding gas of 1 vol.% SF The isothermal oxidation was performed in a NETZSCH STA409 thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) apparatus. The TGA allowed characterisation of the oxidation kinetics of each sample in terms of the weight gain as a function of oxidation time. Specimens were 10 × 10 × 2 mm in size, cut from the cast ingots, and mechanically ground and polished with 0.3 μm diamond suspension in order to obtain an appropriate surface finish for nanoindentation and nanoscratch tests. The TGA experiments were performed at 400 °C in air (i) for 5 h to determine the oxidation resistance and the incubation period of each alloy; and (ii) for 2 h to produce crack-free oxide layers for TEM examination, and for nanoindentation and nanoscratch testing. For each condition, the isothermal TGA oxidation tests were repeated at least 3 times, and the reproducibility was evaluated using the coefficient of variation ( The investigation of the influence of surface roughness on the oxidation kinetics used specimens ground with 600 grit SiC sand paper, 4000 grit SiC sand paper and polishing with 0.3 μm diamond suspension. Three-dimensional (3D) surface morphologies and surface profiles were measured using an Olympus LEXT OLS4100 confocal laser-scanning microscope in reflection mode. The arithmetic average height parameter, A JEOL 2100 transmission electron microscope (TEM), operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV, was used to examine cross-sections of the oxide layers on the specimen surface after 2-h isothermal oxidation at 400 °C. Diffraction patterns of the oxide layers were obtained by the selection area diffraction (SAED) technique. The concentrations of the major alloying elements in the oxide layers were measured using energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) in the TEM. Due to the small concentration of Be, long time data acquisition times were used to generate the EDS spectra. TEM foils were prepared in a FEI Dual FIB/SEM-SCIOS focused ion beam (FIB) milling system. To prevent sample charging in the FIB milling system, the oxidized samples were carbon coated before milling. Nanoindentation and nanoscratch tests, using a Hysitron TI900 Triboindenter For nanoindentation, a load control mode was used, in which the load was gradually increased to a preset peak load in the range of 50–2500 μN. The load was maintained at the peak value for 2 s, and was then released. Measurements were also conducted on substrates of the same samples for comparison. Each loading protocol was repeated 5 times and the reproducibility was assessed based on the coefficient of variation, For nanoscratch, testing was conducted using linear loading and constant loading. For linear loading, the normal force was increased from 0 to 1000 μN at a loading rate of 34 μN/s. For constant loading, a normal force of 100 μN was applied and kept constant during testing. In both loading conditions, the tip was moved horizontally across the surface of the sample at a fixed rate of 20 μm/min for a length of 10 μm. The lateral displacement, normal force and the lateral force acting on the tip during scratching were recorded. For each loading condition, 5 repeat tests were performed and these indicated good reproducibility.   Within the initial parabolic stage, the MgO layer was expected to be crack-free, and therefore provided protection of the substrate from oxidation [ In contrast, during the accelerated oxidation stage, it is expected that there was a non-protective oxide layer. The onset of the accelerated oxidation is attributed to the cracking in the MgO layer and the end of the incubation period [ In order to produce the crack-free oxide layers within the incubation periods on both alloys for in-depth examination, a 2 h (120 min) TGA was performed at the same condition i.e. at 400 °C in air.    All the AZ91 specimens with different surface roughness had two oxidation stages: (i) the protective parabolic stage; and (ii) the accelerated oxidation stage, which followed power-law kinetics. The incubation period was ∼70 min for ground samples, and this increased to ∼150 min for the polished samples. In contrast, all the AZ91Be60 specimens showed only parabolic oxidation kinetics for the entire test period. In addition, For the samples with the same apparent surface area, a rougher surface is associated with a larger surface area exposed to air for oxidation, because of additional facets related to the crests and grooves on the surface [ Furthermore, These results further indicate the efficacy of Be microalloying in improving the oxidation resistance of Mg alloys.    Many attempts were made to measure the Be distribution in the oxide using EDS, but these were not successful because of the low Be concentrations in trace amounts. Attempts using atom probe tomography (APT) were also not successful. APT is an ideal technique to measure the distribution of Be atoms in the oxide layer. However, because of the large difference in the evaporation temperature of Mg and MgO, vigorous evaporation of the Mg substrate always occurred prior to that of the MgO during the APT measurements, which led to the oxide layer peeling off. Thus, the preparation of APT specimens is a big challenge. The growth of the MgO oxide layer is dominated by the outward diffusion of metal cations and the inward diffusion of O The lattice parameter, a, for MgO for each alloy was evaluated from the data of the SAED patterns shown in In addition, Nanoindentation was used to measure the elastic modulus   A deconvolution method proposed by Jung et al. [  These values indicated that the Be enrichment (i) provided a small effect on the elastic modulus of the oxide layer, but (ii) did significantly increase the hardness. The elastic modulus is considered inherently related to the atomic bonding energy [ Nanoscratch tests were conducted to further characterise the mechanical properties of the oxide layers of AZ91 and AZ91Be60. The scratch tests with constant loading were carried out on the two oxide layers at a normal force of 100 μN. The average normal penetration depths into the MgO oxide layer on AZ91 and the (Mg,Be)O oxide layer on AZ91Be60 were 64 nm and 44 nm, respectively. Because the thicknesses of the oxide layers were over 100 nm as presented in The increase in the strength of the (Mg,Be)O layer was attributed to both solid solution strengthening of Be and the grain refinement strengthening resulting from the finer oxide grains. The lattice distortion within the (Mg,Be)O created local stress fields, which effectively impeded the movement of dislocations, causing the increase in the layer strength. The refined oxide grains in the (Mg,Be)O layer were accompanied with more grain boundaries that acted as barriers for dislocation movement, thus causing the increase in strength and fracture toughness [ The high temperature oxidation resistance of Mg alloys is mainly governed by the protective capability of the surface oxide layer [ The present results indicated that the surface enrichment of Be during oxidation significantly reinforced the initially formed oxide layer through forming a fine-grained (Mg,Be)O solid solution. Such reinforcement provided a significant improvement in the hardness and the strength of the oxide layer. Hence, during high temperature oxidation, cracking and debonding of the (Mg,Be)O layer was effectively delayed due to its higher strength, and higher crack resistance. As a result, the Mg vapour diffusion was significantly retarded, and the oxidation was mainly controlled by the outward diffusion of Mg  Microalloying 60 ppm (wt) Be led to a significant decrease in the oxidation rates of AZ91, and significantly increased the incubation period. The decrease of oxidation rates by microalloying with Be was attributed to the reinforcement of the initially formed oxide layer on the alloy surface by (i) Be enrichment to form a (Mg,Be)O solid solution, and (ii) the smaller grain size of gains of the (Mg,Be)O solid solution. Compared with the MgO layer formed on the AZ91 alloy, the fine-grained (Mg,Be)O layer over the AZ91Be60 alloy exhibited higher mechanical strength, and crack resistance. During high temperature oxidation, the fine-grained (Mg,Be)O layer provided sufficient strength and crack resistance against the internal stress and Mg vaporisation, and therefore delayed the occurrence of layer cracking and debonding. Hence, the oxidation incubation period was effectively extended, resulting in the achievement of high oxidation resistance. Decreasing surface roughness decreased the initial oxidation rates of both AZ91 and AZ91Be60, and somewhat increased the incubation period for AZ91. The authors are very grateful to The