We explore the out-of-sample performance of domestic UK asset allocation strategies that use forecasts of expected returns from a linear predictive regression and those that are implied by asset pricing models such as the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) or arbitrage pricing theory (APT). Our findings suggest that using forecasts of expected returns from the predictive regression generate significant benefits in out-of-sample performance. We find the performance of the strategies using expected return forecasts implied by the CAPM or APT is lower than the predictive regression strategy. However, with binding investment constraints, the performance of the APT matches that of the predictive regression.Recent empirical research shows that financial asset returns in the United States (e.g., The existence of predictable stock returns is controversial in the academic literature. Predictable stock returns can be consistent with market efficiency if it can be explained by rational time variation in expected returns (e.g., We use the framework of Our study complements and extends the evidence of whether predictable stock returns is consistent with different asset pricing models provided by We present three main findings. First, the strategy that uses forecasts of expected returns from the linear predictive regression provides significant benefits in out-of-sample performance for the domestic asset allocation strategy. Second, strategies that use forecasts of expected returns from the linear predictive regression that are consistent with the CAPM or APT generally produce lower performance compared to the strategy that uses the forecasts of expected returns from the predictive regression. However, we find that the performance of the strategy that uses forecasts that is consistent with the APT matches the performance of the strategy that uses the forecasts from the predictive regression whenever investors face binding investment constraints. Third, we find that the performance of the strategies that uses forecasts of expected returns that are consistent with the APT perform better than the strategy that uses forecasts that are consistent with the CAPM. Our results suggest that most of the predictability in UK stock returns can be captured by multifactor asset pricing models. The article is organized as follows: The standard approach to evaluate predictability in stock returns is to use the linear predictive regression model. Define    To calculate the expected excess returns from We use the forecasts of expected returns from We construct the asset allocation strategies as follows. At the start of each month, we estimate expected excess returns using data over the prior 60 months for the different models. We use the sample covariance matrix of the industry portfolio excess returns over the prior 60 months as the input for the covariance matrix, which is the same across all models. We evaluate the performance of the mean-variance strategies using a wide range of performance measures. This includes the The performance measures of The The We estimate the Jensen and FS measures of the asset allocation strategies using the domestic market index as the benchmark portfolio. We can view the Jensen and FS measures as the abnormal returns of the strategies compared to an alternative passive strategy that invests in the risk-free asset and the domestic market index with the same risk characteristics as the strategy (see The performance measures of    We use monthly return data from the London Business School Share Price Database (LBS) between February 1955 and December 1995. We use 10 UK industry portfolios as the investment universe for the domestic asset allocation strategies. We form the industry portfolios using the industry classifications Mineral extraction—group numbers between 123 and 165. Building and chemicals—group numbers between 210 and 255. Engineering—group numbers between 261 and 270. Printing and textiles—group numbers between 282 and 297. Consumer goods—group numbers between 320 and 380. Distribution, leisure, and media—group numbers between 412 and 436. Retailers and other services—group numbers between 440 and 490. Utilities—group numbers between 620 and 680. Financials—group numbers between 710 and 794. Investment trusts—group numbers between 801 and 980. We use four categories of models of expected returns in the analysis. This includes the following. This is based on the statistical model of returns in This is based on the restricted coefficients in This is based on the restricted coefficients in We also construct two other multifactor models that are available between February 1976 and December 1995. The first is based on the APT and uses economic variables as the risk factors. We construct the APT model following the approach of (i) excess return on the FTA index, (ii) term structure—difference in monthly returns of 15-year UK government bonds (obtained from Datastream) minus the risk-free return. (iii) monthly percentage change in UK industrial production (obtained from Datastream), seasonally adjusted, (iv) monthly percentage change in UK inflation (obtained from LBS). (v) difference between risk-free return and inflation. Since factors (i) and (ii) are already portfolio returns, we do not require mimicking portfolios (see The first step in the The second multifactor model we use is similar to This is based on the sample mean excess return of the asset of the prior 60 months. This provides a useful comparison for the other models of expected returns.  The mean monthly excess returns in We begin our analysis by exploring the ability of the CAPM and APT (Stat) models to explain the in-sample predictability of UK stock returns over the whole sample period. We use the stochastic discount formulations of the models under the assumption of a constant price of risk as in  We now examine the out-of-sample performance of the asset allocation strategies. Our first set of out-of-sample tests assumes that the investor faces no investment restrictions.  The estimated performance measures in The significant positive performance of the Cond model supports the findings of The results in   We next examine the impact of using different multifactor models in our analysis. In addition to the APT (Stat) model, we use the APT (Risk) and The results in The APT (Stat), APT (Risk), and FF models also provide significant benefits in out-of-sample performance. All three models have higher Sharpe measures than the Mean and CAPM models. In addition, all three models have significant Jensen and FS performance measures. The APT (Stat) model provides the most positive abnormal returns across the three multifactor models. However, the performance of the multifactor models is lower than the Cond model. In contrast to the multifactor models, the CAPM performs poorly. The CAPM model has a negative Sharpe measure and negative abnormal returns irrespective of how we measure performance. These findings suggest that multifactor models do not fully explain the predictability in UK stock returns and multifactor models do a better job than the CAPM in explaining the predictability in returns. This supports our earlier findings for the whole sample period.   The findings in We examine the out-of-sample performance of domestic asset allocation strategies using forecasts of expected returns based on the predictability of returns. We use forecasts based on the unrestricted version of the linear predictive regression as well as the restricted version of the predictive regression that is consistent with a candidate asset pricing model We also find that the performance of the APT (Stat) model provides significant benefits in out-of-sample performance. When there are no investment constraints, the performance of the APT (Stat) model is poorer than the Cond model. This poorer performance suggests that multifactor models are unable to fully explain the predictability in UK stock returns. However, with binding investment constraints, the performance of the APT (Stat) model matches that of the Cond model. This result suggests that the APT (Stat) model can capture the benefits of predictable stock returns when investors face realistic investment constraints. Our subsidiary findings show that the APT model based on statistical factors performs as well as models using economic risk factor or empirical factors as in