Acromial fractures are a rare occurrence, representing less than 1% of all skeletal fractures. When they occur they often do so in association with other injuries and usually as a result of a car accident or other major injury mechanism. Os acromiale, on the other hand, is a relatively more common occurrence representing the failure in fusion of the ossification centers of the acromion. The true incidence of os acromiale is not known as many cases are diagnosed as incidental findings on X-rays taken for other reasons. Further, os acromiale often is asymptomatic. Both acromial fractures and an os acromiale can cause symptoms requiring treatment, including surgical stabilization with either bony union of the fracture or fusion of the os. We discuss the incidence and presentation of each of these entities and a brief discussion of our approach to treating them.Acromial fractures are relatively rare. When considered in the larger category of scapular fractures in general, they represent only 1% of all skeletal fractures reported nationwide and most of those occur as the result of high-speed trauma such as motor vehicle accidents. When considering only sports-related scapular fractures, the incidence drops even lower. Coracoid fractures do occur in target shooters and make up a large percentage of this already small number of sports fractures. In a report by Kocher and Feagin, a skiing accident caused the only acromial fracture they saw in 3,451 cases. Most athletic acromial fractures occur with direct trauma to the superior aspect of the shoulder. Fractures caused by this mechanism are usually at the base of the acromion and difficult to see on standard trauma X-ray series. Other fractures occur lateral to the acromioclavicular joint and can easily be confused with os acromiale. Comparison examination—both physical and radiographic—is necessary to diagnose these injuries and should be performed routinely with these and other shoulder injuries. Stress fractures of the acromion are another reported type of acromial fracture felt to occur secondary to superior migration of the humeral head. This is seen with massive rotator cuff tears as the subacromial space becomes diminished and the humeral head begins to articulate with the undersurface of the acromion. Iatrogenic fractures of the acromion were reported and studied by Coen and coworkers They found that the transacromial portal utilized by some to approach the superior glenoid labrum for the arthroscopic fixation of SLAP lesions compromises the acromial integrity by as much as 85%. Care in using this approach and/or avoidance of it was recommended. As mentioned, acromial fractures can be missed, especially when they are associated with multitrauma patients with other more life-threatening injuries. They are also often nondisplaced and require close examination to diagnose. Standard X-rays of the shoulder as well as axillary, 30° caudal tilt and outlet views can be helpful as well as the comparative views with the opposite shoulder. CT scans may be necessary and can clearly identify these fractures when the complexity of the local anatomy is not clear on conventional X-rays. Most nondisplaced acromial fractures will go on to uneventful healing with conservative care alone. Immediate motion and close observation are recommended, as shoulder stiffness has been reported. Different methods of fixation have been reported and individualization of the operative approach to the particular situation is required. Pins and/or Kirschner wires in the older literature have now been replaced by screws and small plates across the acromion. Anterior-posterior screws in a lag technique are successful when a single fracture and limited comminution are present. Use of cannulated screws and placing wires through the cannulation and then over the superior surface of the acromion in a tension-band-like fashion is advocated by some to improve healing rates. When several fracture lines and/or comminution exists small plates are needed. These plates should extend down the scapular spine, where better quality bone can be found to which to secure the plate. Extension to the spine is also important when more medial fractures are being treated. Some authors have also suggested the use of plates which cross the acromioclavicular joint. These plates are usually utilized when the acromioclavicular joint is grossly involved and/or there is an associated distal clavicular fracture. These plates are commonly removed after bony union is achieved. In any of these cases the limited amount of bone apposition requires that these are protected until solid bone healing is achieved. Slow rehabilitation is also necessary as the limited amount of soft tissue covering the plates and/or screws is apt to break down, creating an even greater problem. Os acromiale is a nonunion or lack of fusion between the three ossification centers in the acromion. The lack of fusion of these centers leads to the problem also known as a bipartite acromion. This entity is described anatomically depending on which portion of the acromion fails to unite. As seen in The identification of an os acromiale is often an incidental radiographic finding that causes no disability. It can, however, be the cause of subacromial impingement and has been implicated as a potential cause of a rotator cuff tear. Os acromiale is not thought to be an inherited but rather a congenital abnormality. The anterior two thirds of the os is pure cartilage until the age of 15 or 16, when the ossification centers appear, with fusion of the centers normally occurring by the age of 25 (though we have observed both at early ages). The incidence of os acromiale is between 1 and 8%. Liberson, in a large radiographic study of cadavers, demonstrated an incidence of 1.4%. Most cases of os acromiale become symptomatic after age 40, though younger individuals have been described. Initial treatment should be conservative in nature. Avoidance of aggravating activities and therapy to treat impingement syndrome with emphasis on the periscapular musculature is often successful in less mobile os acromiale cases. A full, compliant 3-month course of rehabilitation is suggested before considering other treatment options. Failed conservative management can be treated with surgical intervention. Many older authors described the treatment of isolated, symptomatic os acromiale with decompression alone. The results of this treatment were variable, presumably because the cause was not being addressed. Further, these small case series have multiple variations and different magnitudes of nonunions present. Techniques attempting to create fusions represent the bulk of surgical options now discussed. Successful fusions are not easily achieved, however, with fusion rates ranging from 20 to 85%. We have noted good success in obtaining a fusion by the following method. Following glenohumeral arthroscopy, the subacromial space is inspected. The undersurface of the acromion is debrided, with identification of the os as possible. Depressing the anterior acromion while the bursal side is observed is sometimes the only method possible to identify the nonunion site. Once this is clearly defined, the arm is supported (we perform shoulder arthroscopies in the beach chair position) to lessen the pull on the acromion. An incision over the acromion is usually made in the medial to lateral direction. Basiacromiale or metacromiale cases may need anterior-to-posterior incisions to access both the nonunion site and the anterior acromion. The os is identified and debrided of all fibrous tissue. Creating a free fragment is not appropriate, as this will both devitalize the fragment and make fixation more difficult and reduce the clinical success rate. Rehabilitation is guided by the size of the os and the healing progress of the nonunion. Slow, gradual return of motion in an active, assisted manner is begun and a return to day-to-day activities at around 3 weeks is allowed, with no repetitive or overhead activities until 6 to 8 weeks postoperatively. A return to athletics around 3 months is possible. The only problem we have encountered with this approach is the need to remove painful, retained hardware. The burying of hardware as well as the use of permanent sutures instead of wire has lessened this need.