The relatedness of copper and iron speciation to chalcopyrite bioleaching by acidophilic Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans was analyzed by synchrotron radiation-based X-ray diffraction (SR-XRD) and Cu, Fe K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy, accompanying with the determination of leaching parameters and the observation of chalcopyrite surface modification by scanning electron microscopy. The results showed that chalcopyrite was leached gradually by A. ferrooxidans, with ~70.58% of Cu2+ dissolution after 30days of bioleaching when the mineral surface was evidently attacked. During the bioleaching, bornite and chalcocite were detected at day 3 and day 9 when the redox potential was less than 500mV, but they disappeared at day 18 and day 30 when covellite was detected and the redox potential was about 550mV. The linear fitting of Cu and Fe XANES spectra quantitatively demonstrated the composition of leaching residue: the copper species comprised ~84.8% of chalcopyrite, ~10.2% of bornite and ~5.0% of chalcocite at day 3, then changed to ~90.1% of chalcopyrite, ~6.5% of bornite and ~3.4% of chalcocite at day 9; the composition became ~89.8% of chalcopyrite and ~10.2% of covellite at day 18, and ~80.3% of chalcopyrite and ~19.7% of covellite at day 30. The iron species comprised ~26% of chalcopyrite and ~74% of jarosite at day 30. Elemental sulfur and jarosite were detected from day 3 but without evident negative effect on the copper extraction.Biohydrometallurgy plays an important role in copper recovery from low grade mineral sulfides that cannot be cost-effectively extracted by the traditional metallurgical methods ( The bioleaching of chalcopyrite can be affected by the speciation of intermediates that is much dependent on species and environmental conditions such as temperature, pH, and solution redox potentials, which can be exemplified by the series of work of ours as well as the colleagues in the world ( The dissolution of chalcopyrite (CuFeS The bioleaching intermediates are often difficult to detect due to their low abundance and un-stability ( In the present study, the SR-XRD and the Cu and Fe K-edge XANES of chalcopyrite leached by mesophilic  The reference minerals chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite, elemental sulfur and jarosite were provided by School of Minerals Processing and Bioengineering, Central South University, Changsha, China. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis indicated the original chalcopyrite was mainly composed of chalcopyrite. X-ray fluorescence spectroscopic analysis showed the original chalcopyrite contained (wt.%): Cu, 32.6; S, 31.05; Fe, 27.11; O, 2.7; Zn, 1.94; Ba, 0.50; Ca, 0.43; Si, 0.37; Al, 0.17 and Mg, 0.09. Before the experiment, original chalcopyrite was first ground to powder, passed through a sieve of 200–400  The surface morphology of chalcopyrite residues was observed by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Nova™ NanoSEM 230, FEI, USA) ( The Cu and Fe speciation of chalcopyrite was studied by SR-XRD and XANES spectroscopy. Before these analyses, the samples were washed with pH  The leaching parameters of chalcopyrite by By contrast, Chalcopyrite could be dissolved by protons in acidic solution (Eq. In addition, the [Fe  The surface morphologies of the chalcopyrite residues during bioleaching and in the sterile control experiment were observed by SEM ( The Cu and Fe speciation on mineral surfaces was studied by SR-XRD and XANES spectroscopy. SR-XRD patterns ( The Cu and Fe K-edge XANES spectra of the reference mineral samples and chalcopyrite leached by The fitted results of XANES spectra in The release of iron into electrolyte was usually faster than copper, and the iron deficient minerals and metastable layers (Cu Other intermediate products during bioleaching of chalcopyrite, such as elemental sulfur and jarosite, have been widely reported ( The dissolution of chalcopyrite (CuFeS By combining SR-XRD and XANES spectroscopy, this study also presents a new method to analyze the surface chemical species qualitatively and quantitatively. The composition is first qualitatively analyzed by SR-XRD, which shows a higher signal/noise ratio and spatial resolution and is useful to identify the structure and composition on minerals surface. In addition, the mineral surface is analyzed to quantify the composition. On the other hand, though it may have some errors when these unknown spectra are linearly fitted by using the reference spectra, the combination of the SR-XRD and the XANES spectroscopy will provide more convincing results. By using the SR-XRD and XANES spectroscopy, not only did we confirm the formation of metal-deficiency metal sulfides but also quantified the composition of them on the surface of chalcopyrite during bioleaching by The relatedness of Cu and Fe speciation to chalcopyrite bioleaching by We are grateful to the staff at beamlines BL14B and BL15U1 of Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF) for their help in beamlines operation and data collection. This work is supported by the Joint Funds of