The appearance of a significant amount of liberated fine pentlandite in the Raglan tailings, during a campaign to demonstrate future ore behaviour, called attention to a recovery opportunity. This opportunity was identified by a statistical benchmark survey of the operation during that campaign, and QEMSCAN measurement of these survey samples. This development was caused by escalating ore treatment rates and different characteristics in future ore sources. It was thus proposed to change the selection of collector from potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) to potassium isobutyl xanthate (PIBX). Laboratory scale flotation testwork, using high-confidence flotation testing, followed. The PIBX showed much faster flotation than the PAX. Nickel yield to first rougher concentrate was increased from 23.5% to 44.2%. The Raglan flowsheet bypasses this first rougher concentrate directly to final concentrate. Thus there was an expectation that overall performance would improve at plant scale when using PIBX. A designed plant trial was implemented in 2007 to measure and confirm the performance gain. This trial design used on–off switching following a 3-month baseline data block of normal operations using PAX. This layout provided checking of standard PAX performance prior to and during the trial. Thereafter, they were used to evaluate the trial blocks using PIBX. This trial format was deliberately designed so as to overcome the effects of autocorrelation in the operations data. In this way, small but significant metal recovery gains may be measured and proven in a plant trial. The paper describes the case study to show that this approach successfully blocks out autocorrelation in time, which is an obstacle in analysing concentrator operations data. The results showed that the PIBX had produced clear and statistically significant recovery gains for Ni, Cu, Pt and Pd. Adjusted for feed and concentrate grades, these recovery gains were: Ni: 1.04%, Cu: 1.01%, Pt: 2.67% and Pd: 1.79% in absolute terms.Concentrator operations treating sulphide ores produce the largest and most variable paymetal loss in the saleable metal production ( Minimise negative impact by unit cost control, with no process change. Parity with competitors, reducing unit cost by larger unit operations (economies of scale), which attract capital expenditures. Support company’s competitive position by challenging existing paradigms, expending capital for process performance gains. Company uses competitive strategies based on a co-ordinated effort from all functional areas, including processing. These strategies are based to a significant extent on advancing processing capabilities. Processing is expected to make a significant contribution to the success of that company. A typically documented history of these endeavours exists ( There are three challenges that develop from these pursuits: The sampling from such concentrator flowsheets has to be representative. Modern quantitative mineral measurements systems are needed. The small recovery gains targeted by this practice are difficult to prove. The first of these problems was addressed in a study which developed Statistical Benchmark Surveying and the Campaign Survey Model ( On a foundation of modern process mineralogy, there is a good basis for identifying flowsheet changes in a concentrator which would have a likelihood of achieving and sustaining grade or recovery improvements. The remaining problem is that concentrator data are autocorrelated in the short-term and have a high degree of variance. This makes the measurement and proof of small recovery increments difficult. The next challenge in concentrator optimisation is in proving that the performance gain from a flowsheet change was attained and is sustainable. It is the purpose of this paper to identify and use some of the relevant methods to develop such proof. The use of an undesigned plant trial format otherwise runs the risk of inconclusive measurements at the risk of project capital expenditure and team reputation. Small but economically significant performance gains across a concentrator operation present the problem of measurement and proof. This problem is generic for sulphide ore concentrators across the world. Historically the mineral processing industry has left these small gains to the realm of the unprovable, and has preferred to pursue larger performance gains because of their easier proof. The cost of this approach has left a much larger total business opportunity on the table, since there are many more small performance gain opportunities than there are large ones. The leverage of statistics into mineral processing re-opens the discussion of these small recovery gains, because the test designs can deal with the central problem, viz. small performance changes within noisy data and associated with autocorrelation. Earlier publications have clearly set the example of how this may be done, using the replicated blocking method ( There are two choices that develop from this problem. One would be to work within autocorrelation and use the appropriate autocorrelation models. The other would be to work outside autocorrelation by ‘blocking’ the effects of autocorrelation by appropriate test design. Autocorrelation may be defined in this context as the short-term predictable relationship between and within flotation feed grade measurements, and downstream metallurgical products, that is inherited from the spatial correlation of paymetal grade that exists in the orebody as unbroken ore. The choice made by the investigator depends on the type of problem, and determines the project schedule. This is because working within autocorrelation will mostly be in the short-term. Typically this is the choice of the process control discipline, which relies on this autocorrelation to model short-term behaviours. This provides online feedback controls on operating processes ( The Raglan operation is located in the Ungava peninsula of northern Québec, and was commissioned into production in January 1998. The initial measured treatment capacity was approximately 108 The orebody is hosted by an alternating succession of thick komatiic peridotite flows and sills of Archean age ( The following points, and The overall recoveries of pentlandite and chalcopyrite from mill feed to final concentrate were 90.4% and 91.5%, respectively. Size by size recoveries are shown in The final tailings losses of pentlandite and chalcopyrite occurred in both liberated and locked phases, but to different extents. It is these liberated sulphides that form the focus of the reagent trial. In the case of pentlandite, an overall loss to tailings of 9.6% was measured, based on mill feed as 100%. Within the tailings, liberated pentlandite accounted for 36.5% of all pentlandite in tailings (or 2.6% of pentlandite in mill feed). Pentlandite liberation in the tailing is shown in In the case of chalcopyrite, an overall loss of 8.5% was measured, based on mill feed as 100%. Within the tailings, liberated chalcopyrite accounted for 11.6% of all chalcopyrite in tailings (or 1.0% of chalcopyrite in mill feed). Chalcopyrite liberation in the tailing is shown in Pyrrhotite recovery to final concentrate was 20.2%. Within final concentrate, liberated pyrrhotite accounted for 75.8% of all pyrrhotite in final concentrate, and occurred in a positive flotation profile as documented by In the preceding figures, the following annotation legend was used: The escalation in ore treatment rates at Raglan has also reduced the retention time of solids in the flotation plant, thus the flotation rate had become a more important factor than before. A factorially designed series of laboratory scale flotation tests was performed at Xstrata Process Support (XPS) to determine the potential of alternative xanthates to the standard PAX at Raglan. This work, which was performed using high-confidence flotation testing ( Based on the information gathered from the survey and from the laboratory scale flotation testwork, it was decided to test the PIBX against standard PAX in a substitution plant scale trial that would last several months. This trial and would clearly demonstrate the flotation performance improvements indicated by the laboratory work. Specifically, the paymetal set Ni, Cu, Pt and Pd would be the focus of the performance measurements, and it was expected that small but sustainable recovery gains would be made as a result of this change. The trial was to determine how much these gains would be, and whether they could be significantly proven. A 3-month baseline block of data for normal operations, using PAX, was taken from 20 February 2007 to 21 April 2007. No circuit or reagent suite changes were made during this time. Measurements were available at a level of two 12-hour shifts per day. Normally-scheduled mill shutdowns for maintenance still took place during this period. These reduced the total capture of shift-frequency observations from 122 to 116. Data captured were Rougher Float Feed, Final Concentrate and Final Tailings samples and assays for Ni, Cu, Pt and Pd. Ni was used as the adjudicating element between the internal and external data blocks on PAX. Following on from the 3-month baseline measurement, four internal data blocks, two using PIBX and two using PAX, and each lasting 2 In each internal data block, the first 4 In statistical terms, the above layout is a shortened version of a replicated block design. Each reagent type (PAX or PIBX) is tested more than once so as to ‘double-check’ the observations. The blocking format is a deliberate arrangement which randomises the measurements. This randomisation, together with the blank period of 4 It should also be noted that the 4 The handling and preparation of the samples from this trial required special attention. The streams used were: rougher float feed, final concentrate, and final tailings. Each shift of production operation produced a 12-h composite sample of each of these streams. In addition to the base metal assays which were performed by the site laboratory, subsamples had to be extracted using a spinning riffler for fire assay. The subsamples for fire assay were further pulverised in a manner so as to address the bias errors that exist in this process due to platinum group element mineral occurrence and hosting, and particle size distribution ( The Rougher Float Feed and Final Tailings were pulverised to a The overall trial results are summarised in  Inspection of It will be shown that, after adjusting for the differences in feed and concentrate grades, and after modelling a best estimate of mass balance using Bilmat software, the following recoveries in The external and internal data blocks using PAX are designed to cross-check that when the plant was put back onto the standard PAX, it would replicate its grade and recovery behaviour on nickel. This is done by a two-dimensional data block in the form of grade/recovery points and domains. The baseline data, drawn from 3-months of baseline operations before the trial, produced the results shown in Here the standard deviations of nickel grade and recovery were estimated from the 3-month data file. The limits were then calculated as the sample mean plus or minus two sample standard deviations. The rectangle describes the limits of the baseline PAX grade/recovery domain at the 95% confidence level, i.e. at plus and minus two sample standard deviations of the mean. Now using this reference domain to check that the plant repeated its typical behaviour at a future date when PAX was put back onto the circuit, the pooled results of the two internal data blocks on PAX are overlaid with the baseline reference domain. This outcome is shown in Inspection of The Raglan operation has a zero discharge circuit for water. This brings about the documented buildup of inorganic species totalling 30,000 In terms of organic species, the question may arise as to the survival of residual xanthate species in this process water. The possibility of some residual form of amyl xanthate recycling in the process water may be considered. If such concentration of residual amyl xanthate interacts positively with the new isobutyl xanthate being dosed, this interaction or synergy might be attributed to the claimed or observed metal recovery gains for isobutyl xanthate. This invokes a discussion on the synergistic effects of mixed collector systems: Positive interaction between certain xanthate types was reported by In more recent studies, the proven range of relative dosage of these mixed collectors in such systems so as to produce flotation synergy is in the order of 90–10% for pyrite to 65–35% for heazlewoodite, based on new mill feed ( The 4-day disqualification period at the start of each reagent changeover was deliberately designed to effectively turn over any existing inventory of amyl xanthate in the reagent mixing and dosage equipment of the flotation plant. Inspection of the data would suggest that the nickel recoveries are higher when using PIBX than PAX. If this was true, then the tailings grades would show a significant difference. Reference to To derive the Referring to tables of the Other features of the plant performance need to also be tested; for example nickel in feed and concentrate grade. In Recognising the influence of ore and concentrate grades on recovery ( In like manner to the above calculations for nickel, the analysis of variance for tailing grades of copper, platinum and palladium was performed. Details of these calculations are shown in The final tailings and concentrate grades were modelled using the statistical software package SAS (see Using the mean values of the non-Type variables, we take account of differences in feed and concentrate grades. This resolves to. The model Repetition of the method led to an equivalent regression on copper, the details of which follow. SAS produced the following model after optimising significant variables: Using the mean values of the non-Type variables, we take account of the differences of feed and concentrate grades. This resolves to. The model Because of the trace levels of Platinum Group Elements in the Raglan orebody – in the range of 1–2 Traditionally the Raglan operations have measured platinum and palladium at a monthly composite level, and have used the shift-frequency base metal analysis to control the operation. Where small recovery differences are sought amidst wide-ranging and variable data, it is necessary to change the measurement practice to a shift-frequency arrangement for the PGE. This reduces the standard error of the group means by a large amount. Referring to the formula for the standard error as It is thus easier to compare averages with smaller standard errors than those with larger ones. A further benefit is derived from the Central Limit Theorem by this arrangement. Averages of observations that exceed 4–5 invoke the powerful effects of this process, and tend to produce distributions of errors that are normal, independently of the type of distribution from which the data were obtained. The overall error is thus reduced ( The final tailings and concentrate grades were modelled using the statistical software package SAS. The reagent type was represented by an indicator variable, setting the value ‘0’ for PAX and ‘1’ for PIBX. The following results were obtained. SAS produced the following model after optimising significant variables: Using the mean values of the non-Type variables, we take account of differences in feed and concentrate grades. This resolves to The model SAS produced the following model after optimising significant variables: Using the mean values of the non-Type variables, we take account of the differences of feed and concentrate grades. This resolves to The model A common mass balance had to be derived for each of the PAX and PIBX data. This was done using the mass balance software called Bilmat. In each case, the Ni, Cu, Pt and Pd data were used for feed, concentrate and final tailings data, providing a best estimate of the mass and value balances by several means in each case. The raw data are shown in Comparison of A significant amount of the palladium in the Raglan orebody is hosted as solid solution in pentlandite. Thus, the nickel and palladium recoveries are correlated to a certain extent. Laser-Ablation Mass Spectrometry performed by Cabri in 2000 found an average tenor of 4.3 The correlation developed was This work has shown that small but significant recovery gains can be measured and tested by using an appropriate plant trial design. These have been estimated and reported. In this case study, care was taken to design in sufficient redundancy so as to allow cross-checking of measurements. The use of the trial block system with replicate block design and disqualification of changeover shifts has set the platform for clear and obvious observations to have been made. PIBX has been adopted by Raglan management as the new standard xanthate in use at the Raglan operation from early 2008. The authors would like to thank the management of Raglan and of Xstrata Nickel, and the management of Xstrata Process Support, for permission to publish this paper. Mr. Colin Hardie, at the time Chief Metallurgist, was instrumental in facilitating many of the detailed arrangements that were necessary for this work at the plant level. His team at site executed this trial efficiently to the last detail. This exemplary effort has made a remarkable difference to the clarity of the results. See