 The symbiotic relationship between microbiology and metals is illustrated through an interdisciplinary approach interlinking occurrence of mineral deposits through microbial activity with role of microorganisms in metal extraction, mineral beneficiation, metal corrosion, and environmental pollution and protection. This book contains 14 chapters devoted to biotechnology–materials interface, microbiological aspects of leaching microorganisms, bioleaching mechanisms, methods in biohydrometallurgy, bioleaching technologies for copper, uranium, zinc, nickel, cobalt, and gold, electrochemical concepts in biohydrometallurgy, microbially induced mineral beneficiation, newer and novel applications such as reduction bioleaching, bioprocessing of rare earth elements, industrial wastes as well as polymetallic ores, nodules, and black schists, biofouling and microbially influenced corrosion, and microbial aspects of acid mine drainage and environmental control. A final chapter on experimental and research methods in The author of this book had early developed an international web course titled METALS BIOTECHNOLOGY under National Program of Technology Enhanced Learning (NPTEL) sponsored by the Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India through participation of IITs and IISc. The above web lectures have been thoroughly revised, expanded, and updated for the preparation of this text book. I would like to express my sincere thanks and gratitude to several good friends, colleagues, and students who helped with the design and preparation of this book. Many contributed to the contents of this book in the forms of valuable criticisms, comments, corrections, providing photographs and figures, as well as extending the necessary official permission for reproduction of figures and tables. Special thanks are due to Petrus J. van Staden, Senior Technical Specialist, HYDROMETALLURGY DIVISION of Mintek for kind help with providing photographs, information on Mintek operations as well as valuable inputs on biohydrometallurgy. Sincere thanks are due to Mr. Jan Van Niekerk, Senior Manager (BIOX), Outotec(Finland)Oy for providing valuable photographs of several bioreactors along with pertinent literature. I thank Mr. Rail Fatkullin and Mr. Wallies Olivier of Biomin South Africa (Pty) Ltd for their valuable advice and help. The author would wish to thank Dr. Kostas Marinakis, Ms. Christine McElvenny, Ms. Carly Demetre, and all in the Editorial team of Elsevier for their help, interest, and advice in bringing this book to fruition. Thanks are due to Ms. Deepa Tejaswini for patiently typing all the chapters and revising all figures and tables through computer graphics.