It is well known in the practice of flotation that mixtures of various collectors often behave with greater effectiveness than would be expected from their individual known characteristics. This phenomenon is a classical example of synergism in flotation, in which the combined effect exceeds the sum of the linearly weighted partial effects. Such phenomena are not only consciously applied by adding mixtures of reagents, especially collectors, but may also occur inadvertently since many industrial reagents are synthesized from less than absolutely pure chemicals, resulting in the presence of small amounts of different product molecules which are often capable of having a positive synergistic effect on the flotation behaviour. Such synergism can have a significant effect not only on the recovery but also on the selectivity of specific minerals in differential flotation. The manner in which reagents interact in order to achieve a synergistic effect is a complex function of their chemical nature as well as their chemisorptive or physisorptive properties. The former will determine whether the chemical composition of the reagent changes when another compound is present through, for example, a dimerization reaction. The latter will determine how competitive or synergistic adsorption will influence the ultimate flotation behaviour. The analysis of synergism between reagents in flotation is complicated by the fact that the roles and interactions of the different classes of reagents are difficult to isolate due to the complexity of the flotation process, viz. the frother is added to stabilize the froth zone but can also interact with the collector and affect the performance of the collection zone. This review firstly discusses those properties of pure collectors, frothers, depressants and activators which are pertinent to their potential synergistic behaviour. The interactions between collectors, frothers and each other are then reviewed. The emphasis here is on sulfide minerals but similar effects have been extensively reported in the case of oxide flotation. Finally, an hypothesis is proposed to explain the synergism observed when mixtures of thiol collectors are used in the flotation of pyrite. This represents a typical sulfide mineral flotation system and will serve to highlight how the various subprocesses of flotation may be influenced in a synergistic manner, thus influencing the ultimate flotation performance. The predominant functional role of collectors is to induce hydrophobicity by adsorption onto the desired mineral and they are therefore concentrated at the mineral–water interface. Collectors are heteropolar molecules containing a nonpolar hydrocarbon chain, which renders the particle hydrophobic, and a polar group that interacts with the mineral surface. Collector molecules can be divided into three classes: nonionic, which are largely insoluble and used in the flotation of coal and graphite; cationic, which are typically amine salts and used in the flotation of silicates and sulfides at alkaline conditions; and anionic, which are used to float basic minerals such as metal oxides and sulfides. Fatty acids are used for the flotation of nonsulfide minerals such as apatite, calcite, feldspar and hematite. Sulfonates and sulfates are used for apatite as their frothing properties limit their usefulness for other systems. Sulfhydryl or thiol collectors are used for the flotation of sulfide minerals and, of these, xanthates, first patented in 1925, are still the most widely used. The mechanism of mineral–collector bonding depends on the collector type and the nature and charge of the mineral surface and can occur via physisorption or chemical bonding. There are several modes of chemical interaction of the collector with the mineral surface. In the case of physisorption, the collector does not interact with the mineral surface. The attachment is due primarily to van der Waals forces and the Gibbs free energy of adsorption is relatively low. In the case of chemisorption, when the collector interacts with the mineral surface without movement of the metal ions from their lattice sites, this produces monolayer coverage. When the surface chemical reactions are associated with movement of metal ions from their lattice sites, multilayers may form. If a reaction occurs in the bulk solution between dissolved ions and the collector, a hydrophobic surface will only be established if there is bulk precipitation on the mineral surface. Sulfide minerals are semiconductors and react electrochemically with thiol collectors according to the mixed potential model. This involves the cathodic reduction of oxygen and the anodic oxidation of collectors. The electrochemical potential of the system and the thermodynamics of the respective reactions determine the nature of the surface products. Depending on the nature of the surface products formed, the collector may however be physisorbed, such as in the case of the neutral dithiolate, or chemisorbed, as in the case of the metal thiolate. Naturally, when mixtures of collectors are used, a combination of these mechanisms and products may occur, possibly resulting in an enhanced flotation performance. Frothers are added to create a stable dispersion of bubbles in the pulp which will subsequently create a reasonably stable froth and which will allow selective drainage from the froth of entrained gangue and improve the flotation selectivity. The frother also affects the flotation kinetics. They are nonionic heteropolar molecules and, unlike collectors, are not associated with particular categories of minerals. The frothing ability of a compound is associated with hydroxyl (–OH), ester (–COOR) and carbonyl (–CO) chemical groups, and commercial frothers can be divided into three main categories: alcohols, alkoxyparaffins, polyglycols and polyglycol ethers. The polar end of the frother molecule forms hydrogen bonds with the water and no mineral–frother bonds are formed. The nonpolar end is hydrophobic so that the frother concentrates at the air–water interface and is thus described as being surface-active. This affects the surface tension, which indicates the difference between the surface activity of frothers and causes a stable froth to form. In general, increased surface activity results in increased floatability and froth stability. The role of depressants, which are either inorganic salts, such as sodium silicate, sodium sulfite or organic compounds such as polysaccharides, dextrin and starch derivatives, guar gums, carboxymethylcellulose and alginates, is to reduce the collection of unwanted gangue which consists of typically talcaceous or other oxide minerals. This is done by either enhancing the hydrophilic nature of the gangue surface, by preventing the formation of hydrophobic species which might adsorb on the gangue surface or by preventing the coating of unwanted slimes on the mineral surface. Mechanisms of depression also include the formation of large aggregates and the complexation of the collector in solution. Activators are specifically added to enhance flotation performance, usually by modifying the surface of the particle in some way so as to make it more amenable to interaction with the collector. They may however have unexpected effects, for example, by complexing with other ions in solution and rendering particles less floatable. Copper sulfate, for example, is a well-known activator. Under certain circumstances, in sulfide flotation, the copper may ion-exchange with surface ions, creating a readily floatable particle but in different pulp conditions may complex as a hydroxy species and depress the particles. Such effects may be considered synergistic but fall outside the scope of this article. Another commonly used activator is sodium sulfide or bisulfide which is used as a sulfidizing reagent for tarnished or oxidized ores. There has been a considerable amount of work done on the effects of mixing reagents in flotation. The use of mixtures of collectors has long been recognized in plant practice and has been shown to enhance flotation performance. These benefits have been reported for a wide range of collector mixtures (anionic, cationic and nonionic) and include lower dosage requirements, improved selectivity and rates and extents of recovery and an increase in the recovery of coarse particles. In many cases an optimum ratio of constituent collectors was shown to exist. Dithiophosphates are a class of thiol collectors that are so widely used in mixtures that they are known as promoters. Using measurements obtained from experimental techniques shown in When using mixtures of collectors it has often been observed that there is a greater surface coverage of the adsorbed collectors on the mineral than would have been expected from their weighted averages. This could either enhance the overall hydrophobicity of the mineral surface or result in an adsorbed surface layer of collector molecules more suitable for frother–collector interactions. The increased mineral hydrophobicity could result from the formation of a more evenly distributed surface species. The change in hydrophobicity can be measured by, for example, changes in contact angle, bubble loading and ultimately the recovery in batch flotation tests. It has also been proposed that, for certain systems, when a mixture of collectors is exposed sequentially to a surface which, by definition, must have a heterogeneous distribution of energetically different sites, the weaker collector will adsorb preferentially on the strong sites and the strongly adsorbing collector, added subsequently, will adsorb on the weaker sites. In this way as many sites as possible are utilized for adsorption, thus enhancing the hydrophobicity. Single collector addition may only result in adsorption on strongly adsorbing sites, forming nonuniform coverage and thus a less than optimal adsorption capacity. It is possible that such an effect will not be observed if the collectors are pre-mixed before addition, thus emphasizing the fact that synergism may depend on the sequence of addition as much as on the presence of a mixture. The grade of the concentrate is largely a function of the depressant used, which affects the froth zone characteristics. The presence of hydrophobic solids in the froth phase will destabilize the froth, causing bubble coalescence in the froth which results in improved drainage and consequently increased selectivity and grades. The presence of hydrophilic or only slightly hydrophobic minerals can stabilize the froth zone and thereby decrease the grade achieved. The use of a combination of collectors resulting in both physisorbed and chemisorbed surface products can also affect the froth structure and influence the final grade achieved. It is also often observed that enhanced performance is achieved when a strong collector with no frothing properties is used with a weaker collector with frothing properties. The former increases coarse particle recovery and the latter increases fine particle recovery. This is however not a true synergistic effect since the combined effect is the sum of the individual effects. Before the collision of a mineral particle and an air bubble, adsorbed layers of reagents are present at both interfaces. At the time of collision, there are interactions between these layers which are affected by the nature and charge of the respective molecules. Any associated molecules are anchored to the mineral group by the polar groups of the collector. The strength of this film determines the tenacity of attachment of the mineral to the bubble and the ultimate success of the flotation process. When the molecular associations between frother and collector are suitably balanced the appropriate mechanical properties of the film at the interface are created, resulting in good recoveries and grades. If the collector or frother dosages are too high, the molecules would be too densely packed and penetration and successful attachment would not take place. This supports the well-known phenomenon that too high a dosage of reagents can result in reduced recoveries. In this case synergistic interactions between the frother and collector that improved flotation performance at the lower dosages are no longer possible at the higher dosage. Frother molecules can accumulate at the mineral surface, without enhancing its hydrophobicity and, at the time of collision with a bubble, re-orientate quickly, facilitating mineral–bubble attachment. this produces a stable three-phase froth and strong tenacity of mineral–bubble attachment. An alternative explanation is that at the mineral–water interface the alkyl chains of frother and collector molecules are held together by van der Waals forces. Frothers are able to hydrogen-bond with the oxygen atom in the collector molecule. These associations are only formed when a mineral is present. The frother's ability to interact with the collector is thus more significant than its surface activity, which is required to produce a stable froth zone. This also explains why detergents are not suitable frothers. It has moreover often been shown that the collector can affect frothing properties and that the frother can affect mineral hydrophobicity. The surface activity and thus frothability of the frother is very sensitive to the presence of small amounts of other substances, such as impurities or collector molecules. The chemical nature of certain combinations of frothers and collectors may result in interactions occurring at the point of collision of the pure components. The properties of frothers can sometimes be additive, with the mixing of stronger and weaker frothers to form medium-strength frothers. Synergistic enhancement of flotation performance has been observed in batch flotation tests with a low grade pyrite ore using thiol collectors at pH 4. The collectors tested were potassium  In order to elucidate the mechanisms of synergism, the extent of bubble loading and the heats of adsorption were measured for the respective collectors and collector mixtures using pure pyrite at pH 4, ( 