Surgical and conservative management of partial tears of the rotator cuff has long been a controversial topic for many generations of shoulder surgeons. These tears frequently occur on both the articular and bursal surfaces and within the intrasubstance of the rotator cuff. The term “PASTA lesion” describes the partial articular supraspinatus tendon avulsion–type injury. A less common variant of this injury is the bony PASTA lesion or partial articular bony avulsion of the supraspinatus tendon (PABAST).Surgical and conservative management of partial tears of the rotator cuff has long been a controversial topic for many generations of shoulder surgeons. In 1934 Codman A 60-year-old right hand–dominant female nurse sustained a traction-type injury to her right shoulder. The injury occurred while she was walking her dog and the dog suddenly pulled against the leash to chase a squirrel. The patient reported immediate pain, along with limited range of motion and function. Initial radiographs at another institution showed an avulsion fracture of the greater tuberosity, and she was treated in a conservative fashion by another orthopaedic surgeon with 4 weeks of sling immobilization, followed by 4 months of physical therapy. She subsequently presented to us with continued pain and significant weakness of the right upper extremity despite conservative treatment. Repeat radiographs showed a delayed union of the avulsion fracture of the greater tuberosity, and subsequent magnetic resonance imaging confirmed a bony PASTA lesion of the right shoulder. After we discussed operative versus nonoperative treatment options with the patient, the decision was made to proceed with an arthroscopic inspection and possible repair. The arthroscopic technique is performed with the patient in the lateral decubitus position but is certainly amenable to the beach-chair position as well. A standard posterior portal is created, and a diagnostic arthroscopy is performed. Additional intra-articular pathology may be addressed in the same setting. Once the partial undersurface tear of the supraspinatus is identified ( After lightly decorticating the bony surfaces, we used an 18-gauge spinal needle to localize the insertion point of the anchor. A percutaneous skin incision is made following the course of the spinal needle and is carried down through the rotator cuff, parallel to the supraspinatus fibers. An anchor (5.5-mm Bio-Corkscrew suture anchor; Arthrex, Naples, FL) is inserted in the standard percutaneous fashion in preparation for repair. The spinal needle is again inserted from a lateral entry through the rotator cuff, just medial to the tear. A monofilament suture is passed through the spinal needle and retrieved out the anterior portal along with 1 of the free limbs of suture from the anchor. The spinal needle is removed, and the monofilament suture and the free limb of suture from the anchor are then tied together and shuttled out the lateral skin in the standard fashion. This shuttle sequence is repeated, progressing from the anterior aspect of the tear to the posterior aspect of the tear. The sutures are retrieved and shuttled in a horizontal mattress configuration. Additional anchors are placed and sutures are passed to accommodate the size of the tear ( Once the sutures have all been shuttled, attention is turned to the subacromial space. The same posterior portal is used, and the arthroscope is redirected into the subacromial space. A standard lateral portal is established by an outside-in technique, and a shaver is used to remove the subacromial bursa in an effort to localize the previously passed sutures. It is recommended to begin the subacromial bursectomy well medial to the sutures in an effort to avoid inadvertent suction of the sutures into the shaver device. Alternatively, the bursa may be removed before passing the sutures to make visualization less precarious. Once localized, the sutures are retrieved within a cannula from the posterior portal and subsequently tied from posterior to anterior by use of a standard sliding locking knot with 3 reversed half-hitches ( Rotator cuff pathology is 1 of the most common conditions evaluated and treated by the practicing shoulder surgeon. Multiple studies have shown an increase in prevalence of rotator cuff tears with age, and examination of asymptomatic patients with magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound has documented significant findings of full-thickness and partial rotator cuff tears. Unlike the natural progression of attritional rotator cuff tears, Surgical techniques for addressing partial rotator cuff tears have progressed from early arthroscopic debridement to tear completion and repair, and more recently, a transtendinous arthroscopic repair has been described. Both Bhatia et al. 