The recent annual output of major industrial mineral powders in the mainland of China has been more than 100milliont, accompanied by active development of such supporting technology as comminution, classification, separation/purification, and surface modification. In particular, the present paper reviews technologies for preparing ultra-fine particles involving dry and wet processing, modification and composition, calcination of kaolin clay, and processing of spherical/acerous industrial minerals.According to China Non-Metallic Minerals industry Association and China Building Material Industrial Association, the total output of industrial minerals in the mainland of China was 103.9 In the mainland of China, industrial minerals processed by comminution fall into two classes: coarse products (10 Comminution and classification are allied operations, using equipment as described in Most of industrial minerals (such as limestone, calcite, marble, dolomite, gypsum, barite, talc, pyrophyllite, chlorite, bentonite, illite, wollastonite, hard-kaolinite and quartzite) are processed by simple manual or mechanical sorting, although other minerals such as asbestos, graphite, kaolin clay, diatomite, bentonite, quartz, mica, garnet, cyanite, sillimanite, andalusite, vermiculite, magnesite, feldspar, rutile, zircon sand, fluorite, phosphorus lime, sylvite, etc., need to be purified at the same time. Air separation and sieve classification are applied to processing asbestos, while other methods like flotation or/and chemical methods (leaching with acid or alkali, and calcination) are utilized to treat graphite and gravity separation (i.e., hydrocyclone, centrifugal classification), high-intensity magnetic separation (HIMS), high-gradient magnetic separation (HGMS), super-conducting HGMS, leaching and de-ferrization are used to purify kaolin clay. Special technologies are used in the treatment of diatomite, i.e., dispersion by scrubbing, sands removal by classification and clay separation by selective sedimentation. Quartz is purified by acid leaching followed by washing. Treatment of mica involves sorting, abrasive separation, air separation, and gravity separation. Gravity separation (i.e., shaking table) is also used to process garnet. Sillimanite and cyanite are mainly processed by flotation after desliming. For processing feldspar, magnetic separation is primarily used for removing ferric impurities, and flotation for separating quartz from feldspar. Air or water separation can be used to separate vermiculite, after expansion from heavier gangue minerals. Magnesite is mainly processed by hot separation after controlled calcination. It employs electrical, magnetic, and/or gravity methods to separate rutile from zircon–quartz sands. The main method for treating fluorite and talc is flotation ( Surface modification, which is used to produce fillers from industrial minerals for plastic, rubber, adhesive, polymer or its composites, paint, pigment, etc., is an important technology to improve the performance of powders. This technology involves surface chemical modification, sedimentation reaction modification and layer-inserted modification, either wet or dry. The chemicals used could be either organic or inorganic. The equipment used could be a continuous powder surface modifier, a batch heat-agitated machine, a vortex mill, a reaction vessel, etc., as illustrated in Since dry classification of particulate materials was first developed in 1985 ( High-speed impact mill, a major equipment for grinding dry particulate materials, is frequently equipped with dry ultra-fine classifiers in a closed loop in virtue of simplicity and high size reduction ratio. The unit capacity of recently developed versions (see Ring roll mill system with a classifier developed by Minxi Fengli Grinding Machinery Co. Ltd., as shown in  During the past decade, due to the development of paper-making industry, the annual output of GCC has been increased by at least 10%, causing the rapid development of the corresponding technology for grinding calcium carbonate into ultra-fine products, in particular, large stirred bead mills for wet ultra-fine grinding with mill volume of 300 The characteristics of the GCC slurry product, i.e., product size distribution and slurry rheology, have been improved to meet the specifications demanded by advanced applications. For instance, for paper-coating, the solid content has been raised to 73–75 In the meantime, single-treatment batch processes for dry industrial mineral powders are being challenged by recent developments of surface modification/compound technologies dealing with ultra-fine powers, such as the following. Manufacture/application of continuous modifiers, i.e., the models SLG and PSC continuous powder surface modifiers, developed by Jiangyin Qitai Non-Metal Engantiineering Co. Ltd. and Qingdao Qingkuang Mining Equipments Co. Ltd., as shown in Use of combined dry/wet process and compound modification systems, including ultra-fine grinding with surface modification, consecutive drying with surface modification, inorganic precipitation coating with organic surface modification, and mechano-chemical processing with organic coating modification. Recent technologies for producing ultra-fine kaolin clay with high whiteness involve ultra-fine grinding and calcination as described below. Hunan Chaopai Chemical Engineering Co. Ltd. has manufactured commercial-scale stirred bead mills for wet ultra-fine grinding of kaolin clay since 1995, reaching a mill volume of 5000 In addition, four large stirred bead mills made by Hunan Chaopai Chemical Engineering Co. Ltd. used for ultra-fine grinding of kaolin clay with a capacity of 30,000 The calcination of kaolin-rich coal for producing calcinated ultra-fine kaolin clay has been improved via three stages: (a) stationary calcination kiln in the early 1990s, (b) gas muffle kiln in 2000, and (c) direct gas flame rotary kiln during 2005–2006. The improvements involve increased energy efficiency, lower specific energy consumption and lower investment. For instance, the specific energy input for a 10,000 The annual production of ultra-fine kaolin clay from kaolin-rich coal resources has been on the increase with considerable reduction in investment due to the use of large scale stirred bead mills and direct gas flame rotary kilns, e.g., RMB 45 million for a 10,000 Ultra-fine spherical silicon powder is an advanced material for encapsulation of integrated electronic circuit planes. This particulate material can be produced commercially in only a few developed countries ( Recently, Shanxi Taihua Company developed a TH200 classifying mill for producing high length/diameter ratio acerous wollastonite powders, as shown in Since 2005 the annual production of industrial mineral powders in the mainland of China has been over 100 In addition, advanced technology for calcination and ultra-fine grinding has been used for producing ultra-fine kaolin clay with high whiteness. Spherical silicon and acerous wallastonite powders have also been produced using recently developed methods.