The hydraulic properties of geologic formations, such as specific storage and hydraulic conductivity, are known to vary spatially due to formation heterogeneity; however, they may also change temporally if the formation undergoes mechanical disturbance such as occurs during mining. Characterising changes in hydraulic properties is important for groundwater systems that are disturbed by mining. Conventional hydrogeological investigations rely on literature derived values or limited programs of field testing (e.g. pumping test) to define specific storage; but these approaches do not consider the change in compressibility that may occur due to mechanical disturbance. This paper presents, for the first time, direct in situ measurements of the changes in compressibility, and consequently specific storage, as a result of mechanical disturbance within geologic formations overlying underground mining operations. The in situ measurements of compressibility are derived in this study from the pore-pressure response to barometric loading or strains induced by earth tides. Even prior to disturbance, the compressibility obtained from in situ measurements was found to be an order of magnitude lower than that measured on core samples by unconfined strength test in the laboratory. The differences in compressibility for the intact formation are likely due to sample disturbance and the differences in strain level imposed by the field and laboratory methods. The increase in compressibility of the overburden rock varied with the location of the monitoring site relative to longwall extraction and the level of strain the formation sustained. The study found that quantifying the changes in compressibility, and consequently specific storage, as a result of mine-induced disturbance is critical to our understanding of subsidence, the extent of depressurization, and the impact that mining may have on regional groundwater flow systems.Underground mining disturbs overburden due to stress changes and strain associated with the redistribution, concentration, reorientation and release of stress created as a result of longwall extraction. The compressibility of soils and rock has been shown to increase with relatively small increases in strain ( Qualitative and quantitative changes in S Recent literature related to the impact of longwall methods of underground coal mining on surface and groundwater found that the impact of mining on groundwater flow systems is not fully understood ( Current conceptual models of how overburden rock is disturbed during the advance of longwall mines ( The focus of this research is on the constrained zone ( The current study attempts to quantify, for the first time, the progressive change in  Changes in barometric pressure cause a change in total stress on the ground surface. Within the geologic formation, this change in total stress is distributed between the pore-water and the solid phases, with the proportion of stress carried by each phase dependent on their relative  The loading provided by the barometric pressure acts in a vertical direction with no lateral strain ( In geotechnical engineering, elastic modulus, rather than compressibility, is used to describe stress strain behavior in the context of elastic theory ( Since the strain produced within a geologic media as a result of barometric loading is small it can be assumed to be elastic. However, where larger strains develop as a result of larger ground disturbance (e.g. tunnels, retaining walls or foundations), The S The research site is located in the Southern coalfields of the Sydney Basin, eastern Australia ( The nearly 300 Geology, topography and structural features of the Basin influence hydrogeological relationships ( The data for this study was obtained from pressure transducers installed in two drillholes, shown as S1910 and S2192 in S2192, drilled in 2012, is located centrally above LW9 ( Barometric pressure data for 2013 was collected from the site weather station located near the mine office. Barometric pressure for the period from 2008 to 2013 was obtained from the Camden weather station located 30 Rock core samples were collected during diamond coring of the S2192 and S2220 holes ( Unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests were conducted on the core samples using the MTS815 machine in the Mine Geomechanics laboratory at the School of Mining Engineering, UNSW Australia. The testing was completed using procedures given in AS 4133.4.3.1 and AS 4133.4.2.2 (2009 and 2013). The samples were 60 mm in diameter and had 2–2.5 length to width ratios. The samples were not saturated prior to testing, but were tested at almost in situ moisture content conditions (some loss may have occurred during transport). The pore pressure was not monitored or controlled during the test. The stress and lateral and vertical deformation were recorded. It is acknowledged that the laboratory testing conditions do not represent the in situ conditions, and laboratory simulated stresses exceed those present in the field. There are advantages and disadvantaged to obtaining elastic rock parameters in the laboratory. The disadvantage is the lack of representation of rock structural features, while the advantage is the major advance in solving elastic theory problems relating to rock mechanics ( In order to help interpret the elastic properties of the core, the samples were also monitored for circumferential strain. For each test, at least three UCS samples (adjacent or in the same facies) were tested to achieve statistical significance of the results (except for the upper HBSS where only two samples were available). The samples were loaded at a controlled rate of 0.5 Several methods have been developed to estimate LE ( In the first method, the corrected pore pressure (p) is calculated based on the following equation: The second method of estimating LE was through the use of the least-square regression between the observed changes in pressure and the changes in barometric pressure over a range of times (i.e. short-term and long-term). The long term method represents the change in head as a result of large and continuous changes in barometric pressure while the short-term fluctuation captures changes in pressure associated with rapid changes in barometric pressure. A third estimate of LE was made using the hydraulic head response to earth tides (LE The data from sites S2192 ( A slow decline in hydraulic head was observed at S2192 in all hydrostratigraphic units following March 2013. In the deeper strata (SPCS and lower BGSS), the hydraulic head decrease is gradual as the formations are dewatered. However, during June 2013 the hydraulic head in the upper HBSS (95 As the longwall approaches S2192 in July 2013, the hydraulic heads in the deep SPCS and lower BGSS decrease and water drains to the mine workings. However, similar to the June 2013 event, the heads in the upper BGSS (175 Finally, the decline in head in all transducers above BGSS (175 The hydraulic head response to mechanical changes was very different in S1910 compared to S2192; all but two of the shallowest HBSS VWPs showed a steady gentle decline starting in May 2013. Significant depressurisation (35 The observed differences in hydraulic head response at S1910 between lower HBSS and upper BGSS (32 m and 82 m decline in head for lower HBSS and upper BGSS) were similar in trend to each other although different in the magnitude of the change. If both responses were related to dewatering then slower but larger responses would be expected as opposed to rapid changes resulting from pore pressure response. Such responses are observed in the fractured zone close to longwall extraction zone where full dewatering occurs. We note here that the height of fracturing at approximately 150 In general, three stages of hydraulic head change in response to mining were observed ( The third stage was followed by recovery of 21–26% of the initial hydraulic head decline in BGSS (169 In addition to vertical heterogeneity, significant lateral heterogeneity in lithology and variation of thickness of siltstone, claystone and conglomerate layers was observed. These variations were evident in BGSS and HBSS over spatial distances of 100 A comparison of LE as estimated from barometric pressure changes and earth tides was undertaken to correlate the two values to estimate the The values of LE were also estimated using Fourier analysis of nine months of hourly data during the pre-mining period (S1910 October 2008 to June 2009). These LE On average, the values of LE The LE values obtained from the least-square regression analysis method are presented for the upper three hydrostratigraphic units for both the short time intervals (LEs) and long time interval (LE The change in LE from the barometric loading (visual method) as mining advanced was measured by comparing data from the period before the start of LW9 extraction (from 2008 to 2012) with data collected during longwall extraction (2013). These values of LE were converted to Both shallow and deep formations during the pre-mining period (prior to LW9 extraction) show changes in As the LW9 extraction encroached on the instrumentation locations (S1910) at the start of 2013 there was a clear increase in The increases in In general, An increase in both LE The stress-strain data from the USC tests were used to track the evolution of Young’s modulus and rock damage with strain. The elastic modulus was defined as the slope of a line tangent to the axial stress/strain curve at 50% within elastic stage, and υ was calculated directly from the ratio of axial and lateral strain. Bulk compressibility ( The  The weathered, medium–grained sandstone samples (16C, 8C and 36) had a higher The volumetric strain within the elastic stage for most samples was between 0.1 and 0.2%; however, it is of note that the elastic stage of BHCS sample 36 extends over a wide range of strain (0.1–0.6%). At the same time, the S During mining the values of S S Natural hydrostatic conditions were evident within hydrostratigraphic units prior to new mining extraction. Prior to mining, small changes in hydraulic head and relatively constant values of During mining a slow decrease in hydraulic head occurred in unconfined and partially dewatered deep formations while in confined formations (BGSS, lower HBSS) a rapid decline and then an increase of hydraulic head was observed. These larger, more rapid changes in hydraulic head were likely due to relatively rapid changes in mechanical stress and compressive straining of the formation rather than the result of slower groundwater (drawdown) response (Noordbergum effect) ( In the upper constrained zone there was a time lag in the hydraulic head response compared to deep BGSS and SBSS units. The head change was more gradual where the formation had higher transmissivity and more rapid where the formation had lower transmissivity, consistent with responses observed by Decreases in hydraulic head were eventually observed in all hydrostratigraphic units. In the deeper strata it is expected that the decline in head was due to dewatering via the network of connected fractures. In the constrained zone, the head decline is expected to be the result of depressurisation associated with response to stress changes (compression and relaxation of strata) consistent with literature findings ( As discussed by Hydraulic head recovery in shallow units can be related to recharge, while in deeper strata it is related to partial closure of fractures during the compression phase above the longwall panel. However, the inconsistent response in various strata units is explained by thickness of units and geological heterogeneity. This understanding is consistent with other studies ( The field and laboratory measurements presented in this study highlight changes in Our study showed that in situ Laboratory measured The Geological heterogeneity was found to be an important factor influencing There have been a wide range of S Such a large variation in S The values of S S In summary, the laboratory derived S With time and disturbance, there was a tendency towards increased S In this paper we evaluated changes in The ability to detect changes in Authors would like to thank South32 (R. Walsh and the geology team) for providing data for this paper. Our thanks go to G. Rau, CWI UNSW Australia for useful discussions during paper preparation and P. Cai, K. Gamage and M. Whelan from the School of Mining Engineering, UNSW Australia for assistance with geomechanical testing of core samples. Data used in this study are listed in references. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or industry sectors.