Objective
                  To evaluate the expression of glucocorticoid receptor (GR), calcitonin receptor (CTR), and osteocalcin (OC) in aggressive and nonaggressive central giant cell lesions (CGCLs). The numbers of mitotic and multinucleated giant cells were also evaluated.
               
                  Study Design
                  Thirty-one cases of CGCL were submitted for immunohistochemistry. Mitotic figures and multinucleated giant cells were assessed through histochemical analyses.
               
                  Results
                  Positive staining for GR, CTR, and OC was observed in all cases studied. There were no differences between CGCL variants with regard to the expression of GR, CTR, or OC. The aggressive group showed a higher number of multinucleated giant cells compared with the nonaggressive group (P < .05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Nonaggressive and aggressive CGCLs cannot be distinguished by OC, CTR, or GR expression, although the number of multinucleated giant cells may help differentiate between CGCL types. There is no difference with regard to the expression of glucocorticoids and calcitonin receptors between nonaggressive and aggressive central giant cell lesions (CGCLs), suggesting that treatment with glucocorticoids and calcitonin may be indicated in both types of CGCL. Osteocalcin expression in mononuclear cells of the nonaggressive group may reflect a reduced osteolytic potential. The central giant cell lesion (CGCL) of the jaws is a benign intraosseous lesion. Whether CGCLs are consistent with neoplastic or reactive lesions is not well understood and needs to be clarified. The classic treatment for CGCL may result in esthetic and functional defects, and thus, surgical procedures are undesirable in some cases, including in children and young adults. To justify the treatment of CGCLs with glucocorticoids and calcitonin, some studies have investigated glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and calcitonin receptor (CTR) expression within lesion cells. Tobón-Arroyave et al. Besides the use of glucocorticoids and calcitonin in CGCL treatment, it has been described the use of proteins that act in bone remodeling, such as denosumab. The bone resorption process in CGCL is well documented in the literature The present study evaluated and compared the expression of GR, CTR, and OC in aggressive and nonaggressive CGCLs. Furthermore, the number of mitotic mononuclear cells and the number of multinucleated giant cells were evaluated in both groups of lesions, and we verified the association between cell number and lesion aggressiveness. This investigation may help to elucidate any differences between aggressive and nonaggressive CGCLs with regard to the expression of GR, CTR, and OC, thus providing evidence in favor of alternative treatments, such as the prescription of intralesional glucocorticoid and calcitonin, instead of surgical procedures. For this study, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples from 31 cases of CGCL were selected from the archives of the Oral Pathology Laboratory of the Oral Pathology Department, Dental School of Federal University of Goiás, Brazil. The inclusion criteria were as follows: well-preserved paraffin-embedded specimens from primary CGCL patients who did not receive prior treatment, as confirmed by assessment of the microscopic and clinical data; complete clinical and demographic records; specimens with sufficient tissue for analysis; and interpretable radiographic images. The cases that did not meet these criteria were excluded from the sample; cases of brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism and cherubism were also excluded. The clinical and radiologic data were retrieved from patient records. Review of the specimens and clinical data was conducted to confirm the CGCL diagnosis. These data were used to classify the lesions, based on criteria established by Chuong et al., A rapid growth rate was considered when the patient's records indicated that the lesion had evolved over a 6-month period. A high rate of recurrence was defined as at least one recurrence within 24 months of the previous treatment (this period was established on the basis of reports by Chuong et al. This research was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Federal University of Goiás (UFG: No. 556.175/2014). GR, CTR, and OC expression levels were assessed by immunohistochemical staining. For the staining procedure, 3-μm sections were coated with 2% 3-aminopropyltriethylsilane (Sigma Chemicals, St. Louis, MO), deparaffinized, and hydrated. The sections were incubated in a citrate buffer (pH = 6.0) for 25 minutes (this step was excluded for the antibody anti-osteocalcin) and then incubated with peroxidase blocker (EasyLink One, EasyPath, Sao Paulo, Brazil). The sections were blocked by incubation with goat serum (Easy LinkOne) and then incubated at 4°C overnight with the following primary mouse and rabbit antibodies: anti-glucocorticoid receptor (BuGR2, ab2768, Abcam, Cambridge, MA), anti-calcitonin receptor (ab140778, Abcam) both diluted 1:100, and anti-osteocalcin (FL-100, sc30044; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) diluted 1:50. The sections were then treated using the HRP-polymer method (EasyLink One) and incubated in 3.3'-diaminobenzedine (Easy Link One) for 3 minutes for the GR and CTR antibodies and for 1 minute for the OC antibody. Finally, the sections were counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin. Human kidney tissue was used as a positive control for OC antibody staining, and human thyroid tissue and human tonsil tissue were used as positive controls for CTR and GR staining, respectively. Negative controls were obtained by the omission of the primary antibody and the use of rabbit or goat serum instead. The staining analysis was assessed by counting the number of positive and negative cells in the samples based on the methods of Tobón-Arroyave et al. The number of stained cells was divided by the total number of cells in each field; a percentage of the mean in the eight high-power fields was used as the estimation for expression in each case. Each sample was then scored, according to the proportion of stained cells, as 0 = no stained cells; 1 = less than 25% stained cells; 2 = 25% to 50% stained cells; or 3 = greater than 50% stained cells. Qualitative analysis of the immunohistochemical staining was conducted to determine if the staining occurred in the cell nucleus, cytoplasm, or cytoplasmic membrane. Additionally, the staining intensity in each field was evaluated and compared with that of the control to classify each sample as 0 = no staining; 1 = weak staining; 2 = moderate staining; and 3 = intense staining. Furthermore, a staining-intensity-distribution (SID) score was calculated by multiplying the stained cell proportion score by the staining intensity score in each field. The mean of the eight fields was used as the SID score for that case. The number of mitotic figures in mononuclear cells and the number of multinucleated giant cells (cells with three or more nuclei) were determined by assessment of slides stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The slides were evaluated in 10 consecutive fields under ×400 magnification using an integration graticule (4740680000000-Netzmikrometer ×12.5; Carl Zeiss, Germany) on a light microscope. The statistical analysis was performed by using the IBM SPSS Statistics Software 20.0 for Windows. The nonparametric Mann-Whitney test was used to compare the proportion of stained cells and the SID score between clinical CGCL variants. The Spearman's correlation coefficient was used to verify correlations. Statistical significance was set at All cases showed a predominance of female patients (58%), with a mean age of 28 years (standard deviation ± 22.2). The mandible was the most commonly affected site (61.3%). The clinical and radiographic features of the cases studied classified as nonaggressive and aggressive are summarized in Positive immunohistochemical reactivity for GR was detected in the cell nuclei of mononuclear and multinucleated giant cells in all cases analyzed ( The percentage of mononuclear cells positive for GR expression was 33.21% in the nonaggressive group and 44.09% in the aggressive group ( The SID score analysis in mononuclear cells was 3 in the nonaggressive group and 6 in the aggressive group ( The immunoreactivity for CTR was detected in the cytoplasm and cytoplasmic membranes of mononuclear and multinucleated giant cells in 100% of the cases studied ( In mononuclear cells, the percentage of cells positive for calcitonin receptor was 34.12% in the nonaggressive group and 32.27% in the aggressive group ( The SID scores for the mononuclear component was 4.69 for the nonaggressive group and 4.68 for the aggressive group ( Immunoreactivity for OC was scarce in the cytoplasm of mononuclear and multinucleated giant cells ( The OC expression in mononuclear cells was higher in the nonaggressive group (5.35%) compared with the aggressive forms (3.43%), although this difference was not statistically significant ( The SID score in the mononuclear component was 1.56 in the nonaggressive group and 1.62 in the aggressive group ( The median number of mitotic figures in 10 high-power fields was 6 (range, 0-18) in the nonaggressive group and 1.0 (range, 4-18) in the aggressive group ( A significant correlation between CTR expression in mononuclear cells and that in multinucleated giant cells could be observed (r = 0.45; Our results demonstrated that there is no difference between GR and CTR expression either in aggressive or nonaggressive CGCLs. OC expression was higher in the mononuclear component of the nonaggressive form; however, this difference was not statistically significant. These findings suggest that GR, CTR, and OC expression in mononuclear or multinucleated giant cells cannot distinguish between the aggressive and nonaggressive forms of CGCL. Because both types of CGCL have the same cell lineage, their aggressiveness can be related to other factors, such as the stromal vascular density of lesions The diversity among the results of alternative CGCL treatments has encouraged investigations of GR and CTR expression. Nogueira et al. Therapies for CGCL using calcitonin and glucocorticoids have been described in the literature, and the results of these therapies vary from complete resolution to lesion enlargement. Although there are reports about the successful use of calcitonin, In our study, expression were investigated only in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded CGCL material before the treatment, and our results, together with the results of previous studies, To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate OC in nonaggressive and aggressive CGCLs. OC expression can be used to determine the level of osteoblast activity and bone formation. In this study, we found little OC expression in both nonaggressive and aggressive cases of CGCLs. Park et al. Based on our results, we speculate that a lesser expression of OC in mononuclear cells in the aggressive group may reflect larger lesions with a higher potential to resorb bone, including the cortical plate. Associated with this, aggressive lesions may present a higher number of multinucleated giant cells compared with nonaggressive lesions, Previous studies have suggested that the stromal cells of giant cell tumors of the bone (GCTB) also express little to no OC. The number of mitotic cells has been associated with CGCL aggressiveness. Some authors have demonstrated that aggressive lesions have a higher number of mitotic figures. Our results provide new information about bone repair capacity in CGCLs through the investigation of OC expression. Due to the limited number of cases and bone repair markers evaluated, more studies should be conducted to assess the role of osteogenic cells in CGCLs and also to provide evidence to justify treatments that induce bone repair through the activation of OC-positive cells. In summary, our findings support that the positive expression of GR and CTR in CGCLs can inform choices of alternative treatments with intralesional glucocorticoids and calcitonin in aggressive or nonaggressive CGCLs. This type of therapy may reduce or avoid the defects caused by surgical treatment. GR, CTR, and OC expression levels are not different between the nonaggressive and aggressive forms of CGCL; however, the number of multinucleated giant cells may be helpful in distinguishing these types of lesions. The presence of GR and CTR gives a biologic justification for the use of glucocorticoids and calcitonin as alternative treatment approaches for aggressive and nonaggressive CGCLs. The reduced OC expression observed in our study may be due to the osteolytic behavior of the lesion. We believe that OC-positive cells may promote bone repair when stimulated by osteogenic agents. More studies about osteogenic cells in CGCLs should be conducted to help elucidate their role.