One of the longest continuous periods of dome-forming activity on record is the ongoing eruption of Santiaguito, Guatemala. Dome-building began in 1922, within the crater formed during the cataclysmic 1902 eruption of Santa María, and continues today. The earliest erupted Santiaguito lavas are chemically and mineralogically identical to the dacite pumice erupted in 1902. The erupted magma has become progressively less evolved over time, with a decrease in whole rock SiO2 from ~66 to ~62wt.% from 1922 to 2002. New geochemical data from Santiaguito are consistent with a model of magma being extracted progressively from a chemically-stratified lower crustal (~12 to ~25km) storage zone thought to have formed during the ~25ka of quiescence that preceded the 1902 eruption. The bimodal distribution of plagioclase phenocryst core compositions in early Santiaguito lavas suggests that they were strongly influenced by magma mixing in addition to fractional crystallization. However, lavas erupted since the 1940s show a unimodal distribution, suggesting a diminishing role for mixing within the Santiaguito system. Trace element data suggest that the decrease in silica content over time is best explained by a decrease in the extent of fractional crystallization of ~15% over the 80years covered by our sample set.Our understanding of long-lived silicic lava dome complexes has been greatly improved by petrological studies such as those at Merapi, Indonesia (late 18th century to present, e.g. The Santiaguito lava dome and flow complex lies on the southwest flank of its parent volcano Santa María ( The Santiaguito lava dome began erupting in June 1922, and activity has continued, without interruption, to the present day (  In this paper, we use new geochemical and petrological data from Santiaguito to test the relationship between the 1902 pumice and the early Santiaguito lavas ( Fifty-three rock samples were obtained from the Santa María/Santiaguito system, representing the prehistoric stratocone, the 1902 pumice, and many of the dome and flow units of the Santiaguito complex ( Fifty-three rock samples were obtained from the Santa María/Santiaguito system, representing the prehistoric stratocone, the 1902 pumice, and many of the dome and flow units of the Santiaguito complex ( The Santiaguito lavas have not been described in the literature since The Santiaguito lavas have not been described in the literature since Plagioclase crystals range in size from sub-micron to > Plagioclase crystals range in size from sub-micron to > Four different types of inclusions are present in our samples: crystal clusters, amphibole decay clusters, xenolithic inclusions, and relatively mafic magmatic enclaves (detailed in Electronic Appendix B). Santiaguito lavas are calc-alkaline andesites and dacites; SiO Santiaguito lavas are calc-alkaline andesites and dacites; SiO Selected Harker plots are shown in Selected Harker plots are shown in Fig. 5 and Supplementary Fig. D. Samples define tight compositional trends, with few outliers, as expected for a suite of magmas being progressively extracted from a single magmatic system. Incompatible elements are typically positively correlated with silica (including Ba, Ce, Cs, Hf, La, Mo, Nd, Pb, Pr, Rb, Th, U, and Zr), while some transition metals (Sc, Cr, Cu, Ni, V, and Y) and some heavy rare earth elements (Dy, Er, and Ho), are negatively correlated with silica. Other trace elements show no significant correlation with silica (Co, Eu, Ga, Lu, Sm, Sn, Sr, Tb, Tl, Tm, Yb, and Zn). We obtained four samples of prehistoric Santa María lava during the 2009 field trip (Supplementary Table K). SG-09-42 was taken from a lava flow approximately 5 We also analyzed three pumice samples from the 1902 eruption (samples SG-09-26, -27, and -41). These three 1902 pumice samples are dacites (63.4 to 66.8 We also analyzed three pumice samples from the 1902 eruption (samples SG-09-26, -27, and -41). These three 1902 pumice samples are dacites (63.4 to 66.8 The dominant dacitic component of the 1902 pumice (samples SG-09-26, -27, and -41) is chemically very similar to the earliest Santiaguito lavas (SG-09-23 and -24) ( The dominant dacitic component of the 1902 pumice (samples SG-09-26, -27, and -41) is chemically very similar to the earliest Santiaguito lavas (SG-09-23 and -24) ( Textural analysis shows that the 1902 pumice has significantly lower crystallinity than the Santiaguito lavas ( Textural analysis shows that the 1902 pumice has significantly lower crystallinity than the Santiaguito lavas (Supplementary Table C), as expected given their different eruptive styles. However, the geometric parameters of the plagioclase phenocrysts themselves do not change significantly from 1902 to date: average crystal size is 0.1 In summary, our petrological, geochemical, and textural data support the suggestion of The longevity and continuous activity of Santiaguito are unusual among historic dome eruptions; most are either short-lived (e.g. Mont Pelée, Martinique, 1929 to ~ Incomplete mixing prior to the 1902 eruption is thought to have resulted in a heterogeneous magma body ( We have modelled simple mixing of two end members: our least evolved basaltic andesite (52 When geochemical evidence is ambiguous, petrological data can be used to identify mixed magmas (e.g. When geochemical evidence is ambiguous, petrological data can be used to identify mixed magmas (e.g. The compositional distributions of Santiaguito plagioclase phenocryst cores are shown in A single-peaked distribution centred at An A single-peaked distribution centred at An The continued, albeit diminished, presence of a minor component of magmatic enclaves in lava extruded since the 1940s suggests that a small degree of mixing continues, with either more primitive magma or xenocrystic fragments, but, based on the unimodal distribution of plagioclase core compositions, we suggest that progressive mixing of a mafic magma into a silicic host has not been the dominant influence on the bulk rock petrology or geochemistry over recent decades. In summary, mixing between plausible end members can account for the range of major element compositions seen at Santiaguito. However, while the petrological evidence for mixing is clear in products from 1902 to the 1940s, it is less so for lavas from the 1940s onward. Fractional crystallization undoubtedly plays a major role in the Santa María/Santiaguito system (e.g. Fractional crystallization undoubtedly plays a major role in the Santa María/Santiaguito system (e.g. Although large amphibole phenocrysts can be abundant in some other dome-forming systems (e.g. Soufrière Hills, Montserrat, This crystallizing assemblage (plagioclase, enstatite, amphibole, and titanomagnetite) was used alongside whole rock compositions of our most and least evolved historic samples (1902 dacite with ~ We have used our modelled assemblage along with In summary, our whole rock geochemical data suggests that chemical evolution from andesite to dacite in the Santa María/Santiaguito system is consistent with fractional crystallization and removal of amphibole and plagioclase from the magma at depth ( In preceding sections, we focused on changes in the geochemistry of magma over time. Here, we relate these changes over time to geochemical changes within the subsurface magmatic plumbing system. The petrological evidence suggests that Santiaguito magma fractionates within the deep crustal storage zone ( The petrological evidence suggests that Santiaguito magma fractionates within the deep crustal storage zone (Supplementary Fig. F; Research by Research by The dacite erupted in 1902 and during the early dome-forming cycles of Santiaguito lavas resulted from ~  The establishment of an open and continuously erupting system, as shown in Santiaguito is a complex of lava dome and flow units that has been continuously active since 1922. Santiaguito lavas are porphyritic andesites and dacites. Except for the obvious differences in vesicularity etc. associated with the very different eruptive styles, the earliest dome-forming Santiaguito rocks are geochemically and mineralogically identical to dacitic pumice erupted in 1902 from the parent stratocone, Santa María. A mafic component of the 1902 pumice, considered partly responsible for triggering the eruption, is evident in these Santiaguito units as discrete enclaves. The bimodal distribution of plagioclase phenocryst core compositions in early Santiaguito lavas shows that they were strongly influenced by magma mixing in addition to fractional crystallization. The silica content of Santiaguito magma has decreased steadily over the 80 A change from heterogeneous to homogeneous plagioclase phenocryst population between Santiaguito Cycles III and IV (the 1930s and 1940s) suggests that all the hybridized dacite left from the 1902 eruption was extruded in the early dome-forming cycles. As activity has continued at Santiaguito, progressive tapping of the stratified deep storage zone has resulted in extrusion of progressively less evolved magma ( The following are the supplementary related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Funding was provided by