This paper explores the applicability of an innovative electrochemical cell with a solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) with mesh electrodes for the electrochemical oxidation of a low conductivity solution (0.022 mS/cm) containing crystal violet (CV) dye compound as model pollutant in a range concentration of 25–100 mg/L. The system anode/membrane/cathode is formed by Nafion membrane sandwiched between a Ti/RuO2 cathode and a BDD anode. The dependence of applied current, stirring rate, supporting electrolyte and temperature has been investigated. The experimental results showed that the electrochemical cell with SPE is suitable for the treatment of solution with a very low conductivity since the CV solution was completely mineralized with an energy consumption of about 60 kWh m−3. Furthermore, the process was under charge transfer control for low applied current, becoming mass transfer control around 1 A. The addition of supporting electrolyte as Na2SO4 (0.6 and 1 g/L) and NaHCO3 (1 g/L) to the solution decreased the removal rate due to the presence of competitive reaction and scavengers media. The evolution of nitrogen compounds during the electrolysis shows that at the end of the process the 80% of initial N has been converted in nitrate and ammonium, indicating the formation of volatile compound.Wastewater treatment is one of the currently most important challenge under a technological and economical point of view. The development of processes able to remove the highest amounts of pollutants, reducing sludge and costs is a key factor. Classical treatments, such as biological and chemical approaches, have shown their limits, mostly as regards the high production of sludge, which can require a special disposal. One possible solution is offer by electrochemical technologies, in particular by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) that allow the treatment of several kind of residuals (pharmaceutical, textile, urban and industrial) also containing persistent pollutants The improvement of economic feasibility of electrochemical treatments is crucial and one fundamental parameter to define the energy consumption is the solution conductivity. In fact, the long treatment time typically required by electrochemical methods make the conductivity closely related with the running cost of the industry. The increase of conductivity leads to a lower voltage losses and energy consumption. Nevertheless, residual from different productive sectors (e.g. pharmaceutical industries, food industries, hospital wastewaters, etc.) do not fulfill the high conductivity solution condition. To get over the restriction due to the conductivity and to provide a rapid oxidation of pollutants with high current efficiencies different approaches have been proposed such as the adoption of capillary cells, the use of microfluidic cells Considering these aspects, the SPE solution, in which a solid polymer electrolyte is placed between anode and cathode, has received a great attention and technological development, guaranteeing an adequate current flux in a solution with low conductivity, with promising removing results. Possible drawbacks of its employment are the cost of membrane and possible formation of fouling. Currently, in electrochemical industry, solid polymer is especially employed to produce ozone For example, Kraft et al. In this article, the oxidation of synthetic solution with low conductivity containing crystal violet (CV) as model organic compound was investigated using a Nafion® membrane as solid polymer electrolyte in order to optimize the experimental conditions and reduce the energy consumption. The membrane was sandwiched between a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and a Ti/RuO The synthetic solution was made by dissolving 50 mg/L of CV (C All electrolyses were carried out in an open, undivided, cylindrical glass cell containing 500 mL solutions under stirring by a magnetic bar with an adjustable rotation speed. The stirring ranging between 100 and 1100 rpm, that corresponds to mass transfer coefficient k Anode/membrane/cathode sandwiches were constructed by sandwiching a Nafion® N324 ion exchange membranes between a Nb/BDD mesh anode and a Ti/RuO The degradation of CV was followed by spectrophotometric measurements using a JASCO V 630 spectrophotometer with cells a 1 cm path length. The Total Organic Carbon (TOC) of the initial solution and electrolyzed sample was evaluated with a Dr. Lange DR3900 system. Chemical analyses of the water-soluble inorganic ions (NH The mineralization current efficiency (MCE in %) for each treated solution at a given electrolysis time t (h) was then calculated from TOC values, using the following relationship where The number of electrons ( The specific energy consumption ( The applied current intensity is one of the parameters that influence the electrochemical oxidation of organic pollutant. To find the adequate operating conditions for the degradation of CV by the electrochemical oxidation method, a series of experiments were realized using different current intensity ranging from 0.5 A to 1.5 A during 100 min of electrolysis time.  An increase of the applied current from 0.5 A to 1.0 A favoured the oxidation of the dye and the electrolysis time for the complete CV removal decreased from 100 to 70 min, due to the greater production of hydroxyl radicals. On the contrary, a further increase of the current at 1.5 A did not produced significant improvements in the oxidation rate. This fact indicates that at low currents, the oxidation is under charge transfer control, while at higher currents the process became controlled by mass-transport and an increase of the applied current does not favored the oxidation of the pollutants but increase the secondary oxygen evolution The effect of reaction Moreover, an increase of the applied current resulted also in an increase of the cell potential that was 8.1 V, 8.7 V and 9.8 V at 0.5 A, 1 A and 1.5 A, respectively. The energy consumption for the removal of 97% of CV was 13.5 kWh m In order to better understand the effect of the mass transfer of the oxidation of CV, some electrolyses were performed at 1 A with four stirring rates in the range 100–1100 rpm and the results are presented in  To evaluate the effect of higher concentration of supporting electrolyte, different amounts of Na Na Persulfates are strong oxidants at high temperature, but at 20 °C they have lower oxidation potential than As regard HCO However, the addition of supporting electrolyte also has the advantage of lowering of the cell potential. For example, the cell potential was 8.7 V in double distilled water, 8.5 V in tap water, 8.0 V in 1 g/L NaHCO  After 30 min, for example, CV was reduced by 94%, 87% and 63%, proving a gradual loss in percentage of CV removal when rising the initial concentration from 25 to 100 mg/L. Nevertheless, an increase in dye content accelerates the CV removal rate (the amount of dye that is removed per time period), owing to the decrease in the mass-transport limitation. In fact, after 30 min, for example, 23.5, 43.5 and 36 mg/L of CV were already oxidized from starting solutions containing 25, 50 and 100 mg/L of dye, respectively.  In order to verify the effectiveness of the SPE cell for the mineralization of the CV, an electrolysis was performed at 1.0 A with a stirring rate of 800 rpm at 20 °C and the TOC of the solution was monitored during the oxidation.   One of the key parameters for electrochemical process, which requires an investigation and optimization, is the energy consumption (kWh m The sandwich BDD anode/Nafion/TiRuO Results show that the process was under charge transfer control for low applied current, becoming mass transfer control around 1 A. This conclusion has been also supported by experiments performed at different stirring rate in the range of 100–1100 rpm and an applied current of 1 A. The presence of supported electrolyte as a strong influence on CV removal, increasing the necessary time to obtain a complete oxidation of pollutant, due to the presence of competitive reaction and scavengers media. The evolution of nitrogen compounds during the electrolysis shows that at the end of the process the 80% of initial N has been converted in nitrate and ammonium, indicating the formation of volatile compound. A further confirmation that the sandwich system with SPE is suitable for the treatment of solution with a very low conductivity has been obtained from energy consumption analysis, which indicate an energy demand about 60 kWh m The authors acknowledge Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 