Background
                  Intra-articular tibial plafond fractures are a challenge for the surgeon with generally poor functional outcomes. The purpose was to assess the impact of this injury on patient quality of life (QOL), as well as analyzed the predictor factors.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective study of 47 patients with mean age of 44.4 (range 18–79) years. Patients were also invited for new clinical and radiological assessments. QOL was evaluated by the Short Form-36 questionnaire and compared to the standard in the age-matched general population. Olerud-Molander ankle score (OMAS) was used to assess function. Digital radiographs were evaluated for linear and angular measurements.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up at last visit was 5.3 (range, 2–10) years. Sequelae were present in 20 patients, mainly including chronic pain (8) and arthrosis (10). Articular step-off at least 2mm was present in 20 patients had, articular gap greater than 2mm in 13, and malalignment in 5. Worse reduction was obtained with external fixation. QOL was significant lower than age-matched general population (p=0.000). Main prognostic factors of worse SF36 were fracture severity, reduction quality and arthrosis. A strong significant relationship was found between SF36-physical and OMAS scores (p=0.000).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Intra-articular tibial plafond fracture had a dramatic impact on QOL. Among the predictors of unsuccessful outcome, the reduction quality was the only modifiable factor by the surgeon. The OMAS had a predictive value on the prognosis of QOL.Tibial pilon fractures, or plafond fractures, are injuries difficult to manage. Among these injuries, intra-articular fractures are the most complex and are usually associated to metaphyseal and articular comminution, displacement and severe soft tissue injury The prognostic factors of outcome reported in the literature are very varied and controversial. The complexity of fracture, reduction quality, soft tissue injury, complications or treatment method have been described in some studies as relevant factors influencing outcomes Thus, the available evidences on the QOL after intra-articular tibial pilon fracture are very limited. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of intra-articular tibial pilon fracture on the QOL from the patient's perspective irrespective of the surgical treatment used, as well as identify the prognostic factors that influenced these outcomes. A retrospective study was designed to assess QOL after intra-articular tibial pilon fracture. The study was approved by our institutional ethics committee and informed consent was required. All consecutive patients who underwent surgery for a tibial pilon fracture at our centre between January 2006 and December 2014 were potentially eligible for study. The inclusion criteria were intra-articular tibial pilon fracture, AO/OTA Forty-seven patients met the inclusion criteria. There were 24 men and 23 women with a mean age at injury of 44.4 (range, 18–79) years, and 62% of patients were aged between 20 and 60 years. The cause of injury was a fall from a height in 33 patients, traffic accident in 10, sports in 2 and work accident in 2. At the time of injury, 36 patients were occupationally active and 11 retirees. Comorbidities were not relevant in any patient. According to AO/OTA classification, there were 26 type-B fractures and 21 type-C. One patient had associated talus osteochondritis. There were 7 open fractures, 3 grade-I, 1 grade-II and 3 grade-III by the Gustilo system Medical records were reviewed to collect patient characteristics on admission, operative procedures, and postoperative data. All patients had routine clinical and radiological assessments for at least 2 postoperative years. All patients had injury radiographs and CT scans which were reviewed to identify the fracture patterns. Clinical assessments had been performed pre and postoperatively at 1, 4, 6 and 12 months, and then annually. In addition for the present study, patients were invited to return between 2 and 10 years after the injury for clinical and radiological re-examination. All patients accepted and they signed an informed consent. The assessments were performed by an independent observer who was not involved in the treatment. The primary outcome was QOL at last follow-up as measured by the Short Form-36 (SF36) health survey validated for our country Likewise, ankle functional assessment was performed using the Olerud-Molander ankle score (OMAS) Based on the literature, many potential factors influencing outcomes were collected in order to control for confounding, including demographic and social factors, fracture type, complications, perioperative data, and postoperative functional and radiological data at the time of the last follow-up. Ankle motion (dorsal flexion and plantar flexion) was measured with a goniometer. According to Teeny and Wiss Standard radiographs (anteroposterior, mortise and lateral views) were made in each postoperative visit. Routine postoperative CT was not made, by high cost and unnecessary for postoperative evaluation or measurements, unless complication had occurred. All radiographs were digitized and using a computer tool for linear and angular measurements. All measurements were performed by the same independent observer to minimize error. Quality of reduction was classified as successful or unsuccessful based on the radiological criteria of Teeny and Wiss A posteriori statistical power was calculated by estimation of relative risk in the cohort study of 47 patients. Using an estimated fracture prevalence of one per thousand (samples ratio of 0.001), assuming a standardized average difference of 0.45 (clinical relevant difference of 15 points in health-related quality of life), and confidence level of 0.05, a power of 81% was obtained. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software v. 20.0. Normality was tested by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. For univariate analysis, chi-square with Yates correction or non-parametric Mantel-Haenszel tests were used for categorical variables, and t-Student or Mann-Whitney The mean postoperative time between injury and the last evaluation was 5.3 (range 2–10) years. The mean ankle immobilization time was 38.8 (range 1–55) days. There were early complications in 21 patients (44.7%), such as skin necrosis in 6 patients, wound superficial infection in 5 and none deep infection, and causalgia (acute reflex sympathetic dystrophy) in 10 patients. Sequelae were present in 20 patients (42%) including chronic pain in 8, ankle instability in 1, arthrosis in 10 (of which only one patient has arthrosis prior to fracture which worsened), and ankle fusion due to posttraumatic arthrosis in 1. There was delayed union in 8 patients and nonunion in 1 (bone healing at 12 months after subsequent surgery). Mean overall treatment time, from injury to definitive medical discharge, was 12.9 (3–43) months. At last radiological evaluation ( At last follow-up, the mean SF36-physical score was 54.8 (SD 21.1) and SF36-mental score 63.3 (SD 22.1). All domains on the SF36 demonstrated a significant negative effect of the injury on general health compared to those parameters in age-matched healthy controls ( Regarding SF36-mental outcome, in univariate analysis ( At last follow-up, the mean OMAS ( The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of intra-articular tibial pilon fracture on the QOL irrespective of the surgical treatment used. Thus, the variables analyzed were those with potential influence on quality of life. Therefore, comparison of clinical results between different surgical methods was not performed. Tibial pilon fractures are difficult to treat injuries. The results described in the literature are generally poor especially in intra-articular fractures, Prognostic factors for this deterioration in QOL are varied and controversial in the literature. In the present study the main unsuccessful outcome factors were fracture type C, use of external fixation, reduction quality, arthrosis and limited ankle motion. Sociodemographic factors or occurrence of complications were not significant predictors. Contrary, Mitkovic et al. In the present study, occurrence of complication had no significant impact on the QOL or ankle function. Similarly, other studies on intra-articular pilon fractures also found a high complication rate In the present study there was a strong significant association between ankle functional outcomes measured with OMAS score and those referred to quality of life measured with SF36. This seems to indicate the predictive value of OMAS on the prognosis of quality of life. This finding was only reported in the literature by another study on bimalleolar fractures This study had several limitations, mainly its retrospective design, therefore some other variables could not be analyzed and no comparative data were available on the preinjury status. Given the low prevalence of this topic, a prospective study was not proposed. Another limitation was the sample size which was attributed to the low prevalence of this type of fracture. The study had an adequate power for main variable, but some predictors had a wide IC which does not negate the statistical significance, but it is difficult to know exactly how much the variable influenced. Other limitation was the medium-term follow-up and there was the possibility of change in patient outcomes over the time. However, most studies had similar or lower follow-up and other authors reported that the greatest decrease in QOL after these fractures occurred between 6 and 12 postinjury months and then the outcomes improved progressively until the second year Ankle functional outcome was significantly related to fracture type, surgical procedure, reduction quality as well as ankle motion and occurrence of arthrosis. OMAS score was strong associated to SF36 scores. Except general health, all SF 36 domains were far below the mean normal population-based norms. The main predictors of QOL were fracture type, reduction quality and occurrence of arthrosis. None.