Layered magnetoelectric (ME) composite structures of varying geometry consisting of PZT and Ni layers were prepared by electrodeposition. Trilayered plate, bilayered and trilayered cylindrical structures’ ME performance was compared. The ME voltage coefficient increased with Ni layer thickness. Cylindrical composites show better ME performance than the plate structures with the same magnetostrictive-piezoelectric phase thickness ratio under high applied magnetic fields at resonant frequencies. Bilayered cylindrical Ni/PZT structure has the best performance in axial mode under high magnetic field, exhibiting linear ME voltage coefficient dependence on the applied magnetic field, which makes it a promising candidate for magnetic field sensor applications. Cutting the ring along the axial direction drastically decreased its performance.Layered multiferroic materials are candidates for the next-generation multifunctional devices There are two major types of synthesized ME composites: particulate and layered composites. Particulate composites include sintered and organic solidified composites Layering has become a popular method for synthesizing ME composites. This is especially true for joining together piezoelectric and piezomagnetic phases by bonding or hot pressing Liu and co-workers made layered composites with improved ME effect by bonding layers of varying geometry Electrodeposition is widely used for making composite functional materials with good interfacial adhesion. Electrodeposition process has the ability to coat complex shapes, while controlling coating thickness and composition Three different structure types were made, and include planar trilayered Ni/PZT/Ni, cylindrical trilayered Ni/PZT/Ni, and cylindrical bilayered Ni/PZT composites, presented schematically in Sample preparation consisted of the following steps: first, the PZT was mechanically cut into desired shape, then polarized (vector For the cylindrical trilayered ME composite, shown schematically in Ni electrodeposition process is described in detail elsewhere The magnetoelectric measurement system is described in detail elsewhere For these cylindrical layered samples, two ME voltage coefficients Three plate structures with varying Ni layer thickness, shown schematically in   We also measured the dielectric constant and the dielectric loss of the laminated Ni–PZT–Ni composite as a function of frequency, and found that the dielectric constant discontinuity happens at the resonance frequency of 90 For the trilayered plate For the magnetoelectric layered structure, the interfacial bonding between magnetostrictive and piezoelectric layers is important to their ME performance. Liu et al. theoretically predicted the influence of interfacial bonding layer thickness and its shear modulus on the magnetoelectric effect  Similar to the trilayered plate structure in the vertical direction, there are two peaks observed for the trilayered cylinder, one at low, and one at higher magnetic fields. The cylindrical ME composite can be divided into a series of infinitely small vertical units. In the axial mode, the fields are applied along the axis of each infinitesimal cylindrical unit, so a sharp  The ME effect for the cylindrical composites at low magnetic fields (<0.16 In our previous study, the cylinder can be simplified as an infinitesimally plate layered structure, the boundary conditions of the cylinder are not the same as those of the plate layered structure The self-bound state can promote the ME effect in layered composites, which strongly depends on the mechanical coupling between the layers. Guo et al. reported that the clamped ME composites had a larger ME voltage coefficient than those in the free state The dependence of The bilayered cylinder ME composite frequency dependence of A linear relationship between the ME voltage coefficient and the magnitude of applied magnetic field at resonance frequency was observed For ferromagnetic materials, like Ni, line magnetostriction As shown in The method of electrodeposition was used to make layered magnetoelectric composites of varying geometry. The disadvantages of using an intermediate binder layer (nonrigid contact, fatigue and aging) were eliminated, which enhanced the magnetoelectric effect. Electrodeposited plate Ni/PZT/Ni layered composites have ME properties comparable with bounded Terfenol-D/PZT structures. Electrodeposition provides means for synthesizing various ME composites with complex geometries, so that better ME properties can be obtained though structural design. Cylindrical layered composites have larger ME voltage coefficient compared to the plate layered composites due to their complex geometry. The longitudinal model of the plate structure is similar to the axial mode of the cylindrical composite. The linear relationship between This work was supported by the Major Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50572006, 50802008 and 50874010), and by the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing, China (Grant No. 2073026), and by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (Grant No. 20060420152), and by Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (Grant No. 0509). Alex A. Volinsky would like to acknowledge support from NSF (Grant No. CMMI-0600266).