A method for three-dimensional crack propagation by the numerical manifold method (NMM) is analyzed. With the help of mathematical cover and physical cover, no Heaviside function is required to describe a crack in the NMM, and so the three-dimensional crack propagation with NMM can be analyzed being similar to that of two-dimensional cases. Mohr-Coulomb criterion with a tensile cut-off is used to analyze failure state of each crack tip line. A simplified method for determining the final propagating direction is described. According to the final propagating direction, a non-local crack tracking method is used to determine the updated crack tip line. Quadrilateral or triangle tracking method is selected according to the situation during propagation. For boundary faces, in order to make the deformed surface remain plane, new generated faces are needed to be triangulated. Three numerical examples are analyzed to validate the proposed 3D crack propagation method. The numerical results are all in good agreement with those results in the existing studies. Furthermore, a concrete gravity dam under water pressure with an overload factor is simulated and the progressive failure process of the concrete gravity dam is obtained, which demonstrates the applicability of the proposed method in practical engineering.The study on 3D crack propagation is very meaningful since the prediction of the 3D crack propagation is still very challenging nowadays, such as the determination of crack path and the generation of updated element information. Many researchers have been devoted to the study on 3D crack propagation, and then various numerical techniques have been put forward to overcome the difficulties when predicting 3D crack propagation and great successes have been achieved. The earlier studies mainly focused on the preset path of propagating crack, however, an actual problem is often complex, and for a cracking simulation of brittle and quasi brittle materials such as rock and concrete cracking, the crack may be extended along the path of arbitrary complexity, namely the so-called moving discontinuities problems in computing mechanics. A crack path was often difficult to know in advance and thus a large number of interface elements were set in the continuous boundary Recently, new numerical methods, such as the extended finite element method (XFEM) In the present paper, a non-local tracking method with the NMM is proposed to simulate 3D crack propagation. Only physical covers, manifold elements and crack loop shells are required to be updated. Mohr-Coulomb criterion with a tensile cut-off is used to analyze failure state of each crack tip line. A simplified method for determining the final propagating direction is described in the present paper. According to the final propagating direction, a non-local crack tracking method is used to determine the updated crack tip line. Quadrilateral or triangle tracking method is selected according to the situation during propagation. For boundary faces, in order to make the deformed surface remain plane, new generated faces are needed to be triangulated. Three numerical examples are analyzed to validate the proposed 3D crack propagation method. Furthermore, a concrete gravity dam under water pressure with an overload factor is simulated and the progressive failure process of the concrete gravity dam is obtained, which demonstrates the applicability of the proposed method in practical engineering. The concept of 3D NMM is similar to that of 2D case and is mainly based on three basic concepts, i.e. the mathematical cover, the physical cover and the manifold element. The mathematical cover system is a set of small patches that must large enough to cover the whole considered physical domain. Each small patch is termed as a mathematical cover, denoted by A mathematical cover can be tetrahedron, hexahedron and other polyhedron. Without loss of generality, a hexahedral mesh is selected in the present paper. In order to explain these three concepts clearly, an example is illustrated in The weight function of 3D NMM is defined on mathematical cover while the displacement functions are defined on physical covers. On each mathematical cover On each physical cover The discrete and integration of considered domain are finally based on each manifold element and thus the global displacement A non-local tracking method in 3D NMM should be in accord with the basic concept of the NMM. For a manifold element with a non-across crack, in order to maintain the original shape of the crack, the surfaces of the crack are kept without branches deletion. In addition, in order to facilitate the application of the present method, the crack tip functions for discontinuous displacement in these manifold elements are not included. Although some errors will be produced during this simplification, these errors can be controlled in an acceptable range as long as mathematical covers are small enough. Before crack propagation, the potential failure manifold elements should be determined whether they will be failure in the next time step. The Mohr-Coulomb criterion with a tensile cut-off has been widely used in rock mechanics and has been successfully applied in 2D crack propagation As introduced in Section At present, there are mainly four strategies for tracking crack surface, such as the fixed tracking method For a domain meshed with tetrahedron, a 3D simplex integration scheme is often selected step by step while a Gauss numerical integration For a boundary inconsistent manifold element with hexahedral mathematical covers, a deformed polygon surface with four or more vertices may be not in the same plane, and in order to facilitate further analysis such as grid updating in multi-step calculation, the surface is required to be triangulated, as shown in Three numerical examples are illustrated to show the validity and applicability of the proposed 3D crack propagation method. The simulation results are discussed by comparing them with theoretical studies or experimental results. A concrete gravity dam under water pressure with an overload factor is also described to show the applicability of the present 3D crack propagation method in engineering. Here, the comparison and validation are focused on the fracturing process and the final failure patterns. Thus the density of the considered material are assumed to be consistent with The first example is a thick rectangular plate with an edge crack subjected to tensile loading The second example is a flattened pre-notched thick disc subjected to compressive loading on the top and bottom, as shown in The third example is a cantilever beam with an edge crack subjected to tensile loading The previous three subsections are illustrated with three classical examples to validate the present method. Herein a concrete gravity dam model without initial crack is described to show the application of the present 3D crack propagation method in engineering, as shown in The progressive failure processes of the concrete gravity dam for various time steps are shown in In the present paper, a method for 3D crack propagation by the NMM is described. Taking the advantages of mathematical cover and physical cover, no Heaviside function is required to describe a crack in the NMM, and thus the 3D crack propagation with NMM can be analyzed being similar to that of 2D cases. Only physical covers, manifold elements and crack loop shells are required to be updated. The Mohr-Coulomb criterion combined with a tensile strength criterion is applied to determine whether an element will be failure in the next time step and a crack propagates in a direction perpendicular to the direction of maximum principle stress. For a kinked crack tip line, a simplified method for determining final propagating direction is described in the present paper. According to the final propagating direction of crack tip line, a non-local crack tracking method is used to determine the corresponding updated crack tip line. Quadrilateral or triangle tracking method is selected according to the situation during propagation. For boundary faces, in order to make the deformed surface remain plane, new generated faces are needed to be triangulated. To demonstrate the utility of the proposed technique, three numerical examples are conducted to validate the proposed 3D crack propagation method by comparing them with theoretical studies and experimental results. They are all in agreement with previous numerical studies and experimental results. From the results of the proposed 3D crack propagation method, it can be seen that a crack can stop inside a manifold element which is more flexible to simulate 3D crack propagation with arbitrary length at each time step. A concrete gravity dam under water pressure with an overload factor is described to show the applicability of the present 3D propagation method in engineering and progressive failure process of the concrete gravity dam is obtained. However, some issues such as the dependency of cover size, concave contact, failure criterion effect and singular asymptotic functions are not considered. Therefore, further efforts are required to develop this 3D crack propagation method for the numerical manifold method in the future. This work was supported by the Project funded by