Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), an aliphatic alcohol, is widely used as a frothing reagent in coal flotation but it has safety concerns owing to its low flash point (approximately 40°C). In the present work, we studied a cyclic alcohol, methyl cyclohexanemethanol (MCHM) with a high flash point (approximately 110°C) and compared its coal flotation performance with that of MIBC. A bottom-driven mechanical flotation cell and two coking coals of distinct floatability, namely A and B, were used. Collectorless flotation tests were carried out with process water for coal A. Flotation tests with diesel as collector at 50ppm were carried out with simulated process water (0.03M NaCl solution) and highly saline water (0.5M NaCl solution), respectively, for coal B. The flotation results showed that MCHM was an effective alternative to MIBC. The highly saline water produced sufficient frothing, obviating the necessity of adding MIBC or MCHM. To understand the effect of frother type and concentration and NaCl concentration on the coal flotation performance, we conducted surface tension measurement for the frother solutions, characterized the dispersion of air near bubble sparger, and measured the stabilities of froth, foam, and foam film. It was found that MCHM was more surface active and more capable of stabilizing froth and foam than MIBC. Foam film stability measured at a broad range of interface approach velocity followed a bell-shaped trend and at a given NaCl concentration, the observed peak foam film stability of 15ppm MCHM was higher than that of 15ppm MIBC. Increasing NaCl concentration from 0.03M to 0.5M had the effect of stabilizing the froth and foam but destabilising the thin foam film.Run of mine coals are often beneficiated to remove mineral matter before being sold to market. Fine (< In Australia, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), an aliphatic alcohol, is the most widely used frother in coal flotation plants ( A potential substitute for MIBC is 4-Methyl cyclohexanemethanol (MCHM), a cyclic alcohol, with a high flash point (approximately 110 Recycling the process water or using saline water is an integral part of current coal flotation practice. The process water or saline water contains a significant amount of inorganic electrolytes which interact with frother. There has been growing interest in understanding the effect of water quality on coal flotation performance. It has been recognized that use of process water or saline water especially under a turbulent condition can increase flotation recovery and reduce frother dosage ( In the present work, we studied MCHM, the cyclic frother, and compared its coal flotation performance with that of MIBC using two coking coals of distinct floatability, namely A and B. Coal A is readily floatable without adding any collector, therefore, collectorless flotation tests were carried out. Flotation of coal B would require diesel as collector and the optimum collector dosage was 50 Diesel (Caltex) was used as collector, and MIBC (98% purity, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and MCHM (98% purity, TCI America, USA) were used as frother. De-ionised water was used throughout the experiments, except for the coal flotation tests that used the actual process water in the collectorless flotation described in A bottom-driven mechanical flotation cell (112 Collectorless flotation tests were carried out for coal A. The solids content of the coal slurry fed to the flotation cell was 6 Flotation tests with diesel as collector at 50 The plot of cumulative yield (Y Following the work of The selectivity index ( In the present work, we determined the optimal frother dosage by considering the following two criteria: The minimum concentration of frother that yields a maximum value of the The minimum concentration of frother that reaches a maximum value of Next, the recovery-grade curves obtained at respective optimum conditions were compared using the Fuerstenau upgrading curve. An Gas dispersion characteristics of MIBC and MCHM solutions were compared using a high-speed camera (Phantom V2011). Bubble swarms at the bottom of the bubble column (diameter The high-speed camera and a 100 The gas holdup was estimated by off-line image analysis using a method similar to what was used by The froth stability was measured using a modified Bikerman test method ( The dynamic foam stability was measured using the Once the equilibrium foam height was measured, the air supply was cut off to determine the static foam stability. The time taken to see the appearance of a foam-free liquid surface at the centre of the foam was measured as an indication of the static foam stability. The surface tension isotherm of MCHM solution in the presence of 1750 The thin foam film was formed in a bike-wheel film holder in the presence of 0.1 We measured the stability of the thin foam film at various interface approaching speeds which were controlled by compressing the film by adjusting air pressure inside the glass vessel. More details can be found elsewhere ( A series of mechanical flotation tests for coal A in the absence of collector were carried out to compare the performance of MCHM and MIBC at the concentration range of 3–18 A  By jointly considering  The  Comparing In the presence of 29,200  The importance of the gas dispersion properties (i.e., bubble size, number of bubble, gas hold up, bubble surface area flux) on flotation have been advocated by many researchers (   In what follows, we measured the dynamic froth stability as it also plays an important role in flotation ( We also measured the dynamic (   A close relationship between foaminess (foam formation rate) and the surface elasticity was reported by many researchers (  It is believed that the froth and foam stabilities are largely determined by the stability of thin liquid film (lamellae) inside the froth phase. With bubble bursting at the top of the froth and the variation in bubble size along the height, one can expect that the interface approaching speeds of the lamellae throughout the froth phase are not uniform ( In the presence of 1750  Compared to MIBC, the higher foam film stability of MCHM is consistent with its higher froth and foam stabilities achieved when all other conditions were kept the same. With increasing electrolyte concentration, however, the observed increasing trend of froth and foam stabilities and air dispersion were not consistent with the decreasing trend of foam film stability. Similarly, The results presented hitherto suggest that what determines froth stability and the separation efficiency in coal flotation with highly saline water can be irrelevant to surface active species and there is a need to improve the understanding of the interaction between electrolyte and hydrodynamic turbulence. This paper compares the coal flotation performance of MCHM with that of MIBC. A series of mechanical flotation tests were carried out using two different coking coal samples. The optimum frother dosage was determined by finding the minimum concentration of frother that yields the maximum value of We investigated the surface tension, gas dispersion and the stabilities of froth, foam, and foam films to understand the effect of frother type and concentration and electrolyte concentration on the coal flotation performance. The results show that MCHM is more surface active than MIBC and in the presence of 1750 Foam film stability measured at a broad range of interface approach velocity followed a bell-shaped trend and at a given NaCl concentration, the observed peak foam film stability of MCHM was higher than that of MIBC. In the presence of 1750 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from