Thirty-six patients with intra-articular displaced calcaneal fractures were examined to determine both physician- and patient-based outcomes.
                  Three groups were selected. Group A was treated with open reduction and internal fixation, group B was treated with open reduction internal fixation and supplemental bone graft augmentation and the patients in group C were treated with plaster cast immobilisation and no formal operative treatment.
                  All cohorts were well matched for age, sex and severity of injury. Patients were evaluated using both the American Foot and Ankle Society Scoring System (AFASS) and the short form 36 (SF-36). Minimum time to follow up was 4 years. No significant difference was observed between the three groups with regards to pain and functional outcomes using the AFASS score (P>0.05). No difference was observed between the three groups using the SF-36 score (P>0.1). A statistically significant difference was observed, using radiological criteria, between both groups A and B when compared to the non-operative group C. The rate of wound infection in groups A and B was 31.5%. No correlation was found between the SF-36 score and the AFASS score. No correlation was found between the radiological score and either the SF-36 or the AFASS score.
                  This study has found that the conservative treatment of calcaneal fractures can produce satisfactory outcomes with lower morbidity than surgically treated fractures.The os calcis is the most commonly injured tarsal bone; however, the literature is often conflicting and vague as to the correct treatment for these fractures. Recent reports on the treatment of calcaneal fractures promote internal fixation. In a study by Leung et al., a comparison was made of clinical outcomes and radiological scores of both operated and conservatively treated groups at 3 years follow-up Other authors have claimed that the conservative management of these fractures gives better outcomes than internal fixation. Kundel et al. in a retrospective review of 63 patients reported that there were more complications in those patients treated operatively than those treated without operative intervention The confusion in interpreting these studies may be due to varying outcome assessment tools being employed. The present investigation is an attempt to resolve the conflict in the reported literature by using a standard assessment tool. This study is a retrospective, hospital database review of three methods of treating intra-articular calcaneal fractures. Of 111 patients identified, 36 patients were selected, matched for age, sex and severity of injury ( Three groups were identified from the cohort. Ten were treated by open reduction and internal fixation (group A). Twelve patients were treated by open reduction and internal fixation supplemented by bone allograft (group B) and 14 patients were treated conservatively with the use of a plaster cast (group C). The difference in treatment methods within the same cohort characterises the three senior authors’ preferred method of treatment and represents the conflict surrounding treatment of these fractures, an issue this paper attempts to address. Of those patients treated with internal fixation, a standard lateral incision was used Both subjective and objective outcome-scoring systems were used. The American Foot and Ankle Society Scoring System (AFASS) We identified 10 patients who met inclusion criteria to group A. There were seven males and three females with a mean age of 39 years. All patients in this group were treated by open reduction and internal fixation. All patients had similar fracture patterns ( Twelve patients were treated by open reduction internal fixation supplemented by bone allograft (group B). Of the nine males and three females within this group, the mean age was 37 years. Fourteen patients were identified who met the criteria for group C. Of these, four patients did not have a pre-operative CT scan performed but were included in the study as their post-operative CT was used to classify the fracture pattern. Ten males and four females with a mean age of 41 years were treated with plaster cast immobilisation. The mean age, sex and degree of injury were matched for each group so that the combined study population was regarded as a cohort to out-rule bias ( Using the AFASS score, hind foot motion and alignment were slightly better in both groups A and B than in group C. There was, however, no statistical significant difference between the three groups regarding functional outcome. In addition, there was no significant statistical difference in the total AFASS scores between any of the three groups ( Radiological outcomes were slightly better in surgically treated patients when an anatomic reduction of subtalar joint was achieved; however, this was not associated with either a better AFASS or SF-36 score ( Overall complications were higher in those that underwent internal fixation with an incidence of wound infection of 31.5% ( Traditional methods of evaluating calcaneal fractures are being challenged, and particularly so when several methods of outcome assessment are used resulting in recommendations that are difficult to interpret. The treatment of the intra-articular fractured os calcis highlights the inherent difficulty in interpreting the recommendations within the contemporary literature. Open reduction and internal fixation, with and without bone graft augmentation, as well as conservative treatment have all been advocated. This study attempts to address these concerns by evaluating three treatment modalities using a standard patient assessment score in addition to a physician’s outcomes assessment score. Several authors have investigated the role of internal fixation in treating the os calcis fracture. Sanders et al. Supplemental bone graft in calcaneal fractures was first reported by Palmer Despite evidence supporting the use of internal fixation, several studies continue to uphold the value of conservative management in these fractures. Buckley and Meek One problem with the current and previous literature is that the method of evaluating outcomes varied thus confounding any meta-analysis or meaningful results. The present study uses the SF-36 score as a standard patient assessment tool. This has been validated previously by Fitzpatrick and coworkers No apparent benefit in open reduction was observed in this study. This may be due to the degree of injury required to produce these fractures. High energy intra-articular fractures cause substantive articular destruction that can neither be appreciated at the time of index presentation, nor following reduction. It is the degree of articular destruction that is a predictor of outcome. Internal fixation and anatomic alignment may facilitate a favourable radiographic appearance, but has little impact on articular regeneration or repair. This is substantiated by our finding that although there was a better radiological score in group B, this did not affect overall patient satisfaction, or physician outcome. However, the confounding variable in our study is moderate-term follow-up (4 years). Poorer radiological scores in group C may be a harbinger of decreased functional outcomes at a future time point. In the era of cost containment, future treatment strategies for calcaneal fractures will be directed by outcome analysis, cost and risk–benefit paradigms. Within this current study, open reduction and fixation were associated with longer hospital stays, increased hospital costs, particularly with the use of allograft and a high wound complication rate. The role of internal fixation may therefore be questioned by health trusts and insurance companies. This study has found that conservative treatment continues to be a safe, effective and cost-efficient treatment modality. Open reduction may be employed to improve significant loss of normal bony alignment, but at medium-term, follow-up has no apparent benefit to functional outcomes or patient-based outcomes. The authors recognize that degenerative arthrosis is an evolving process, and that at 4 years follow up, clinical and radiological symptoms and signs may not yet be present. Nevertheless, on the basis of the data presented, we cannot condemn the conservative management of these complex fractures.