Capillary forces caused by nano-bubbles at the surface have a considerable influence on the adhesive forces acting on hydrophobic surfaces. The existence of these bubbles is proved on smooth surfaces after preparation processes like solvent exchange or temperature change, which leads to supersaturated liquids and the formation of nano-bubbles on the surface. On highly rough surfaces, the typical procedures like topography scans to evaluate the existence of nano-bubbles are not possible. The approach taken in this study is the validation of nano-bubbles on rough surfaces by force/distance measurements using contact-mode atomic force microscopy. Afterwards, the obtained data is analyzed and subdivided into classes of interaction mechanisms, which represent either capillary forces or non-capillary forces. With this strategy, nano-bubbles can be identified that occur after the addition of the liquid to rough surfaces. The results indicate relations between the frequency and snap-in distance and the measured macroscopic wetting angle. This correlation allows an estimation of the probability of occurrence of capillary and non-capillary forces.The modeling of adhesive forces is a necessary step in predicting results in many process engineering operations. This is possible using the assumption of an ideal system, which implies ideal, smooth surfaces and known geometries. With that, the calculation of van-der-Waals as well as acid/base and capillary force interactions becomes possible In real systems, surfaces are inhomogeneous and rough with unshaped geometries, which makes the exact prediction of forces impossible. Some approaches to close this gap – which are limited to disperse van-der-Waals interactions – can be found in the literature. Rumpf developed a modified analytical formula to calculate the disperse van-der-Waals force between one particle and another particle with an added hemisphere, which serves as the rough element The influence of the wetting properties on the adhesive force can be calculated using the extended DLVO (XDLVO) theory if capillary interactions can be excluded. The theory connects the surface energies of the participating materials to the free energy of interaction. Hydrophobic systems have higher free energies than hydrophilic ones, leading to higher adhesive forces. This behavior is confirmed in several studies reported in the literature In addition to disperse and polar forces, capillary interactions due to nano-bubbles (also called nano-bubble bridging capillary force) can occur. These bubbles can be seen on smooth, hydrophobic surfaces after liquid exchange or temperature change, which result in a supersaturated liquid. The excess gas forms small bubbles at the surface. To detect such bubbles at smooth or nano-scale rough surfaces the topography and phase-contrast can be scanned using non-contact or taping-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) The resulting adhesive forces are measured with an AFM XE-100 from Park Systems using the colloidal probe technique. In this process, an alumina particle is glued onto the end of a tip-less cantilever. The particle has a diameter of about 25 As a counterpart to the particle, a sintered alumina plate is applied as a substrate. Both the alumina particle and the alumina substrate are silanized with Dynasylan The measurement setup is assembled in a liquid cell and the substrate sample is covered by the liquid. The liquid cell has a constant temperature of 20 The contact angle measurements use liquids and substrates identical to those in the AFM measurements. Surface energy values of the water/ethanol mixtures as well as the surface energy of the coated alumina, which are necessary for calculating the interfacial energy between the droplet and the substrate, can be found in the literature The mixture of water and ethanol is a non-ideal system. This is reflected, for example, in non-linear behavior with respect to density, surface tension, and viscosity of the mixture. The interfacial energy The interfacial energy decreases until an ethanol mass fraction of 0.3 is reached. Afterwards, it reaches a constant value of approximately 0 The assumption used can be proved by simulations which can be found in the literature The Langmuir approach can be used in the case of adsorption of monolayers to the surface, which is the case for ethanol in an aqueous liquid that is in contact with a hydrophobic surface Examples for force/distance curves recorded with the AFM are shown in Example (b) shows a single snap-in. At this point, the particle is spontaneously wetted by a gas bubble at the surface, and an attractive force arises due to the capillary interaction generated (see In curve (c), the particle attaches to the bubble, but no wetting occurs. This is displayed schematically in Even in case (b) where spontaneous wetting occurs a thin liquid film between the nano-bubble and particle surface exist. But after a very short time (below the time resolution of the AFM measurements) this film ruptures due to local roughness and surface inhomogeneities which can accelerate the drainage of the liquid. Also the size of the bubble influences the stability Curve (d) shows a measurement with a snap-in during the trace and multiple pull-offs when the particle is removed from the substrate. This is a combination of example(b) and (c), and indicates a capillary at trace and retrace. All force/distance curves which are carried out on the rough substrate can be subdivided into these groups. The measured force/distance curves are analyzed by a programmed MATLAB routine. In this way, the highest force of attraction is determined for each test run and classified into the acting mechanism established.  The wide range of forces detected for each kind of interaction leads to an overlapping of the distributions. For this reason it is possible – with a certain degree of probability – that the measured disperse and polar force was higher than the force caused by a capillary attraction.  For all ethanol concentrations, the mean adhesive forces are higher if any capillaries are present during trace or retrace. This is expected due to the higher capillary forces compared to disperse and polar forces. The decrease in the capillary force with increasing mass fraction has two reasons. The interfacial energy between the liquid and the solid decreases, leading to smaller gas bubbles on the surface. Therefore, smaller capillaries appear and lower forces are measured. Furthermore, the surface energy between the liquid and the gas bubble also decreases, which reinforces the effect.   The results of this study indicate that an exact calculation of adhesive forces on real surfaces is still not possible. This is caused by the force distribution of each kind of interaction due to roughness and surface inhomogeneity and by the probability of each kind of interaction. This study shows the influence of the wetting angle on the probability of occurrence of a certain kind of interaction. The forces were measured using atomic force microscopy with the colloidal probe technique against a rough substrate as counterpart. Afterwards, the forces measured were categorized by the method described. The results indicate a wide distribution of the forces in general and for each kind of interaction due to roughness and an inhomogeneous surface. Decreasing the wetting angle by adding ethanol to the liquid leads to lower mean adhesive forces for all kinds of interactions. Changing the wetting angle also influences the probability of each kind of interaction. Lower wetting angles increase the frequency of exclusively disperse and polar forces, while the number of capillary interactions decreases. In general, the results show the challenge in calculating adhesive forces on rough, non-ideal surfaces due to the distribution of the forces and type of interaction. The authors would like to thank the