In recent years, the application of non-conventional water sources, such as seawater in metal extraction industries located in arid and semi-arid areas have been increased. In this study, the integration of seawater in the solvent extraction of copper hydrometallurgical operation was investigated. Accordingly, two commercial copper extractants, Acorga M5774 and LIX 984N were used in extraction of copper from a sulfate–chloride solution containing seawater. The results showed a higher concentration of copper in the pregnant leach solution (PLS) as a result of using seawater; however, the concentration of Fe and the impurities that are associated with seawater, i.e., Cl, Na, Mg, Ca, K were also increased. The presence of the chloride ion resulted in a higher copper extraction at pH values below 1.5. Synergistic system of LIX 984 N and Acorga M5774 (1:1 vol mixture 15% v/v) was found more efficient in extraction of copper at pH values below 1.5 in comparison to sole LIX 984 N and Acorga M5774. Similarly, the extraction of impurities (Na, Mg, K, and Cl) were observed less when a mixture of extractants were used. The results showed that increasing the chloride concentration had a negative effect on copper extraction as the organic to aqueous ratio was decreased. The copper extraction mechanism was also studied using single LIX 984N, Acorga M5774, and a 1:1 vol mixture of these two extractants at chloride concentrations of 0 and 40 g/L. Increasing the chloride concentration resulted in the involvement of more organic molecules.The water crisis is one of the main emergencies threatening humanity. This issue is more severe in arid and semi-arid areas In these water-stressed regions, usage of non-conventional water sources such as wastewaters, sewage water and seawater have been increased At present, the ore dressing plants are the largest water consumers in copper extraction industry Hydrometallurgical extraction of copper consists of three main stages: leaching, solvent extraction (SX), and electrowinning (EW) SX is the most common process for the purification and concentration of the copper-bearing solution. Selective separation of copper from other impurities is done by an organic extractant according to the following reaction: where HR In recent years, few studies have been done on the effect of chloride ion on copper solvent extraction Aqueous solutions were prepared by leaching of a mixed malachite and azurite ore (2.98 wt% total copper) using dilute sulfuric acid solutions. In order to prepare a PLS solution at different chloride concentrations, leaching tests were conducted using either distilled water or the seawater. The chemical composition of the used seawater is shown in PLS representing chloride concentration of 0 g/L, 20 g/L, and 40 g/L was obtained by leaching the copper ore using solution prepared with the addition of sulfuric acid (95% pure, Merck Germany) to distilled water, seawater, and concentrated seawater, respectively. Concentrated seawater was prepared by evaporation of a known volume of the seawater to the half, to obtain a solution with a chloride concentration of 40 g/L. The leaching experiments were performed under similar conditions. The leaching operating parameters are shown in As is evident in The organic extractant used in this study was an industrial-grade LIX 984N, and Acorga M5774 diluted in kerosene. LIX 984N is a 1:1 vol mixture of LIX 84-I (ketoxime) and LIX 860-I (aldoxime), and Acorga M5774 is an ester-modified aldoxime. Each extraction test was performed by mixing 20 ml of the aqueous solution with a variable amount of organic solution according to the known organic to aqueous ratio (O/A), for 10 min at room temperature (25 ± 2 ℃). Aqueous and organic solutions were mixed using a magnetic stirrer (Alfa HS/860, Iran). The effect of the equilibrium pH and O/A on the extraction of copper and impurities were assessed from 0.5 to 2.5, and from 0.125 to 4, respectively. The pH was monitored using a pH meter (AZ 86552, Taiwan) with a 3 M KCl electrode. The pH was adjusted by addition of either sulfuric acid (300 g/L) or ammonia (25% v/v, Sigma Aldrich). The extractant concentration was constant at 15 v/v % in all the experiments. The synergistic effect of the extractant, was studied by keeping the total extractant concentration at 15% v/v. After each extraction test, the loaded organic was stripped four times with a 180 g/L sulfuric acid solution at O/A of 1 for 10 min. The element’s concentration was determined using the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry, ICP-OES (Varian-735, United States). The chloride concentration was determined by Ion Chromatography Assay, ICS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). The extraction mechanism was investigated using two different methods; slope analysis and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, FT-IR (Avatar 370 Thermo Fisher, United States). For slope analysis, extraction tests were performed at different extractant concentration ranging from 7.5 to 25 v/v %. The extraction percentage (E), distribution coefficient (D), and separation factor (β) were determined using the following formulas: The effect of the chloride concentration and equilibrium pH on the copper extraction with O/A of 1 using LIX 984N (15% v/v), Acorga M5774 (15% v/v) and 1:1 vol mixture of LIX 984N and Acorga M5774 (15% v/v) are shown in This different extraction behavior may be justified through the variation in the activity of the aqueous species. By increasing the chloride concentration, a considerable amount of cupric (Cu The copper extraction efficiency using three studied organic solutions (LIX 984N, Acorga M5774, and LIX 984N + Acorga M5774) at various equilibrium pH and chloride concentrations are shown in The effect of the equilibrium pH at different chloride concentrations on impurities extraction using LIX 984N (15% v/v), Acorga M5774 (15% v/v), and the mixture of LIX 984N and Acorga M5774 (1:1, 15% v/v) are shown in As shown in section 3.1.1, both of the extractants and their mixture are an excellent copper extractant at equilibrium pH values above 2. Therefore, the ability to extract other elements alongside copper can be the key factor in differentiation of these extractants. As shown in The effect of equilibrium pH on Cl extraction is shown in Another important aspect of the incorporation of seawater in hydrometallurgical extraction of copper is the concentration of the entrained impurities to the loaded organic. As discussed earlier, through the application of seawater, a considerable amount of impurities entrained in the PLS. As shown in The inclusion of a wash or scrubbing stage between extraction and stripping stage is an effective way to control the impurity level in the electrolyte The effect of the organic to the aqueous ratio on the copper extraction using three different organic extractants at various chloride concentrations is shown in The effect of the chloride concentration at various O/A ratios using LIX 984N, Acorga M5774, and mixture of extractants are also shown in Synergistic effect of LIX 984N and Acorga M5774 on copper recovery at three different O/A ratios and different chloride concentrations are shown in The extraction mechanisms have been determined via slope analysis and FT-IR measurement. The extraction mechanism of copper has been studied for the PLS containing 0, and 40 g/L of chloride ion. These methods have been used in several publications in determining the extraction mechanism of copper The extraction of a metallic cation by the extractant is shown below: in which M By assuming that the concentration of MR By substituting Equation Accordingly, at constant extractant concentration, by plotting logD versus pH, n can be calculated. Then, at a fixed pH, by varying extractant concentration, m can be determined. However, the above equation cannot be used for determining the stoichiometric constants of the mixture of the two extractants. The synergistic extraction equation may be written as: In a similar manner for a single extractant, Equation It should be noted that the formation of other organic complexes of M metal is possible, but it is assumed that one organic molecule of each extractant substitutes an acidic proton with copper. Since the final equation is independent of the complex organic concentration, the application of this equation can be considered correct. As stated earlier, the copper extraction mechanism has been studied from PLS containing 0 and 40 g/L chloride ion. In the absence of chloride, the dominant copper species is Cu As shown in Based on these explanations, the plausible mechanism of the copper extraction using LIX 984N, in absence and presence of the chloride can be written as: Similar procedure was taken to determine the extraction stoichiometry of copper using Acorga M5774. The results are shown in Accordingly, the copper extraction mechanism using Acorga M5774 in the absence and presence of chloride can be written as: It is evident that, in the absence of chloride ion, copper was extracted in a similar manner using both LIX 984N and Acorga M5774. However, more organic molecules of Acorga M5774 were dimerized in comparison to LIX 984N when the concentration of chloride increased to 40 g/L. Equation The addition of the chloride ion has resulted in dimerization of more Acorga M5774 molecules in the synergistic system. The number of the organic molecules of LIX 984N, even by addition of chloride, has remained constant similar to the absence of chloride ion case. As stated earlier, LIX 984 N is a 1:1 vol mixture of LIX 84-I and LIX 860-I. FT-IR spectra of fresh 15% v/v LIX 984N, loaded LIX 984N in the absence of chloride ion, and loaded LIX 984N in the presence of 40 g/L of chloride ion are shown in FT-IR spectra of a fresh Acorga M5774 15% v/v and a loaded Acorga M5774 in the presence and absence of the chloride ion are shown in Finally, FT-IR analysis of a fresh and loaded organic mixture of LIX 984N and Acorga M5774 (1:1, the total concentration of 15% v/v) are shown in Based on the results of the FT-IR analysis, the interaction of metal ion with the organic molecules hvae only affected the O-H characteristic band. No variation in the other characteristic bands of the extractants was observed. Accordingly, it can be concluded that the extraction of ions mainly happened by cation ion exchange, which can confirm the proposed mechanisms in the previous section. Variation in the spectra of both extractants before and after extraction indicates that both of these extractants have an active role in metals extraction. Moreover, no difference in the spectrum of the loaded extractant in the presence and absence of chloride ion was observed. For illustration purposes, based on the obtained results, a schematic presentation of copper extraction using LIX 984N, Acorga M5774, and the mixture of the two extractants are shown in This study was primarily performed to investigate the incorporation of seawater in hydrometallurgical extraction of copper from copper ores. Leaching with the seawater results in a higher copper dissolution and generates a PLS richer in concentrations of copper but also the presence of impurities such as Cl, Na, Mg, K, and Ca, as the major ions in seawater. Considering the transfer of chloride ion from sea water to the PLS, in this study, the effect of the chloride ion on copper solvent extraction using LIX 984 N, Acorga M5774, and a 1:1 volumetric mixture of the two extractants were investigated. The results showed that increasing chloride concentration had a positive effect on copper extraction at equilibrium pH values below 1.5. Synergistic effect of the LIX 984N and Acorga M5774 was more pronounced in copper extraction at pH values below 1.5 comparing to the sole usage of LIX 984N and Acorga M5774. At pH values higher than1.5), no noticeable difference in the copper recovery was observed regardless of the extractant type and chloride concentrations. The extraction of Na, Mg, K, and Cl was observed significantly lower than the sole usage of the extractant comparing to the mixture of LIX 984N and Acorga M5774. The effect of O/A in extraction stage was also investigated and showed that increasing chloride concentration had a noticeable negative effect on a copper extraction when the O/A is decreased. The copper extraction mechanism was studied at chloride concentrations of 0 and 40 g/L. Increasing the chloride has resulted in the dimerization of more organic molecules.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge A. H. Shahnazi for his valuable suggestions and providing some of the material and reagents. We would like to express our sincere appreciation to Dr. S. Firoozi for his guidance, suggestions, and encouragement.