Mechanochemical synthesis of amorphous Fe72Al5Ga2C6B4P10Si1 alloy starting from different initial ingredients (pre-alloys mixture Fe–Al–Ga–P, Fe–C–B–Si and previously melted ingot of the aimed composition) was investigated by X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis. Comparison between the resulting amorphous powders and rapidly quenched (RQ) amorphous ribbon of the same composition as regards the thermal stability, diffraction halo width and crystallization products was carried out. Complete amorphization was achieved only if pre-alloys mixture was used as initial ingredients. On thermal stability this amorphous phase is practically identical to amorphous RQ ribbon and has sufficiently wide range between the temperatures of glass-transition and crystallization.Multicomponent bulk metallic glasses are a new class of materials in which the amorphous state in centimetre-sized volumes is obtained by conventional metallurgical methods In this work the possibility to obtain the well-known soft-magnetic alloy Fe The high-energy planetary ball mill of AGO-2U type with plate rotational frequency 685 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were taken with Co Kα-radiation using step scanning DRON-4 diffractometer. While analyzing the samples with amorphous phase (AP) a modification of Rietveld full profile fitting method Thermal stability and crystallization of AP on heating was investigated by differential thermal analysis (DTA-7 HT thermal analyzer) in He atmosphere. Heating rate was 100 The alloy target composition was to be obtained by interfusion of two pre-alloyes Fe Amorphisation of each pre-alloy on mechanical milling was investigated prior to MS of their mixture. The pre-alloys XRD patterns after processing in the ball mill are presented in DTA data ( The MS of pre-alloys Fe The ingot of alloy under consideration was also milled directly. The XRD patterns of milling products in relation to processing time are presented in The data for amorphization kinetics are presented in To compare the amorphous phases obtained by different methods the integral width of 1st diffuse halo maximum was measured. It is common knowledge that halo angular coordinate (center of gravity) depends on average interatomic distance 〈 As it follows from the data presented in All samples obtained by milling of various initial ingredients were subjected to thermal analysis and the results were compared with DTA-behaviour of RQ reference ( The DTA data corroborate that amorphization of pre-alloys mixture by MS takes place. The transition to amorphous state under treatment with The DTA data on powders obtained by ingot milling revealed a broad peak with noticeably low transformation temperature From the Crystallization products of amorphous phases obtained by different methods were compared. These products are very close to each other as can be seen from Mechanochemical synthesis of two pre-alloys led to AP formation and energy intensity affected only the time of transition to amorphous state. The AP obtained by MS is shows lower halo width than the RQ ribbon but resembles it as regards The DTA-curve for intermediate milling time (curve 2, Two different amorphous phases probably differ in chemical composition. It is likely that each pre-alloy give rise to the related AP at the onset of transformation. As this takes place, it can be suggested that the presence of pre-alloy Fe The analysis of crystallization products gives indirect evidence that powders include segregations with composition close to Fe According to XRD, in the course of ingot comminution attention, very fast amorphization occurs. However the presence of slight and smeared heat effects instead of sharp exothermic crystallization peak points to transformation into amorphous-like or ultrafine nanostructured state with nanometer-sized crystallites. Judging from phase content after DTA, milled ingot may consist of ultrafine mixture of phases Fe The possibility of obtaining alloy Fe The complete amorphization is feasible only if the pre-alloy mixture of Fe This work was partially supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research RFBR (Grants No. 04-03-32700).