Primary halo zone is an important theory for prospecting the deep blind ore body and predicting resource potential. The common description of primary halo zone of multiple elements is based on their behaviors during hydrothermal alteration or mineralization. A geofluid with multiple elements, which are Bi, Cu, Pb, Zn, Cd, Ag, and As (bearing Ni and Mo), is prepared to simulate the dispersive transfer of elements in a hydrothermal fluid–granite reaction at 15 MPa, 100 °C using a new-constructed core flow-through pressure vessel reactor. Core granite samples with 5 cm long after water-rock reaction are cut into ten sections to analyze their major oxides and trace elements. According to experiment results and the method of immobile plateau, we determine that Al and Ti are immobile elements during the water-rock reaction and the hydrothermal alteration of granite is a mass gained process. The mobility index (MI) of each of experimental elements is calculated based on the immobile component Al2O3. The sequence of experimental elements is from As to Ag, Pb, Zn, Cu, Bi, Ni, Cd, and Mo, which are sorted on their values of MI in these reacted granite cores from near to far end respecting to the reaction fluid. This result is consistent with the empirical sequence of zonation of primary halo elements which is derived from the statistical results from 58 gold deposits in China. The denudation coefficient of primary halo zone (Zf or Zfe) is proposed to assess the degree of approaching to ore body on these experiments, which is the averaged MI ratio of front halo elements to ore-body halo elements. The denudation coefficient of primary halo zone is applied on the cross section of gold ore-body hosted in the granite of the Linglong gold deposit located in the Jiaodong peninsula of eastern China. The degree of approaching to the gold ore body is clearly illustrated by the denudation coefficient of primary halo zone.Primary halo zone is an important theory for prospecting the deep blind ore body and predicting resource potential ( The common chemical indices for describing the process of alteration are divided into two types. One type is constructed on the major oxides of samples to indicate the degree of alteration, such as Alteration Index (AI; The sample of granite for simulation experiment was collected from Linglong biotite granite located in the Jiaodong Peninsula, China (  The reaction fluid in S3 is prepared by dilution of standard solution, which represents a geofluid with multiple elements in low contents. In fluids of S4 and S5 which represent hydrothermal fluids with high metal contents, Bi, Cd, Ag and As are made by dilution, while, Cu, Pb and Zn are made from the dissolution of standard solid (nitrate). The element concentrations of fluids adopted in this simulation are listed in Based on the reactor system reported by Temperature, pressure and reaction time were set in these simulation experiments and are listed in In S3, when the fluid–rock interaction had experienced 13 h, the effusion took place at the trailing end of granite core, thus brought S3 to the end of simulation. Accordingly, in the subsequent S4 and S5, the reaction time was set at eight hours to avoid the effusion and model the multi-component dispersed transformation in granite medium, rather than the transformation dominated by fluxion. Remarkably, the S4 and S5 are characterized by the same experimental parameters, indicating that they are repeated experiments. All granite core samples before and after the experiment were respectively cut into 10 sections at 0.5 cm interval from the near to far end to the reaction fluid, with each sample labeled as 1 to 10 (e.g. 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110 in Granite samples were analyzed at the Hubei Geological Research Laboratory in China. Major oxides (SiO The accuracies of the above-mentioned analyses were monitored using standard materials. Most of the analytical methods yield accuracy higher than 5% for major oxides and 10% for trace elements. The relative errors of repeated sample analyses are less than 10% and most exhibit less than 5% of relative errors. The bulk analyses of major oxides, rare earth elements and other trace elements of the reacted granite samples are listed in Major oxide contents (including LoI), WIG, Al WIG index is constructed on the major oxides of sample to describe the degree of granite weathering ( Compared with the No. 1 sample (before simulation), the contents of major oxides (including LoI), and values of WIG, Al The behaviors of major oxides (including LoI), WIG, Al The contents of Fe At 0.25 cm (the near end), the content of SiO Although the contents of Al At 0.25 cm, the content of SiO The similarity of behaviors of the above indices including contents of major oxides in samples of No. 4 and No. 5 indicates the simulation experiments show a well reproducibility. The reaction time is 13 h on sample No. 3 which reacted with hydrothermal fluid containing low concentration of metal ions, while the time is 8 h on samples of No. 4 and No. 5 which reacted with hydrothermal fluid containing high concentration of metal ions. The contents of major oxides keep invariable in No. 3, but contents of SiO The contents of rare earth elements of granite samples before and after experiments are plotted in The contents of REE (such as La, Gd, Yb, and ∑REE) keep invariable within the analysis errors from the near end (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm) before and after the experiments. Furthermore, the REE patterns of all the granite samples are very similar. This indicates that no fractionation of REE occurs during the hydrothermal alteration of the granite in these experiments. The reactor and connected wires used in the experiments are made from hastalloy B. Therefore, Ni and Mo must be dissolved into the hydrothermal fluids. Here Ni and Mo along with Bi, Cu, Pb, Zn, Cd, Ag, and As are viewed as target elements in the experiments. The spatial distributions of target elements before and after the experiments are shown in The behaviors of target elements in sample No. 3 (with slight alteration) relative to in No. 1 (before experiment) are as follows: The contents of Pb, Zn, Cu, Ag, and As show no clear changes from the near (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm) to the reaction fluid within the homogeneous errors of the granite. At 0.25 cm (the near end), the contents of Cd and Bi increase clearly. The contents of Ni and Mo are decreasing gradually from the near (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm). The behaviors of target elements between No. 4 and No. 5 are similar as follows from the near (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm) to the reaction fluid: The contents of Pb, Zn, Cd, Bi, As, Ni, and Mo are decreasing gradually. With respect to No. 1, the contents of As in both samples are depleted. The contents of Ag show no clear changes from the near (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm) to the reaction fluid within the homogeneous errors of the granite excluding at the 4.75 cm in No. 5. The contents of Cu show no clear changes from the near (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm) to the reaction fluid within the homogeneous errors of the granite excluding in sample No. 5. That is, a clear difference of Cu contents occurs between No. 4 and No. 5. A worse reproducibility in Cu contents is observed in the experiments. The spatial distributions of other nine trace elements before and after the experiments are shown in The contents of nine elements including Nb, Th, Y, V, Be, Sr, W, Sn, and Sb show no clear changes from the near (0.25 cm) to far end (4.75 cm) to the reaction fluid within the homogeneous errors of the granite before and after the experiments. The contents of the other ten elements including Ta, U, Sc, Co, Cr, Li, B, Ba, Rb, and Hg show similar behaviors. No. 1 is the granite sample before reaction. The average contents of elements among ten sections (0.25 cm–4.75 cm, interval at 0.5 cm) from No. 1 is used to represent the element contents in the granite before reaction, which is labeled as S1. As the samples of No. 4 and No. 5 are set as repeated experiments, the average contents of elements in the same section between No. 4 and 5 are used to represent the element contents in the granite after reaction, which is labeled as S45. That is, the average sample of 401 and 501 in According to the results of major oxides, S1 represents fresh granite, while S45-1 represents the granite in strong degree of hydrothermal alteration, and S45-2 in weak. These three samples are selected to investigate the immobile elements during the hydrothermal alteration of the granite. The common method used to determine immobile elements during geochemical process is the isocon diagram ( In the diagram of S1/S45-1, three plateaus can be recognized as Al-Ti, La-Y, and Ta-U-Th-Yb. In the diagram of S1/S45-2, two plateaus can be derived as Nb-La-Th-Y and Al-Ti-Yb. Only plateaus of Al-Ti and La-Y occur in both diagrams. The alteration degree of S45-1 is stronger than that in S45-2, but the plateau of La-Y in both diagrams is ca. 0.9. Therefore, we exclude La and Y as immobile elements and select Al and Ti as immobile elements during the simulation experiments. According to the Al and Ti immobile elements, the mass ratios of S45-1 and S45-2 to S1 are calculated as 1.17 and 1.02, respectively. Both ratios, which are larger than 1, indicate that the hydrothermal alteration of the granite in this simulation is a mass gained process. Although Al The mass transfer of elements can be presented by Mobility Index ( The spatial distributions of mass transfer on mobility index ( According to For Ni and Mo, their In the sample S45, the mass of Cd, Bi, and Zn is clearly gained ( In the sample 3, the gained mass of Cd is decreasing from the near to far end to the reaction fluid, until In these experiments, components of the two sections near to the reaction fluids were altered clearly, while components of the other eight sections (from the third to the tenth) are similar to those of their parent rock. Here the first, second, third and ninth sections are selected to represent the strong altered, weak altered, light altered, and parent samples to assess the mass transfer of elements on In the third and ninth section in sample 3, the  In these experiments, the sequence of target elements on According to the empirical primary halo zones in gold deposits ( According to the idea that the ratio of front halo elements to ore-body halo elements can be used to evaluate the denudation degree of ore body ( The both denudation coefficients on primary halo zone,  The Jiaodong Au province, located in the Jiaodong peninsula of eastern China, is the largest Au mining and production area in China ( Here we selected the No. 53 vein in Linglong gold deposit to test the denudation coefficient on primary halo zone. The cross section of the No. 53 vein at −130 m level along the No. 631 exploratory line is shown in The spatial distributions of nine target elements in the experiments and other primary halo elements, together with Au, Al Although the section crosses over the No. 53 vein ore body, the maximum content of Au in quartz-sulfide vein is only about 20 ng/g, which may be resulted from “the granular gold effect in chemical analysis”. Maximum contents of Pb, Zn, Cd, Bi, Mo, Cu, and As occur in the central section, while the maximum contents of Ni and Mo are at the 6th m and 13th m in the cross section, respectively. The minimum content of Al Although the behaviors of TiO The S1 sample in the above experiments is treated as the parent rock of the six samples in the cross section of No.53 vein, the element According to the empirical primary halo zones in gold deposits derived by The maximum value of The simulation experiment that focuses on the transfer behavior of elements in reaction between a geofluid with multiple elements (Bi, Cu, Pb, Zn, Cd, Ag, As bearing Ni and Mo) and granite is conducted at 15 MPa, 100 °C, using a new-constructed core flow-through pressure vessel reactor. Al and Ti are determined as immobile elements during the hydrothermal alteration of granite or mineralization, and the hydrothermal alteration of the granite is a mass gained process. The elements of hydrothermal fluid can be brought in and out during the hydrothermal alteration of granite. The zonation of primary halo elements is from As, to Ag, Pb, Zn, Cu, Bi, Ni, Cd, and Mo, which are sorted on their values of Based on the experiment results and zonation of primary halos, the denudation coefficient on primary halo zone, This work was financially supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at