The distribution, size, and amount of intermetallic compounds (IMCs) due to the effect of applied harmonic vibration during gas metal arc welding (GMAW) of AA-5083-H321 aluminum alloy joints were characterized in this research. For this purpose, three groups of specimens were welded, whereas nine samples welded while vibration was applied, and the other without vibration. The experimental procedures conducted to investigate the microstructure of the weld samples, including optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with a wavelength dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (WDS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), simultaneous thermal analysis (STA), and a statistic method based on Murakami's method of rating the inclusion. The results show that mean grain size of the non-vibrated welded sample was about 200 μm. While, it decreased significantly due to the application of vibration during welding, even to about 50 μm. It was also, observed that due to the conventional GMAW, IMCs such as Al6Mn and Al3Fe became fine, and was distributed as a semi-continuous network in the matrix. While, by the effect of vibration, the area fractions of IMCs were increased significantly. Moreover, with increasing the vibration force, IMCs were increased in both amount and size. On the other hand, the samples were welded with the vibratory force of 400 N, 2200 N, and 3150 N, the IMCs size was increased about 7 %, 13 %, and 26 % respectively, compared to that of the sample was welded without vibration.Due to so many great advantages of AA-5083 aluminum alloy, including good formability, weldability, and corrosion resistance, it has been widely used in the construction, automotive and marine industries. The alloy has an intermediate level of Mg content (4−5 wt %) as the main alloying element, and a relatively high content of Mn (about 0.8 wt %) [ Mg is the major constituent in the Al-Mg group of aluminum alloys, which achieve high strength with good ductility through cold work, together with. Mn and Mg have an additive effect on the mechanical properties [ GMAW as one of the fusion welding processes is widely used in the aluminum welding. Due to fusion welding, coarse dendrites formed in the fusion zone. In addition, the grain size of the weld center increased due to heat input [ Vibratory weld conditioning (VWC) is a process in which vibration force applied by flexing the workpiece with a sufficient amplitude during welding. Application of vibration during welding effected on solidification, accelerated heat transfer, and reduced thermal gradient in weld pool from weld center towards to the weld edge. Therefore, due to higher constitutional supercooling smaller grains generated [ To understand, the effect of cooling rate and harmonic vibration force on the both size and the amount of IMCs, AA-5083-H321 aluminum alloy samples were welded while vibration was applied during GMA welding in comparison to the conventional GMAW. In addition, to characterize the influence of vibration force on solidification of the weld metal and corresponding microstructure, a quantitative observation carried out by variations of vibration frequency in the range of 50 Hz, 75 Hz, and 90 Hz while vibration force were varied 400−3150 N consequently. The welding coupons were AA-5083-H321 aluminum alloy sheet thickening 5 mm, were cut into 400 × 150 mm Welding structure design and real assembly are shown in The welding structure was located on a vibration-isolated base to eliminate excessive vibration from the ground. The rubber pads were located under the welding structure (between the welding structure and the support table), to avoid the welding structure from lateral movement. So, the welding structure only can move in the Z direction (along the sample thickness direction). The samples were carefully cleaned using acetone prior welding to remove dirt and oil pollutions from the surface, followed by a stainless steel brushing. Finally, the samples were welded according to the parameters are presented in To study the effect of vibration force and vibration frequency on AA-5083-H321 aluminum alloy microstructure and IMCs distribution, ten series of samples were welded in butt-joint configuration, in which nine series were welded while vibration was applied, and one sample without vibration. Vibration frequencies were 50 Hz, 75 Hz, and 90 Hz and vibration forces were ranged from 400−3150 N, applied with an AC vibrating motor. A CA-YD-11814 (SINOCERA) accelerometer was mounted on the structure to record the vibration amplitude (V) with respect to the vibration time (s). A thermocouple was also attached on the part to measure temperature variation during welding ( To examine the microstructure of the weld samples, the images were taken from the cross-sections of the weld, by the ZEISS (Axioplan 2 Imaging) optical microscope. Prior the metalorganic examination, the cross-sections of the weldments were polished through a series of silicon carbide abrasive papers (400, 800, 1500, 3000 and 5000 grit). Subsequently, polishing was performed using alumina powder solution (0.25 μm), followed by treating with a reagent mixing 50 ml (1 ml H Moreover, a statistical method that is proposed by Murakami [ In the above equations, n is a number of inspections and j is counting number from 1 to n. The process of how to measure the maximum size of the IMCs in the samples is explained completely in [  With identical welding parameters, the heat input supplied by the MIG process is the same value for all of the samples. However, the item that influenced on the graph of the thermal cycle is vibration. When vibration was applied during welding of the samples, the weld metal convection increased, and the heat transfer rate increased too. It can be concluded that the maximum cooling rate was measured by the effect of vibration. Therefore, the thermal gradient from the weld center to the weld edge was decreased. By attention to Weld metal was mixed thoroughly and dendritic arms were broken under the influence of both the mechanical vibration and dendrite arms necking due to surrounded high-temperature molten metal. The microstructures of vibrated weld samples compared to that of the sample was welded without vibration are shown in It is noticeable that the presented microstructures belong to the top of the weld. As can be seen in the picture, the sample was welded without vibration, solidification was undertaken with the formation of columnar grains. By applying vibration during welding, solidification underwent serious changes, in which the columnar structure replaced by equiaxed grains. Vibration is the driving force to enhance heat transfer from the weld metal and dendrite arms degradation. From the above-mentioned consideration, when vibration frequency was varied from 50 Hz to 75 Hz and finally to 90 Hz and vibration forces were ranged from 400−3150 N, the smaller grains were generated. From the results, weld samples mean grain size was reduced significantly by means of vibration, compared with the sample was welded without vibration that is illustrated in Compared to the non-vibrated welded specimen, while vibration forces were increased from 400−1000 N at a given frequency of 50 Hz, mean grain size was decreased from 140−115 μm. Moreover, it was changed from 120−75 μm with increasing vibration force at a given frequency of 75 Hz. Finally, at a frequency of 90 Hz, mean grain size reduction was about 100−50 μm, while vibration forces were ranged from 1250−3150 N. At identical welding conditions, applied vibration caused grain refinement. Grain refinement under the influence of vibration during welding was occurred in such a way, including a higher nucleation rate due to dendrite arms fracturing and detachment. It is also could be possible due to the remelting at the neck of dendrites. External particles, which are presented in the weld pool act as a non-homogeneous nucleus. Surface grain refinement also either was occurred by instant temperature reduction or by removing heat entered the surface of the molten pool [ In order to investigate the effect of frequency and vibration forces on the distribution of IMCs, the samples were studied by SEM. On the other hand, IMCs were analyzed in terms of EPMA and area fractions. By attention to The chemical analysis of the IMCs, which are shown in The combination of microstructural observation and EPMA results allow us to identify the gray IMCs includes Al The characteristic of the solidification structure was to not only the content of Fe, Mn, Si, and Mg but also higher cooling rate and vibration force. IMCs distribution in the weld samples due to the combination of cooling rate and the applied mechanical vibration (i.e., given frequency of 50 Hz, 75 Hz, and 90 Hz, and vibration forces of 400 N, 2200 N, and 3150 N), are shown in According to the above-mentioned results, the vibration force has a serious effect on the changing of the number of IMCs. By increasing vibration force at each frequency, the area fraction of the IMCs has an increasing trend. Cooling rate plays a critical role in the refinement of IMCs. As mentioned earlier, higher cooling rate leads to IMCs diminish in both size and amount, as can be seen in the sample that was welded without vibration. In order to examine the effect of the cooling rate on the microstructure and the formation of IMCs in the welded samples, thermal analysis was conducted. At first, the samples were heated to 800 °C and then solidified at different cooling rates of 5 °C/min, 10 °C/min, and 40 °C/min, respectively. The results of thermal analysis of AA-5083 aluminum alloy sample are shown in Solidification starts with the formation of aluminum grains. The solidification temperature slightly decreases with the increasing cooling rate, due to the increased undercooling. According to the results, the microstructure of the weld metal not only influenced by the effect of alloying elements such as Fe, Mn, Si, and Mg but also the cooling rate as well as the vibration force, are very influential factors in solidification of the welded samples. It can conclude that the IMCs nucleation seriously depends upon the cooling rate, and they nucleation delays due to cooling rate increment. It is reported that [ XRD diffractometry utilized to confirm the microscopic examination. The results provide confidence in the phase classification based upon the metallographic study of the welded specimens. The results of XRD analysis in form diffractogram are shown in The FWHM (full width at half maximum) parameters were measured by curve fitting using a pseudo-Voight function, are shown in The other distinction that is evident in Since it is not easy to differentiate the size of intermetallic phases, using only one technique, besides light optical microscopy examination, observation by scanning electron microscopy of the weld sections were performed by attention to a statistic method. To analyze the size of IMCs in the samples, many statistic methods existed such a method discussed by Murakami [   The smallest IMCs were found in the sample which welded without vibration, about 9.9−12 μm. Finally, in the samples welded while vibration was applied, with increasing vibration force IMCs became bigger. On the hand, the sample was welded with a vibration force of 400 N, the IMCs size was about 10.6–12.8 μm. In addition, while the vibration force was 2200 N, the IMCs size was about 11.2–13.5 μm. Finally, while the vibration force was 3150 N, the IMCs size was 12.5−15 μm. By attention to the data was obtained from the statistic method, the applied vibration force during welding of AA-5083 aluminum alloy samples as a driving force led to IMCs generate and grown, in comparison with the sample was welded without vibration. On the other hand, the bigger IMCs can be formed under the influence of vibration. As mentioned previously, cooling rate was increased due to the application of vibration during welding, so it was expected that the higher cooling rate influenced on the IMCs in both of size and amount, leads to refine them even to inhibit, as shown from the thermal analysis data. However, by attention to the SEM micrographs of the welded samples, it can be seen obviously that IMCs in the vibration assisted welded samples were increased in both of size and amount, in which was approved by the data from XRD examination, and the above-mentioned statistical procedure. As a microstructural point of view, vibration force plays as a driving force that enters into the structure during welding, caused grain refinement and IMCs increment in size and amount. Vibratory GMA weld conditioning of AA-5083-H321 aluminum alloy was undertaken at the various frequencies of 50 Hz, 75 Hz, and 90 Hz, while vibration forces were ranged from 400−3150 N, and the summary of the results are mentioned below. Weld samples mean grain sizes was reduced significantly, when the vibration force was increased, compared with the sample was welded without vibration. The grain size at the top of the weld area of the sample was welded with conventional GMAW is 200 μm. Increasing vibration forces in frequencies of 50 Hz, 75 Hz, and 90 Hz resulted in a reduction of mean grain size about 140−115 μm, 120−75 μm, and finally 100−50 μm, respectively. In the base metal, IMCs are larger and dispersed as single particles in the structure where, in the welded samples, a semi-continuous network of IMCs can be observed. The area fraction of IMCs in the base metal is about 5 %. However, the area fraction of IMCs in the welded sample was lower in amount compared to the base metal. Final size and distributions of the IMCs in the weld samples depends upon the effect of both the cooling rate and vibration force. The vibration is more effective than the cooling rate, because it plays as a driving force that promotes IMCs to nucleate and grown. With applying vibration during welding, not only grain size was reduced significantly, but also the IMCs were increased in both size and amount, in which the samples were welded with the vibration force of 400 N, 2200 N, and 3150 N, the IMCs size increased about 7 %, 13 %, and 26 % respectively, compared to that of sample welded without vibration. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.