Context
                  The introduction of new lithotripters has increased problems associated with shock wave application. Recent studies concerning mechanisms of stone disintegration, shock wave focusing, coupling, and application have appeared that may address some of these problems.
               
                  Objective
                  To present a consensus with respect to the physics and techniques used by urologists, physicists, and representatives of European lithotripter companies.
               
                  Evidence acquisition
                  We reviewed recent literature (PubMed, Embase, Medline) that focused on the physics of shock waves, theories of stone disintegration, and studies on optimising shock wave application. In addition, we used relevant information from a consensus meeting of the German Society of Shock Wave Lithotripsy.
               
                  Evidence synthesis
                  Besides established mechanisms describing initial fragmentation (tear and shear forces, spallation, cavitation, quasi-static squeezing), the model of dynamic squeezing offers new insight in stone comminution. Manufacturers have modified sources to either enlarge the focal zone or offer different focal sizes. The efficacy of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) can be increased by lowering the pulse rate to 60–80 shock waves/min and by ramping the shock wave energy. With the water cushion, the quality of coupling has become a critical factor that depends on the amount, viscosity, and temperature of the gel. Fluoroscopy time can be reduced by automated localisation or the use of optical and acoustic tracking systems. There is a trend towards larger focal zones and lower shock wave pressures.
               
                  Conclusions
                  New theories for stone disintegration favour the use of shock wave sources with larger focal zones. Use of slower pulse rates, ramping strategies, and adequate coupling of the shock wave head can significantly increase the efficacy and safety of ESWL.Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) is a well-established treatment option for urolithiasis This paper is based on discussions held during the 4th Consensus Meeting of the German Shock Wave Lithotripsy Society A representative shock wave is shown in Initial fragmentation, similar to the fracture of any brittle object, represents a process whereby cracks form as a result of stresses generated by applied shock waves If the length of the pulse is smaller than the stone, then because of the geometry of the stone surface and its internal structure, the compressive phase of the shock wave will generate pressure gradients, which can result in shear and tensile stresses in the stone. These stresses can produce tearing and shearing to fragment that stone The fluid of the distal stone surface represents an acoustically soft interface, and the leading compressive phase will be reflected as a tensile wave. The amplitude of the tensile stress depends on the difference in acoustic impedance and the geometry of the stone surface. Using high-speed shadowgraphy to image stress waves in translucent model calculi ( If the focal spot is broader than the stone, then pressure waves travel in the fluid along the stone's surface. The leading compressive phase can create circumferential stress, which acts on the stone by quasi-static squeezing, inducing a binary fragmentation with the first cleavage surfaces parallel or perpendicular to the axis of shock wave propagation ( In addition to direct shock wave effects, cavitation generated by the negative pressure phase of shock waves occurs in the fluid surrounding stones and within microcracks or cleavage interfaces ( In dynamic squeezing, calculi are fragmented by shear waves created inside the stone driven by squeezing waves from the lateral stone borders ( Sapozhnikov et al. Fragmentation inflicted by shock wave lithotripsy accumulates during the course of treatment, leading to eventual destruction of the stone configuration According to acoustic properties, shock wave efficacy depends on various factors ( Four generating principles are used in clinical lithotripters. In electrohydraulic lithotripters (EHLs), a spark discharge between two electrodes produces the shock wave. EHLs have a great shot-to-shot variability, as the spark location varies as the electrodes wear down. The significance of this “jitter effect” is under debate In all extracorporeal lithotripters, energy from a large source is focused onto the stone. The size of and peak pressure at the focus depends on the source and the method of focusing (ie, aperture). It is difficult to compare different lithotripters in terms of acoustic output because the range of focal widths and delivered peak pressures is great ( Some lithotripter manufacturers have found ways to adjust the focal width to suit specific clinical applications. In the MODULITH SLX-F2 urologic workstation (Storz-Medical, Kreuzlingen, Switzerland), two focal sizes are realised by modifying pulse duration using the same electromagnetic source. The larger focal zone (50 Recent broad-focus, low-pressure lithotripters (LithoSpace [AST, Jena, Germany], lithogold [MTS, Konstanz, Germany], XX-ES [Xi Xin Medical Instruments, Suzhou, PRC]) attracted attention because research showed that focal width affects stone breakage in several ways Cavitation bubbles produced by the rarefaction phase of shock waves can decrease the energy of the following impulse through scattering and absorption. Once created, the cavitation bubbles decay in time, so the longer the period until the next shock wave, the fewer bubbles are presented to decrease the energy. Therefore, as the pulse rate frequency (PRF) increases, the number of bubbles in the path increases. It has been shown that increasing the PRF from 1.0 Cost reduction as well as modular and multifunctional lithotripter designs have changed the ideal coupling of the water bath of the HM3 lithotripter to coupling cushions, making coupling quality a key factor in its success ( Stones must be targeted effectively during the delivery of shock waves. This targeting is difficult because respiratory movement can carry the calculus out of the target zone. Immobilisation by high-frequency ventilatory respiration anaesthesia was clinically effective but too invasive. Systems with respiratory belts and shock wave triggering (Lithostar, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) have been abandoned because of increased treatment time. Cleveland et al. The debate continues as to which imaging system provides the best localisation. Fluoroscopy is the first choice because of the simplicity of isocentric C-arm systems compared with the HM3 lithotripter's in-bath converters ( Automated fluoroscopic localisation (LITHOSKOP [Siemens], Sonolith i-sys [EDAP TMS]) significantly reduces x-ray exposure Greenstein and Matzkin Low PRF prolongs treatment time significantly and may lead to inconvenience for patients not able to maintain a stable position. The analysis of seven RCTs ( Both in vitro and in vivo studies show advantages in the slow increase of generator voltage (“ramping”) during shock wave lithotripsy As long as the threshold is exceeded, P According to animal experiments as well as kidney perfusion models Basic research reveals a differentiation between cavitation and pressure-induced cell damage. Williams et al. Besides renal injury, ESWL is not completely free from other serious complications, such as gastrointestinal injury in 1.8% of cases, including colonic perforation or duodenal erosions Studies indicate that shear could be the initial insult leading to vessel rupture We note that for a given shock wave source, energy output and ED increase in parallel as the power level of the lithotripter is increased. In systems allowing creation of different focal zones, ED should be lower in larger focal zones New theories for stone disintegration favour the use of shock wave sources with larger focal zones. The use of slower pulse rates, ramping strategies, and adequate coupling of the shock wave head can significantly increase the efficacy and safety of ESWL (              The acoustic energy (E) of a shock wave pulse for lithotripsy should be determined within an area corresponding to the average size of urinary stones (ie, 12 Focal size corresponds to the location where peak pressure P Only one experiment supported the theory of spallation: the crack occurred a third of the way proximal to the distal end of test stones. Other findings, however, did not support this ( The energy dose—E