Hydrothermal mineralization can cause enrichment or depletion of elements in ore bodies and surrounding country rocks. Local metal-enriched rocks can become an ore body that can be mined at an economic profit. Therefore, understanding the spatial distribution of elements caused by mineralization is crucial for mineral exploration and resource assessment. In this study, a total of 24 representative samples were collected from different veins within the Tongchang ore body of the Dexing porphyry Cu–Mo Deposit. The objectives of this work were firstly to identify different vein types and secondly to evaluate the potential of multifractal parameters, constructed using the so-called method of moments, to characterize the spatial and temporal distribution patterns of concentration of elements on mineral surfaces, which may provide insight into hydrothermal mineralization and its effect on spatial and temporal distribution of element concentration. Based on the analytical results and previous investigations, the vein systems within the deposit can be divided into four main types as follows: (1) early quartz veins (A-type veins) related to K-feldspar alteration; (2) quartz-pyrite-molybdenite-chalcopyrite veins (B-type veins) related to chlorite+illite alteration; (3) quartz-pyrite-chalcopyrite veins (D-type veins) related to late phyllic (muscovite+quartz) alteration; and (4) the latest carbonate-sulphate-oxide veins (H-type veins). The multifractal distributions of concentration of chemical elements on the surface of pyrite crystals selected from veins of different types were investigated using digital images generated by means of ESEM. To achieve our goal, the distribution patterns of element concentration values of eight elements (Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, P, S, Si and Ti) on the pyrite surface selected from B-type, D-type and H-type veins and veinlets were represented by multifractal spectra. Several multifractal parameters were calculated; however, the most significant ones are ∆α and ∆α
                     L. These parameters are found to be higher in the D-type veins related to late phyllic alteration and mineralization in comparison with other veins and vein systems, indicating that the ore minerals containing Cu and Fe sulphides are highly enriched in D-type veins. This result is consistent with previous research on the area as well as new field observations, chemical and petrographic analysis carried out for this study. Therefore, the multifractal parameters, particularly ∆α and ∆α
                     L, appear to be promising to discriminate between mineralized veins developed during different stages of hydrothermal activity which led to development of the porphyry system at Tongchang ore body.The spatial distribution of ore-forming elements at different scales is of primary importance for ore exploration, and researches in recent decades have demonstrated that similarity exists at different scales or non-scale distribution, which can be investigated by fractal/multifractal theory. Many authors have studied ore deposits at regional, deposit, or ore body scales (e.g., Fractal theory ( In multifractal analysis, the combination of all fractal sets results in a multifractal spectrum that characterizes variability and heterogeneity of the studied variable. This multifractal procedure has been used to characterize variability of many natural phenomena, including characteristics of mineralization and mineral deposits ( The Dexing porphyry copper deposit is the largest and most typical of its kind in China, with about 1200 Mt of ore at 0.5% Cu, 0.01% Mo and 0.19 g/t Au ( The mineral assemblages, zoning and paragenesis of the hydrothermal minerals of the Dexing porphyry deposit as well as the origin and evolution of the porphyry system have been studied in detail ( In order to describe the hydrothermal alteration and the vein systems in the Tongchang ore body, a total of 24 representative samples ( Four main types of vein systems and associated veinlets were recognized as follows: (1) early quartz veins (A-type veins) related to K-feldspar alteration; (2) quartz-pyrite-molybdenite-chalcopyrite veins (B-type veins) related to chlorite+illite alteration; (3) quartz-pyrite-chalcopyrite veins (D-type veins) related to late phyllic muscovite+quartz alteration; and (4) the latest carbonate-sulphate-oxide veins (H-type veins) ( Several systematic studies have been concerned with element distributions on crystal surfaces ( In this study, the X-ray elemental mapping across the surface of a pyrite crystal was generated by energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer attached to the environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM/EDAX). Elements and X-ray lines used for analysis were S(K), Cu(K), Fe(K), Si(K), Mn(K), Ni(K), P(K) and Ti(K). The spectrometer was set to register a dot on the imaging device when it detected an X-ray of the appropriate energy creating a dot map for the spatial distribution of the corresponding element. Given sufficiently long collection times, the digital imaging capabilities of the machine can generate elemental dot maps that show relative X-ray intensity at each point ( The dot maps produced were processed in order to quantify numerically their scaling characteristics and to get information about the nonuniformity of the spatial distribution pattern of the element. Further image processing procedure involved the conversion of the elemental dot maps produced by the ESEM into a 256-grade black–and-white image of gray scale mode. The gray scale represents element concentration value. Recent researches have demonstrated that the element concentration in geochemical field possesses fractal/multifractal characteristics. Our present study focuses on the micro-distribution of elements on the surface of minerals, namely, pyrite, which is assumed to be closely related to genetic processes and various system properties. Our objective was to determine whether elemental distribution on the surface of pyrite crystals from different veins (B-type, D-type and latest H-type veins and veinlets) exhibit multifractal features in their spatial distribution and whether multifractal parameters could be used to describe and compare vein types from which the pyrite crystals were analyzed. To achieve this goal, the distribution patterns of eight elements (Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, P, S, Si and Ti) concentrations were represented by multifractal spectrum curves ( Since detailed information about multifractal approach can be found elsewhere ( The measure The mass exponent function The function For multifractal measures, the probability mass function, Similar The curve of In this study, a total of 24 representative samples were collected from different veins within the Tongchang ore body. These samples were analyzed using transmitted and reflected light microscopy, XRD and ESEM. Based on the analytical results and other previous investigations, the vein systems were divided into four main vein types and associated alteration and mineralization stages. The early K-feldspar alteration and related A-type veins is observed only in few places on small scale. It is destroyed and overprinted by later alteration and mineralization. The chlorite+illite alteration is transitional and characterized by B-type veins. Late alteration and mineralization are characterized muscovite+quartz alteration and is related to D-type veins. The latest alteration and mineralization stage is characterized by carbonate-sulphate-oxide alteration and associated with H-type veins ( The This apparent multifractal behavior reveal that the spatial variability of studied element concentrations on surface of pyrite crystals from different veins and veinlets can be successfully correlated with the vein types and related alteration and mineralization zone delineated using other customized geological methods. The ∆ The authors would like to acknowledge the support received from