The process of digestion of an oil sand lump moving in the heated water flow is considered. A lump is modelled as a heated sphere subjected to shear stresses and ambient temperature and melting when the combined effect of these two factors exceeds some critical value. This critical value is introduced in the form of a critical temperature and it is associated with the minimum adhesive strength of bitumen. This temperature is a model constant that can be determined from an experiment. The complicated heat transfer conditions of a lump are taken into account by averaging the Nusselt number (the second experimental constant of the model). A numerical analysis of the dependence of digestion rates on water and lump temperatures, and on lump sizes is performed to illustrate the applicability of the model.An oil sand lump can be viewed as a porous rock comprising sand and other fine particles held together by bitumen. The pores are filled with water or air. The extraction of bitumen from the lump (the digestion) is based on a very strong dependence of bitumen viscosity on temperature. For example, the bitumen viscosity drops 15 times as its temperature increases from 20 to 40°C ( In the paper, a mathematical model of lump digestion caused by heating and shear forces is developed. The effect of various parameters on the rates of digestion is investigated numerically. The real process of digestion is very complex due to the lump randomness in shape, composition, system of shear forces acting on it in a turbulent flow, and the non-uniform temperature field. Our model is based on the following simplifying assumptions: A lump consists of a homogeneous material having some equivalent coefficient of thermal conductivity. A lump remains spherical during the digestion process. Heat transfer between the lump and the ambient liquid is due to convection only. The averaged effect of shear stresses is reduced to some constant (averaged) surface temperature. The process of lump digestion is assumed to be continuous. Mathematically, the problem is reduced to a one-dimensional model of heat conduction of a shrinking sphere. The diagram of the decomposing lump illustrating the mathematical model is shown in The above equation can be applied to a sphere with moving boundary by using the following coordinate transformation ( As a result of transformation, the equation of heat conduction is written as The equation of heat conduction As long as the variable sphere radius is found, the volumetric rate of bitumen extraction from a single lump can be calculated as To illustrate the model application we performed calculations of the digestion of a single lump rolling along a pipeline in a turbulent flow with the velocity equal to 3 m/s (the lump is initially motionless). The heat transfer from the water to the lump in this case is due to turbulent convection. The external forces acting on the lump surface are caused by turbulent eddies interacting with the lump surface. The Nusselt number in this case was estimated by an empirical equation for a sphere moving in a turbulent flow ( It was found that the digestion rate increased with the increase in the initial water temperature and decrease in the lump size. The important point for applications is the sensitivity of the digestion rate to the above factors since it affects the decision on water temperature (i.e. energy expenses) and size control (i.e. oil sands crushing expenses). The numerical analysis shows that the most efficient way to speed up the digestion process is to reduce the lumps initial sizes. The model of digestion of an oil sand lump moving in the heated water flow and subjected to external stresses was developed. The decomposing lump was considered as a heated sphere that melted while maintaining constant (critical) surface temperature, which was, in this case, a pseudo-phase transition temperature. This critical temperature was the model constant and it integrated the effects of external shear forces and ambient temperature on the critical bitumen resistance. The averaged heat transfer conditions were taken into account by the Nusselt number, which was the second model constant. Numerical calculations of the digestion of a single lump showed that the digestion rate significantly increased with the increase in water temperature and lump initial temperature. However, the most significant increase in the digestion rate was observed when the lump size was decreased. The financial support provided by Syncrude Canada Ltd. in the form of contract is gratefully acknowledged.