A three-node triangular element with continuous nodal stress (Trig3-CNS) was recently proposed for static analysis. The Trig3-CNS element, which is the development of the partition-of-unity based “FE-Meshfree” quadrilateral element with continuous nodal stress (Quad4-CNS), uses hybrid shape functions that combine the meshfree and finite element shape functions so as to synergize the individual strengths of meshfree and finite element methods. As a result, high order global approximations in Trig3-CNS element could be easily constructed without adding extra nodes and DOFs, thereby achieving high accuracy and convergence rate. In this paper, the element is further applied to conduct free vibration analysis of two-dimensional solids. The numerical tests in the present work demonstrate that Trig3-CNS has higher tolerance to mesh distortion and gives more accurate solution as compared to the three-node triangular element (Trig3) and four-node quadrilateral element (Quad4).The FEM Meshfree methods, which do not need a mesh to discretize the problem domain, provide an effective approach to solve the problems related to large deformation A family of smoothed finite element methods (S-FEMs) During the last two decades, several methods including the hp clouds To synergize the individual strengths of meshfree and finite element methods, a new family of elements called ‘FE-Meshfree’ elements which is based on the PUM has been developed In other front, based on the concept of “twice-interpolation” procedure, Zheng et al. There have many effective numerical methods on the application to free vibration analysis, such as FEM Because Trig3-CNS has higher tolerance to mesh distortion and gives more accurate solution than Trig3 and Quad4 elements for linear elastic problems Consider a triangular domain Unlike Trig3-DNS element, which uses the shape functions of Trig3 to define its weight functions, the weight functions of Trig3-CNS element are written as There are four important features for the weight functions of Trig3-CNS element as described in The nodal approximations associated with node The Trig3-CNS approximation By manipulating Eq. If node Some useful properties of Trig3-CNS are shown as follows: The derivative of weight function is of zero value at the nodes, which has already been discussed in The derivative of Trig3-CNS global approximation is continuous at the nodes The Kronecker-delta property Consider a 2D eigenvalue problem defined in domain Numerical tests with the present Trig3-CNS model for free vibration analyses of 2-D solids were carried out. Except specially mentioned, the physical units used in the present work are based on the international standard unit system. Here, A two dimensional cantilever beam fixed at the left end with length To examine the convergence of numerical solutions in Trig3-CNS element, three discrete models with regular grids are constructed as shown in  By simply employing the strain smoothing technique, SFEM can significantly improve accuracy of FEM without increasing the order of global approximation. Unlike SFEM, the proposed PU-based Trig3-CNS element employs higher order global approximation which will yield higher accuracy than those of FEM and SFEM. As shown in Trig3-CNS element is able to improve accuracy under regular and distorted meshes by adopting the same mesh as in Trig3 element. However, Trig3-CNS element increases the bandwidth of the global stiffness matrix which leads to the increase of computational time. Therefore, it is critical to find the right balance between simulation speed and accuracy in Trig3-CNS. The relative errors in the first two natural frequencies versus the corresponding solution times for Trig3-CNS and Trig3 elements are shown in The cantilever beam shown in First, the numerical errors given by Trig3-CNS and Trig3-DNS elements do not change appreciably with the increase of distortion parameters, while the numerical errors given by Trig3, Quad4 and Quad8 elements increase rapidly. The present Trig3-CNS and Trig3-DNS elements are seen to be insensitive to mesh distortion. Second, the results of Trig3-CNS and Trig3-DNS elements are similar, which are always much better than those of Trig3 and Quad4 elements. Third, the results of Quad8 element are better than those of Trig3, Trig3-CNS and Trig3-DNS elements when the distortion parameter 2 Fourth, compared to Trig3-CNS element, Trig6 element generally achieves more accuracy results. However, with the increasing of distortion parameter, accuracy of Trig6 element decreases to the same level as that of Trig3-CNS element. Moreover, as discussed in Section  In this test, a practical test, homogeneous slope The Trig3-CNS element Compared to meshfree methods, the shape functions of Trig3-CNS element possess the much desired Kronecker-delta property, so the essential boundary conditions can be easily applied as in the classical FEM. Compared to FEM, higher order global approximations for Trig3-CNS element could be easily constructed without adding extra nodes and DOFs, thereby achieving higher accuracy and convergence rate. Accuracy of Trig3-CNS is generally better than that given by Trig3, Quad4, NS-FEM The mesh distortion test conducted in Section Although Trig3-CNS element works well in 2D linear elastic and free vibration problems, all the practical problems are never 2D and the development of its 3D version, namely, four-node tetrahedral element with continuous nodal stress (Tet4-CNS) is very important. Formulations and numerical tests of this Tet4-CNS element will be present in the next work. This study is supported by the The weight functions of Trig3-CNS have four features they satisfy the PUM condition: the weight functions are non-negative on the weight functions satisfy the Kronecker-delta property Moreover, the gradient of the weight functions is continuous over all the nodes. First the node patch of the node Several constrained least-squares methods have been proposed to construct shape functions with the Kronecker-delta property, such as LSPIM Using least-squares method, the nodal approximation The moment matrix Recall that To improve least-squares method, an orthonormalized and constrained least-squares method (CO-LS) is developed using the Gram–Schmidt orthonormalization process Normalizing vector Using Lagrange multiplier method, the constrained nodal approximation