We present a series of flume tests to observe the process of tailings slope failure when subjected to a concentrated water flow. Progressive flow slides were observed in a range of tailing deposits with varying relative densities, in which hydraulic conductivity reduced with increasing relative density. Slope densification by compaction of very loose or loose tailings deposits can lead to a lower permeability, generating excess pore pressure, and subsequently reducing slope stability. This is evident from the great number of acoustic emission signals before sudden failure, and from a sharp increase in the surface displacement and internal displacement observed after excess pore pressure generation. The variation of fluid-pressure distribution results in successive sliding, onset at the toe and progressing from the toe to the rear of the slope. Excess pore pressure generation is found to occur after, rather than prior to sliding, and it only occurs along the slip surface. An optimal relative density of 0.35 was identified, in which the slope failure changes from a sudden collapse to a progressive failure. However, the optimal relative density may vary with the height of the slope. This research extends existing knowledge about behavior of tailings materials, while the observed discrepancy between the failure mechanisms of slopes made of loose and dense deposits could provide insights for preventing failures of tailings dams.Tailings dams are built to store waste from mineral processing. Depositing tailings is hazardous and can cause catastrophic failure of the tailings. A rupture is often followed by a fast-moving mudflow, which can run downstream for several miles, leading to significant loss of life and property. Over the past century, fast-moving mudflows resulted in a cumulative released volume of tailings deposits in excess of 270 × 10 In most cases, the failure of tailings dam was not triggered by a single factor but was rather a consequence of a series of minor incidents ( The failure process could be studied by numerical simulations ( Tailings deposits often comprise small particles accompanied by high water contents, resulting in transitional behavior which can be found in particular types of tailings ( Here we present the results of flume experiments on instrumented artificial tailings slopes with different relative densities of tailings materials and subjected to a constant concentrated flow at the back of slope. Pore pressures, internal displacement, surface displacement, seismic signals, and acoustic emission (AE) events were monitored. The runout was measured after failure using 3D topography. Finally, we discuss the influence of the initial relative density on the modes of rupture.   The granular material used in the flume tests was collected from the iron waste deposits from a tailings pond in An-Ning, Miyi town, about 75 km from the northeast border of Panzhihua City in Sichuan province, China.  The tests were carried out using an instrumented flume, 2 m in length, 0.35 m in width, and 0.55 m in height, with an inclination of 20°. The floor of the flume was covered with sand grains glued to a rubber sheet to reproduce a high frictional contact preventing the base from sliding. The side-walls of the flume were made of transparent plexiglass sheets to allow the sliding process to be recorded using cameras (Sony/HDR-CX210E). Details of the instrumentation are given in Pore pressure transducers (PPTs) were installed to monitor pore pressure. PPT No. 1, 2, 3, and 4 were installed on the floor of the model at distances of 20 cm, 30 cm, 50 cm, and 70 cm from the back of the flume, respectively. PPT No. 5, 6, and 7 were installed 20 cm, 40 cm and 60 cm from the back and 12 cm above the floor. The PPTs on the floor of the model were installed before the prepared sample was added, while the PPTs in the middle layer of the model were installed after the formation of the first layer. The internal movement was measured using a linear displacement transducer placed at the upper end of the flume, which was connected to a built-in styrene foam ball (2 cm in diameter and 0.1 g in weight) with a stiff wire (0.5 mm in diameter). A 160 g counterweight at the lower end of the flume was installed to balance the pulling resistance of the transducer and to minimize the relative movement between the ball and the surrounding soil. A laser-point displacement transducer (ZSY/ZSDL100) was installed above the slope to measure the vertical displacements of the soil mass in the middle of the slope. A seismic accelerometer (Wilcoxon Research Company, 731A/P31) with a high sensitivity (100 V/g) was positioned under the flume floor 50 cm from the back of the flume to monitor the vibrations generated by the movement of the overlying soil mass. High-frequency (100–400 kHz) AE signals were measured with a high-sensitivity (40 dB amplification) wideband AE transducer (Physical Acoustics, Mistral Group, inc.) on both sides of the walls. A 3D laser scanner (Pentax S-3 × 80) was installed to map the surface of the slope during and after the flume tests. Some selected tests were performed after retrogressive sliding to obtain 3D scanner data during the tests. The runout distance and the 3D topographic profile of the slope could be obtained accurately using the Surfer software. To initiate sliding, a concentrated water inflow at the rear of the slope was applied to provide a continuous water outlet, while the water head was maintained at 10 cm above the flume floor. The discharge was accurately controlled by a flow meter and a flow valve. A total of 14 tests were carried out. Seven tests were conducted with different relative tailings densities of 0.03, 0.1, 0.25, 0.35, 0.45, 0.6, and 0.75.   The general failure modes of the slopes with different relative tailings densities are quite different. The failure process of the flume tests with medium tailings densities of Both sudden and progressive failure could be simply categorized as wetting, precursory slides, and major failure, as suggested by    The failure process of the flume tests with a medium   From The flume tests performed on tailings materials prepared with different relative densities highlighted significant differences in the slope failure modes. It is interesting to note that a transition from a sudden to progressive failure was observed for the three tests with Internal displacements were recorded by measuring the movement of deposits between the soil layer during the major failure. The internal displacement increased gradually with relative tailings densities increasing from 0.1 to 0.35, but then dropped significantly ( Even for dense slopes, the maximum velocity is greater than 0.5 m/s, which is categorized as a very rapid rupture according to the landslide velocity scale suggested by  The tailings material used in this work is a grading mixture of sand (size less than 2 mm), fine sand (size between 0.20 mm and 0.063 mm), and silt (size between 0. 063 mm to 0.002 mm) ( We have presented experiments on artificial tailings deposits subjected to a concentrated flow and highlighted the role of the relative density of the deposits and pore pressure generation on the progressive slope failure mechanism. This paper has highlighted the different processes of failure in loose and dense deposits. Sudden failure occurred for slopes made of very loose and loose deposits, while pronounced progressive failure for slopes made of medium dense deposits was observed. Progressive saturation of slopes made of very loose and loose deposits caused densification, resulting in the creation of a crack at the crest of the slope. However, sliding did not initiate from the crack, as the crack only accelerated pore pressure generation at PPT No. 4. Consequently, sliding of deposits at the toe caused the generation of excess pore pressure at PPT No. 1, and then the entire slope suffered a sudden rupture. Monitoring signals of densification for tailings dams constructed of loose deposits could provide an early warning signal. In contrast to the failure behavior of slopes made of loose deposits, fluidization of dense deposits ( The relative density of 0.35 marks a transition from loose to medium dense tailings. Three repeated tests with The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the