Introduction
                  Distal radius fractures are very common upper limb injuries irrespective of the patient's age. The aim of our study is to evaluate the reliability of the three systems that are often used for their classification (AO – Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Association for the Study of Internal Fixation, Fernandez and Universal) and to assess the need for computed tomography (CT) scan to improve inter- and intra-observer agreement.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Five orthopaedic surgeons and two hand surgeons classified radiographs and CT scans of 26 patients using the Fernandez, AO and Universal systems. All data were recorded using MS Excel and Kappa statistics were performed to determine inter- and intra-observer agreement and to evaluate the role of CT scan.
               
                  Results
                  Fair-to-moderate inter-observer agreement was noted with the use of X-rays for all classification systems. Intra-observer reproducibility did not improve with the addition of CT scans, especially for the senior hand surgeons.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The agreement rates observed in the present study show that currently there is no classification system that is fully reproducible. Adequate experience is required for the assessment and treatment of these injuries. CT scan should be requested only by experienced hand surgeons in order to help guide treatment, as it does not significantly improve inter- and intra-observer agreement for all classification systems.Distal radius fractures are among the most common upper limb injuries irrespective of the patient's age, accounting for a sixth of fractures presenting to accident and emergency departments. Two presentations occur; the first in the younger patient following high-energy trauma which are often intra-articular and the second more prevalent amongst females as a consequence of osteoporosis which is becoming more common In recent years, researchers have contributed to the surgeons’ understanding of the mechanism of injury of distal radial fractures and have given an appreciation of the various patterns of clinical presentation proposing several classification systems along with treatment options Inter-observer or intra-observer reliability with the use of the described distal radial fracture classifications has limitations that have been reported in the literature The aim of this study is to evaluate the intra- and inter-observer reliability of each classification system based on plain radiographs, and to assess whether performing a CT scan of the wrist could improve the accuracy of these parameters. From 2007 to 2013, all patients with distal radial fractures that required admission for surgery or assessment were prospectively included to a computerised database in our hospital. The senior author retrospectively selected cases of radial fractures where the CT scan was also done to help plan treatment. Overall, 723 radial fractures between the ages of 5 and 106 were seen for a displaced fracture that had not responded to simple manipulation presenting to the accident and emergency department or via clinic. Plain X-rays were arranged in all and a CT scan was arranged in 158 cases. An independent researcher randomly selected 26 radiographs of distal radial fractures in order to reflect the usual variability of fracture patterns encountered in the clinical practice. All radiographs and CT scans were rendered unidentifiable and assigned random numbers by the independent researcher. The same person was responsible for the collection of the responses from the assessors and for joining radiographs and CT scans in pairs at the end of the classification process. The evaluation of radiographs and CT scans was performed in different sessions in order to further reduce bias ( Five orthopaedic surgeons, all with at least 5 years of experience in wrist surgery, were asked to individually classify the fractures according to the AO, Fernandez and Universal classifications. Even though all assessors were familiar with the classification systems, they were supplied with a written and an illustrated description of them in order to facilitate the evaluation process and to increase the accuracy of our results ( During the same period, two consultant hand surgeons reviewed the same radiographs and CT scans separately at first to classify the same fractures using the AO, Fernandez and Universal systems as part of the analysis. Then to develop the “gold standard,” this assessment was compared by the two hand surgeons to develop a consensus opinion against which all others were measured for accuracy and successful classification. The senior authors also commented as to whether the CT scans added anything to the determination of the fracture complexity or likely surgical intervention. Inter-observer reliability analysis was measured using Kappa statistics to determine the consistency amongst the observers and any changes caused by the evaluation of the CT scans. The Online Kappa Calculator For all the measurements, we calculated Randolph's free-marginal multirater kappa Values of Kappa can range from −1.0 to 1.0, with −1.0 indicating perfect disagreement below chance, 0.0 indicating agreement equal to chance and 1.0 indicating perfect agreement above chance. A Kappa of 0.70 or above indicates adequate inter-observer agreement The inter-observer reliability for the five less experienced assessors along with their level of agreement with the “gold standard” after evaluating the plain radiographs only is presented in Overall, the inter-observer agreement was fair to moderate for all classification systems (Kappa range 0.19–0.43) for both the X-rays and CT scans. The best values were obtained with the Fernandez classification using CT scan (Kappa 0.43 – moderate agreement, 55% inter-observer and 11.5% agreement with the perceived “gold standard”). The worst values were obtained with the Universal classification after evaluation of the X-rays (Kappa 0.19 – slight agreement, 27% inter-observer and 0% agreement with the “gold standard”). The use of CT scan did not significantly influence the observer's classification in comparison to plain radiographs. The Universal classification system was most helped by having the CT scans with the inter-observer agreement increasing from slight to fair (Kappa X-ray 0.19, Kappa CT scan 0.27). The mean intra-observer Kappa value was 0.50 and agreement was 55% indicating that the CT scan caused a change in the classification in 45% of the cases. In contrast for the AO classification, the agreement remained fair after the CT scan without real gain from the CT scan (Kappa X-ray 0.29 – Kappa CT scan 0.29). The intra-observer Kappa for the AO was 0.65 and the agreement 69.5%, meaning that the observers changed their classification in 30% of the observations. The Kappa value for the senior authors was 1 and percentage 100%, meaning that the classification was not influenced by CT for the hand surgeons. Finally, the Fernandez classification was the least affected by the addition of the CT scans but the concordance also improved from fair to moderate after evaluation of the CT scans (Kappa X-ray 0.40 – Kappa CT scan 0.43). The intra-observer Kappa for the Fernandez system was 0.65 and the percentage of agreement came to 72%, meaning that only 28% of the classifications were changed by the use of CT scan. The Kappa value for the senior authors was 1 and percentage 100%, which implies that the classification was not influenced by CT scan assessment for the more experienced hand surgeons once again. To summarise the results, there was fair-to-moderate agreement for all classification systems with slightly better inter-observer reliability with the use of the Fernandez classification (Kappa 0.43). The use of CT scan in this study did not significantly improve the inter-observer reliability improving slightly the Universal System classification only (Kappa X-ray 0.19, Kappa CT scan 0.27). Intra-observer reliability improved slightly or moderately with the addition of CT scans (Kappa: AO 0.65, Fernandez 0.65 and Universal 0.50). The addition of CT scan did not influence the more experienced “gold standard”; the Kappa value was 1 for AO and Fernandez and 0.65 for the Universal classification. It appears that the Fernandez classification is more reliable and useful for everyday use compared to the AO and the Universal system. The addition of CT scan did not significantly influence the classification of the fractures and may lead to a delay in treatment, especially when this is performed by experienced hand surgeons and thus should not be routinely used in the assessment of distal radius fractures. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the inter-observer agreement and intra-observer reproducibility of three distal radial fracture classification systems commonly used to aid treatment of complex radial fractures. Given the emphasis that orthopaedic surgeons place on classification systems in clinical practice as a guide to prognosis or treatment and in the literature to allow comparisons between studies, it is imperative that such systems be reliable and reproducible. Burstein The AO classification system was created in 1986 and reviewed in 1990 The Universal rating system described by Cooney The rating system proposed by Fernandez is based on the trauma mechanism The AO classification, with 27 categories, is the most detailed. It is the most comprehensive making it useful in the broad anatomic categorisation of large numbers of fractures for trauma registries, even if it is cumbersome and lacks sufficient focus when used for clinical decision making. This system is intended to provide a measure of severity of injury with higher grades indicating more severe fractures While several clinical studies have confirmed the reproducibility of defining the distal radius fractures into three basic types (extra-articular, partial or complete articular) The Universal classification proposed by Cooney The final classification that we wish to highlight is that proposed by Fernandez, based on the mechanism of injury The highest values of reliability were obtained with the Fernandez classification using CT scan with Kappa 0.43 and moderate agreement, 55% inter-observer and 11.5% agreement with the “gold standard.” By contrast, the lowest values were obtained with the Universal classification after evaluation of the X-rays (Kappa 0.19–slight agreement, 27% inter-observer and 0% agreement with the “gold standard”). Following the assessment of the CT scans, the Fernandez classification system was the least affected and the Universal was the most affected of all three classification systems used in this study. Despite the fact that the Fernandez classification showed better inter-observer reliability, its value is still moderate and we believe that this could be attributed to its relatively vague description of complex injuries, as it is difficult to differentiate between types 3 and 5. The results of the present study suggest that the Fernandez classification of distal radius fractures proved more reliable compared to the other two and was less affected by the addition of the CT scan. The use of CT scan can help, to a small degree, inexperienced surgeons to classify these injuries in all three systems but scans take time, increase exposure to radiation and are expensive. Therefore, we suggest that CT scans should only be ordered by the treating senior hand surgeon. This would reduce the exposure to radiation and could lead to estimated cost savings of around 5000 pounds a year. The senior authors still make use of CT scans for further evaluation of distal radius fractures in more complex injuries such as comminuted intra-articular fractures, including die-punch fractures or when there is a volar ulna fragment that cannot be visualised easily. This volar ulna fragment of the distal radius is frequently missed on plain radiographs. However, it is particularly important for the stability of the carpus and failure to address this problem can lead to volar carpal instability with adverse long-term consequences. In cases with intra-articular fragments and comminution, when a CT scan is indicated, Harness et al. proved that three-dimensional reconstruction (3D/CT) should be performed if possible. 3D/CT improves the identification of the fracture fragments and thus influences treatment decisions and patient outcome Our results are similar to other studies’ outcomes regarding the level of inter-observer reliability after assessing plain radiographs, which are universally poor or moderate Several authors have tried to simplify classification systems, although it is difficult to imagine simplifying any of the systems to the point that excellent reliability would be guaranteed while still maintaining its capacity to direct treatment or establish a prognosis. Practice and experience in the use of any single system helps to improve the intra-observer reliability, judging from the concordance of the senior surgeons, but is unlikely to affect inter-observer reliability significantly Limitations of this study merit to be mentioned. Firstly, this is a retrospective study based on X-rays chosen by an independent researcher and may include bias in their selection. Secondly, this study is not multicentric and is based on the experience of a single orthopaedic unit. The three classification systems evaluated in the present study were chosen because they are among the most widely studied and used to classify distal radius fractures. The agreement rates observed in the present study show that currently there is still no classification method that is fully reproducible. There is a need to perform new studies aimed at clarifying which classification variables present the highest disagreement rates between observers, with consequent limits to reproducibility. In the continuing search for an ideal classification, prospective studies to describe which variables can predict the instability factors in such fractures through radiographic examination are necessary. Adequate experience is required in the treatment and assessment of these injuries. CT scans should be requested by experienced hand surgeons only to help guide treatment. None declared. We confirm that no organization funded our research and we did not receive any grants for the completion of our paper. We would like to acknowledge Dr. Fabienne Gobel and Mr. Tamer Sherief for their help in the completion of this paper.