Despite the wide use of electrostatic precipitators for particulate control in pulverised coal combustion, there are still some aspects surrounding the performance of these devices which are not fully understood, particularly with respect to high carbon ash. The introduction of low NO
                        x
                      burners to meet more stringent emissions regulations has also resulted in an increase in the carbon present in fly ash. An investigation was carried to assess how the operating conditions of a pilot-scale single-stage electrostatic precipitator test facility (ESPTF) affected the collection efficiency of two high carbon fly ashes. Whilst our findings demonstrated the effectiveness of the ESPTF in collecting both fly ash and carbon particles, the performance of the high-resistivity fly ash was significantly better than expected, particularly at higher temperatures. It was concluded that ESP performance of any particular fly ash and the separation of the carbon fraction may not necessarily be predicted by its resistivity alone.The use of electrostatic precipitators (ESP) to remove fly ash from flue gas is the most common particulate emission control technology in coal-fired power stations in the UK and worldwide In order to achieve the required collection efficiency of fly ash and to avoid major capital investment, a better understanding of the mechanisms involved in the collection process and the effect of operating conditions of the ESP is crucial. Research on electrostatic precipitation, to date, has addressed many different areas Power generators face a major challenge with regard to NO The pilot-scale single-stage ESPTF at Nottingham University can simulate conditions in the fourth stage of a full-scale ESP. In the fourth stage of a commercial full-scale ESP, the inlet concentration of dust is low and the particles are difficult to collect. The overall collection efficiency for modern industrial ESPs is designed to be in excess of 99.9% The main body of the test facility is 4.5 The fly ashes were characterised for carbon content and particle size distribution. The loss-on-ignition test was used as a measure of the carbon content of the fly ash Particle resistivity is normally determined by measuring the leakage current through a dust layer in a high voltage conductivity cell. A resistivity-meter previously employed for the in situ measurement of resistivity of fly ash in boiler flue gas, was used. This instrument, which consists of an AVO Super Meg-ohmmeter model RM170 and measurement cell, was modified and used to measure the resistivity of the fly ashes at ambient temperature For this particular electrode arrangement, an equation of resistivity in terms of electrodes geometry and the resistance of the ash layer was devised: With the aim of assessing the effect of operating conditions, voltage applied and temperature, as well as ash loading, on ESPTF collection efficiency, the experimental matrix, which appears in The precipitated ash was collected from the test facility by using a vacuum cleaner. The collection zone was split into three identical sections to assess any changes in collection efficiency along the length of the test facility (see Ash composition, carbon content, and resistivity of the fly ashes are presented in The particle size distribution of the fly ashes, as derived by Malvern sizing analysis, is presented in Data on collection efficiency and fly ash mass balance along the ESPTF is presented in For the 30 Closer inspection of the results revealed a more interesting trend in relation to runs performed at 30 ESPs work best under normal dust resistivity conditions, which according to experience, have been found to be in the range of 10 As far as fly ash B is concerned, it exhibits a very low resistivity of 9.3 The carbon content of the collected dust samples was measured to investigate the mass distribution of carbon along the different sections in the test facility. The results for each fly ash sample at the various test conditions were plotted and are shown in When no electric field was applied to the ESPTF, for both samples, the collection efficiency of carbon was much higher for ambient temperature runs. Approximately 46–52% of the material was collected at ambient temperature and in the order of 31–37% at 130 For tests performed with an electrical field, the percentage of carbon collected in the test facility was considerably higher for fly ash B in most cases. For fly ash A, the amount of carbon collected in Section 1 was dependent on ash loading rather than temperature. For fly ash B the effect of temperature and ash loading on the collection of carbon in this section was negligible. The temperature had, however, an apparent effect on the collection of the ash. The increasing concentration of carbon from inlet to outlet of the test facility showed that it is more difficult to collect than the mineral matter, and takes longer to be attracted to the walls or to settle. Although more than half of the fed carbon was precipitated in Section 1, and no significant effect of the temperature was noted, there were some differences in relation to the amount of carbon collected in Sections 2 and 3. For the low ash loading runs the amount of carbon collected in Section 2 was just over 6% higher at 130 The results suggest that loss of carbon by re-entrainment in Section 1 was independent of temperature. However, for Section 2, and to some degree for Section 3, temperature did have an effect on re-entrainment, particularly for fly ash A. Carbon particles are very conductive and are easily re-entrained into the gas stream owing to the lack of cohesive or holding forces from the electric field as they readily release their charge through the collector plates. The lower the temperature, the more conductive carbon particles are and therefore, the more prone to be re-entrained. It is of paramount importance to maintain an acceptable gas distribution and a reasonable axial velocity along the ESP when dealing with these particles In order to compare particle sizes amongst samples collected in the ESPTF and cyclone, the parameter When no electric field was applied to the ESPTF, the percentage of coarse particles collected in Sections 2, 3 and the cyclone increased with increasing ash loading and temperature as shown by a higher For the 30 The main drawback of using a cyclone is that particles less than 5 The collection efficiency for fly ash B were in line with those cited in the literature The support of The European Coal and Steel Community (project 7220-PR-123), is greatly acknowledge for the funding of this work.