Well logs are considered as powerful tools in characterization of petrophysical properties of reservoirs such as permeability and porosity. Although a vast majority of petrophysical parameters are directly related to well logs, however, reservoir permeability is not that easily attainable from any special logs. Sonic, density, neutron, resistivity, photoelectric index and gamma ray are the most principal logs in reservoir permeability determination. It is natural that all these logs may not provide equal contribution in permeability determination; hence, there is no need to take them all into consideration. This paper presents a new approach for selecting the most effective logs in reservoir permeability determination. In this issue, using back-propagation neural network (BPNN) enables us to compute an index called Relative Strength of Effects (RSE) that determines influence of each input data on the corresponding output. For this purpose, a perceptron neural network is designed and trained by petrophysical logs data as inputs and the core permeability as the desired outputs. Then the network weights and bias along with RSE relations assist us in finding relative effect of each log on permeability prediction. Next RSE values were expressed in terms of frequency percentage ranging from −1 to +1 with identical interval of being equal to 0.1, and then plotted using column chart. Finally, the resulting chart proves that sonic, neutron and density well logs play more prominent roles in predicting permeability of the reservoir rocks.Knowledge of rock permeability, as a key parameter, in estimation and development of oil and gas hydrocarbon bearing reservoirs, has remained as one of the most fundamental challenges to petroleum engineers and researchers. Usually, in petroleum industry, the invaluable information obtained from rock cores and well logs are employed for accurate permeability determination. Though, these are the most popular methods of reservoir permeability estimation, however, due to the high cost and being time consuming are not recommended except for especial cases. Hence, nowadays, petroleum engineers generally implement indirect methods such as statistical regression analysis and virtual intelligent techniques. In fact, permeability is one of the most significant characteristics of hydrocarbon reservoirs that control the production rates. Hence, an accurate determination of reservoir rock permeability may lead the petroleum engineers to design and manage to evaluate the hydrocarbon reserves and production of the projects more efficiently. Generally, the permeability of geological formation is often measured from rock cores laboratorial and or evaluated from well test data directly. Also it could be predicted using the data provided by petrophysical well logs indirectly. In some fields, due to presence of complex parameters such as heterogeneity of the carbonate reservoirs, for accurate permeability evaluation, regardless of high operating costs and time, it is inevitable to core some wells. However, in spite of invaluable information provided by this approach, well testing is an uneconomical method and only a limited number of well tests are advisable in any field ( In petrophysical methods, the objective of most studies is to accurately predict permeability especially in wells from which cores are unavailable or left unmeasured for any other reason (fractured samples, etc.). Reaching this goal has remained as one of the fundamental challenges to researchers since no particular log has been developed yet to directly measure permeability through a well. Hence, it is of essential importance to identify logs with the most effective role in predicting reservoir rock permeability. This goal could be reached using artificial neural networks (ANN) method along with an index called Relative Strength of Effects ( The present paper focuses on permeability estimation by utilizing artificial neural networks (ANN). At this stage, a multilayer perceptron (MLP) neural network is used. The method is based on back-propagation training algorithm and has been trained with the best data available. The data bank used in this project contains a large number of core analyses and well logs data. The data have been collected from a typical hydrocarbon reservoir of South Pars Gas- and Oilfield located in south of Iran. Finally, bias and weights of the trained networks are used to compute The South Pars Gas- and Oilfield, shared between Iran and Qatar is located in the Persian Gulf. Geo-structure of this field resembles dome-shaped with gentle flanks situated in the north extension at N-trending Qatar–South Pars Arch. This field is hosted by heterogeneous carbonate-evaporites successions of Permo-Triassic Dalan-Kangan formations which is equivalent to Khuff formation in Arabian geo-structural of Persian Gulf. Due to fundamental discrepancy in altitudes between Qatar–South Pars Arch and lateral sedimentary basins (in the center of Persian Gulf), the drilled wells are located far enough from each other. The southeastern flank has a gentle slope while the northwestern one is considered steeper. The geological sequence of drilled formations in order of age, from the youngest to the oldest respectively, include Asmari-Jahrum, Sachun, Sarvak, Kazhdumi, Dariyan, Gadvan, Fahliyan, Hith, Surmeh, Neiriz, Dashtak, Kangan and Dalan. Datasets used in this study belongs to two main gas-bearing formations, that is, Kangan (Triassic) and Dalan (Permian) which are considered as the reservoir rocks of South Pars Gas- and Oilfield. The stratigraphic of these formations is shown in Artificial neural network (ANN) is extremely powerful non-linear computational tool. Thus ANN is an information processing system that has certain performance characteristics in common with biological neural networks. In fact, this system attempts to resemble the human brain. Unlike digital computers that are basically dependent on an explicit set of instructions, no pure mathematical model is required as prerequisite for neural networks since likewise human brain it is capable of learning from a number of examples. Hence, it is strongly recommended for subjects with no precise mathematical relationship between input and output data. The basic unit of a neural network, a biologically inspired computing scheme, comprises neurons (or processing elements) and their connection strengths (weights). Training is accomplished by modification of the weights on a continuous basis until convergence is achieved between the network output and the desired output from the training dataset. The capability of changing the weights allows the network to modify its behavior in response to its inputs, or to learn ( A specific architecture and training algorithm is selected, and then the network has been trained until it converges, subsequently, its function is generalized upon new data. An artificial neural network is a collection of neurons that are arranged in specific formations. Neurons are grouped into layers. In a multilayer network there are usually an input layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer. The number of neurons in the input layer corresponds to the number of parameters that are being presented to the network as an input data. The same is true for the output layer ( However, as a rule of thumb, the best configuration is found by trial and error during the training stage. Neurons of different layers are interconnected by the corresponding connection weights that represent the strength of their connections to the neuron in the next layer. The weighted sum of the inputs of each neuron is fed to its activation function to give the corresponding output so that the output of the last layer is considered as the final estimated value of the network ( Among numerous training techniques, an error-back-propagation algorithm as one of the most commonly used training algorithms is utilized in this work. The database, for this study, contains the information obtained from the well logs as the input data and the permeability obtained from the core analysis is considered as the output of the neural network. Wireline logs available for almost all wells of this field include sonic transit time (DT), gamma ray (GR), neutron porosity (NPHI), density (RHOB), microspherically focused log (MSFL), deep laterolog resistivity (LLD), shallow laterolog resistivity (LLS) and photoelectric factor (PEF). In addition, horizontal and vertical permeability ( In a typical neural data processing procedure, the database is divided into a training set, a training validation set (cross validation set) and a testing set. The training set utilized to fit the weights of the network. The cross validation set is used to determine the level of generalization produced by the training set. Cross validation is executed in accord with the training of the network. Every so often, the network weights are frozen, the cross validation data is fed through the network, and the results are reported. The stop criteria of the controller can be based on the error of the cross validation set instead of the training set to insure this generalization. The stop criteria of the controller, instead of being based on the training set, could be based on the error of the cross validation set to insure this generalization. The test set is a series of examples used to assess the generalization performance of a trained neural network. Number of training samples used in a network has a noticeable effect on the learning and that different thoughts have been stated about the required number of training data ( Generally, two methods are employed to classify the entire assembled data. In the first method, only the data obtained from some wells are selected for training set and the remaining data from other wells will be allocated to the network testing, while, in the second approach, all datasets, regardless their geographical locations are combined and will be used with identical probability selection. In this work, the second method has been utilized to achieve the more accurate data classification. Note that this method eliminates influences of geographical parameters and well location on data processing. Thus, the network will be trained under reservoir conditions which lead to keep generalization capability. In this paper, at the very beginning of the data analysis, that is, before the training step starts, all input parameters (well logs data) were normalized into an interval [0, 1]. The advantage of using normalized data to train the network system is because the activation functions (e.g. sigmoid function) are unable to discriminate the differences among large values. However, this may cause severe problems during the training stage. It is worthy to mention that taking logarithm of the original permeability values is a kind of normalization, but in another range, so merely input parameters are normalized in this study. In order to achieve an optimal design for a back-propagation neural network, various training and activation functions together with several numbers of layers and neurons were used by trial and error ( Feeding proper input parameters the system enables the trained neural network to calculate the corresponding output accordingly. By using the available relationships of artificial neural network, an Index named Relative Strength of Effects For a given sample set where It should be noted that the Generally, the larger the absolute value of For calculating Feed the input neurons by all the assembled input data, and then calculate the values of where Calculate the function If If a neural network has more than one hidden layer, then calculate the Repeat this calculation to the first hidden layer. Calculate the Suppose the number of output units is Finally, calculate the value of where According to Eq. (8), all The present study is aimed at evaluating influence of different petrophysical logs on the permeability estimation of the reservoir rock. This could be assessed by using the artificial neural network. Therefore, after training the network, weights and bias were extracted to calculate the corresponding Although Results were expressed as a percentage frequency in the range of [−  As shown in     As it is seen in The histogram of  With regard to the high frequency of absolute values of The The weak relations to PEF and LLD are because these logs are usually associated with fracture development, which is not captured in the core samples. Logs of MSFL and LLS have limited impact on estimating of the reservoir rock permeability in South Pars Oil- and Gasfield. The fact may be explained by understanding that these logs mainly read in the zone close to the borehole affected by mud filtrate, and therefore still have an overall porosity imprint, irrespective of the actual reservoir content at that depth. Considering the impact of porosity on permeability this may well explain this apparent weak dependence. Adaptability in number of input parameters as one of the fruitful merits of neural networks gives us a chance to add or remove any desired element. For instance, if it is proven by sensitivity analysis that a variable has unnoticeable impact on the output, training phase should be iterated excluding that parameter. With respect to the statistical analysis of The next phase was followed to quantify the benefit of the study by comparing blindly use of one log r using multiple logs via ANN. For this purpose, many networks were trained by inputting blindly combinations of certain logs which all could have an impact on permeability analysis. Therefore, considering the Each of the achieved networks is trained by employing neural network toolbox of MATLAB using back-propagation algorithm. After a number of iterations the training stops when the calculated output values best approximate the desired values. The last four columns of The predicted permeability values were plotted against the core permeability values for these networks, ( Statistical analysis of Relative Strength of Effects ( In general, extreme caution should be exercised when using blind neural networks. The outcome of a neural networking approach would probably be greatly enhanced by initially using proper petrophysical understanding in the selection of the various parameters to be considered.