The April–May 2010 eruption of the Eyjafjallajökull volcano (Iceland) represents an example of explosive activity dominated by prolonged, low- to mid-intensity emission of ash, as it was characterized by a continuous injection of tephra into the atmosphere that affected various economic sectors in Iceland and caused a world-wide interruption of air traffic. This eruption has become a benchmark for the understanding of the processes that govern the dynamics of ash-dominated eruptions, also representing a unique opportunity for direct ash particle investigation.
                  In this paper, selected ash samples from all phases of the eruption were studied in order to characterize: 1) the morphology, composition and texture of ash fragments; 2) the variability of the products of each phase of the eruption; 3) the progressive changes of these features with time. The large morphological and textural variability of the ash fragments throughout the eruption is unrelated to any important compositional change, and it reflects changes in eruption dynamics and in the mechanisms of magma fragmentation. Textural and morphological features of juveniles suggest that primary magma degassing dominated and modulated the dynamics of the entire eruption, while hydromagmatic fragmentation was particularly effective only in the very initial phase. As a consequence, the large production of fine-grained ash cannot be attributed to processes of magma–water interaction, and mechanisms of brittle to ductile fragmentation related to magma degassing or ash recycling must be invoked. The study demonstrates how the textural and morphological analysis of ash fragments can give important hints to the understanding of the eruption dynamics of complex, long lasting eruptions.The products of mid- to low-intensity eruptions (e.g. subPlinian, violent Strombolian, Vulcanian) are characterized by variability of the juvenile fraction, in response to the complex dynamics of magma degassing and fragmentation. These eruptions are often characterized or accompanied by prolonged phases of dominant ash emission ( The predominance of fine-grained material (ash) in the products of explosive eruptions has been often related to processes of magma–water interaction ( Wide research effort has been dedicated in the last two years to the study of the March–May 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökull (Iceland) (e.g., The 14 April–21 May 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökull was characterized by a nearly continuous injection of tephra into the atmosphere, up to 9 km above sea level ( The explosive activity was preceded by a mildly Na-alkaline, basaltic fissure eruption on the east flank (Fimmvörðuháls) of the volcano, with activity characterized by up to 150 m-high lava fountains and lava emplacement (20 March–12 April). Activity recommenced inside the summit caldera in the early morning of 14 April. The summit eruption consisted of three phases ( The second stage of Phase I started around 6:30 pm of 14 April, when a dark ash-laden plume emerged from the summit vents, and lasted until 18 April. From 15 April, activity concentrated in the summit area and remained within the cauldron until the end of the eruption ( The intensity of the eruption drastically dropped on 19 April (start of Phase II), followed by the onset of a lava flow which lasted until 4 of May. This was accompanied by a semi-continuous discharge of meltwater and steaming from the northern edge of the ice cauldron due to the lava flowing underneath the Gígjökull glacier, with no signs of major water accumulation within the summit cauldron. This phase was characterized by small eruptive plumes (2–3 km above the vent) and an average A new phase of explosive activity started on 5 May (Phase III) with renewed production of nearly continuous ash-rich columns rising to heights in excess of 5 km (up to 10 km). Activity alternated short periods of low magma discharge ( The total bulk volume of tephra emitted during the 39 days of activity has been estimated at An extensive tephra sampling was carried out between 2 and 56 km from the vent, east and southeast of the volcano ( Tephra emplaced during Phases I and II were collected from the fall deposits interbedded with the snow in sections EJ13 and EJ07. Section EJ13 ( Section EJ07, approximately 20 km east from the vent ( Tephra of Phase III was collected approximately 9 km east of the crater as it fell from the plume on 5 May (sample EJ15; The first observation of the tephra deposits in the field revealed that different types of juvenile clasts coexisted within each level, and that the relative abundance of these different clasts also varied with the stratigraphic height. Juvenile fragments (always accounting for more than 85 wt% of the samples) varied from dense, poorly-vesicular obsidian clasts up to highly-vesicular, elongated pumice, to scoria fragments. Fragments of altered lavas and scoriae mainly formed the lithic fraction. Grain-size analyses show a bimodal distribution for all the five samples studied, with main modes ranging from The overall morphological and textural features of the juvenile material, and the relative proportions of the different clast types were defined in the coarse ash fraction (0 Spongy, finely vesicular clasts (SFV) are characterized by very irregular external surfaces, due to the presence of broken, thin (<10 μm) bubble septa. Clast vesicularity is generally high (mean value 58 vol.%, range 35–73 vol.%); vesicles are roughly equidimensional and homogeneously distributed. Most of the vesicles are smaller than 100 μm. Vesicle shape varies from equant to sub-equant. Coarsely vesicular clasts (CV) have slightly irregular, planar to curviplanar external surfaces, with few protruding septa or fluidal sectors, and equant to moderately elongate shapes. Morphology is determined by the intersection of the external surface with coarse vesicles (>100 μm). Clast vesicularity varies between 27–70 vol.% and highly vesicular clasts (60–70 vol.% vesicles) predominate. Vesicles are spherical to irregular, with a large dimensional range. Blocky clasts (BL) have equant to sub-equant, roughly prismatic shapes, showing planar to curviplanar, to slightly irregular, external surfaces that rarely intersect vesicles. Curviplanar surfaces possibly result from rupture of very coarse bubbles or not vesicular glass. Clasts are generally incipiently to moderately vesicular (12–40 vol.%), with a modal value around 30 vol.%. Black, obsidian-like glassy clasts characterized by smooth external surfaces are present at the base of the succession. Vesicles are generally spherical, with a wide dimensional range. Elongate tubular, coalescing vesicles showing a preferred orientation are also present in some BL clasts. On average, these are characterized by the highest values of vesicularity for this category. Fluidal clasts (FL) are sub-equant to elongate (rod-like). The general shape is moderately to very irregular, with a smooth-skinned surface; external surfaces cut only few bubbles. Clast vesicularity varies in the same range of SFV and CV clasts (34–70 vol.%), with a mode at approximately 55 vol.%. Vesicles have a wide dimensional range, with the coexistence of large, irregular, contorted, elongated vesicles, and small-sized, nearly spherical ones. The smooth-skinned surfaces visible on these clasts possibly represent the inner surface of a population of very large, irregular bubbles (or of a complex network of interconnected bubbles), disrupted at fragmentation. Open cracks, typical of hydromagmatic clasts ( The juvenile component ejected during the different phases of the eruption shows a large morphological and textural variability also at the scale of the single eruptive phase ( the most diagnostic clast types for eruptive dynamics are BL and FL, as they are not always present, with BL being most abundant and FL being absent in the first stage of Phase I. low-vesicularity, BL clasts are abundant only at the onset of the eruption, together with coarsely vesicular clasts (CV); fluidal, highly vesicular clasts (FL) appear and are most abundant by the end of Phase I and during Phase II; coarsely vesicular clasts (CV) and highly vesicular clasts (SFV) are the only two components that are always present in all samples; SFV clasts, which record the most vesicular portions of the magma, are particularly abundant in the tephra deposited by the most intense phases of the eruption (Phase I, Phase III). Projected outlines of the juvenile clasts depict a clear morphological variability along the eruption sequence, with jagged, irregular, elongated clasts being predominant by the end of Phase I to the end of Phase II (samples EJ13C and EJ07; The different clast types have average vesicularity values around 55 vol.% except for the BL clasts, which present a lower vesicle content (around 30 vol.%; The range of total groundmass crystallinity is quite similar for CV, SFV and FL clasts, with the majority of them having average crystal content between 3 and 35 vol.% ( Analyses of matrix glass were performed on the different types of ash fragments from all the studied samples, for a total of more than 100 clasts ( For CV, SFV and FL clasts no correlation is observed between groundmass glass composition, clast type and stratigraphic position of the sample ( Morphological, textural and compositional features of pyroclasts have often been used to discuss the relative roles of ascent-related magma degassing and magma/water interaction, as well as the influence of magma composition and rheology in generating many of the observed features of the clasts. Magmatic fragmentation of a melt rising into a conduit can be either related to brittle failure of the highly vesicular melt (by strain-induced, viscoelastic relaxation following rapid acceleration, or for sudden release of bubble overpressure) or to inertially driven ductile deformation caused by bubble growth during decoupled gas-melt ascent ( Morphological and textural analyses of April–May 2010 Eyjafjallajökull ash evidence the presence of four main types of fragments, distributed with different proportions along the eruption sequence. In spite of these differences, clasts of variable type and from the same stratigraphic level share similar glass composition and groundmass crystallinity, excluding a dependence of the clast features on the chemical and mineralogical composition of the magma. Irrespective of the clast type, however, a compositional and textural trend is observed in the groundmass of the whole juvenile fraction, passing from the first to the last erupted products. All these data are discussed here in terms of the dynamics of eruption and fragmentation, degassing and crystallization of the magma, and of the distribution of physical and rheological properties inside the ascending magma column. Variations in the morphological features of the clasts can be interpreted in terms of the relative role played by different fragmentation processes during the eruption. The presence inside a single stratigraphic level of three to four different clast types suggests that fragmentation occurred over a heterogeneous magma column characterized by variable vesicularity and rheological features. The predominance of highly vesicular fragments in all the main phases of the eruption suggests a prominent and always active role of degassing-related magmatic fragmentation during the eruption. Estimates of dissolved water content in magma ( – BL clasts BL clasts are abundant (40 vol.%) only in the sample of the onset of Phase I ( The textural features of BL clasts are important to define the role of hydromagmatic fragmentation in the eruption. We suggest that the glassy, dense BL clasts may represent fragments of the sill/dyke body intruded in the conduit and under an ice cover of about 200 m ( A low amount of blocky clasts is also present in samples EJ13B to EJ15 (main stage of Phase I to Phase III); these clasts have an incipiently to poorly vesicular, microlite-rich groundmass, clearly contrasting with the glassy, nearly microlite-free nature of BL clasts observed in the first erupted products. Although not studied in detail here (for their low abundance), groundmass crystallinity of this second type of blocky clasts is generally higher even of all the other vesicular clasts present in the same samples. We suggest that these microlite-rich clasts derive from the shuttering of the syn-eruptively degassed, crystallized, more rigid (lateral?) portions of the magma column induced by the explosive fragmentation of the volatile-rich portions of the magma column. – CV and SFV clasts CV and SFV clasts are characterized by moderate to high vesicularity, and they dominate the entire sequence. They mainly differ in the range of size and aspect ratio of the vesicles. SFV have nearly equidimensional and homogeneously distributed vesicles, while in CV these are spherical to irregular with a larger dimensional range, possibly recording a more complex (and mature) vesiculation history ( – FL clasts FL clasts show the widest dimensional range of vesicles, due to the coexistence of large, irregular/elongated and small, nearly spherical vesicles ( Important changes in the groundmass texture occur along the studied sequence and can be interpreted in terms of changes in the modalities of syn-eruptive magma ascent and decompression, and the contribution of different magma batches to the eruptive dynamics. Conditions of fast magma ascent are recorded in the groundmass of clasts from the first stages of the eruption (EJ13A and EJ13B). In particular, these samples are characterized by the low groundmass crystal content and by the small size of the microlites; besides, plagioclase microlites are characterized by the high values of AR The increase of the average microlite size and the sharp drop in the value of AR An important change in the process of magma feeding is suggested to occur at the shift from Phase II to Phase III (5 May), when an arrival of primitive, deep-derived magma has been inferred mainly based on the presence of mafic minerals in disequilibrium with the evolved trachyandesite magma, accompanied by an increase in deep (18–23 km) seismicity ( All features of juvenile clasts well relate with observations of eruption dynamics, adding insights into the reconstructed model of the eruption ( The main stage of Phase I, characterized by the formation of an ash-laden plume and by hydromagmatic-style activity ( Phase III ( The abundant production of fine ash during the entire eruption is one of the main features of this event. Our data suggest that, despite the general interpretations of subglacial activity, magma–ice–water interaction played an important role in enhancing or promoting magma fragmentation only in the very initial phases of the activity, when the amount of available water was sufficiently high with respect to the erupting magma, and before the combined effects of the intracauldron tephra cone and water drainage from below the ice cap substantially inhibited the contact. We suggest here that an additional process able to generate large amounts of ash was possibly related to the continuous recycling of large amounts of fragmented material accumulated in the ice cauldron. Comminution of this mixture by mechanical milling within the vent would be able to produce more fine ash from previously fragmented material ( Some conclusions on the studied eruption and on the general problem of mid-intensity, ash dominated eruptions can be drawn from the presented results: The presence of several types of juvenile clasts with different vesicularity and groundmass crystal content during each phase of the eruption suggests the fragmentation of a vertically heterogeneous magma column. The uneven distribution of gas vesicles within the magma column resulted in local conditions of closed and partially open degassing. A more efficient magma–gas decoupling established during the less intense phases of the eruption. The rheological properties of the magma, close to the threshold for the passage from ductile to brittle fragmentation, coupled with the variable MDRs (and hence magma ascent velocity) determined the conditions for the alternation among the two styles of magma fragmentation during the course of the eruption. The observed variation throughout the eruption of the magma composition possibly represents only a second order factor in producing important differences in morphology and texture of the ash fragments. The most evident feature of the summit eruption was clearly the production and dispersal of a large amount of fine ash. This has been traditionally interpreted as the result of an efficient magma–water (ice) interaction all along the eruption. Our data suggest that magma–water interaction was an efficient mechanism of fragmentation only during the very initial stage of the eruption, while primary magma fragmentation was always active throughout the eruption. Syn-eruptive clast recycling was possibly an additional mode of ash production, mainly related to mechanical milling in the vent structure. The interaction of the erupting magma with ice and melting water mainly controlled the vent dynamics and the ash dispersal and deposition, driving early sedimentation of fine ash. The explosive activity which dominated the Phase I, reflects the presence of an important amount of ice-melt water into the eruptive vent, interacting with an already fragmented, high-vesicularity magma, and can be explained by a process of bulk interaction steam explosivity ( All the above data suggest that caution should be used when assessing the role of magma–water interaction in dominating fragmentation processes in subglacial volcanism. The study demonstrates that detailed analysis of ash fragments is an important tool for understanding the dynamics of complex ash eruptions. In particular, we demonstrate that shape, composition, vesicularity and cristallinity of the ash well record the transitions in eruptive style and fragmentation dynamics that characterize these eruptions. Only few eruptions dominated by ash emission, up to now, have been studied with this detail, and our data, applied to a well known eruption like the Eyjafjallajökull 2010, are a clear demonstration of the potential of this method, which can help formulating conceptual models for this type of eruptions. The authors are grateful to M. Rosi, M. Ripepe, R. Genco, D. Delle Donne, G. Lacanna, M. Hensch, and Þ. Sæmundsson for their contribution and discussion in the field. R. Cioni, M. Pistolesi and A. Bertagnini were supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.