Kaolinite is of very fine particle size in nature and thus its dispersion plays a key role in the successful removal of kaolinite in iron ore flotation and selective flocculation processes. As the most widely used dispersant in the world, sodium silicate has been used as a standard dispersant in iron ore industry. However, in the author's previous work, the actual effect of sodium silicate on the colloid stability of kaolinite particles was found to be weak under the typical conditions of iron ore flotation and selective flocculation.
                  In this work, the dispersive effect of a low molecular weight polyacrylic acid on kaolinite particles was systematically investigated through electrophoretic mobility and colloidal stability studies. The results demonstrate that interactions between polyacrylic acid and kaolinite take place over the entire pH range studied in this work, from pH 5 to 10.5, with stronger interactions observed at neutral and acidic pH. This indicates that polyacrylic acid adsorbs on both positively and negatively charged sites on kaolinite, although the presence of positively charged sites on the clay surfaces at low pH and in CaCl2 and MgCl2 solutions at high pH significantly enhances its interactions with kaolinite. The strong dispersive effect of polyacrylic acid on kaolinite in the presence of CaCl2 and MgCl2 shows that polyacrylic acid is a promising dispersant for kaolinite under the typical conditions of iron ore flotation and selective flocculation.Alumina containing minerals in iron ore, such as kaolinite, are detrimental to blast furnace and sinter plant operations. In the literature, selective flocculation and flotation have both been investigated for the removal of alumina containing minerals from iron ore ( Kaolinite is of very fine particle size in nature and thus the dispersion of kaolinite particles plays a key role in the successful removal of kaolinite from iron ore in both de-sliming and flotation processes. In iron ore industry, sodium silicate is widely used as a dispersant of silicate gangue minerals. However, its actual dispersive effect on kaolinite has received very limited attention. In the author's recent studies ( In this work, the dispersive effect of polyacrylic acid (PAA) on kaolinite was investigated. Kaolinite from Georgia, USA, was provided by Ward's Natural Science Establishment. Quantitative X-ray diffraction analysis shows that the sample contains 93% kaolinite and 7% illite. The average particle size of the sample was determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 and was found to be 4.2 Polyacrylic acid (MW 1800) was supplied by Sigma. Calcium chloride, magnesium chloride, sodium chloride and sodium hydroxide are ACS-certified chemicals from Ajax Finechem. The colloid stability of kaolinite particles was investigated through turbidity measurements with the use of a Hach 2100AN turbidimeter. Turbidity values are expressed in nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). In the turbidity tests, 0.5 Zeta potential measurements were performed with the use of a Zetacompact Z8000 model (CAD Instrumentation, France). An electric field of 80 The effect of PAA concentration on the zeta potential of kaolinite at pH 5, 7, 9 and 10.5 is presented in Selective flocculation of iron ore is usually performed at pH 10.5, which is in the pH range of reverse cationic flotation (10–10.5), the most widely used flotation route in iron ore industry. As hydrolyzable metal cations, i.e. Ca  PAA contains carboxylic acid groups, which are capable of dissociation depending on the pH of the solution. The pH at which 50% ionization of PAA occurs was determined to be 4.5 by The adsorption mechanism of PAA has been widely studied. Thus it appears that there is a common belief in the literature that PAA only adsorbs on the positively charged sites on the surfaces of kaolinite and oxides. According to In process water, calcium and magnesium are common cations and their concentration is often in a range of 0.0001 The results of electrophoretic mobility and colloidal stability studies demonstrate that interactions between PAA and kaolinite take place over the entire pH range studied in this work, from pH 5 to 10.5, with stronger interactions observed at neutral and acidic pH. Since the PZC of the edge planes of the kaolinite sample used in this work is between pH 7 and 8, it appears that PAA adsorbs on both positively and negatively charged sites on kaolinite, although the presence of positively charged sites on the clay surfaces at low pH and in CaCl