Deep bed filtration in aqueous media is a well-known process for solid–liquid separation. However, the use of deep bed filtration for the purification of metal melts is a relatively new field of application. In particular, the separation mechanism of metal melts filtration is a new area for investigation. The current paper aims at examining the influence of wetting on the filtration efficiency of ceramic foam filters that is an important feature of the metal melts filtration process. A model system was designed using water and alumina particles (<200μm). The particles and filter medium were coated to model poor wetting. Thus, examination of the influence of wetting on the adhesion energy and filtration performance was possible. Furthermore, the effect of fluid velocity was studied. To this end, the experiments were carried out under atmospheric conditions and at 20°C. The findings showed that poor wetting between the fluid and solid phase significantly increased the filtration efficiency.buoyancy coefficient collector diameter, m particle diameter, m distance between particle and collector surface during contact, m adhesion energy between particle and collector, J kinetic energy of particle before collision with collector, J adhesion force between particle and collector, N detachment force acting on attached particle, N gravitational constant, m/s Hiller number mass of filter after filtration experiment, g mass of filter after cleaning, g mass of particles introduced, g mass of particles that do not flow through the filter, g interception number sedimentation number Reynolds number of particle with a certain size Stokes number fluid velocity, m/s effective fluid velocity relative to attached particle, m/s mean fluid velocity in the filter, m/s mean fluid velocity in the pipe, m/s velocity of particle near collector, m/s effective particle velocity, m/s particle sedimentation velocity, m/s particle density, kg/m fluid density, kg/m fluid viscosity, Pa s adhesion collector filter effective liquid normalized particle Filtration of metal melts using porous ceramics has been employed in the casting industry for many decades ( To study the filtration of metal melts, it is necessary to design a model system operating under ambient conditions (20 Filter structures for metal melts mainly consist of ceramic materials and are available in many geometries and constructions ( The aims of this study are to determine the influence of wetting on deep bed filtration performance and to characterize the filtration ability of ceramic foam filters. Both processes are important for understanding and optimizing metal melts filtration processes. Deep bed filtration is a widely accepted theory for describing metal melts filtration ( The contribution of diffusion is negligible owing to the particle size that is >1 Because Owing to the particle sizes investigated, inertia and interception are important capture mechanisms. The inertia effect is described using the Stokes number The probability of interception depends on the ratio of the particle size Based on the work of The Hiller number can be obtained from Eq. As a summary of the introduced collision effects, Besides the filtration mechanism, it is important to consider the metal melts properties. It is well known that metal melts on non-metallic oxidic surfaces have contact angles above 100° ( Finally, statistical tools were used to evaluate the experimental results. Most of the results are displayed as box-plot graphs to extract information about the quality of the results. Each box envelops 50% of the values measured for one data set. The median value of the data set is displayed by a straight line in the box, and the mean value by an open square. The whiskers above and below the box encompass the results between 5% and 95% of the data set provided their distance to the box is no larger than 1.5 times that of the box height. Any data that are out of the whiskers range are plotted with crosses as outliers. When two boxes of different data sets overlap in the One major aim of this study is to determine the impact of wetting of the particles and the filter medium with the fluid on filtration efficiency. This requires the development of a model system that can adequately simulate the wetting behavior of the metal melts system. Water was used as the model fluid, whereas alumina particles <200 Coating resulted in changes in contact angle of water with the solids to ∼105°. Hence, the resulting solids were hydrophobic. The particle size distributions with and without the coating shown in To further examine the influence of wetting on filtration, AFM measurements were performed. A detailed description of the experimental procedure is given elsewhere ( The samples (P: particle; F: filter) were described by their surface properties, i.e., either wetted (phil) or not wetted (phob) by the liquid. Thus, the wetting modifications were obtained from different systems: P-phob|F-phob represents a system where both the particle and substrate are coated, P-phob|F-phil denotes a hydrophobic particle interacting with a hydrophilic substrate, and P-phil|F-phil represents a system where both the particle and substrate are hydrophilic. Because coating reduces the interfacial surface energy of the solid, water is not expected to spread on the surface. This hypothesis was verified by changing the water contact angle from 50° to 105° following coating. Thus, the model system has a contact angle that is in the reported range of a real metal melts system. Further information in Herein, 20-ppi (pores per linear inch) ceramic foam filters (CFFs) were used as the filter medium. However, based on optical characterization of the foams, only 8–10 pores were visible ( Besides this volumetric inhomogeneity, each filter medium has a unique network orientation comprising struts and nodes (  The experimental set-up allows for a high number of processing parameter variations, which will be described in subsequent publications. The reference experimental procedure, which forms the basis for the following discussion, is defined by: filtered water (3 particle size distribution of <200 stirrer circumferential velocity of 1.83 solid concentration of 0.033 ethanol concentration of 0.1 orifice diameter of 5 This set-up enables the separation of floating particles that are problematic for the hydrophobic particles in particular. The separation is necessary because the floating particles lead to the formation of a particle film at the liquid–gas interface. If this particle film is not retained in the suspension tank, it will cause a surface filtration effect when the liquid–gas interface flows through the filter. First, this effect cannot occur in a real system because the filters used are never drained. Second, owing to this undesired surface filtration, examination of the deep bed filtration efficiency becomes extremely difficult. The separation of the floating particles is achieved by closing the suspension tank valve 01 and simultaneously opening the bypass valve 02. An additional important step during the filtration experiment is the injection of the particles. The particles are pre-suspended in ethanol, which acts as a dispersant. This has a negligible influence on the wetting angle, as confirmed by contact angle measurements on a planar surface. The pre-suspended particles are injected with a syringe below the liquid–gas interface to prevent interaction with the gas. This is necessary because the hydrophobic particles will interact readily with gas bubbles, leading to large and unwanted gas/solid agglomerates or increased bubble flotation. The prevention of gas bubble formation in the filtration test rig was a major task during commissioning of the test set-up. The measurements were quantified by the corrected filtration efficiency  The 20-ppi alumina filters were unsuitable for separation of the hydrophilic particles, as shown in The most remarkable result obtained relates to the influence of the surface interaction between the particles and fluid on filtration efficiency. One reason for the effect illustrated in To improve the overall filtration efficiency in the fully hydrophobic system, it is well known from aerosol science ( When the fluid velocity increased above the reference value 0.11  To generalize the influence of wettability on filtration efficiency, all wetting modifications were tested at different fluid velocities. Based on the findings in Comparing the current observed influence of fluid velocity with the reported data of the metal melts system ( To our knowledge, the present study on ceramic foam filters is the first report that examines filtration efficiencies in correlation with wetting behavior. By coating alumina particles, it is possible to assess the effect of wetting of the fluid on the filtration process. AFM analyses showed that hydrophobic surfaces developed higher adhesion energies than geometrically identical hydrophilic surfaces. The higher adhesion energies consequently led to significantly improved filtration efficiencies. By reducing the flow velocity, the filtration efficiency of the hydrophobic particles increased significantly. This illustrates the increased influence of interception. The filtration efficiency of the hydrophilic particles was lower than 2 To model the correlation between the measured adhesion energy and filtration, the dimensionless Hiller number, which describes the probability of adhesion of a particle colliding with the filter, was introduced. Experiments are underway to further examine the influence of wetting on the filtration process. To confirm the statements made in this study, a single-collector test rig will be investigated. Thus, the influence of wetting on filtration efficiency may be verified without the uncertainty introduced by the ceramic foam filters. The defined Hiller number will be extended to include the effect of liquid layer rupture during collision of particles with the filter medium ( The authors thank the