Ceramic microstereolithography has recently emerged as a solid free form fabrication techniques for the fabrication of three-dimensional (3D) ceramic components of complex shapes. The spatial resolution of ceramic parts depends upon cure depth and cure width of UV curable ceramic suspensions. Ceramic particle size, its distribution and difference in the refractive indices between ceramic particles and UV curable monomer influence suspension microstructure which will be reflected in viscosity change and extent of colloidal gelation. Suspensions of alumina are formulated in a monomer having hydrophobic backbone structure (monomer chains terminating both ends with –CH2–) by dispersing alumina modified with suitable carboxylic acids (stearic acid and oleic acid). Another suspension was prepared just by dispersing as received alumina in a monomer having hydrophilic backbone structure (monomer chains terminating one end with –OH–). Suspensions exhibit different microstructures owing to solvency of adsorbed layer in monomer having hydrophobic backbone structure, interaction of hydroxyl groups present on alumina particles with monomer having hydrophilic backbone structure as revealed by dynamic rheology. We report effect of microstructure of these suspensions on UV curing behavior by monitoring C=C conversion. The spatial resolution of ceramic part is predicted by measuring cure depth and cure width for the suspensions cured in microstereolithography apparatus.Recently, capability of Stereolithography (SLA) technique has been extended to fabricate complex 3D ceramic objects by formulating stabilized suspensions comprising of ceramic particles dispersed in photo polymerizable resins UV curable suspension usable in MSL and SLA must fulfill certain criteria. Ceramic suspensions should be stable and for satisfactory layer recoating, viscosity of UV curable suspension should not exceed 5 Ceramic particles such as alumina, silica, and zirconia typically have hydroxyl groups on their surface which is responsible for their hydrophilic nature; however, photopolymerizable resins in which ceramic particles have to be dispersed can be hydrophilic or hydrophobic in nature depending on their chain ends. Hydrophilic monomers would readily form hydrogen bond with ceramic particles leading to homogeneously dispersed particles in suspensions. However to form stable suspension with hydrophobic monomers modification of ceramic particle surface is essential. In this article we report formulation of ceramic suspension considering these interactions and chemical modification of ceramic powder particle surface. Here we have selected submicron size alumina to prepare suspensions in several photopolymerizable resins. Previous articles on related theme reported effect of particle size, solid loading, energy intensity, effect of interparticle distance, concentration of photo initiator, UV absorbing dyes on cure depth The ceramic powder used in this study is alumina (Almatis, density 3.9 Alumina powder was dried in a vacuum oven at −260 Wettability of these surface modified powder was investigated on polished alumina compacts using contact angle measurement instrument (Digidrop GBX). The polished alumina compacts were immersed in acetone containing SA and OA in amounts as generally used with powders for 12 TGA of chemisorbed alumina powder was characterized by Perkin Elmer instrument (Diamond TG/DTA) with heating rate of 10 UV curable suspensions were formulated by dispersing surface modified powder incrementally in HDDA till solid volume fraction reached 0.40. Homogeneity of suspension was achieved by ball milling along with ceria stabilized zirconia balls (1:1 with respect to the weight of the powder) at 90 Dynamic and steady state rheological behavior of the suspension was measured with modular compact rheometer (Anton Paar Physica MCR 301, parallel plate arrangement maintaining gap of 0.5  Another UV lamp (maximum power 6 When carboxylic acid RCOOH dissolves in acetone it ionizes into RCOO  Suspensions of alumina modified with various weight percentages of OA and SA in HDDA exhibited different viscosities as shown in Though optimum concentration of SA and OA as shown in The ability of carboxylic acid to form stable metal carboxylate compound with ceramic particle surface depends on its miscibility with solvent used for facilitating physisorption on the particle surface. The difference in solubility parameters of solvents and carboxylic acids should as large as possible in order to form more stable carboxylate compound. If the difference in solubility parameters of solvent and acid is less then solubility of acid in solvent increases and adsorption on particle surface decreases resulting in less stable carboxylate compound Suspensions with high concentration of filler exhibit viscoelastic behavior and can be characterized by dynamic rheological measurements or oscillatory measurements The microstructure of suspension can be of two types a stable sol and a gel. In case of stable sol short range repulsive force exists between the particles that keep them from coming near to each other. In case of gel repulsive forces are weak resulting in particle–particle contact; hence there exist 3 dimensional networks of the particles in gel. The state of particulate structure in terms of gel or sol can be ascertained by knowing the values of storage modulus ( Colloidal gelation in ceramic suspension has significant effect on photopolymerization. The extent of gelation in suspension not only retards photopolymerization process but also reduces polymeric gelation by UV light as rest of the rigidity in the suspension is contributed by colloidal gelation  Prior to UV exposure absorption bands of twisting H  Cure depth and cure width of ceramic suspension govern the resolution of ceramic part fabricated by MSL apparatus. Larger cure depth and smaller cure width are desirable for good spatial resolution in MSL apparatus. Cure depth and cure width of cured ceramic suspensions were found from experimental setup schematic of which is shown in Compatibility of carboxylic acid adsorbed on ceramic particles with UV curable monomer plays major role in forming stable colloidal suspension. Stearic acid is not effective in dispersing alumina particles in monomers having hydrophobic backbone structure due to its limited solubility in monomer as revealed from dynamic rheology. On the other hand oleic acid proved effective in dispersing particles in hydrophobic monomer. For a particular monomer-photoinitiator system having same solid loading extent of double bond conversion does not get affected by extent of colloidal gelation or underlying microstructure. Structure of carboxylic acid also influences curing behavior of suspension. Oleic acid having carbon double bond absorbs UV light to some extent and reduces cure depth and cure width of ceramic suspension. The extent of gelation of resin having hydrophobic backbone structure dispersed with stearic acid modified alumina causes excess broadening of cure width, reducing spatial resolution of ceramic part.