In this study, Al2O3/Cu core-shell nanostructure was fabricated by electroless plating of copper on Al2O3 particles. In order to reach to the maximum efficiency of electroless deposition, the influence of main effective parameters such as type of pretreatment process, HCHO/CuSO4·5H2O molar ratio, C4H4O6KNa·4H2O/CuSO4·5H2O molar ratio, pH, pouring rate, concentration of Al2O3 particles, bath temperature, plating time, stirring speed and Al2O3 particle size were investigated. The morphology, uniformity, and chemical composition of the activated and Cu coated Al2O3 particles were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The results show that, by optimization on the electroless bath composition and the process parameters, using minimum chemicals usage maximum copper plating rate of 19.51% on the surface of Al2O3 particles is obtained. As result of copper deposition on the surface of Al2O3 nanoparticles, uniform shells with about 10nm thicknesses was fabricated on the Al2O3 nanoparticles.Metal-coated ceramic particles are an attractive kind of core-shell structures due to their improved functional and mechanical properties. Moreover, in the such structures combined characteristics of tough and conductive metals with those of high temperature resistant ceramic particles leads to formation of high performance materials as new advanced materials The structures can be fabricated by solid-state methods such as ball milling, liquid-state methods such as sol–gel, electroless deposition (ED) and precipitation deposition, and vapor deposition such as PVD There are some articles on preparation of core-shell structures by ED. While most of them are mainly focused on micron or sub-micron particles, there are little reports on preparation of the nanoparticles by electroless plating. Moreover, in most of them the thickness of shell was reported submicron substrate properties: such as catalytic activity of particles (type of pretreatment process), morphology of particles, surface charges of particles and load (size and concentration of particles). Bath composition parameters: type and concentration of main salt, reducing agent, complexing agent, buffering agent, stabilizer and accelerators. Process parameters: temperature, pH, plating time, mixing mode, mixing rate, agitation type and agitation intensity Among these parameters, effects of some ones on the deposition rate, uniformity and chemical composition of coated layers had been studied Copper was coated on the surface of Al Subsequently, ED was performed in a copper electroless bath containing copper sulphate (CuSO Finally, the powders were washed in distilled water for several times, filtrated (nano powders should be separated centrifugally) and dried in a vacuum oven at 80 Influences of various parameters on the efficiency of ED were investigated. The main controlling electroless parameters and their levels are reported in At first, the effects of type of pretreatment process on the catalytic properties of Al In the second part, parameters of bath composition were analyzed. Here, minimum chemical usage and maximum process efficiency are favorable. Therefore, concentration of CuSO Bath parameters were optimized in the next section. Concentration of Al In the last part, effect of Al The weight of powders before and after each ED process measured with an electronic digital balance with accuracy of 0.001 The morphology, uniformity, and coating thickness of the Cu coated Al As it is known, because of chemical inertness of Al In one-step pretreatment method, surfaces of particles are activated by coarsening treatment. In this study, we perform an experiment based on one-step pretreatment method, by coarsening the micron sized Al In two-step method, pretreatment is performed after coarsening in a bath containing SnCl  As soon as the activated particles are dispersed in an electroless bath of metal ions, complexing agents, reducing agents, buffers and stabilizers, an autocatalytic electrochemical reaction are performed as follow: As the reaction started, bath solution turned to be dark pinkish color, indicating deposition of Cu, and lots of hydrogen bubbles appeared in the solution. SEM micrographs and EDS analysis of as received Al In this section, optimization of chemicals concentration in a Cu electroless bath is discussed. To reach this aim, concentration of CuSO  In electroless plating the characteristics of coated layers are much dependent on the composition of electroless bath. However there is a little theoretical study on plating composition, in more studies choosing the appropriate bath composition is determined through experiments In this study C Another influencing parameter of bath composition is buffering agent concentration. During ED, because products of the reaction consume OH Ling and Li studied various feeding modes in electroless powder deposition and reported that, when the copper-complex solution was fed into suspending solution of reducing agent, buffering agent and activated particles, more uniformity of copper coating was appeared Statistical ANOVA was performed to identify the effect of individual factors on the process response and understanding which process parameters are statistically significant. Through ANONA, The percentage contribution for each factor can be calculated based on variability of the S/N ratios and by using parameters of dƒ (degree of freedom), SS (sum of squares), MS (mean sum of squares) and F (variance ratio). At the final step of Taguchi method optimal combination of the process parameters and response of this situation were predicted using ANOVA. B3, C2, D3 and E1 are the best levels of each parameter to achieve maximum plating rate. The estimated value for optimum plating rate is 17.93%. Verification experiment was conducted and plating rate was measured as17.46%, which is in good agreement with the calculated amount. Bath composition is the major parameter affecting the coating process however, process parameters such as concentration of the substrate, bath temperature, plating time and etc., also affect coating process in a major way  Effects of bath temperature on the process efficiency also investigated. It is indicated that the plating rate increases significantly by increasing bath temperature. It is because ED is an endothermic reaction that needs to absorb energy from the surroundings, and so the rate of process increases with increasing temperature. While lower temperatures are not enough to start ED, higher temperatures lead to the self-decomposition of Cu particles in the bath, difficulty in pH controlling and subsequently, declining of coating uniformity. Further, it is concluded by some researchers that the operative electroless bath temperature changes by pH, substrate particle size and ultrasonic waves. On the other hand, maximum plating rate is observed at temperature about 60–80  In the last part of The results of ANOVA for plating rate as the function of process parameters are given in To investigate the effects of initially Al  XRD result of the produced Al  Pretreatment procedure consisting three steps of coarsening, sensitization and activation, was recognized as the most accepted method for activation of the Al By increasing HCHO concentration plating rate, thickness of coated layer, plating time and hydrogen evolution increased, meanwhile more increasing in reducing agent concentration caused to solution decomposition. Optimum C Increasing pH range of the solution from 11 to 13 and decreasing feeding rates caused to better and more effective depositions. Plating rate increased as Al