Understanding the behaviour of fluid flow through packed ore/rock beds is essential for estimating metal extraction from low-grade ores via dump leaching as well as the release of toxic elements from mine waste rocks. One fundamental factor that determines the flow behaviour in ore/rock beds is particle size distribution. Given the limitations presented by the traditional sieve analysis, we applied aerial imagery to investigate the particle size distribution in ore piles. Using dump leaching as an example, we analyzed the aerial images of a dump leach pad acquired by a camera installed on a drone while the leach pad was under construction. The image analysis results showed that the dump leach pad contained an extremely wide range of particle sizes. A spatial segregation of fine and coarse particles was observed. The widely used P80 was deemed to be questionable to represent particle size distribution in dump leach pads. The Sauter mean diameter (d32) and the dump permeability were found to increase with depth. The technical method described in this study provides a more convenient and reliable tool for particle size distribution analysis, thereby facilitating future studies that will enhance understanding of metal extraction from low grade ores in leaching operations as well as the potential release of pollutants from waste rock piles.The movement of fluids (water and air) through packed beds of ore/rock particles plays an essential role in the extraction of valuable metals from low-grade ores via heap/dump leaching as well as the release of potentially harmful substances from mine waste rocks ( Fluid flow in unsaturated porous media is described by such bulk parameters as the fluid properties (density and viscosity), the intrinsic permeability of the porous media, and the degree of saturation ( To understand fluid flow through rock piles, we investigated the particle size distribution of a dump leach pad and estimated its permeability based on the particle size distribution. Particle size distribution is typically derived from sieve analysis, where the size of a particle, typically not spherical or of any regular shape, is based on the aperture of a screen. However, the existence of particles as large as 100 to 200 The case study site was the Quebrada Blanca (QB) copper mine located in northern Chile. The operation produces copper cathodes using heap and dump leaching, solvent extraction, and electrowinning. This study aimed at investigating the particle size distribution of the dump leach pad, which was constructed via end dumping of the run-of-mine ore using haulage trucks without further crushing of the ore. During dump construction, a new dump face was formed after a truck load of ore was deposited over the previous dump face. Images of various dump faces were taken using a camera installed on a drone operated by San Lorenzo S.A. (Iquique, Chile). The angle of repose was between 30° and 40°. The camera was adjusted roughly in parallel with the dump faces at an angle of 35°. Four PVC pipes of 1-m length and 1-inch diameter painted in orange that provided high visibility were placed on the leach pad in the shape of a square as the reference size for the subsequent image calibration. Ten images in total, each representing a distinct dump face, were selected for the image analysis using ImageJ software, an open source platform designed for scientific image analysis ( Even though efforts were made to obtain a perfect view of the entire dump face, imperfections were still found in six of the ten images due to the large dimension of the leach pad. The imperfections were on the part of the images that represented the top 2 To study the segregation of fine and coarse particles along the dump face, each of the ten images was segmented into sub images that represented different depths along the dump face. The segmentation started with the first sub image representing the top 2 The accuracy of the image analysis results was subjected to the quality of the images, which could be compromised by such issues as shadows and blurry particle boundaries caused by uneven natural lighting. One possible consequence was that the percentage of fine particles was underestimated. This could occur when a cluster of fine grains was wrongly identified as one single large particle because of no significant changes in the pixel intensity values among the fine particles in the cluster. To minimize this effect, manual adjustment that involved manually circling out the largest particles in individual images was applied. In this way, the largest possible diameter was known. Any particles larger than this diameter were considered as fine particle clusters instead of one large particle. These presumed fine particle clusters were then converted to certain numbers of fine particles under two assumptions: (1) the diameter of the fine particles was equivalent to the smallest identifiable particle size in a particular image, typically between 1 and 2  The stark difference of P  Discernable differences in the spread of these lines across different particle size ranges were observed. For all depths, the lines exhibited more pronounced spreading within the large particle range than within the fine particle range, which was manifested by the different magnitudes of variation of the characteristic diameters, d These results raised an interesting question on what would be a more effective characteristic diameter to use in dump leaching. Traditionally, mine operations use d In reference to the analysis of the gradation of soils, the gradation of ore particles in the dump leach pad was examined. Some commonly used measures of gradation in soil mechanics are the uniformity coefficient defined as the ratio of d The spatial heterogeneity in the particle size distribution has important implications for the leaching process. As the depth increased, the Sauter mean diameter, d The permeability of the dump The particle size distribution of the dump leach pad at the case study mine was characterized by analyzing the aerial images acquired by a camera installed on a drone. The image analysis results showed that particles in the dump covered a wide range of sizes from less than 2 The spatial particle size segregation would have important implications for the chemical leaching in the dump leach pad. The Sauter mean diameter was found to increase with increasing depth, indicating that the surface area available for the leaching reactions decreased with depth. Meanwhile, the dump permeability, which seemed to be extremely high, increased with depth, suggesting that the spatial heterogeneity may cause preferential flow to occur. The findings of this study demonstrated the importance of characterization of particle size distribution in ore/rock piles for determination of fluid flow and the amounts of solutes leached. In addition, understanding the possible large particle effect on the leaching process may guide the modern blasting technology to control the size of the largest particles. Aerial images used for the analysis were provided by the Quebrada Blanca Mine.