The influence of Sm on the microstructure, electrochemical properties, and discharge performance of cast AZ80 as the anode for Mg-air battery are investigated. AZ80 containing Sm has refined α-Mg grains and contains the Al2Sm phase. With increasing Sm content, the number and size of the Mg17Al12 phase particles are reduced. The AZ80-xSm anodes have higher electrochemical activity and lower self-corrosion rates than AZ80. The AZ80-xSm anodes also have a high discharge performance and a stable discharge voltage, which is attributed to the refined structure and Al2Sm particles. The AZ80-3Sm anode has the best discharge capacity of 1439 mAh g−1 and the best anode efficiency of 65% at 40 mA cm−2, which are 17% and 20% higher than for the AZ80 anode. This anode has an output peak energy of 1719 mWh g−1 at both 10 and 20 mA cm−2, compared with 1510 mWh g−1 for AZ80 at only 20 mA cm−2. The AZ80-xSm anodes have smoother discharge surface morphology, which is beneficial to the exfoliation of discharge products.Environmental issues such as global warming and extreme weather events have recently received a lot of attention [ The Mg-air battery consists of the magnesium alloy as the anode, O Sm is a light, inexpensive RE element. Most Sm is used to manufacture magnetic materials [ Four alloys with different Sm contents were used in this study. Specimens for microstructure observation were cut from the ingots. They were ground using different grades of SiC papers, polished with diamond paste, and were etched using 4.2g picric acid in acetic acid and alcohol. The microstructure observation was implemented using optical microscopy (OLYMPUS BX53). A linear intercept method was employed to measure the average grain size. The phase morphology and distribution were observed by SEM (TESCAN MIRA3 XMH) coupled with EDS. The phase composition was determined by XRD. Specimens for electrochemical tests were cut from the ingots with a dimension of 10 mm Specimens for Mg anodes were cut from ingots and embedded into a plastic mold with only one surface exposed in the electrolyte. They were ground using 300 SiC paper and polished. A self-designed Mg-air battery was used using the MnO   The above results indicated that the Sm refined the α-Mg and also the Mg    Since the self-corrosion resistance is a key factor for the performance of Mg-air battery, the corrosion rate was measured using hydrogen evolution and mass loss test. The hydrogen evolution and weight loss measurements of the four investigated alloys are shown in Based on electrochemical and immersion test results above, adding Sm into AZ80 alloy decreased its self-corrosion rate. The improvement is likely caused by the Sm and unlikely to be attributed to Al  The cell voltage can be affected by the internal resistance of the battery, electrode polarization, and discharge products [  According to the results and discussion in section  In this work, the influence of Sm on discharge and electrochemical behaviors of AZ80 anode for Mg-air battery was investigated in 3.5 wt % electrolyte. The results show the following. Alloying Sm to AZ80 produced the Al Dr. Xingrui Chen, Prof. Qicih Le and Prof. Andrej Atrens designed the experiments. Dr. Xingrui Chen, Dr. Qiyu Liao, Dr. Qi Zou and Dr. Henan Wang implemented experiments. Dr. Xingrui Chen wrote the manuscript. Dr. Xingrui Chen and Prof. Andrej Atrens revised the manuscript. This research was financially supported by the