Selection of a prosthetic aortic valve for use in the young patient is complicated by a variety of important considerations. Age, growth potential, activity and life style expectations, child bearing, and social factors, in addition to anatomic considerations, are all important to the recommendation of a prosthetic valve choice. We review the clinical experience and expectations of currently available prosthetic aortic valves available for the young patient, and describe the advantages and disadvantages for each.  We review important considerations affecting aortic valve replacements in young patients. The choice of aortic prosthesis in a young patient is complex, with multiple factors often under consideration. Factors such as age, lifestyle, child bearing, and associated medical conditions must be reconciled with safety and durability of the chosen prosthetic valve. Traditionally, mechanical prostheses have been considered the most durable replacement option, owing to accelerated deterioration of bioprosthetic valves in the young patient. However, recent advances in both mechanical as well as bioprosthetic valve technologies further complicate an already complex decision-making process. We will review recent data on aortic valve replacement in the young patient, and discuss the role of contemporary options for aortic valve replacement in the young patient. The preoperative evaluation of patients with congenital heart disease includes a thorough history and physical exam. Comprehensive echocardiogram is performed to delineate the intracardiac anatomy and to determine the need for additional interventions. The various features examined include the diameter of aortic annulus, sinotubular junction, left ventricular outflow tract, and size and function of the pulmonary valve. The anatomy of the existing aortic valve leaflets is also determined. Children and young adults with active lifestyles and women who intend to have children are candidates for bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement. There have been significant improvements in commercially available biological valves. Considerable effort has been given to the redesign of the valve cuff to help improve the effective orifice area and thus help reduce the incidence of patient-prosthesis mismatch. A newer generation of anti-calcific treatments has also helped reduce the acceleration of structural valve deterioration and thus help prolong the durability of these valves. Stented bioprosthesis Stentless bioprosthesis (xenograft and allograft) Pulmonary autograft Autologous stentless valve in-situ (Ozaki technique) There are a variety of stented valves available for aortic valve replacement, such as porcine aortic, bovine, and equine pericardial valves. The valves differ in the types of anti-calcification process used and the configuration of the sewing cuff. The stented valves are usually available in outer diameter size 19 mm and up. There is variability in the inner diameter between valves made by different manufacturers, so it is important to understand the effective orifice area of different valves. This could potentially help avoid patient prosthesis mismatch by using appropriate sized valves. The important consideration when using the stented valves is the variable durability of these valves in the pediatric population. There have been several reports of accelerated deterioration of these valves. These concerns require regular surveillance of these patients with physical exam and echocardiographic evaluation. A recent paper Anti-mineralization treatment consists of treating biological tissues used for valve prosthesis with the intent of slowing structural valve deterioration secondary to calcification and mineralization. One study One large single-institution series examined the outcomes of pediatric biological valve replacement for both aortic and mitral valve replacement. Stentless bioprostheses includes homografts and xenografts (porcine aortic root). These conduits can be used for either subcoronary implantation or full root replacement. The advantage of these valves is the lack of a rigid stent. The lack of rigid stent allows for implantation of a large-size valve conduit and having lower gradients across the left ventricular outflow tract. However, they are also plagued by the same structural valve deterioration concerns of other biological valves. There have been improvements in the anti-mineralization techniques that have positively impacted valve durability. The important consideration again is the avoidance of patient prosthesis mismatch. One series Utilizing autologous pulmonary valve for aortic valve replacement has several theoretical advantages. The main advantage of autograft replacement is the avoidance of stented prosthesis in the aortic position and avoidance of gradient in the left ventricular outflow tract. Numerous publications have illustrated the durability of this type of aortic valve replacement in the pediatric population. One single-institution series A large series of patients who had undergone the Ross procedures examined the concept of autograft reinforcement and subcoronary implantation technique. At Boston Children’s Hospital we have performed 62 pulmonary autograft replacements of the aortic valve over a 14-year period (internal data, in press). Operative survival was 99% and 5-year survival was 96%. Freedom from reintervention on the autograft is 55% at 5 years. There has been a growing interest in aortic valve repair in children using various biologic tissues. The most widely used materials are autologous pericardium and bovine pericardium. The durability of these repairs has been shown to depend on various patient factors, such as aortic valve anatomy and geometry and age. One of the newest pericardial reconstruction techniques is one proposed by Ozaki et al. We briefly touch on this choice of valve prosthesis to highlight the risks and benefits of mechanical prosthesis. There have been significant improvements in the material and design of mechanical valves over the past few decades. There are mechanical prostheses available to size 15 mm, which makes them suitable for certain infant and pediatric patients. The advantage of this prosthesis is the potential for longer durability. One of the biggest drawbacks of mechanical valves is the need for anticoagulation and the annual risk of bleeding associated with this. In addition, there is also the risk of thromboembolism related to the mechanical prosthesis and lack of proper anticoagulation. Anticoagulation is a very important consideration when choosing valve types for pediatric patients because this can interfere with active lifestyles of children and young adults. With the advent of newer materials, there is considerable interest in these types of valves because they require lower anticoagulation levels. One such valve is the On-X valve (On-X Life Technologies, Inc, Austin, TX), which is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for using lower anticoagulation target (INR 1.5 to 2.0). There are several choices for biological aortic valve replacement in children. However, this decision is something that takes several factors into consideration, such as patient and parent choice, patient lifestyle, anatomic characteristics of the aorta and aortic valve annulus, and the presence of other comorbidities. At our institution, there has been a renewed interest in the use of the autograft for aortic valve replacement. We also have been adopting the pericardial valve reconstruction in situ (Ozaki technique) because this technique may afford the favorable hemodynamic profile with early but encouraging durability profiles. As with any prosthetic valve technology, intermediate and long-term results are extremely important, but extremely difficult to obtain. Given the pace of change in valve technology, the moving target of the most “appropriate“ aortic valve replacement in the young patient remains a customized decision, informed by the best available data.