Percutaneous fixation of pelvic and acetabular fractures are technically demanding procedures, and high rates of screw misplacement and potential neurovascular complications have been reported.
                  One hundred and sixty two screws from a prospectively collected database were analysed to evaluate the accuracy of a fluoroscopically assisted computer navigated technique to insert a cannulated screw to treat pelvic and acetabular fractures. Actual screw position and trajectory with the intraoperative surgical plan stored in the navigation computer.
                  The actual screw position differed from the surgical plan by a mean of 3.9mm, with a mean 1.4 degree difference in screw trajectory. Post operative CT analysis of patients showed 10 screws perforated cortical bone.
                  Our results show that the use of computer navigation can aid in the accurate placement of percutaneous screws along a predefined plan. It is still possible to incorrectly place a screw and great care needs to be taken with the surgical plan and also to understand the complex anatomy of the bony pelvis.Severe pelvic ring and acetabular fractures are high-energy injuries resulting from significant forces such as motor vehicle and motorcycle crashes and falls from height. Surgical management of these complex fractures has undergone a steady evolution over the past 50 years, with advances in the understanding of pelvic anatomy and concepts of surgical fixation leading to improved operative approaches Due to the anatomical complexity of the pelvis and intrapelvic structures, internal fixation of pelvic ring and acetabular fractures can be technically demanding, often requiring large operative exposures to allow safe and accurate reduction and fixation. Complication rates as high as 25% have been reported, with the majority of these associated with operative exposure, rather than initial injury Percutaneous insertion of cannulated sacroiliac, anterior column and supraacetabular screws can be used to manage amenable pelvic and acetabular fractures after closed reduction. This minimally invasive approach has been shown to be a safe alternative to open fixation, with lower rates of bleeding and infection Percutaneous screw insertion, however, is a demanding procedure requiring adequate reduction of the fracture and accurate screw fixation across narrow safe corridors. In the case of sacroiliac screws, insertion requires repetitive alterations in C-Arm position to acquire inlet, outlet and lateral views whilst drilling or passing guide wires. As corrections in one plane may also cause deviations in others, insertion may require extensive fluoroscopy and multiple passes with a drill or guide wire The narrowest part of the safe corridor for sacroiliac screws, the sacral pedicle, has been measured in 3D CT reconstruction studies with a mean width of only 15.6 After CT guided navigation systems were shown to improve accuracy of pedicle screw insertion in spinal surgery The aim of this study was to determine the accuracy and safety of pelvic ring and acetabular fracture fixation using a computer navigated cannulated screw technique. We have performed an analysis of our prospectively collected database of intraoperative fluoroscopic images and navigation computer data to assess deviation of the implanted screw from the operative plan. All patients undergoing operative treatment of pelvic or acetabular fractures using percutaneous cannulated screws inserted with the aid of computer navigation were recorded on a prospective database. All patients were included in the study if they required operative intervention with a pelvic fracture Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS) 2005 update code of 856,171.4, 856,163.4, 856,172.4, 856,164.5 or 856,174.5 between July 21st 2006 and December 31st 2012. All patients were operated under the supervision of one of the senior authors (RdS, AB). This project was submitted to the Royal Melbourne Hospital ethics committee and received full approval as a Quality Assurance research project. Patients were positioned supine on a radiolucent table. For sacroiliac fixation a radiolucent pad was placed under the sacrum to assist screw placement. Reduction of the pelvic ring was achieved by closed methods, usually with the addition of an anteriorly placed external fixator. Once satisfactory reduction had been achieved, a reflective array was attached to a 5 These images were displayed on the computer navigation monitor and used to plan a safe trajectory for a cannulated screw (see After placement of the screw, fluoroscopic images were then reacquired and registered to the computer navigation system. The planned screw path was mapped onto the new fluoroscopic images by the computer, allowing the position of the inserted screw to be compared with that of the plan. These images were captured as screenshots and assessed using OsiriX DICOM image processing software (Pixmeo, Geneva, Switzerland). In each case, the projection showing the largest divergence between the planned and actual screw was selected for analysis. The angle of divergence was measured using a dynamic angle function of the OsiriX software ( From September 2008, all patients underwent a post operative CT scan to assess reduction and screw position. These scans were also analysed to assess cortical screw perforation. One hundred and seventy three percutaneous cannulated screws were used to treat pelvic and acetabular fractures in 124 patients between the 21st of July, 2006 and the 31st of December, 2012. Patients had a mean age of 42.4 (range 15–87), 59.7% were males and the mean time to surgery of 4.6 days (range 0–25 days). It was not possible to analyse the accuracy of 11 screws because the array was placed on the ipsilateral ASIS to the fracture. Although this allowed accurate screw planning and insertion, it was not possible to analyse accuracy as any compression across the fracture results in a “reference shift”, making it impossible to compare the final screw position with the preoperative plan. These 11 screws were excluded, leaving 162 screws available for analysis. There were no cortical perforations or complications associated with the excluded screws. Of the remaining screws, 115 sacroiliac screws had been inserted, 26 into the anterior column and 21 into other sites around the pelvis (see All sacroiliac screws were inserted for Tile type B and C injuries. The average screw length was 99 Post operative CT imaging was available in 105 of these screws. Eight screws had been performed before a pelvic CT was made part of our postoperative protocol in September 2008. A further 2 screws did not have CT imaging due to the patient dying in the postoperative period. Ten of the 105 screws (9.5%) showed a cortical perforation. These screws deviated from the planned screw by 2.2 degrees (range 0.18–5.85) and 4.6 Of note, 2 ipsilateral screws were inserted into the same S1 vertebral body in 10 patients, and 3 of the 10 cortical perforations were seen in these patients. A further 2 cortical perforations occurred when the fracture had been poorly reduced. Analysis was performed on 26 screws inserted percutaneously to fix anterior column acetabular fractures. The average screw length was 103 Twenty-one screws were also navigated into other sites, with 17 supraacetabular screws and 4 iliac wing screws. The supraacetabular screws deviated from the planned screw path by an average of 1.78 degrees (range 0.1–3.9; SD 1.2), with a mean deviation distance of 3.4 The aim of this study was to demonstrate the accuracy and safety of pelvic ring and acetabular fracture fixation using a computer navigated cannulated screw technique. Our findings show that this technique is able to accurately place a screw to an intraoperatively planned position, but cortical perforation is still possible, particularly if the intraoperative plan for the screw does not take into account the sacral anatomy, or if the fracture is not accurately reduced. We believe our series of 162 screws represents the largest reported series of navigated percutaneous sacroiliac, pelvic and acetabular screws and the first to use intraoperative imaging registered to the navigation computer to compare screw placement with the intraoperatively planned screw position. Our findings are in keeping with those of other published navigated screw series. Arand et al. Gras et al. Similarly, Zwingmann et al. Most recently, Takao et al. used Ten of the sacroiliac screws in our series were found to have breached the cortex of the sacrum. The accuracy of these screws were not significantly worse than the other sacroiliac screws in angle ( Ten patients early in our series had 2 sacroiliac screws inserted down the same sacral pedicle. Three of our cortical perforations occurred in these patients. In retrospect we now believe that the safe corridor for sacroiliac screw insertion is not wide enough to accommodate two 7.3 There were some weaknesses in this study. There was no control group as the senior authors (AB, RdS) changed from a standard technique to a navigated technique after initial trials. The operative technique underwent a slight evolution during the course of this series, with the first 60 screws using an earlier version of the “X-Spot” registration device. Some patients did not have postoperative CT imaging and therefore there may have been some unknown perforations. All screw deviations, however, were able to be measured. In cases where screws were passed across a comminuted fracture, compression across the fracture could cause the position of the bone to move relative to the reference array. This “reference shift” could move the position of the planned screw relative to the bone, producing inaccuracy in measuring the position of the inserted screw. A potential solution would be registering the position of the guide wire prior to screw insertion, but this would increase the patient's exposure to fluoroscopy. This study demonstrated that a navigated percutaneous screw technique for pelvic ring fixation enables a surgeon to accurately insert a screw, along a pre-defined plan. Accurate fracture reduction and a thorough understanding of the complex and variable pelvic anatomy are required to plan a safe screw trajectory before performing the surgical procedure. There is not, to my knowledge, any financial and personal relationships between the contributing authors and other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence or bias this review article.