Thiosulfate is an alternative lixiviant for the leaching of precious metals. Research and development of thiosulfate leach technology has been prompted by environmental concerns with the use of cyanide and problems associated with the processing of difficult-to-treat ores. The Newmont Mining, Nevada, operation has successfully developed a combined biooxidation–thiosulfate heap-leaching process for carbonaceous/high sulfide ores and a direct thiosulfate heap-leaching process for carbonaceous/low sulfide ores. The chemistry of copper catalytic thiosulfate leach is a complicated system due to the simultaneous presence of ammonia, thiosulfate and Cu(II)–Cu(I) redox couple, especially for a heap leach operation. In this paper, factors affecting both the leach reaction and the stability of the lixiviant are discussed relating to heap-leaching operation from a solution chemistry perspective.Since 1980, mine production of gold has steadily increased. Primary gold mine production accounts for most of the total US production. The most common leaching process for gold dissolution involves cyanidation, a process that has been practiced for over a century. During the past three decades, the development of heap-leaching technology for low-grade ore has extended the world resource base considerably. Most gold production from primary resources is still achieved by cyanidation; many research activities have been focused on alternative processes using non-cyanide lixiviants. Such research has been prompted by environmental concerns and problems associated with the processing of so-called difficult-to-treat ores or refractory gold ores. Among the non-cyanide lixiviants, thiosulfate as an alternative leaching reagent has received much attention in recent years. Ammonium thiosulfate is an inexpensive, nontoxic reagent, used mostly for fertilizer. Acceptable leaching rates using thiosulfate are achieved in the presence of ammonia with cupric ion acting as the oxidant. Newmont has developed a heap leach process using ammonium thiosulfate for gold recovery from low-grade carbonaceous sulfidic gold ores. Gold cannot be heap leached with cyanide due to high preg-robbing characteristics of the carbonaceous matter in the ores. It has been found that activated carbon has a very low affinity for gold–thiosulfate complex ion The copper–ammonia–thiosulfate solution used for precious metal leaching was reported to be a very complicated system. Many interactions may occur among the system constituents, not to mention that the system itself is thermodynamically unstable. Unlike cyanide, thiosulfate is metastable and tends to undergo chemical decomposition under improper leach conditions. Numerous factors affect the system's stability. Thiosulfate solution applied to a heap leach operation is more complicated since it requires a long duration leach period. Leach solution after gold recovery is required for recycling and it forms aging solutions after an extended leach period. Heap leaching is applied to low-grade ores associated with various minerals. Most of the sulfide minerals react with thiosulfate and affect gold dissolution and thiosulfate stability. Maximum control of the stability of the leaching system is a key factor for success, especially for a heap leach operation. In this paper, factors affecting a thiosulfate leaching system are discussed. Solution chemistry related to gold recovery from thiosulfate solution using copper cementation will be discussed on another occasion. Since the cyanidation process has been very successful in treating oxide ores and non-preg-robbing ores over the years, from a technical point of view, it is still the preferred process for the recovery of precious metals whenever possible. However, cyanide has problems leaching gold occurring in carbonaceous ores. Newmont's Nevada operation has refractory ores in which sulfide locking of gold occurs with preg-robbing carbon. The high-grade refractory ore was treated by roasting the ores at high temperatures, followed by a cyanidation carbon-in-leach (CIL) process. For low-grade sulfidic and carbonaceous refractory gold ores, Newmont has used the capabilities of sulfide-oxidizing bacteria as a pretreatment process Gold recovery from thiosulfate pregnant solution was achieved with copper powder cementation. After gold recovery, the barren solution was recycled back to the heap. A total of 55,790 oz (1.735 tonne) of gold was produced from the thiosulfate leach technology as shown in Pilot plant tests and several demonstration field tests have been reported Demonstration plant tests confirmed that higher gold recoveries and a lower reagent consumption were obtained from carbonaceous, low-sulfide (or oxide) ores compared with carbonaceous high-sulfide ores even with biooxidation pretreatment. Though it has been confirmed in laboratory tests that oxygen is an important factor for increasing gold reaction kinetics, the Newmont thiosulfate demonstration facility did not have the capability to add air into the heap. Depending upon the ore characteristics, air permeability within the heap and the lift height of the heap, gold leach kinetics may be limited due to the availability of oxygen in the heap. After the demonstration plant tests, implementation of the thiosulfate leach technology to a commercial operation was initiated. However, the construction of a commercial plant has been postponed due to low gold prices and limited carbonaceous ore reserves. Gold dissolution in ammonium thiosulfate solution is described by the following reaction:  It is due to this electrochemical process involving copper that gold can be dissolved. In the absence of copper ions, the limited solubility of oxygen in the thiosulfate solutions and its slow reductions at the gold surface resulted in unsatisfactory gold dissolution. During the leaching reaction, copper ions in solution transfer back and forth from Cu(II) ammine to Cu(I) thiosulfate as shown in Gold in carbonaceous refractory ores is associated with various minerals. Many of these minerals are conductors and semiconductors and are also electrochemically active in the thiosulfate system. Newmont's refractory gold ores contain sulfide minerals with preg-robbing carbon. The most common sulfide minerals associated with gold are pyrite, arsenopyrite and pyrrhotite, with minor amounts of copper sulfides (chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite, etc.). The behavior of these sulfide minerals in thiosulfate solution affects the thiosulfate stability and gold leaching kinetics. Eh–pH diagrams for copper and iron sulfide minerals in an ammonia–thiosulfate system are shown in The dissolution of iron and copper sulfide in the ammonium thiosulfate solutions has been demonstrated by electrochemical study (1) The rest potentials of gold and sulfide minerals, which were directly measured in thiosulfate solutions, are compared in The most difficult minerals to be oxidized in the thiosulfate solution are pyrites, while gold has a relatively strong tendency to be dissolved. (2) The current densities, which were measured at 340 mV (SHE) are given in It should be pointed out that in these measurements, the measured current of anodic oxidation includes two reactions: the decomposition of a sulfide mineral (or the dissolution of gold) and the decomposition of thiosulfate. Nevertheless, results indicate that these sulfide minerals may oxidize in thiosulfate solutions. Many applications have been reported using the thiosulfate leach technology for gold and silver extraction from sulfide ores and complex sulfide concentrates without pretreatment The copper catalytic ammonium thiosulfate system is a complicated system due to the simultaneous presence of thiosulfate, ammonia and the Cu(II)/Cu(I) redox couple. While both leaching and cementation are carried out in the same solution, the ions in the solution may go through a series of changes. An important difference between the cyanide system and the ammonium thiosulfate system is the stability of the lixiviants. While the cyanide is relatively stable throughout the production cycle, ammonia and thiosulfate are not so stable if the operation conditions are not properly controlled. The escape of free ammonia from the leaching solution is unavoidable. Thiosulfate ions are metastable and tend to undergo chemical decompositions in aqueous solutions, especially in the presence of copper In copper–ammonia–thiosulfate solution, many interactions may occur among the system constituents, not to mention that the system itself is thermodynamically unstable. The successful development and utilization of the thiosulfate leach technology will depend upon a detailed knowledge of the system, an understanding of the reaction mechanisms and control of the solution chemistry. In recent years, a significant amount of research has been carried out using thiosulfate for gold leaching. Recently, fundamental studies of thiosulfate leach technology were reported For practical applications, in order to achieve a sustainable and acceptable leach rate along with acceptable thiosulfate consumption, a balance of parameters or conditions is important. It was observed in column tests and field tests that gold leaching kinetics in copper–ammonia–thiosulfate solution was gradually decreased after leaching an extended time. The decreasing leach rate may occur if the gold is not exposed to the solution and is encapsulated in the particles. The gold leaching kinetics was further examined in the laboratory using a gold foil. After the foil had been leached for a number of leaching cycles, the leaching rate was also found to decrease. The surface of the gold foil became tarnished and passivated. XPS, XRD, Raman spectroscopy and microprobe analysis techniques were employed to determine the species on the gold surface. Sulfur and copper sulfides were identified by XPS and microprobe analysis. According to XRD and Raman spectroscopy, the sulfur on the gold surface was either elemental sulfur or in the sulfide form combined with copper. Since not all peaks from either XRD data or Raman spectra agreed with the references, the species on the gold surface may be amorphous or incompletely crystallized. Sulfur and sulfide species on the gold surface appear to form a new interface between gold and solution, preventing thiosulfate from diffusing to the gold surface, thus inhibiting gold leaching reaction. The gold passivation phenomenon in thiosulfate solution was also confirmed from electrochemical measurements Therefore, with the presence of ammonia and oxygen, desirable working conditions, such as solution oxidizing potential and pH value, must be maintained, so as to eliminate sulfur/sulfide formation while decelerating the thiosulfate decomposition. The gold passivation can be reduced to a minimum amount with the presence of ammonia and oxygen under proper Eh–pH conditions as discussed below. It has been suggested that ammonia prevents gold passivation by being preferentially adsorbed on gold surfaces over thiosulfate From past experience, under certain conditions, the copper catalytic oxidation reaction may be limited: (1) inappropriate concentration ratio of ammonia to thiosulfate may stabilize the copper in either the Cu(I) or Cu(II) state, (2) high pH values lead to the precipitation of copper from solutions as oxides and (3) the amount of copper used could be too high. Control of the copper concentration is an important factor to achieve optimum leaching conditions and to minimize thiosulfate decomposition especially for a heap leach operation. High copper concentration increases the gold leaching rate especially for gold extraction from sulfide minerals or concentrates. However, the high concentration of copper also increases the oxidation decomposition rate of thiosulfate. The optimum concentration of copper in the leach solution depends on ore characteristics and the concentration of thiosulfate used. In Newmont's heap-leaching practice, the copper concentration in the initial leach solution was about 30 ppm and increased to 60 ppm after several months of operation. Increasing the copper concentration to 200 ppm resulted in high reagent consumption. As discussed above, maintaining Cu(II) tetra-ammine in the system is very important for the copper(II) ion to serve as an oxidant. The concentration ratio of ammonia to thiosulfate must be maintained for copper ammine and thiosulfate complex ions to coexist. The influences of ammonia and thiosulfate concentrations on the distribution of copper species are presented in It has been observed that the recycled solution after gold cementation sometimes reduces its leaching capability. Part of the reason is due to an inappropriate concentration ratio of ammonia to thiosulfate. Another situation in which this ammonia/thiosulfate ratio may play a role is in the solution aging that occurs during heap leaching after an extended period. In heap leach operation, loss of ammonia due to evaporation and loss of thiosulfate due to degradation are unavoidable. The process design may consider the removal of a bleed stream for better control of solution chemistry. In general, Cu(I) thiosulfate is the predominate species in solution at most common potentials and appears to be in equilibrium with Cu(II) ammine. Potential influences the equilibrium between Cu(I) and Cu(II) ions as shown in Moderate changes in copper concentration do not affect the species distribution diagram significantly. However, it is not recommended that high copper concentrations (>0.003 M) be used. Though high copper concentration will increase the gold leaching rate, on the negative side, copper ions will not only decrease the lixiviants availability for gold dissolution but will also accelerate the decomposition of thiosulfate. It was confirmed experimentally that ammonium and ammonia constituted a pH buffer solution (p Though the solution pH of the lixiviant is stabilized based on the concentrations of ammonia and thiosulfate, many factors affect pH value of solutions from the heap. Depending on ore characteristics (especially sulfide content) and acidity/alkalinity level prior to thiosulfate leaching, pH of the initial leach solutions drained from the heap may be low, even acidic sometimes (in the case of high sulfidic ores). Ammonia with lime or soda ash has been used to adjust the solution pH prior to recycling to heap. Depending upon operation parameters and thiosulfate concentration, leach solution pH ranged from 8.5 to 9.5. Under normal conditions, solution pH was maintained at 8.8–9.2 without any problems. It is not desirable to have solution pH below 8, since the solution would change to acidic dramatically. However, high pH values should be avoided. At high pH (>11), copper will be removed from the leaching solution as oxide species and loss of ammonia will be significant. In general, thiosulfate leach on oxide ore is much easier to operate. Both solution potential and pH can be easily controlled. Depending on the potential Potential influences the equilibrium between Cu(I) and Cu(II) ions as it has been discussed in the previous section. Either Cu(I) or Cu(II) will dominate if the potential becomes too low or too high. At low potentials, where oxidants are deficient, the decomposition of thiosulfate also leads to the precipitation of copper sulfides. In the absence of air, black precipitates were observed to form in solutions containing ammonia, thiosulfate and copper. The precipitates had been identified as copper sulfides by XRD analysis. Under these circumstances, gold extraction may be limited and gold will coprecipitate with sulfides from the solution. In Newmont's heap leach operation, based on solution potential and pH value, a small stream of ammonia is added to the barren solution (if necessary) to control the pH and convert Cu(I) to Cu(II) prior to recycling the solution to the leach pad. The stability of the system is another key factor for normal production. The following facts were observed in our study: dilute solution of ammonium thiosulfate (0.01 M or lower) decomposes more rapidly than concentrated solutions (0.1 M or higher); thiosulfate is more stable in stirred solutions than in stagnant solutions; thiosulfate decomposes immediately in a closed system in the presence of copper and produces black precipitation; and high copper concentration accelerates the thiosulfate decomposition. It has been shown that oxygen availability in the system is of vital importance. Oxygen does not participate directly in the gold leaching reaction as in the case of cyanidation. However, its presence in the system is absolutely necessary. In the absence of oxygen, Cu(I) ions cannot return to the Cu(II) state and, in fact, will precipitate copper sulfides from solution. Under these conditions, the leaching reaction will cease. Depending on the solution potential and pH value, two types of thiosulfate degradation may occur in the system: oxidative and reductive. For the oxidative decomposition of thiosulfate, a series of stable or metastable sulfur–oxygen species may form. The existence of S Sulfate is the most stable and is the final degradation product in the thiosulfate solution under leaching conditions. The sulfate in the heap leach solution reacts with lime-forming calcium sulfate or with ammonia-forming ammonium sulfate. It has been observed during cold weather operations that the crystallized ammonium sulfate formed on the heap surface. The concentration of sulfate (SO For the reductive decomposition, a possible reaction is Copper sulfides and elemental sulfur, the intermediate of thiosulfate decomposition, were observed to form as confirmed by XRD analysis. The reductive degradation of thiosulfate was of concern in the heap-leaching operation since the dissolved oxygen concentration in thiosulfate–ammonia solution was very low. The Cu(II) tetra-ammine concentration may be limited because of the availability of oxygen in the heap. The degradation of thiosulfate not only results in loss of the lixiviants, but also leads to the formation of sulfides which, in turn, passivates gold and limits the leaching rate. In the worst case, gold was precipitated from the solution. It is highly recommended to improve air permeability and have an air ventilation system within the heap. This is especially important in the design and construction of a heap leach system. The addition of sulfite has been suggested to stabilize the ammonium thiosulfate system Cupric–ammonia–thiosulfate leaching has proved to be a promising alternative process for precious metals recovery. Newmont Mining has successfully developed a heap leach process using ammonium thiosulfate for gold recovery from low-grade carbonaceous sulfidic gold ores. A combined biooxidation–thiosulfate heap process was developed for high sulfide ores and a direct thiosulfate leach process for low-sulfide ores. A total of 1.24 million tonnes of low-grade carbonaceous sulfidic ores has been heap leached at Carlin, Nevada, with ammonium thiosulfate. Gold recovery was achieved with copper cementation. After gold recovery, the barren solution was recycled back to the heap for leaching. A total of 55,790 oz of gold was produced from the thiosulfate leach technology. In this paper, the solution chemistry factor for gold leaching with ammonium thiosulfate was discussed. The chemistry of the copper–ammonia–thiosulfate system was found to be complex. Thiosulfate formed complex ions with a variety of metals. Sulfide minerals associated with gold are electrochemically active in the thiosulfate solution. Their behavior affects gold leaching kinetics and thiosulfate stability. The Cu(II) ions in solution participate in a catalytic oxidation reaction and their presence enhances the gold dissolution. For copper to play this role, the leaching solution has to meet certain conditions. It was explained why the concentration ratio of ammonia to thiosulfate is important for successful leaching. The critical point lies in the formation of a solution that allows for both Cu(II) and Cu(I) complex ions to coexist at appropriate concentrations. High copper concentrations accelerate thiosulfate decomposition, and therefore, copper concentration should be controlled. Maximum control of the stability of the thiosulfate leaching system is a key factor for success, especially for a heap leach operation. Proper control of solution pH and potential decreases the tendency for thiosulfate degradation. The loss of ammonia from the leach system is unavoidable. The rate of ammonia loss may be decreased to some extent by maintaining a proper solution pH. Solution potential influences the equilibrium between cuprous and cupric ions. At low potential, where oxidants are deficient, the decomposition of thiosulfate leads to the precipitation of copper sulfides. The reductive degradation of thiosulfate was more concerned for a heap leach operation since oxygen is limited within the heap. Oxygen availability in the system is another important factor. Appropriate access of air must be maintained. Newmont management's direction and support insured the success of the project development. The field tests were supported and conducted by Newmont's Carlin operations. The Newmont researcher–engineer team efforts led the transition of the laboratory-scale research to a practical application. The authors thank Dr. Jun Li on construction of the speciation diagrams.