The recently proposed approach for representing and predicting surface tension of aqueous electrolyte solutions [Chem. Eng. Sci. 56 (2001) 2879] is extended to the prediction of interfacial tension between an organic solvent and aqueous multi-electrolyte solutions. The method of Meissner was adopted in all the calculations of activity coefficient of electrolytes. Model parameters were determined by correlating interfacial tensions reported in the literature for 11 single electrolytes, including 10 inorganic salts and one inorganic acid at isothermal conditions. The correlation yielded an overall average absolute percentage deviation (AAPD) of 0.42. Using these model parameters, the proposed approach was successfully applied to the prediction of interfacial tensions available in the literature for aqueous FeCl3–HCl, NiCl2–FeCl3–HCl and NiCl2–CoCl2–FeCl3–HCl solutions with an AAPD of 5.73.Interfacial tension has an important effect on liquid–liquid extraction processes, such as solvent extraction of metal complexes in hydrometallurgy and liquid–liquid dispersions. It influences the building up of interfacial areas, coagulation of droplets and phase separation. Experimental values as well as correlation and prediction methods of interfacial tension between an organic solvent and aqueous electrolyte solutions are rather limited. Aveyard and Saleem Recently, we proposed a calculation method In the consideration of a liquid–liquid system containing an interface between an organic solvent and an aqueous electrolyte solution, Desnoyer et al. Following our previous work For concentrated electrolyte solutions, activity coefficient calculations are required to take non-ideality into account. In view of the lack of suitable Pitzer parameters for FeCl Meissner and Tester By definition, the activity of electrolyte 12 is expressed by As mentioned above, Meissner and Tester In order to extend Following the derivations made previously It was observed in the application of our model to the prediction of surface tension of mixed-electrolyte aqueous solution that for the mixtures of HNO In order to predict the interfacial tension of mixed-electrolyte systems by using of The interfacial tensions reported by Aveyard and Saleem The proposed two models, Model 1 represented by In this work, experimental densities of aqueous mixed-electrolyte solutions were approximated from the density of their constituent single electrolyte solutions using the following equation The predicted results from both models are compared with the experimental values of Desnoyer et al. Desnoyer et al. For the ternary NiCl Desnoyer et al. The proposed model based on the Gibbs dividing interface, the Langmuir-type adsorption model, and the Meissner’s method for activity calculations, was found to be adequate for representation of interfacial tensions between an organic solvent and aqueous single-electrolyte solutions. The model parameters obtained from these representations were found to be suitable for predicting interface tensions between an organic solvent and aqueous mixed-electrolytes solutions. The predicted results for aqueous FeCl activity interfacial area (m average absolute percentage deviation absolute percentage deviation ionic strength (mol ionic strength of electrolyte 12 (mol adsorption rate constant desorption rate constant adsorption equilibrium constant molality (mol molarity (mol number of moles number of experimental data points Meissner’s parameter Meissner’s parameter of electrolyte 12 temperature (K) charge of positive ion charge of negative ion activity coefficient mean activity coefficient of the electrolyte 12 interfacial excess of electrolyte 12 interfacial excess of water interfacial excess of electrolyte 12 with maximum interfacial excess of electrolyte 12 with function, fraction of interface covered by electrolyte chemical potential of electrolyte  stoichiometric coefficient of cation stoichiometric coefficient of anion density of aqueous electrolyte solution interfacial tension of aqueous electrolyte system (mN interfacial tension in the absence of electrolyte (mN in the absence of electrolyte or single electrolyte solution interface electrolyte electrolyte mixed-electrolyte system total water The financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) is greatly acknowledged.