Unusual monotonous intermediate ignimbrites consist of phenocryst-rich dacite that occurs as very large volume (>1000 km3) deposits that lack systematic compositional zonation, comagmatic rhyolite precursors, and underlying plinian beds. They are distinct from countless, usually smaller volume, zoned rhyolite–dacite–andesite deposits that are conventionally believed to have erupted from magma chambers in which thermal and compositional gradients were established because of sidewall crystallization and associated convective fractionation. Despite their great volume, or because of it, monotonous intermediates have received little attention. Documentation of the stratigraphy, composition, and geologic setting of the Lund Tuff – one of four monotonous intermediate tuffs in the middle-Tertiary Great Basin ignimbrite province – provides insight into its unusual origin and, by implication, the origin of other similar monotonous intermediates.
                  The Lund Tuff is a single cooling unit with normal magnetic polarity whose volume likely exceeded 3000 km3. It was emplaced 29.02±0.04 Ma in and around the coeval White Rock caldera which has an unextended north–south diameter of about 50 km. The tuff is monotonous in that its phenocryst assemblage is virtually uniform throughout the deposit: plagioclase>quartz≈hornblende>biotite>Fe–Ti oxides≈sanidine>titanite, zircon, and apatite. However, ratios of phenocrysts vary by as much as an order of magnitude in a manner consistent with progressive crystallization in the pre-eruption chamber. A significant range in whole-rock chemical composition (e.g., 63–71 wt% SiO2) is poorly correlated with phenocryst abundance.
                  These compositional attributes cannot have been caused wholly by winnowing of glass from phenocrysts during eruption, as has been suggested for the monotonous intermediate Fish Canyon Tuff. Pumice fragments are also crystal-rich, and chemically and mineralogically indistinguishable from bulk tuff. We postulate that convective mixing in a sill-like magma chamber precluded development of a zoned chamber with a rhyolitic top or of a zoned pyroclastic deposit. Chemical variations in the Lund Tuff are consistent with equilibrium crystallization of a parental dacitic magma followed by eruptive mixing of compositionally diverse crystals and high-silica rhyolite vitroclasts during evacuation and emplacement. This model contrasts with the more systematic withdrawal from a bottle-shaped chamber in which sidewall crystallization creates a marked vertical compositional gradient and a substantial volume of capping-evolved rhyolite magma. Eruption at exceptionally high discharge rates precluded development of an underlying plinian deposit.
                  The generation of the monotonous intermediate Lund magma and others like it in the middle Tertiary of the western USA reflects an unusually high flux of mantle-derived mafic magma into unusually thick and warm crust above a subducting slab of oceanic lithosphere.Numerous publications over the past three decades have described compositionally zoned ash-flow deposits presumed to have been derived from magma chambers in which convective fractionation was driven by sidewall crystallization. However, In subsequent decades, these unusual monotonous intermediate ignimbrites have received little attention. Little is known regarding: (1) just how ‘monotonous’ their compositions really are; (2) the nature of compositional gradients – if any – in the pre-eruption magma chamber; (3) possible overprinting of the primary magmatic characteristics by mixing of crystal and glass clasts during eruption or by their fractionation by winnowing; and (4) the role of chamber attributes and tectonic setting in the origin and evolution of the magmas.  In this paper, we define a monotonous intermediate tuff as a very large volume (>1000 km This contribution on the Lund Tuff should not be construed as the final word on monotonous intermediate tuffs. Ongoing research in the San Juan volcanic field by P.W. Lipman, M.A. Dungan and associates, in the remote central Andes by S.L. de Silva and others, and in the Great Basin by us will undoubtedly shed additional insights into monotonous intermediates that will test the conclusions presented here. The best known monotonous intermediate is the Fish Canyon Tuff – a crystal-rich dacite emplaced 28 Ma in the San Juan volcanic field ( Reconnaissance work on the 2.2 Ma Cerro Galan ignimbrite at the southern end of the high Altiplano–Puna in the central Andes by The middle-Tertiary Great Basin ash-flow province ( The Great Basin harbors at least four monotonous intermediates. In the volcanic field in and around the Indian Peak caldera complex ( Where exposed, bedded pyroclastic surge deposits are <1 m thick and plinian fallout deposits are apparently absent beneath the ignimbrites. There are no significant volumes of underlying rhyolite that could represent an erupted differentiate capping the dacitic ‘dominant volume’ of the pre-eruption magma chamber. The Wah Wah Springs Tuff lies directly on the Cottonwood Wash with no intervening rhyolite. Bedded, well-sorted sandstone a few meters thick separates Cottonwood Wash and Lund tuffs from underlying low-silica rhyolite tuffs. In addition to the implied time breaks, the compositions of the rhyolite tuffs render them improbable differentiates of the dacite magmas. The rhyolite tuffs are low-silica (∼71 wt% SiO Cognate pumice clasts in monotonous intermediates are typically inconspicuous; where present, they are generally intensely compacted lapilli in densely welded tuff. The four monotonous intermediates in the Great Basin were emplaced during a brief 3.5 Myr episode (31.0–27.5 Ma) within the much longer ignimbrite flareup (34–17 Ma) but comprise a volume nearly that of the rhyolite tuffs that dominate the remainder of the flareup ( Despite assertions of regional tectonic extension during the ignimbrite flareup, we find no direct stratigraphic evidence for such activity in the outflow areas surrounding the Central Nevada and Indian Peak caldera complexes ( In order to understand the nature and origin of the Lund Tuff, it is mandatory to have a clear understanding of what is and what is not part of the tuff. This correlation problem is compounded by the superficial similarities among the sequentially emplaced sheets of the Indian Peak volcanic field. Recent work shows that some deposits mapped as part of the Lund Tuff are in fact a separate ignimbrite, herein informally named the Silver King tuff. This crystal-rich titanite-bearing dacite underlies the northwestern part of the Lund Tuff ( Oriented cores were collected at 14 sites in the Lund and Silver King units; paleomagnetic results are shown in Sanidine phenocrysts extracted from two samples of the Lund Tuff and two samples of the Silver King tuff were dated by the single-crystal, laser-fusion Definition of the northern and eastern margins of the White Rock caldera ( Calculation of the eruptive volume of any ash-flow deposit in the Great Basin depends critically on the amount of crustal extension after emplacement. But extension was heterogeneous, differing significantly between different structural domains, and in some domains apparently occurred before the ignimbrite flareup as well as afterward. Detailed evaluation of post-Lund extension in the area of the tuff has not been made. However, in an east–west transect now 400 km long between about 39°N and 40°N (just north of the Lund outflow sheet), Using lower and upper limits of 30 and 70% extension and thicknesses shown in The Lund Tuff is typically moderately to densely welded and contains abundant phenocrysts of plagioclase, lesser quartz, hornblende, biotite, minor sanidine, magnetite, and trace amounts of ilmenite, apatite, and zircon. Trace amounts of wedge-shaped titanite grains 1–1.5 mm long are present in most samples and are the most obvious difference between the Lund Tuff and the three otherwise similar large monotonous intermediate tuffs in the Great Basin. In three Lund samples, sparse orthopyroxene (partially altered to hornblende and Fe–Ti oxides) is probably xenocrystic. Phenoclasts ( Lithic clasts are virtually nonexistent in the Lund Tuff. Cognate pumice clasts are uncommon in the intracaldera facies but more widespread in the outflow sheet. Unfortunately, their generally small (lapilli) size and dense compaction precludes extraction for laboratory analyses. Only five cognate inclusions (from two sites) were of sufficient size for study. The mineral assemblage in these phenocryst-rich inclusions is identical to the bulk tuff. Modal analyses of thin sections show that the total phenocryst proportions in the tuff are typically high, with a median of 47 vol% phenocrysts, an average of 43%±12 (1 standard deviation), and a range of 14–56%, all on a dense rock basis. Pumice clasts are also rich in phenocrysts with an average of 52±4%. Samples from the western part of the tuff sheet, especially those collected from the Y section, have fewer total phenocrysts. These anomalous samples are considered further below. Within these crystal-rich rocks, there are substantial variations in proportions of plagioclase (64–48% of total phenocrysts), sanidine (10–0%), quartz (26–2%), biotite (20–6%), hornblende (22–8%), and opaques (essentially Fe–Ti oxides, 8–2%) ( In our small suite of pumice samples, phenocryst proportions do not vary as much as in the tuff, but they fall within the range for the tuff ( Most samples of Lund Tuff ( The range of major element variations in the Lund Tuff ( An apparent paradox is that variations in whole-rock chemical and modal compositions correlate only weakly and not at all if the glass-rich WATER samples are ignored ( Stratigraphic sections were sampled to test for vertical compositional variations in the Lund deposit. These include outflow sections A on the east and U on the west, intracaldera section C, and older caldera fill section S on the east ( With regard to lateral variation, the average elemental composition of the outflow tuff is indistinguishable from the intracaldera tuffs. For example, average SiO Phenocrysts and glass were analyzed by electron microprobe in seven Lund Tuff samples. Silicate and ilmenite phenocrysts are unaltered and gave acceptable analytical totals. Magnetite grains are slightly oxidized along fractures and rims but unaltered interiors were analyzed. The only obvious zoning in mineral grains occurs in plagioclases; different mafic grains within a sample are somewhat variable in composition but unzoned. Representative analytical data are in Plagioclase is zoned andesine, about An The ranges of chemical variation in phenocrysts in the Lund Tuff are comparable to those in systematically zoned deposits ( Even though electron microprobe analyses reveal perturbed alkali concentrations, glass in the Lund Tuff is a high-silica, low-Ti–Fe–Mg–Ca rhyolite. Calculations of intensive parameters from mineral compositions in bulk tuff samples are complicated by phenocryst mixing that may occur during eruption. However, within individual samples grain to grain composition differences are not great compared to the total compositional range ( The inferred Nearly all samples of the Lund Tuff contain the same phenocryst assemblage; in this regard the Lund Tuff is monotonous. Only in mafic samples, with high equilibration temperatures and high TiO The Lund deposit, therefore, appears monotonous in some respects but has variations in modal, mineralogical, and bulk chemical composition. The samples from the western Y section are anomalous in several respects. That they are truly from the Lund Tuff cannot be doubted because WATER-22M has a Lund age ( However, their attributes are consistent with enrichment in high-silica rhyolite vitroclasts ( The conclusion of We next examine the possibility that some of the variability in bulk composition and in phenocryst ratios and compositions represent differing degrees of crystallization at different values of intensive parameters, especially temperature. We have already noted that the trends of variations in phenocryst proportions are consistent with progressive crystallization of a dacitic magma. Yet, on the other hand, What then caused the range of compositions? Fractional crystallization of mafic dacite was tested by Trace element models ( Batch partial melting followed by accumulation of different batches of magma in a sub-caldera chamber might explain the observed trace element trends ( Several open system models must also be considered as possible explanations for the trace element data. For example, the composition of the Lund Tuff lies on potential mixing trends between some andesites and rhyolites ( Another relatively unsuccessful set of open-system models involves assimilation combined with fractional crystallization ( These model calculations do not preclude batch partial melting, magma mixing, or assimilation as important processes in the More successful models of the trace element and phenocryst variations of the Lund Tuff can be created by assuming that varying degrees of fractional crystallization (+/−some small amount of assimilation or mixing) of a parental magma produced a range of complementary melts and crystals that coexisted in the same chamber. If these components were then separated and remixed during explosive eruption, they would produce a shallow trend on a Rb–Sr diagram. However, for the assumptions used here, the models predicts that the bulk tuff samples should consistently have >50% phenocrysts, when in fact few of our samples do. Choosing a more Rb-rich parent as the initial melt only makes this problem worse; assuming an initial magma with less Rb is unable to explain the high Rb rocks. The most successful closed system models involve This, our preferred model, explains many aspects about the Lund Tuff: (1) the compositional variation in the tuff but the absence of systematic zonation in the deposit; (2) the crystal-rich character of the pumices and of the tuff, (3) the relatively flat Rb–Sr trends (and for other elements not shown here for lack of space), (4) the varying compositions of the phenocrysts (and the temperatures calculated from them) but the homogeneity of individual mafic phenocrysts, and (5) the highly evolved character of the glass. Finally, this eruptive mixing model explains the anomalous WATER samples as glass-enriched products of a mixing of mafic phenocrysts with abundant silicic glass. Exactly when or how this mixing occurred is not constrained by the models. Mixing (without re-equilibration) could have occurred in the magma chamber during rapid withdrawal, during fragmentation in the conduit, or during pyroclastic flow and emplacement. Certainly, these trace element models do not provide a unique solution but combine to suggest that progressive crystallization over a range of temperatures followed by eruptive mixing may explain much of the chemical and mineralogical variation in the tuff. Further studies of suites of pumices and of the trace element analyses of glass shards and glassy groundmasses may help constrain this evolutionary model for the Lund and for monotonous intermediates in general. We next explore crustal thickness, rate of input of basaltic magma into the roots of the magma system, crustal stress distribution, and magma chamber shape as possible factors in the origin of the monotonous intermediate Lund magma. Crustal thickness during the burst of Oligocene monotonous intermediate volcanism in the Great Basin can only be inferred indirectly because of subsequent east–west extension and consequent crustal thinning. The early Cenozoic crust had been thickened by Jurassic to Paleocene contractional orogenies to as much as an estimated 50–60 km ( Thermal models of the effects of crustal thickening disclose peak elevation of temperature in the crust a few tens of millions of years after peak contraction (e.g., The critical heat source powering crustal magma generation has to be influx of mantle-derived mafic magma (e.g., O, Pb, Nd, and Sr isotopic data ( In the Great Basin, there is clear evidence for regional tectonic quiescence – neither extension nor contraction – during eruption of the monotonous intermediate tuffs ( The present-day Altiplano–Puna of the central Andes serves as analog of the middle-Tertiary Great Basin area. It seems likely, therefore, that the Lund magma was lodged in a flat sill, or perhaps a swarm of multiple sills. Such a configuration can account for the lack of significant compositional gradients in the Lund deposit. Even if compositional zoning existed in a slab-like chamber it would tend to be destroyed during eruption (S. De Silva, written communication, 1999), rather than preserved as in the systematic withdrawal of increasing diameter, deeper eruptive volumes of a zoned bottle-shaped chamber (e.g., Therefore, despite the lack of systematic compositional gradients in the Lund Tuff, adjacent parcels of magma in a stirred magma slab could have varied somewhat in temperature, melt and mineral composition, and mode – even though the bulk composition of the parcels might have been similar. The lack of zoning in the mafic phenocrysts suggests that they remained in equilibrium with the melt in each parcel during crystallization. Possibly, there were multiple slab-like magma chambers of about the same bulk composition and each having evolved to a different degree that were tapped during the eruption. The sill model for the Lund magma chamber would be consistent with rather wholesale evacuation at a high discharge rate. Perhaps, the 9 km thick roof of Precambrian and Phanerozoic quartzites and carbonate rocks (density about 2600–2800 kg/m The dacitic Lund Tuff is a very large volume ash-flow deposit in the Indian Peak volcanic field of the Oligocene Great Basin ignimbrite province. It is a distinctive monotonous intermediate tuff. The tuff contains abundant phenocrysts of (in generally decreasing amounts) plagioclase, quartz, hornblende, biotite, sanidine, Fe–Ti oxides, and titanite. It was emplaced at 29.02±0.04 Ma, has a normal paleomagnetic direction, and has an estimated volume of at least 2900–3600 km The Lund Tuff is compositionally monotonous – it has virtually the same phenocryst assemblage throughout; it lacks systematic compositional zonation; and it lacks an underlying co-genetic rhyolitic precursor or precursory plinian fallout. Nonetheless, there are significant variations in bulk-rock compositions and in proportions and compositions of phenocrysts, all of which vary along normal calc-alkaline differentiation trends. The tuff typically has 40–50% phenocrysts and cognate pumice fragments are similarly phenocryst-rich. We postulate that the distinctive attributes of the Lund Tuff, resulted from the following factors: The coincidence of unusually warm orogenically thickened crust and an unusually high flux of mafic mantle magma generated during roll back of a subducting slab combined to enhance crustal melting and assimilation. This created a very large volume of dacitic magma. This magma accumulated in a flat sill-like chamber about 50 km across at a depth of about 9 km. Sills were the dominant shape in this thick crust under the quasi-hydrostatic state of stress that prevailed during the middle Tertiary in the Great Basin.  Nonetheless, varying temperatures in the chamber created separate magma parcels that experienced different degrees of equilibrium crystallization. Each parcel had its own distinctive temperature (730–800°C), phenocryst proportions, and mineral compositions. Fragmentation and physical mixing of glass and phenocrysts from these parcels occurred during evacuation and eruption and created a range of tuff compositions. The large size of the chamber combined with roof subsidence created high mass eruption rates and a continuously collapsing eruption cloud. No plinian fallout preceded the eruption. Separation of glass from phenocrysts was not a major factor in creating the compositional spectrum. Funding for our study of Great Basin volcanism was provided by NSF Grants EAR-8604195, 8904245, and 9104612, 9706906, by BYU, and by the Lewis stipend for graduate student research in igneous petrology at BYU. Helpful comments on early versions of the manuscript by Anita Grunder, Peter Lipman, and Shan de Silva clarified our presentation.