In order to investigate the cyclic deformation behavior of natural soft marine clay under the general stress condition, which is due to travelling waves involved principal stress rotation, a series of undrained tests were carried out by using GDS hollow cylinder apparatus (HCA). The principal stress axis rotates continuously while holding the deviator stress (difference between the vertical normal stress and horizontal normal stress) at a constant level. The tests results show that, the pore water pressure, stress-strain hysteretic loop, dynamic modulus of the tested samples are significantly dependent on CSRs and confining pressures. Furthermore, pore water pressure generates slightly during the first 30 cycles, and accumulates with the increase of cycles. The tensile axial strain occurs in the initial loading cycles and the development styles are various with different CSRs and confining pressures. With the larger CSRs and confining pressures, higher strain degradation occurs. A new critical value between 0.16 and 0.18 is suggested for CSR under continuous principal stress rotation.Initial void ratio Specific gravity Initial density Height of the specimen Liquid limit Plasticity index Cyclic deviator stress Cyclic stress ratio Wave amplitude, Wave length Load period Amplitude Confining pressure Axial force Axial deformation Major, intermediate, and minor principal stresses Axial, radial, and circumferential stresses Shear stress Shear strain Major, intermediate, and minor principal strain Axial, radial, and circumferential strain Dynamic modulus Maximum, minimum axial strain Difference between Maximum and minimum axial strain Soft marine clay is widespread in Wenzhou, a coastal city in China. Being one of the most developed areas in China, a large number of infrastructures have been constructed on this kind of soil. The soil grounds of these projects may undergo long-term cyclic loads caused by wave loads, traffic loads, earthquake, etc. during construction and operation period. Ocean structures that are built on soft marine soil foundation are subjected to great damage due to the settlement and large deformation leading by the soil strength weakening of soil foundation and reduction of the bearing capacity. For example, in Yangtze Estuary of China, due to wave and strong storms, a breakwater sinks into the soil in part or several meters deep, or offset the original position about 20 Serious efforts have been made to investigate the dynamic properties of saturated soft clay by triaxial apparatus ( Wave load, a special kind of cyclic load with reciprocation for a long time, is different from the static load and the seismic load. The typical wave load has a period of 5–20 The undrained deformation of soil under continuous principal stress rotation is the utmost concern in many investigations. However, all the studies subjected to principal stress rotation mentioned above focused on sand. The researches about the influence of the continuous principal stress rotation on soft clay are limited. The dynamic properties of soft clay during wave loading are affected by many parameters, including cyclic stress ratio ( In this study, a series of HCA tests have been carried out to investigate the effects of continuous principal stress rotation on the cyclic response of saturated soft marine clay in Wenzhou, China. The tests have been conducted by controlling the torsional shear stress and the stress difference between the vertical normal stress and horizontal normal stress. During the tests, the deviator stresses were kept constant while rotating the principal stress axis. The development of cyclic axial strain, pore water pressure, stress-strain hysteretic loops, dynamic modulus of the tested samples are evaluated and compared under different The natural soft marine clay used in this paper was obtained from a pit with the depth of 2–4 The test equipment used in this study is the 2 Channel 5 The vertical load and torque are applied by the axial actuator and rotational actuator unit consisting of a two brushless dc servo-motors which drive a ballscrew and a splined shaft via toothed belts and measured by a combined load and torque transducer mounted on the top of the cell. The vertical displacement and the rotating angle are measured using encoders mounted on the actuator motor shafts. Three advanced digital pressure controllers are used to apply the inner cell pressure, outer cell pressure and back pressure through de-aired water. They can also measure the volume changes of the inner/outer chamber as well as the specimen to calculate the changes in the inner and outer radii. Besides, pore-water pressure was measured at the top and base of the specimen with external silicon diaphragm pressure transducers. The pressures applied to a hollow cylindrical specimen are illustrated in The outer diameter, inner diameter and height of test specimens were 100, 60, and 200  The elementary stress caused by cyclic loading is as following: If the variable, x, is eliminated between the shear stress, The elementary principal stress as follows： The principal stress direction According to the analysis above, the horizontal shear stress also changes its direction back and forth in the course of zero the wave propagation, inducing another cyclic alteration of shear stress in the soil deposit. The result of the analysis showed that the cyclic loading generates an alternate changeover of two components of shear stresses. It is further indicated that the alternate changeover in stresses as above takes place in such a way that the principal stress axis continuously rotates while holding the deviator stress at a constant level. The stress path and the loading waveform are shown in Cyclic HCA tests with different effective pressures and cyclic stress levels were carried out. Three effective confining pressures, i.e., 50, 100 and 150    However, for To investigate compare the stress-strain relationships for different number of cycles, the stress-strain hysteretic loops under cycles of Nos. 10, 100, 500, 1000, 2000, 3000, 4000, 5000 under different When Under cyclic loading involved continuous principal stress rotation, the tensile and contractive axial strains occur. The specimen collapses due to the brake of the cyclic axial strain, i.e. the difference between the maximum axial strain  Dynamic modulus as an important indicator measure of soil stiffness under cyclic loading has very important significance. Soil spring stiffness is required in the dynamic analyses of the offshore foundation design. The dynamic analyses must ensure that the resonance periods of the platform are sufficiently far away from the wave periods with significant energy. However, even if the load period is not close to any of the resonance periods, dynamic amplification of the wave loads may occur and must considered in design. The dynamic axial modulus under continuous principal stress rotation can be described as  Actually, the wave loads will vary from one wave to another in an irregular manner. The design storm composition is expressed in terms of loads, which depends on wave heights and wave periods in the storm. Both the characteristic loads and the design storm composition must include dynamic amplification of the loads due to flexibility of the platform and the soil foundation ( Test results in this study show that This paper presents an experimental investigation on the cyclic behavior of natural soft marine clay under the continuous rotation of the principal stress axis induced by wave loads. The principal stress axis continuously rotates while holding the deviator stress at a constant level. Particular attention of the investigation has been paid on the influence of The pore water pressure generates slightly during the first 30 cycles, and it accumulates with increase of cycles. The generation of pore water pressure is higher with a larger The tensile axial strain occurs in the initial loading cycles. When The influence of the rotation of principal stress axis on the deformation of natural soft clay is significant. With the increase of cycles for the same confining pressure, the development styles differ with different The shape of the stress-strain hysteretic loop and its development with the number of cycles are significantly dependent on The development of cyclic axial strain depends on The work present in this paper was supported by the