In this paper, a genetic algorithm (GA) based principal component selection approach is proposed for production performance estimation in mineral processing. The approach combines a modified GA with principal component analysis (PCA) in order to improve the estimation accuracy of production performance. In this context, the extended chromosome encoding, the fitness function formed by combining the prediction performance operator and the penalty function is designed based on the standard GA. Both the mutation allele number operator and the allele mutation possibility operator are also introduced in the mutation process of chromosome. The proposed approach can select the principal components which are crucial for estimation performance, and the useful message from PCA can guide the evolution of GA and accelerate the convergence process. The case studies have been carried out on the prediction of the production rate and concentrate grade of a mineral process and the experimental results show the effectiveness of the proposed approach.The production performance estimation is an important problem in control and optimization of mineral processing. There are two factors influencing the prediction accuracy. The first one is the input dimension of prediction model, which influences the model complexity. The other one is how to extract the useful input information for prediction as well as the noise and redundant information is excluded. Thus, in order to improve the accuracy of production performance estimation, it is crucial to reduce the input dimension at the same time to remove the noise and reserve the useful information in the data. Principal component analysis (PCA) The existing methods for PC selection can be divided into two categories. The first category methods select PC according to the variance of each PC, such as Top-Down (TD) method The second category only considers the prediction performance on training set, such as Forward Stepwise (FS), Backward Stepwise (BS) If only the prediction performance on training set is considered, the model can tend to be unstable This paper is organized as follows. Section PCA is a mathematical technique which transforms original variables into a new set of variables called principal components (PCs). Dimension reduction can be achieved by selecting a subset from all the PCs. Let Because PCA transforms original variables into new variables, thus it can be obtained that: The variance contribution rate is used to represent the contribution rate of PC to the total information included by the data Then, the accumulated variance contribution rate (AVCR) of The proposed approach can be divided into two steps. First, PCA transforms the original variables into PCs. Second, an effective GA-based PCs selection strategy picks out appropriate PCs and use them as new inputs variable of the predictive model. The goal is to obtain better prediction performance in terms of both the prediction performance on training data and the generalization capability. In this content, the extended chromosome encoding and the fitness function formed by combining the prediction performance operator and the penalty function is designed based on the standard GA. Moreover, in order to accelerate the process of feature extraction, an effective mutation operator with the repetitive individual extinction mechanics (RIEM) In the proposed modified GA, in order to ensure the generalization of predictive model and accelerate the convergence, the chromosome is added by more information which can help evaluate each chromosome and guide the evolution process. In this regards, the ‘information’ should be the eigenvalue of PCs which can reflect the information amount of the corresponding PC. The extended chromosome encoding strategy is given by: The fitness function, which evaluates the performance of the chromosome, consists of two parts: the prediction accuracy, namely the prediction accuracy operator, and the certain amount of accumulated variance contribution rate, namely the penalty function as shown in The first part of a chromosome, In this paper, the prediction accuracy is obtained from the performance of a support vector machine (SVM) based predictor The PC combination which has small AVCR is punished by the penalty function: In order to accelerate the convergence and ensure the preservation of optimal chromosome of GA, the elitist strategy is applied in the proposed Modified GA. Specifically, the chromosomes of the current population In GA, the chromosome duplication phenomenon commonly exists, especially in later period of evolution. This phenomenon includes duplication in the same generation and duplication between different generations. Moreover, in most of the situation, computation on fitness function costs majority of time in evolution process. The mutation possibility on every single gene is commonly set to be the same. However, in fact, every allele of chromosome in GA always has its real meaning in practical application problem, which decides the different importance of every allele. In this paper, each allele of the chromosome represents corresponding PC respectively. Therefore, the allele which denotes the first PC (PC with largest eigenvalue) has the largest variance contribution rate, which means the influence of its absence or existence in the whole PC combination is largest. The importance of a PC means that it has a huge influence on the performance of the whole chromosome. It is not means that this PC will surely been selected. Thus, the PCs with larger importance on prediction performance should be considered and observed preferentially in order to get access to the ultimate conclusion, namely optimal chromosome, faster. In GA, according to this idea of ‘preferential observation’ on importance alleles, convergence can be effectively accelerated since early period of evolution. In order to solve above two issues, the mutation strategy including the repetitive individual extinction mechanics (RIEM) Step 1: Random ‘single-point’ mutation ( Step 2: Step 3: Cancel last mutation and then implement Step 4: Regard this chromosome as child chromosome and record its existence. The number of mutation alleles should be large enough to avoid that all the possible mutation results are the chromosome existed. An effective method is to estimate the appropriate mutation allele number by considering the mutation times of chromosome, denoted as A chromosome is used to represent a PC combination while a gene represents a corresponding PC. Thus, the importance of each allele in a chromosome is apparently different. As analyzed above, the important alleles should be observed preferentially in order to accelerate convergence. To be specific, the allele of an important PC should have a relative large mutation possibility in the early period of evolution process. On the contrary, in the later period of evolution process, the important PCs have been determined, at that moment the mutation possibilities of unimportant PCs should be large. The allele mutation possibility operator (AMPO) is designed as below: The proposed approach is applied to select the inputs of the predictive model of the production rate and grade of a mineral process to illustrate its effectiveness. Mineral processing is a production process that improves the grade of ore exploited from the earth using a number of production phases along which a chain of physical and chemical transformations take place Each sub-process has its own task and uses different performance indices to evaluate its own product quality and efficiency. All the sub-processes operate together to produce the final product. The production rate and the concentrate grade is the two important global production performance. However, the mineral process is a multi-variable, nonlinear process and its production performance (e.g. the production rate and concentrate grade) is difficult be measured online. To achieve the plant-wide global optimization, the primary task is to establish the relationship between the global production performance and the performance of sub-process. In this content, the input selection is very important for accuracy of the production performance estimation. The data used in this paper is shown in Dataset 1 is for the production rate prediction and the inputs are represented as In this section, the convergence of modified GA and the calculation of the limit of AVCR are presented. Then the performance of the proposed approach is validated through experiments. The population size of our modified GA is set as 20 and the maximum generations is set as 150, the eigenvalues and AVCR of each PC on both datasets are shown in As shown in From From In the proposed approach, the lower limit of accumulated variance contribution rate (AVCR), For both Dataset 1 and Dataset 2, the following PC selection methods are compared: (i) TD method, (ii) FS meSthod, (iii) BS method, (iv) common method, and (v) the proposed method. All these methods will be compared with each other in four aspects: (1) Number of PC, (2) RMSE on training set, (3) RMSE on external validation set, and (4) Number of iteration. On Dataset 1, as shown in As shown in Results of the proposed approach used in the prediction of production indices are compared to those of other predictive methods: (i) SVM-PSO which is a generally applied parameter-optimized SVM and (ii) Adaptive cPSO which is proposed in The prediction performance on training set and on external validation set of Dataset 1 are shown in On Dataset 2, the situation is similar which is shown in It is noted that in this study GA is used therefore the parameters of GA need to be addressed in the experiment; in particular, optimal parameters are difficult to be obtained. However, the acceptable parameters can be obtained after several experiments. In this work, we investigate a genetic algorithm (GA) based principal component selection approach for production performance estimation. Using the proposed approach, the case studies on the prediction of the production rate and concentrate grade of a mineral process have been carried out. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is validated and it can improve the precision of the production rate and concentrate grade prediction. In industrial applications, not all the information in production data is reliable due to the noises. It is crucial to extract useful information from the original data. Therefore, the proposed approach in this work can be valuable for the PC selection of other complex nonlinear industrial process whose first principle model is difficult to be obtained. This work is partly supported by the