Data on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols is essential for salting-out crystallization studies. The solubilities of the quaternary system MnSO4·H2O+MgSO4·7H2O+H2O+(CH3)2CHOH were determined in the temperature range 293.2–313.2K over the 2-propanol mole fraction range of 0.00–0.07. The solubility data were used for modelling with the modified extended electrolyte non-random two-liquid (NRTL) equation. The present extension uses ion-specific parameters instead of the electrolyte-specific NRTL binary interaction parameters. This approach has feasibility for many electrolytes and mixed aqueous solution systems in principle. The model was found to correlate the solubility data satisfactorily.Data on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols is essential for salting-out crystallization studies This paper is a continuation of our thermodynamic research on the effect of different organic solvents on the solubility of manganese sulphate monohydrate in water, and in aqueous alcohols and also to check the accuracy of the correlations and predictions of the liquid–liquid–solid equilibrium by our modified extended NRTL model. In this study, the solubility of MnSO Analytical grade manganese sulphate monohydrate (APS Chemicals Ltd., 99%) and magnesium sulphate heptahydrate (APS Chemicals Ltd., 99%) used without further treatment. 2-Propanol (BDH, 99%) used without further purification. The solubilities for manganese sulphate–water–2-propanol system at the temperature 293.2–313.2 Precalculated quantities of 2-propanol were weighed and mixed with a solution of fixed masses of water and magnesium sulphate heptahydrate to create solutions of various mole fractions ( The concentration of salts in aqueous solution was converted to molality unit of water free basis, not including dehydrate water. To improve the accuracy of the experimental results, duplicate experiments were performed for each data point. The duplicate experimental values were all within 1%. To study the effect of 2-propanol on the solubility of MnSO Crystallization of inorganic salts is based on the phase equilibrium between the aqueous phase and the salt's crystal phase, or on the solubility product defined by activity coefficient and mole fraction of aqueous ions as follows: The ionic strength, based on mole fraction The solubility data for MnSO According to the original NRTL equation (see Eq.  The solubilities of MnSO activity parameter of van’t Hoff equation (J/mol) Debye–Hückel constant for the osmotic coefficient parameter of van’t Hoff equation (J/mol/K) NRTL interaction parameter for all species; molecules and ions (J/mol) parameter of NRTL equation ionic strength in mole fraction scale solubility product based on activity molality (g solvent molecular weight (g/mol) gas constant Temperature (K) true liquid phase mole fraction based on all species; molecules and ions mole fraction 2-propanol on aqueous solvent (salt free) NRTL non-randomness parameter (=0.2) activity coefficient stoichiometric number the closest approach parameter of Pitzer–Debye–Hückel equation (=14.9) NRTL interaction parameter for any species in solution Pitzer–Debye–Hückel equation infinite dilution unsymmetrical convention cation species anion species