The effect of the moisture content of barite-coke paste on the kinetics of carbothermal reduction was investigated to understand the role of extrusion technique on this type of solid-gas reaction. The pastes were formulated using the typical natural barite and coke powders normally used in the industrial scale. 0.65 wt.% carboxyl methyl cellulose and different amounts of distilled water, ranging 24.3–34.4% were added to the mixed powders. The obtained pastes were then shaped by a laboratory extruder. The extrusion process was assessed by determining the total porosity of dry samples. The samples in the form of disc were isothermally heated at different temperatures in the range of 800–950 °C and the conversion of barite into barium sulfide was measured by the iodometry. The reduction data were analyzed by a modified kinetic model and the frequency factor and activation energy were calculated to evaluate the reduction mechanism. It was found that the moisture content of the paste significantly affects the active site density due to increasing contact surface area between coke and barite particles.The carbothermal reduction of barite is frequently used in the industrial scale to produce barium components such as The product of this reaction is called “black ash” Extrusion is an efficient method for manufacturing various materials such as catalysts and adsorbents. Also, it can be used for shaping of raw materials which is used in the other steps such as sintering and calcination Generally, the pastes should contain a minimum amount of The following materials were considered in this study: barite powder (particle size less than 63 μm), coke, carboxyl methyl cellulose and potassium carbonate. The chemical and mineralogical analyses of barite and coke are reported in The extrusion employed in this study is based on generation of the homogeneous pastes comprised by following constituents (i) coke which is used for the reduction of barite, (ii) carboxyl methyl cellulose as an organic binder providing the appropriate plasticity, (iii) potassium carbonate as a catalyst and (iv) distilled water. Firstly, 5 wt.% potassium carbonate was doped on the coke based on dry weight. The pastes of extrusion for forming samples in shape of disc were prepared by mixing of barite and coke powders, adjusting the black ash batch formula as used in the industrial scale. After dry mixing of materials, the batch compositions were prepared with different The reduction of samples were carried out at 800, 850, 900 and 950 The iodine solution and hydrochloric acid solution were prepared by mixing 50 The disc sample was crushed and 2 The black ash suspension was added into the iodine and hydrochloric acid solution and stirred for 3 The solution was titrated with 0.1 The effect of the paste moisture on reduction of the used barite at four different temperatures was shown in From the conversion-time curves, it can be noticed that the reduction rate increases to maximum value with decrease in the paste humidity. The increase in moisture content from 24.3 to 29.3 wt.% changes the reduction rate considerably. When the moisture of paste exceeds 29.3 wt.%, the reduction rate approximately remains constant. As a result, the conversion of barite is not affected by the moisture of paste in the studied range. The values of bulk density and total porosity of the extruded samples were shown in It was impossible to extrude the pastes that contained low amounts of moisture (less than 24.3 wt.%) because of blockage of the pastes in the extruder die. Blocking of the pastes containing moisture less than 24.3 wt.% occurred during the extrusion. It is evident that the moisture content has an effective role on the compaction of samples and interaction of barite and coke particles. The paste was twisted during extrusion and the interaction between the particles increases with decrease in water content. The extrusion pressure acting on the paste containing 34.2 wt.% water is apparently lower than that for the paste prepared with 24.3% water. The extrusion pressure of samples containing 24.3 wt.% is higher than that for other cases. Therefore, the paste containing 34.2 wt.% water is extruded easily. It is concluded that the addition of water is very effective to improve the paste rheology. On the other hand, the rate of reduction was significantly improved with the increment in forming pressure. It is well known that the contact surface area between the barite and coke particles arises with the increment in forming pressure. The reduction rate is sensitive to the forming pressure as a result, conversion rises with the increment in interactions between the particles. In this process, the rate-controlling step can be related to reaction between gas and solid, because the diffusion path of gas becomes longer with improvement in the contact surface area between the barite and coke particles. The gas-solid surface reaction depends on the diffusion of reducing agent like CO to the surface of barite particles and chemical reactions that take place on the surface of particles. With increment in sample compaction as well as decrease in porosity of porous media, the diffusion path of CO and CO The formation of CO improves the barite reduction rate and the importance of this process depends on the gasification rate. The flux of CO is increased by the compaction of samples, improving the reduction rate. The effect of moisture content on the compaction of sample is in a good agreement with the gas diffusion through coke hypothesis that controls the rate of reaction. Moreover, the major role of catalyst is to promote the rate of gasification reaction In order to better understanding the effect of paste moisture content on reduction rate, a modified kinetic model was used. The theoretical base for the reduction of barite was provided by Kasaoka and Sakata The temperature dependency of rate constant is generally expressed by the Arrhenius-type equation as a follows: The ln[-ln(1- The values of reduction rate constant, The The values of conversion computed by Eq. The root-mean-square is mostly used as a part of statistical analysis, especially for deviation. The root-mean-square is a measure of the magnitude of a set data. It gives a sense for the typical size of data. From percent deviation, The experimental data are in excellent agreement with the kinetic model. The value of The effect of The extrusion of samples prepared with low content of moisture (less than 24.3 wt.%) leads to block of the paste flow at a single screw extruder due to the agglomeration of powder. To clarify the effect of moisture content on reduction rate, the extruded samples were heated at four temperatures and the conversion was measured by the iodometry. The experimental results showed that the reduce in moisture content of barite and coke paste causes an improvement in reduction rate due to effective change in contact surface area between the barite and coke particles. The activation energy of reduction process for extruded samples was obtained near to 47 The authors would like to thank Iranian Industry, Mine and Business Ministry (New Industrial Research Section) for supporting this investigation.