In this paper, interlaminar crack initiation and propagation under mode-I with static and fatigue loading of a composite material are experimentally assessed for different test temperatures. The material under study is made of a 3501-6 epoxy matrix reinforced with AS4 unidirectional carbon fibres, with a symmetric laminate configuration [0°]16/S. In the experimental programme, DCB specimens were tested under static and fatigue loading. Based on the results obtained from static tests, fatigue tests were programmed to analyse the mode-I fatigue behaviour, so the necessary number of cycles was calculated for initiation and propagation of the crack at the different temperatures. G–N curves were determined under fatigue loading, N being the number of cycles at which delamination begins for a given energy release rate. G
                     ICmax–a, a–N and da/dN–a curves were also determined for different G
                     cr rates (90%, 85%, 75%, etc.) and different test temperatures: 90°C, 50°C, 20°C, 0°C, −30°C and −60°C.Fibre-reinforced composites represent an evolution with respect to traditional materials due to the benefits provided by their orthotropic structure, which enables the fibres to guide the direction in which stresses act. As carbon–fibre epoxy composites offer the best mechanical properties with low weight, they are commonly used in aerospace and naval applications, competitive sports and high technology applications in general. However, despite their specific strength and stiffness, one of the most life-limiting failure modes in these materials is the phenomenon known as delamination due to the fact that they are composed of laminated layers. The fracture mechanics of these materials under static and fatigue loading are currently the subject of extensive study as these mechanisms have yet to be adequately explained as a result of their complexity. In recent years, several studies have been carried out into the fracture of composites in their different stress modes under static loading, of which modes I and II have attracted more attention. The dynamic fracture regime is different because it has been under-researched on account of the difficulties associated with experimentation ( The composite material employed in this research programme was manufactured by Hexcel Composites and is composed of a 3501-6 epoxy resin prepreg reinforced with AS4 unidirectional carbon fibre (commercially named AS4/3501-6 RC37 AW190). The cured panels are obtained by cutting prepreg laminates, sequentially piled and cured in autoclave, with a volume fraction of 63%. The laminate configuration is symmetric [0°] A double cantilever beam (DCB) specimen was used to characterise delamination under mode-I conditions for both static and fatigue loading. Prior to testing, the specimens were conditioned as indicated by the Standards ( In this study, instead of attaching the specimens to the grips by means of adhesive blocks or hinges as specified in the Standard, a 15 Specimens should not be precracked before testing. The static tests were carried out using a constant crosshead rate of 1 To characterise the behaviour under fatigue of the material, DCB specimens were cycled between a maximum and minimum displacement ( A test procedure was created on the test machine for each temperature and the different fractions of the critical energy release rates The experimental results obtained from the static and fatigue tests for the thermal analysis for the material AS4/3501-6 are presented next. The initial part of the test consisted in increasing the crack length from 3 to 5 Interlaminar fracture toughness in mode-I was calculated for a better characterisation of the mechanical properties of the material. The test results were evaluated using three data reduction methods for calculating the interlaminar fracture toughness ( A constant crosshead rate of 0.5 In order to characterise the initiation process of delamination due to fatigue, the number of cycles required to generate a crack in the material were determined by direct observation of the specimen. This process was characterised by the The crack growth rate (   A fractographic study was performed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) on samples obtained from the previously tested specimens in mode-I static and fatigue fracture, The micrographs thus obtained show different morphologies typical of mode-I fracture. In general, under mode I loading the fibres were separated by fairly flat-sided valleys ( Another general morphology at all the test temperatures comprises the voids in the fibres, which were generally clean, indicating a progression of delamination in the fibre–matrix interface. Broken fibres were also found in the micrographs resulting from “fibre bridging”, one of the characteristic morphologies of mode-I fracture. This paper has analysed the influence of temperature on the process of mode-I delamination in a carbon fibre reinforced epoxy material under static and fatigue loadings. In the studies carried out to characterise the static initiation of delamination, in general, a slight decrease in stiffness was observed for the highest and the lowest temperature. However, the material exhibits better mechanical behaviour in the tests performed at 9 As to static delamination propagation, a general increasing trend in toughness ( During the initiation of fatigue delamination, it was observed that the maximum delamination energy required to initiate the crack ( A constant delamination growth rate ( As it was observed with the static propagation of delamination, in the tests performed at 90 In general, the behaviour of AS4/3501-6 was influenced by the test temperature, although this fact is most noticeable in the fatigue tests, probably due to the length of the tests. In general, the analysed composite shows more brittle behaviour at low temperatures and a significant increase in the ductility of the matrix as the temperature increases. During static tests, the material performs better at room temperature. During fatigue tests, however, the ductility of the matrix increases at 90 As regards the fractographic analysis of the fracture surfaces, it may be concluded that, in addition to the observed typical morphologies of mode-I fracture, the analysed micrographs have a relationship with the results obtained during the experimental procedure. The authors are indebted to the