Identifying a geriatric patient is often a difficult task. Some elderly individuals are healthy and robust to the century mark or beyond. Others become enfeebled before age 65.
                  There are no complications of positioning patients for anesthesia and surgery that occur only in the geriatric population. However, as years are accumulated, certain acquired aspects of longevity increase the likelihood of postoperative problems that can be alleged to have been caused by errors in positioning in the surgical suite. Those factors are considered here. For more generalized information, the reader is referred to articles 
                        3,11
                      or books
                        1,12
                      that cover in greater detail the total subject of patient positioning.
                  A senior citizen who is physiologically unstable and whose physique is relatively inflexible may be unable to assume postures that are acceptable for a more mobile and robust younger person. Preventable injuries are likely unless members of the anesthesia and surgical team are almost compulsively attentive to small details of the positioning maneuvers. However, even that level of diligence on the part of the care team cannot guarantee complete freedom from complications.
                        9
                     
                  
                  When unusual problems of positioning mandate extraordinary measures of protection and surveillance for a given patient, the risk of physiologic injury or structural damage for that person is increased, often greatly. Under these circumstances, the precautions taken and the surveillance rendered should be carefully recorded, either on the anesthesia record or an intraoperative note in an appropriate, visible, and permanent section of the patient's chart. This safeguard assumes importance if litigation subsequently claims that a postoperative neuropathy was a preventable injury caused by improper positioning. Inadequate documentation of protective measures is probably the single most significant issue when lawsuits alleging positioning injuries are decided against the involved anesthesiologist. With impeccable logic, lawyers avow that, “the palest ink is stronger than the best memory.”
                        29