In this work, three advanced oxidation technologies have been studied to improve the quality of the effluents of a physicochemical process and of a combined physicochemical–biological process during the treatment of actual industrial wastes of wooden door-manufacturing factories. From the treatment point of view (neglecting costs), advanced oxidation processes can be successfully used to treat both, coagulated and biologically treated wastes. Conductive-diamond electrochemical oxidation (CDEO) was found to be the more effective technology because it can reduce completely the chemical oxygen demand (COD) (no production of refractory compounds) with a very high current efficiency. However, from the economic viewpoint, the direct treatment of the coagulated wastes can not be recommended because it is very expensive. Only Fenton oxidation or conductive-diamond electrochemical oxidation can be cost-efficiently used to refine the quality of the effluent of the biological process.A small town in the centre of Spain concentrates an important number of door-manufacturing factories. Contrary to what it can be expected, the production of wastes in this type of industrial activities is not limited to solids particles coming from the wood machining, but it also includes small flowrates of a very-highly polluted liquid waste coming from the cleaning of the machinery used in the gluing process, whose purpose is to join different wooden pieces with adhesive substances. The main pollutants of these aqueous effluents are formaldehyde, urea, resorcinol, vinyl polyacetate and other additives used in the formulation of glues, and the organic load is usually over 10,000 Due to the small flowrate produce in every factory (typically 150–200 However, the direct discharge of these effluents during long periods into the municipal sewer system have produced serious problems, because of the blocking of the sewer pipes and also because of the bad operation of the biological process of the municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). It is important to take in mind that polymerization reactions take place during the transport of the effluent along the sewer, forming compact solids that in some points reduce importantly the free cross-sections of the pipes. In addition, the complex nature of the pollutants can affect importantly to the operation of the biological process of the municipal WWTP, especially during winter due to the low temperatures of this zone and their influence on the activated sludge performance. Hence, it is necessary to integrate in the factories processes for the pretreatment of these wastes before its discharge to the municipal sewer system. Several papers have been published in the literature during the recent years about the treatment of the wastes produced in a wooden-door manufacturing factory With this background, the aim of this work has been to study the improvement in an conventional treatment (consisting of coagulation-floculation and biological oxidation) of an actual industrial waste produced in the gluing process of the wooden-door manufacturing factories with three AOPs: conductive-diamond electrochemical oxidation (CDEO), ozonation and Fenton process. The efficiency in COD removal has been monitored in order to compare their technical and economic feasibility. The COD was used to monitor the organic load of the wastes. It was determined using a HACH DR200 analyzer. Measurements of pH and conductivity were carried out with an InoLab WTW pH-meter and a GLP 31 Crison conductimeter, respectively. To compare the performance of different AOPs it is desirable one parameter which quantifies in arbitrary units the oxidants added to the waste. In the literature CDEO assays were carried out in a single-compartment electrochemical flow-cell working under a batch operation mode The COD method was used for the determination of the average current efficiency (ACE), which was calculated using Eq. Ozonation experiments were carried out by continuously feeding an ozone–oxygen gas stream in a mixed semi-batch bubble reactor (continuous for gas and batch for liquid). The experimental set-up consists of an ozone generator (Ambizon, Model GMF-10, Sistemas y Equipos de Ozonización S.L., Madrid, Spain) and a jacketed cylindrical reactor (2.5 Fenton oxidation assays were carried out in lab-scale thermostated mixed batch reactors. The experimental set-up consists of a multistirrer device (Ikamag RO 5 power, IKA-WERKE GmbH & Co. KG, Staufen, Germany) with fifteen mixing sites coupled with a controlled thermostatic bath (Digiterm 100, JP Selecta, Barcelona, Spain). Pyrex flasks (250 Discontinuous biological aerobic oxidation experiments were carried out in tanks of 5 The coagulation experiments were carried in discontinuous operation mode. These experiments were carried out in a standard jar test experimental set-up. In these experiments, different amounts of coagulant (0–300 The wastewater used in this work is the effluent of an actual door-manufacturing factory. It is mainly composed of urea and formaldehyde with different additives. This effluent contains a high concentration of COD (13,068  Results of the physico–chemical treatment do not depend on the coagulant reagent (iron and aluminum curves are overlapped) and a dose of 25 The biological oxidation is a more complex process. In the figure, they are compared the results obtained in the batch biological oxidation using directly activated sludge from a municipal wastewater treatment plant and using previously-acclimatized activated sludge. As it can be observed, results obtained are very similar and they only differs during the three first days: the raw activated sludge does not oxidize COD during this stage (acclimatation of the biological culture to the industrial waste composition) while the acclimatized one starts the biological oxidation almost immediately. After this initial difference, in both cases there are two clear stages during the treatment, a first stage in which the COD disappears rapidly from 8000 Hence, the physicochemical process seems to be mandatory in the treatment of door-manufacturing process (DMP) waste (great removal and low cost) and the biological one can be of a good help if it is used conveniently, but it should not be used alone because it can not warrant a complete treatment. In this point, it is clear that AOP can be used to treat directly the effluent of the physico–chemical treatment or to treat the effluent of the biological process. As it can be observed, only CDEO is able to reduce completely the COD of the physico–chemically-treated waste ( With regard to the biologically-treated waste ( One important point concerning the use of AOP is the combination of AOP with biological oxidation. In many works  Results obtained in this work are compared to those obtained in other works From this, it seems clear that the three studied AOP allows obtaining good results, especially CDEO. However, to compare the results obtained it is important to quantify operation cost, and to do this it is important to have a good value of the unit cost of the oxidant dose. This study has been carried out by our group and recently it has been published Taking into account these data, From this work, the following conclusions can be drawn: Coagulation–flocculation is a very effective treatment for the wastes produced in the gluing process of door-manufacturing factories. Biological oxidation can also reduce significantly the COD but it is a very time-consuming process and very long retention times are necessary to achieve a good removal. From the treatment point of view (neglecting costs), advanced oxidation processes can be successfully used to treat both, coagulated and biologically treated wastes. Conductive-diamond electrochemical oxidation is the more effective technology because it can reduce completely the COD (no production of refractory compounds) with a high current efficiency. From the economic viewpoint, the direct treatment of the coagulated wastes should not be recommended because it leads to cost higher than 20 This work was supported by the JCCM (Junta de Comunidades de Castilla La Mancha, Spain) through the Project PBI06-0134-8096 and by the Spanish government through project CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 (CSD2006-0044).