In this paper, a new pretreatment method was employed for the enhancement of pyrite mineral dissolution by using mechanochemical activation. The mechanochemical activation was carried out by co-milling of pyrite and iron powder for 20 and 50min. The XRD analysis indicated that a fraction of pyrite and iron phase remained and troilite (FeS) was formed as a new phase after 50min milling. In addition, the microstructural changes of mechanochemically and mechanically activated pyrite were investigated by Rietveld method. The results revealed that amorphization degree increased from 53% in mechanically activated pyrite for 50min to 83% in mechanochemically activated pyrite for 50min. The mechanochemical activation intensified crystallite size reduction of pyrite in comparison with mechanical activation. In spite of mechanical activation, the microstrain measures slightly reduced during mechanochemical activation due to mechanochemical reaction. Although, both the mechanochemical and mechanical activations of pyrite can enhance the dissolution of pyrite, total iron extractions in the 1M sulfuric acid leaching tests at ambient temperature increase from 1.12% for the initial pyrite to 21.22% for 50min mechanically activated pyrite leaching and then abruptly climb to 87.2% for 50min mechanochemically activated pyrite leaching.The leaching of sulfide minerals and the hydrometallurgical extraction of valuable metals from sulfide ores are technologically difficult processes for extreme reaction conditions required ( In mechanochemistry science, mechanical energy is employed for the performance of chemical reactions and physicochemical changes through high-energy ball milling process. The mechanochemical reactions occur between reactants involved providing thermodynamic rules permit when the free energy changes of reactions are negative. Keeping chemical composition of involved powders unchanged during high-energy ball milling, mechanical activation phenomena happened. Mechanical activation, a branch of mechanochemistry science, can promote mineral reactivity by affecting a wide range of changes in their structure. Structural changes such as formation of defects, polymorphic transformation, grain and crystallite refinements and lattice strain induced during mechanical activation lead to a large number of positive influences on the processes in which the minerals are involved ( The new term entitled “mechanochemical activation” can arise from mechanochemistry science wherein a mechanochemical reaction was designed for activation of minerals, not for mechanochemical synthesis of a product. The mechanochemical activation of a mineral can be made by co-milling of a constituent element of the mineral during short period of intensive grinding without completion of the mechanochemical reaction, for example; Fe addition during intensive milling of chalcopyrite, ilmenite or pyrite. The short period of intensive milling in mechanochemical activation can increase capacity of related installations and reduce energy consumption and costs. Additionally, there is the hope that the chemical bonds in the mineral composition are weakened during mechanochemical activation more than mechanical activation, promoting reactivity of mechanochemically activated minerals more. Due to the valuable metals present in pyrite, its refractory character and simple crystallographic arrangement (face-centered cubic, FCC), the introduction of new treatment for hydrometallurgical processing of pyrite may be a matter of interest and the used technique can give some insight into hydrometallurgical processing of other sulfide minerals. Also, pyrite (FeS A high-purity pyrite concentrate was obtained using conventional beneficiation methods. XRD analysis of pyrite concentrate disclosed that pyrite reflections solely corresponded with JCPDS No. 1-1295 ( The iron powder (Merck 3800.1000) was used for mechanochemical activation treatment as will be described in the following section. Mechanical activation of pyrite was conducted by a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6, FRITSCH, Germany) in a 250 The leaching experiments were carried out in a 500 The X-ray diffraction patterns were collected with BrukerAxs D8 advanced instrument (Germany), applying Cu Kα radiation (λ To fade disadvantageous impact of high-energy ball milling process such as high energy consumption and low industrial capacity, the milling times were considered less than 1 Analysis of the XRD patterns revealed that mechanical activation leads to structural changes in the pyrite lattice. However, the existence of reflection peaks after 50 The XRD patterns of mechanochemically activated pyrite are illustrated in The comparison between structural changes of mechanically activated pyrite and mechanochemically activated pyrite begins from amorphization degree calculation. For obtaining the amorphization degree, four of the most intensive peaks of pyrite were studied in each pattern as defined before ( The crystallite size, lattice strain and unit cell measures are other parameters that can reflect the structural changes of subjected pyrite to mechanical and mechanochemical activations. These parameters can be determined by using several approaches as mentioned in previous investigations ( The lattice parameter of face-centered cubic pyrite (a) changes by milling time during mechanical and mechanochemical activations ( The mechanochemical and mechanical activation effects on crystallite size and microstrain are presented in But, in comparison with mechanically activated pyrite, microstrain slightly deceases in mechanochemically activated pyrite. The microstrain slight reduction can arise from two reasons, first: fractions of pyrite with high level of microstrain can react with iron and left pyrite structure with less microstrain and second: the iron powder can suppress the complete transformation of mechanical energy to pyrite regarding its ductile properties and newly produced troilite phase, with a lesser strength than pyrite, and can simultaneously deform and adsorb the remaining mechanical energy. Nevertheless, the mechanically activated pyrite has more microstrain than the correspondent mechanochemically activated pyrite. In the following section the influence of structural variation on leachability of pyrite will be discussed. There is no doubt that the most advantageous aspect of mechanical activation of minerals can be reduction of temperatures and rising of metal extraction in subsequent reaction in which minerals are involved by promoting the reactivity (including leachability) of the minerals. As mentioned before, the mechanochemical and mechanical activations induced structural changes in pyrite with discrepant effect on the reactivity of pyrite especially in the case of microstrain. Thus, an effort has to be exerted to evaluate their influences on the reactivity of pyrite in applied cases such as leaching. For getting the purposes, the leaching test was conducted on pyrite, mechanically and mechanochemically activated pyrite in ambient temperature by 1 It is undoubtable that the mentioned structural changes induced during mechanical and mechanochemical activations have a main role in reactivity improvement of pyrite. In activated minerals with small crystallite size, there are a large number of grain boundaries existing on more atoms which are ready to react ( The investigation of structural changes disclosed that the prolonged milling had a completely different influence on the microstrain measures in the mechanically activated pyrite and mechanochemically activated pyrite. Microstrain reduction has a hindering effect on Fe extraction in leaching of mechanochemically activated pyrite, but it increases and facilitates Fe extraction in leaching of mechanically activated pyrite. On the other hand, the amorphization phenomena consume a large portion of induced mechanical energy during intensive milling in comparison with crystallite size and microstrain changes ( The leaching tests prove that the amorphization degree changes can overcome the negative influence of microstrain reduction in mechanochemically activated pyrite. The result emphasizes on the fact that mechanochemical activation directly destroyed most of pyrite atomic bonds implying that the reactivity of mechanochemically activated pyrite can be more than mechanically activated pyrite in which some atomic bonds were indirectly and lowly influenced by mechanical energy induction with regard to the lower amorphization degree of mechanically activated pyrite. The mechanochemical activation was performed by the addition of iron powder in less than 1 XRD tests reveal that during the incomplete mechanochemical reaction, new phase of troilite is detected along with previous phases of iron and pyrite, while no new phase formation was recorded in mechanical activated pyrite. It was also discovered that the mechanochemical activation can intensify crystallite size reduction and amorphization degree increase in mechanochemically activated pyrite compared to mechanically activated pyrite. Due to microstrain decline in mechanochemically activated pyrite reducing reactivity of pyrite, the leaching tests were conducted to prove which one of the microstructural parameters (lattice parameters, crystallite size and amorphization degree) is dominant in reactivity variation of pyrite. The results confirm that rise of the amorphization degree has significant effect on leachability of pyrite. The iron extraction in leaching of mechanically activated pyrite for 50