The reactions of oxide and sulfide minerals with acids are among the most straight-forward of chemical reactions. Despite this, there are still aspects which are not fully understood or explained. The rate of dissolution of these minerals is remarkable, in the sense that their orders of reaction with respect to H+ are most often either 0.5 or 1. In addition, the rate of dissolution is strongly dependent on the metal-oxide bond strength. It is proposed that the breaking of the metal–oxygen or metal-sulfur bond under the influence of the interfacial potential difference determines the rate of dissolution. Both metal atoms and oxygen or sulfur atoms at the surface react independently with species in the solution. The rates of these independent processes are coupled by the potential difference across the Helmholtz layer. The mechanism of dissolution proposed here correctly predicts the observed orders of reaction.The dissolution of sulfide and oxide minerals is important in a wide range of fields, including hydrometallurgy, geochemistry and materials science. Most of the valuable metals processed in metallurgical operations are present as minerals of sulfides and oxides. Knowledge of the mechanism of dissolution can assist in the design, optimization and intensification of processes for the extraction of these metals. Such knowledge would also be of assistance in understanding metal passivation and corrosion phenomenon, weathering of rocks, and the etching of materials. The topic of this paper is concerned with dissolution reactions that are classified as These reactions are among the simplest solid–liquid reactions: the surface is attacked by a simple reagent, H A general mechanism of dissolution was proposed in Part I of this series of papers ( This paper is structured in the following manner. Typical kinetic parameters for the dissolution of oxide and sulfide minerals will be presented in the next section. Following this, the models in current use are critically reviewed. The application of the proposed mechanism to the dissolution of oxides and sulfides is presented in two sections that follow. Two examples of the application of the mechanism are presented before the discussion on the rate determining-step for each of the partial reactions in the mechanism. The kinetic parameter of primary importance in developing a mechanism for the dissolution of minerals is the order of reaction. The orders of reaction for the dissolution of metal oxides in acidic solutions are shown in The orders of reaction for the dissolution of several metal sulfides are shown in The mechanisms of dissolution that have been proposed previously in order to explain these results are discussed in the next section. Dissolution reactions have been studied in detail for more than a hundred years. For example, Earlier theoretical work principally by In spite of this support for the ion-transfer model, it has been criticized from several points of view: (i) Blesa et al. (1995) argued that the work done to move ion across the double layer would typically require below 30 The adsorption model ( The adsorption model can be modified by postulating different adsorption isotherms in order to attempt to describe the orders of reaction. For example, since the order of reaction with respect to H Fractional orders of reaction are found in chain reactions, such as the hydrogenation of bromine (  On the other hand, The view that emerges from this discussion is that although several different mechanisms have been proposed, most do not produce a rate expression that is consistent with the experimental data. The one model that does have some of the features of the reaction, is incorrect. In the next sections, it is shown how the novel mechanism proposed in Part I of this series of papers ( The mechanism of dissolution of the metal oxides is shown in The removal of the metal atom and the formation of the metal ion are given by the following expression: The rate of the removal of the metal atom and the formation of the metal ion is given by the following expression: The oxygen atoms at the surface react with protons at the outer Helmholtz plane, leading to the formation of either hydroxide ions or water. The rate-determining step of this reaction can be represented as follows: The rate removal of oxygen atoms, Eq. The expression for the potential difference, As discussed in Part I ( If the oxygen atom at the surface reacts with only In this case, the overall rate of reaction is one-half order in H If, on the other hand, the oxygen atom reacts with In this case, the overall rate of reaction is first order in H The kinetics of the dissolution of metal sulfides, in contrast with the oxides, is more frequently first order in H In order to illustrate and demonstrate the application of this model, particularly to the reverse reaction, the rate expression for metal sulfides is derived. This is treated in four parts: firstly, we develop the rate expression for the forward reaction; secondly, we develop the rate expression for the reverse reaction; thirdly, we develop the equilibrium condition; and, finally we develop a rate expression that accounts for the effect of the iron-zinc solid solution series. The dissolution of a metal sulfide, MS, in acidic solution occurs according to the reaction: The proposed mechanism of dissolution of metal sulfides by acid is similar to that proposed for metal oxides. This mechanism is shown in The rate of the removal of the metal atom and the formation of the metal ion, The rate of the removal of the sulfur atom on the surface and the formation of either HS The subscripts ‘+’ and ‘−’ in Eqs. The substitution of this derived expression for If it is assumed that the value of If the value of Therefore, the order of reaction with respect to H The rate of the reverse reaction, which describes the precipitation of metal sulfides, was considered by The rate of deposition of the anions on the MS is given by: The rates of deposition for anions and cations are equal to each other, which yields an expression for the potential difference. The substitution of this expression for the potential back into either Eq. Since the values of Overall, the proposed mechanism suggests that the rate of dissolution is given by the following expression: The rate of this reaction was determined experimentally by The equilibrium condition is obtained when the net rate is zero. If the right-hand side of Eq. It is gratifying to note that this is the square root of both sides of the equilibrium expression that would normally be written from Eq. The equilibrium conditions in mineral dissolution are frequently analysed in terms of chemical affinity, The important result is that the value of two in the denominator of the expression in the exponential term arises because the rate of the reverse reaction is one-half order. Values in this position of Eq. In this section, several examples of the proposed mechanism are given in order to illustrate the application of model to different systems. The examples have been chosen to demonstrate the both the validity and the versatility of the proposed mechanism.  These results are interpreted in the following manner in terms of the proposed mechanism of dissolution. The value of It is unclear at this stage of the development of the theory why different anions, sulfate It might be argued that other mechanisms of dissolution might describe the dissolution of CuO in hydrochloric acid, where the measured order of reaction with respect to H This effect of chloride ions on the rate of dissolution can be accounted for as follows. As shown in The removal of oxygen from the surface is given by the following partial reaction: For stoichiometric dissolution, the rates of these partial reactions are equivalent to each other. Equating Eqs. Eq.  These results are interpreted as the adsorption of fluoride ions onto the surface, followed by reaction with hydronium ions. The mechanism is illustrated in If it is assumed that the adsorption and desorption of F The second step is the reaction of the occupied adsorption site with hydroniums ions: The species H If it is assumed that the surface coverage is small (that is, The removal of the hydroxide group from the surface is given by: Eq. Eq. The theory of dissolution proposed in Part I of this series of papers ( dissolution occurs as two partial reactions in parallel: the metal atoms at the surface react with water (in acidic solutions) or hydroxide ions (in alkaline solutions) to form metal ions in solution, and the anionic component of the solid reacts with protons (in acidic solutions) to form hydroxide ions or reacts with water (in alkaline solutions); the critical factor in both of these partial reactions is the breaking of the bonds at the surface under the influence of the potential difference across the Helmholtz layer; if the dissolution is congruent and stoichiometric, the rates of these partial reactions are related by stoichiometry. The proposed mechanism has been shown to be very successful at predicting the orders of reaction for a wide range of dissolution reactions The proposed mechanism is predicated on the effect that the changes in potential difference across the Helmholtz layer have on the rate of reaction of each partial reaction, as exemplified by Eqs. (2) and The determination of the actual rate-determining step even at a pure mercury surface is difficult ( In using Eqs. (2) and Two other possibilities for a rate-determining step that are consistent with Eqs. (2) and If the critical step is the breaking of bonds at the surface, then the rate of dissolution must be correlated with the bond energy for metal-oxide bonds. The rates of dissolution of the metal oxides at a value of the pH of 2 from A better correlation, shown in The reorganization of the water molecules of the inner- and outer-spheres of solvated ions is the rate-determining step for both homogeneous and heterogeneous electron transfer ( A possibility that should be explored further is that bond breaking during non-oxidative dissolution consists of electron transfer events. This explanation is attractive because it accounts for the form of Eqs. (2) and The mechanism of dissolution proposed here, is able to account for the following experimental observations the observed orders of reaction with respect to H the observed orders of reaction for both the forward and the reverse reactions of sulfide minerals. The mechanism proposed here is based on the removal of atoms from the surface that result in the parallel formation of cations and anions. Importantly, the rate of these partial reactions is strongly influenced by the potential difference at the surface. The form of the dependence on potential is similar to that for anodic dissolution and cathodic deposition, rather than on ion transfer. This form is justified by excellent correspondence between the rate expression derived from the mechanism and by the proposal that the rate-determining step within each of the partial reactions is breaking of the bond together with the simultaneous solvation of the ion as it is formed.