Microwave heating inside a cavity is not uniform and depends on various factors such as: cavity geometry, properties of treated material and frequency. In most applications of microwave (MW) heating there is only a small variation in the nature of the feed. At present, the assessment of uniformity of heating is possible only for the case of batch processing cavities. Therefore, it is desirable to have a parameter that will quantify uniformity of heating for continuously operated (non-batch) applicators. This paper has given an account of and the reasons for the widespread use of a new smoothness parameter (SP). This parameter is also compared to the already available parameter (designed for batch processes) through Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations.
                  Assuming a uniform load, it was demonstrated that heating time and applied microwave power have only a small influence on the proposed uniformity parameter. Simulations of heating were carried out using a variable feed inside two microwave applicators with different uniformity parameters. The results are presented in this paper.The microwave field distribution inside a cavity depends, not only on the cavity design, but also on the dielectric properties, the volume and the shape of heated material inside the cavity according to In the past, the cavities were designed based on the theoretical knowledge about MW heating and the only way to test the concept was to build the prototype and test it. Nowadays, the progress in computer industry, gives an opportunity to speed up the designing process by simulating the MW heating for various cavity designs. In order to compare different designs in terms of uniformity of heating, a proper parameter needed to be defined. A considerable amount of literature has been published on Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. A successful experimental validation of a combined electromagnetic and thermal FDTD model of a microwave heating process was done by This smoothness parameter provides an accurate and impartial method for assessing the performance of batch processing MW applicators. In a similar manner, batch processing cavities were assessed by All simulations of microwave heating inside MW cavities were done using Concerto code (Vector Field Software, Kidlington, UK). Concerto software is for high frequency electromagnetic field simulation. Concerto uses the FDTD method. For complicated geometries, it can also use a conformal FDTD method to improve meshing of complex surfaces. The size of the mesh used in the models was For this study three MW applicators were used. The dissipated power by each particle has been calculated based on 10 microwave cycles (started in steady state after 200 microwave cycles); individual particle travels through the cavity in a single path. The dissipated power within each particle, which correlates with heating of the particles, has been extracted using Matlab code. The bulk dielectric properties for particles were used. The movement of the belt has been simulated by taking into account particles heating at several positions along the belt. The dissipated powers within a single particle at different positions along the belt have been added together to represent the total dissipated power for that particle. In order to demonstrate the need for a new smoothness parameter for continuous processing applicators, simulations of that type of cavity (at 2.45 Two simulations were run with different dielectric properties for particles: Load A-Dielectric constant, Load B-Dielectric constant, The dissipated power within each particle, which correlates with heating of the particles are shown in The use of power dissipated per particle instead of the dissipated power density will produce the same result, when the cavity is loaded with identical particles. This is because everything is scaled by the same particle volume. The smoothness parameters ( According to The standard deviation and the average ratio for the results presented in For continuously operating cavities (MW applicator), the particles usually sit on a moving belt and they change positions within the cavity during the heating period, but stay on the same path. Thus, it is required to compare the uniformity of heating across the belt after the heating (at the end of the choke). The modified smoothness parameter, The definition of the There are two assumptions in using this approach: The temperature increase is not sufficiently high to change the properties of the particle (dielectric properties, density and specific heat capacity). The particles, located along the direction of belt movement, are passing through a similar field distribution, as shown in The results presented in Using these assumptions, the temperature increase of a particle at a given path correlates to a sum of dissipated powers inside the particles along that path. In order to define a new version of Thus, the It should be noted that in cases, when the temperature rise of the material inside the applicator is sufficient to change the dielectric and thermo-physical properties of the material, the dissipated power within the material cannot be used to calculate the Based on the results presented in For different dielectric properties of the load, the smoothness parameter, It is also useful to investigate whether the In order to investigate this problem, the heating of uniform particles inside an applicator (at 922 The temperature increase of the particles across the belt for two different heating times is presented in The heating of particles across the belt was simulated for two different input MW powers (15 Based on the results in  In order to investigate whether the proposed parameter can be used to compare cavities loaded with different materials, simulations of the heating of a variable feed inside two microwave applicators, with different uniformity parameters, were carried out. Two applicators were used in these simulations (Applicator 1 and Applicator 2). The applicators were chosen based on the Applicator 1 and Applicator 2 were used to simulate microwave heating of a variable feed. The feed consisted of three different types of particles randomly distributed on the belt; their dielectric properties are displayed in Dielectric properties for Load 1, 2 and 3 were calculated using the Complex Refractive Index (CRI) equation, The total dissipated power for particles presented in The uniformity of heating for batch processing cavities is well described by the smoothness parameter ( The Assuming no change of material properties, it can be concluded that heating time and applied microwave power have only a small influence on the proposed uniformity parameter ( One possible application of the