The mechanical properties and wet sliding wear behavior of spark plasma sintered WC based composites consolidated using 10Ni/7Ni–3Cr (metallic binders) and varied wt.% (15 and 20%) zirconia stabilized with yttria (ceramic binder) as mixed binder additives were investigated. Relative density measurement, SEM analysis, hardness and Palmquist toughness characterization were used to assess the properties of the produced composites. The results show that the use of mixtures of 10Ni, 7Ni–3Cr and yttria stabilized zirconia binder additives for the consolidation of the WC based composites yielded relative densities above 94%. Significant drop in hardness values was observed in the sintered composites with the addition of 15 and 20% zirconia. But the Palmquist toughness improved with the addition of zirconia for both composite grades. The fracture toughness for the WC–10Ni based yttria stabilized zirconia composites appeared to be invariant to the addition of zirconia while the WC–7Ni–3Cr composite grades showed a slight improvement in the fracture toughness with an increase in the zirconia content. The fracture toughness of the WC–10Ni based yttria stabilized zirconia composites was slightly superior to that of the WC–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia composites. The addition of zirconia resulted in a significant reduction of the coefficient of friction of the WC–10Ni based yttria stabilized zirconia composites but resulted in the increase of the coefficient of friction of the WC–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia composites.Improving the service performance of WC based composites has continued to attract a lot of interest from researchers The use of ceramic based binder additives as suitable replacements for metallic binders in cemented carbide has been very appealing judging from its inherent properties. They possess higher temperature stability, high oxidation and corrosion resistance, offer improved bending strength and fracture toughness, and improve the strength of the cermet by suppressing potential carbide grain growth at elevated temperatures In this research work, the combination of metallic and ceramic binder additives as sintering agents in WC is explored. Few literatures are available which have explored the effect of combining both metallic and ceramic binders in the development of cemented carbides. Specifically, the sintering characteristics, mechanical properties and tribological behavior of WC based composites sintered using Ni based metallic binders and varied proportions of yttria stabilized zirconia are investigated. This is aimed at assessing the viability of harnessing the advantages of metallic and ceramic binders in the development of cemented carbides with improved mechanical and tribological properties. The WC based cermets were developed using commercial high purity nano-powder grades of zirconia (ZrO The powders were proportioned to achieve the target compositions of WC–10Ni and WC–7Ni–3Cr mixed with 15 and 20 The surface morphology, phase determination and grain distribution of the sintered composites were determined using a JSM 7600F JEOL ultra-high resolution field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM). The microstructural and compositional analysis was performed following standard procedures Hardness measurements and Palmquist toughness evaluations were used as basis for assessing the mechanical properties of the composites. A Vickers micro-hardness indenter operated at a load of 30 Reciprocating wet sliding conditions was used as test basis for the wear behavior assessment of the composites. A computer-controlled ball-on-disk tribometer (UMT-2-CETR) was used for performing wet contact wear test on the composite samples in simulated mine water. The wear test samples were machined to size 2 The XRD profiles of the constituents blended for the production of the composites are presented in For the WC–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia sintered composites ( The sintered and theoretical densities, from which the relative densities of the sintered composites produced are all presented in The mechanical properties of the WC–10Ni/–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia sintered composites produced are presented in It is noted that the WC–10Ni based composites have generally higher toughness characteristics compared with the WC–7Ni–3Cr composite grades but lower hardness properties compared with the latter ( The data of the wet sliding wear behavior of the composites are presented in Overall, much improved toughness and wear properties are harnessed with the use of 10Ni and yttria stabilized zirconia as hybrid binder additives for the sintering of WC based composites in comparison with the use of 7Ni–3Cr and yttria stabilized zirconia. The characterization of WC–10Ni/–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia composites processed using spark plasma sintering was investigated in this research work. The results show that: The use of mixed metallic (Ni, Ni–Cr) and ceramic (zirconia) binder additives for the consolidation of the WC based composites resulted in very high densification with relative densities above 94% obtained. Significant drop in hardness values was observed in the sintered composites with the addition of 15 and 20% zirconia. But the Palmquist toughness improved with the addition of zirconia for both composite grades. The fracture toughness for the WC–10Ni based yttria stabilized zirconia composites appeared to be invariant to the addition of zirconia while the WC–7Ni–3Cr composite grades showed a slight improvement in the fracture toughness with an increase in the zirconia content. The fracture toughness of the WC–10Ni based yttria stabilized zirconia composites was slightly superior to that of the WC–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia composites. The addition of zirconia resulted in a significant reduction of the coefficient of friction of the WC–10Ni based yttria stabilized zirconia composites but resulted in the increase of the coefficient of friction of the WC–7Ni–3Cr based yttria stabilized zirconia composites. Overall, much improved toughness and wear properties are harnessed with the use of 10Ni and yttria stabilized zirconia as hybrid binder additives for the sintering of WC based composites in comparison with the use of 7Ni–3Cr and yttria stabilized zirconia.