This paper presents a method evaluating in numerical value the magnitude of vibration component contained in the rotor angular velocity of a hammer crusher and a new structure to remove them. In the hammer crusher, while rotating by the rotor, hammers are swinging around their pivots simultaneously. This swinging gives effect on the motion of the rotor, making vibration component contained in the rotor angular velocity. By simulating the rotating process of the hammer crusher, the rotor angular velocity and motor power are obtained, and by using the digital filtering technique, a method is developed to evaluate its magnitude in root mean square value by extracting vibration component contained in this simulation result. With this evaluating method is evaluated the simulation result on the motion process of various structures to find out a new structure model of very little value of vibration components in angular velocity and motor power.Comminution is an essential part in preparing raw materials in a lot of production processes, consuming a great amount of energy. With the development of economy, the demand for various kinds of metal and non-metal mineral materials and building materials is increasing as time goes by, increasing rapidly the amount of materials to be crushed. It further increases the amount of energy consumption, leading us to conduct an ever-deepening study how to reduce the energy consumption. The structure of the hammer crusher is simpler than other types of crushers such as jaw crusher and cone crusher (    As mentioned above, the previous works were mainly focused on improving the operation of the hammer crusher, in particular, those concerned with energy consumption, distribution of the product size and wearing, considering that the structure is very simple. However, this paper shows a need to focus on the structure. A hammer crusher consists of a rotor and hammers. The hammers are hung on the pivots fixed on the rotor and can swing freely. The rotor is rotated through a belt-driven system by an electric motor. While the hammer crusher is working, feed materials drop into the crushing chamber to be shattered by the high-speed hammers. During the impact the hammers pass some of their kinetic energy over the materials to be shattered. The hammers lose their kinetic energy as much as that consumed in shattering materials and that shattered materials newly possess. But, unlike the rotary crusher with hammers fixed on the rotor, because of the connection structure of hammer hinging the rotor, the loss of energy from the collision does not directly affect the rotation velocity decrease of the rotor, but first causes velocity decrease (backward swinging) of the hammers, giving effect on the rotor to decrease the rotor angular velocity. In other words, that is regarded as buffering effect. The feed materials are not always the same kind; in some cases relatively massive and tough the materials, even some hardware difficult to be crushed. In this case, the collision between the hammers and these materials may be regarded as elastic one. So the hammers can't crush these hard materials, with the backward swinging angle of the hammers increased, which plays an important role in protecting the crusher. However, the hinged structure of the rotor and the hammers has somewhat negative effect on the dynamic characteristics of the hammer crusher. Once the rotor starts rotating, the hammers also do along the rotor, swinging around their pivots simultaneously. Although the hammers are pushed further away in the circumferential direction by centrifugal force as the rotor angular velocity increases, they still swing backward and forward around hammer pivots due to the inertial mass and the hinged structure of hammers. And in crushing process there constantly occurs collision of the hammers with the materials, breaking down the stability of hammers and making their swinging stronger. Thus, such a motion characteristics of hammers continuously affects the rotor angular velocity to be instable with its stronger vibration. It causes the noise increase, and power consumption increase and bad effect on the power system with unstable motor power. Therefore it is of theoretical and practical significance to ensure protection of the hammer crusher from overload, the advantage of it, and to decrease the vibration component included in the rotor angular velocity. In this paper presents a method of simulating the dynamic motion process of the rotor in the hammer crusher to evaluate the intensity by extracting with digital filtering technique the vibration component contained in the simulation result. And on the basis of analyzing and evaluating various structures of simulation results in this way, it finds out a new structure to improve its dynamic characteristics by decreasing the vibration component included in the rotor angular velocity. MSC.visualnastran software in MSC is used for simulation of kinetic process of the hammer crusher. Using this software makes it easy to make a model machine and set conveniently the force and the moment. It can be applied in combination with MATLAB which provides good control of machine and analysis of its features. In order to visually derive natural physical characteristics of the kinetic system of the hammer crusher, friction is ignored. One of the important things in modeling to study on the effects of factors on a certain object is to simplify the model to clearly identify the characteristics of factors to be considered. The closer the model is to practical reality and the more factors are considered, the more difficult it is to identify the effect of individual one on the object due to the intervention. For example, if the more factors such as friction in linking parts and resistance caused by fluid dynamic phenomenon when hammers are rotating are added in modeling, the target factor, a proper physical characteristics in kinetic system consisting of crushing mechanism may be hidden by them and not be observed clearly. Thus, in studying on modeling, it is significant to make the model as simple as possible and find out a shortcut for achieving its goal, which is one of good studying methods to shorten the studying time to find out the solution by analyzing easily. From this viewpoint, the friction in linking part and the resistance caused by fluid dynamic phenomenon when hammers are rotating are ignored in this model.  As shown in Moment of the motor is transferred to the rotor through the belt constraint. Then the rotor rotates around its axis with the hammers linked to the rotor by the revolution joint constraints. The faster is the rotor angular velocity, the greater is the centrifugal force causing hammers to pull out in the direction of centrifugal force. On condition that the materials to be crushed have been not provided yet, onto the motor given is the load by inertia moment of the rotor and pulley, the load caused by the varied angular velocity due to hammers' swing and the load by the frictions. When the materials to be crushed are provided, the load from collisions of hammers and materials is more added. This load should be balanced with the moment of the motor dynamically, thus, the motor power can be calculated by multiplying the moment of the motor by the angular velocity of the pulley with motor constraint. So, in this model calculated and analyzed is the rotor angular velocity and the motor power with respect to time. Parameters used in simulating the model are given in When On the basis of the data on 15 When the above moment formula is given to characteristics of the motor constraint in the model, the rotor angular velocity and the motor power from the starting point to the stable state are obtained as in As known from the simulation result, the rotor angular velocity and the motor power in the conventional hammer crusher is too uneven and unequal not only during its starting but in the stable state afterwards. It is related to mechanism of the hammer crusher. From the viewpoint of mechanism, the hammer crusher belongs to a double pendulum mechanism, that is, the first pendulum is that the rotor rotates around rotational shaft and the second is that the hammer swing around its pivot fixed on the rotor. Therefore, the second pendulum hammers swing due to their inertial masses. This swinging of the hammers influences the rotor angular velocity to cause vibration components inevitably involved in it. In the hammer crusher, the crushing is performed through constant collision between the hammers and the materials. In order to observe dynamic characteristics of the hammer crusher after collision, the collision model is made as shown in As shown in Using the simulation results mentioned above, the qualitative estimation of the dynamic characteristics of the hammer crusher rotor is easily to be made, but it may be difficult to make a quantitative evaluation of the vibration of angular velocity. But it is necessary to evaluate how quantitative the vibration of angular velocity to search for a method for improving the dynamic characteristics of the hammer crusher. For this, in this paper the curves of the simulation results in MATLAB, the mathematical library made in MathWork contains various kinds of math tools. Combined with other applications, this software performs mathematical analysis and control. In Coefficient of FIR Decimation element is obtained by using Function fir1( The root mean square value of separated vibration component is obtained as follows:  As shown in When the collision simulation result as shown in  As mentioned above, the root mean square value of residual separated by the digital filtering technique can be used for the quantitative evaluation of vibration component, and the main curve can be clearly observed. The simulation results of Patent WO2011/137702 proposed a structure to limit the swinging of hammers. MSC.visualnastran model (now called Model 2) of the structure is shown in The analysis results of the rotor angular velocity and the motor power of Model 2 are shown in  The structure of Model 2, however, was originally designated not for the purpose of decreasing vibration components involved in the rotor angular velocity and the motor power, but only for avoiding hammers far away from stable location. Therefore, as shown in the above simulation results, the vibration components still remain in the rotor angular velocity and the motor power while vibration continues to exist even though in stable state. For the further considering the dynamic characteristics of Model 2, the collision of hammer with lump is simulated and the variation of the rotor angular velocity is shown in In addition, the structure of Model 2 in which the swinging angle of the hammers is surely limited makes the hammerhead collided with limitation bars in the crushing process. Then the collision, because the greater is the length from the hammer pivot to collision point, the greater is the collision velocity, may lead to severe wear and tear of the bars as well as the hammers. From the simulation of Model 1 and Model 2, the following facts are drawn. The hammers, rotating with the rotor, also swing moving to and fro in the rotating direction of the rotor with the line connecting the rotor axis with the pivot as standard. From this viewpoint, Model 1 and Model 2 are based on the same structure; in other words, swinging characteristics of Model 2 is essentially the same as that of Model 1 except limiting the initial angle of the hammers. This draws a conclusion that in order to avoid the swinging of hammers limitation bars should be fixed to put them on the standard line connecting the rotor axis with the pivot to completely remove the moving possibility of the hammers in any one direction. Backward swinging of the hammers in the hammer crusher is practically necessary, which is one of the great advantages, while unnecessary is the forward swinging, the inevitable movement occurring due to the connection structure of hammer hinging the rotor. In this paper, several structure models are planned and simulated to remove the vibration components of the rotor angular velocity and the motor power, so that finally a new structure (now called Model 3) can be established as shown in  The analysis results of the rotor angular velocity and the motor power of Model 3 are shown in As shown in Model 3 also finds its advantage in crushing process, i.e. after collision, the rotor angular velocity returns to a stable state rapidly and the hammer returns to a stable position very soon to wait for the next collision. At this time, the root mean square values of angular velocity residual of 0.073 The structure of Model 3 is also superior to Model 2 from the aspect of the collision of the hammer and the limitation bar. The velocity of collision between the hammer and the limitation bar is small due to the short distance between the pivot and the colliding point, and it occurs on the handle, not on the head of the hammer. The collision with and friction against materials occurring at the tip of hammerhead are attributed to the hammer's wear and tear in the operation of the hammer crusher. Therefore, when the limitation bar is fixed as shown in Model 3, it doesn't give any effect on the wear and tear of the hammerhead in the crushing period.  As shown in In general, a lot of researchers tend to be interested in the operation of the hammer crusher that is relatively simple in structure. This paper, however, proves that the dynamic characteristics of this crusher can also be improved by giving efficient changes to the structure. From the viewpoint of mechanism, the hammer crusher belongs to a double pendulum mechanism, that is, the first pendulum is that the rotor rotates around rotational shaft and the second is that the hammer swing around its pivot fixed on the rotor. The swinging of the hammer influences the rotor angular velocity, inevitably giving rise to vibration of angular velocity. However, in the process of colliding with materials to be crushed, the structure whose hammer swings around its pivot has capability of protecting the machine from the great reaction when colliding with materials too hard to be crushed. Therefore, in order to improve the dynamic characteristics of the hammer crusher, it is very significant to remove the vibration of the rotor angular velocity, maintaining this advantage. As shown above, the rotor angular velocity in the hammer crusher includes vibration component. For quantitative evaluation of vibration component in such characteristics, digital filtering technique can be applied. This paper simulated the motion process of the hammer crusher and the collision process of hammers and materials by using MSC.visualnastran. From the rotor angular velocity and the motor power obtained through the simulation, the only vibration components are extracted by applying digital filtering technique to calculate their root mean square values, which can be used as quantitative indices for evaluating the dynamic characteristics of the hammer crusher. Then, these evaluation indices on several structures are compared, thus finally designing a new type of hammer crusher with the best dynamic characteristics, maintaining its proper advantage. This evaluation method can be applied to the detailed analysis of geometrical size effect of a hammer crusher on its dynamic characteristics, and to the study on any type of machine whose dynamic characteristics includes the vibration components. Authors are grateful to teachers of mining machine department of mining faculty in Kim Cheak University of Technology for their assistance to accomplish this work.