A study was carried out on the adhesion to sulfide minerals of chemolithoautotrophic acidophilic bacteria obtained from industrial copper bioleaching operation. For this purpose, a mixed culture obtained from an industrial process and two metabolically different pure strains of Acidithiobacillus: A. ferrooxidans and A. ferridurans were used. These microorganisms showed significant differences in adhesion with respect to pyrite and chalcocite in terms of the temporal dynamics patterns and preference. A complex dynamics that involve cycles of attachment and detachment can only be explained by considering both, the intrinsic characteristics of the microorganisms, such as hydrophobicity, resistance and motility, and the properties of each mineral like their hydrophobicity, dissolution behavior and ionic contribution.Copper sulfide bioleaching makes it possible to process low-grade ores at low cost and with low environmental impact. Bioleaching involves chemical and biological processes in which microorganisms have a fundamental role. The interaction between these microorganisms and minerals is one of the principal factors driving the efficiency of the copper recovery. This interaction has been thoroughly studied (e.g., reviews by In the biofilm development, the mineral–cell interaction is a complex process that involves a cycle with three stages — attachment, growth and detachment of the cells ( Chalcocite and pyrite are two commonly found minerals in most of the industrial bioleaching processes. Chalcocite is the one yielding the greatest amount of copper in these processes ( By means of microscopy techniques, we were able to follow the adhesion dynamics directly over the mineral surface. In this way, we saw the effect of the mineral composition and of the surrounding media in pure and mixed bacterial cultures. Adhesion tests were performed on a mixed culture of microorganisms obtained from an industrial bioleaching process. The microorganisms were characterized by means of Real Time PCR using specific probes for The minerals used in this study are greater than 99% pure chalcocite and pyrite (from Museo Mineralógico, Universidad de Atacama, Copiapó, Chile). They were ground to 3 Prior to inoculation, 100 Three tubes containing 10 For the purpose of the analysis, a tube scheduled for a given day was completely emptied and the solution and mineral fragment were examined separately. The mineral fragments obtained from the tubes were gently washed three times using TK saline medium and paraformaldehyde was added until a 4% concentration was reached. The fragments were fixed at room temperature for a period of 1 Total cell counts were obtained using DAPI (4′,6 diamino-2-phenylindole, Sigma), as described by To prevent non-specific adhesion, the mineral samples obtained from the tests were left to stand in 300 A pyrite fragment surface was polished on one side to a mirror-like surface and washed in the same way as described above. The polished mineral fragment was placed in a glass tube with 1 Strains of two closely related species of  To calculate Gibbs energy of cell adhesion between bacteria of the same type (colony formation), Eq. A volume containing a total of 10 The cells present in each of these sections were counted by means of DAPI staining and epifluorescence microscopy. Electron microscope with X-ray diffraction was used to map the copper distribution over polycarbonate filter. A filter with 1 The highest percentage of total cell adhesion occurred during the first day: a total of about 1000 The ratios of In the case of pyrite, there was a steady increase of attached bacteria during the four days of the experiment; the numbers were an order of magnitude greater than the numbers observed for chalcocite. These results suggest that chalcocite dissolution has an impact on bacterial adhesion for the three species studied, though two of them initially attached better to chalcocite than to pyrite. The decrease of cells in solution noted on the first day of the test coincides with the appearance of cells attached to both minerals ( The cell counts on polished pyrite showed practically no variation between replicates. The value obtained for the three mineral fragments using the BET technique was 83 According to the solid–vapor tension calculations, based on the contact angle, chalcocite is lower than pyrite hydrophobicity and The number of Control filters without cells were used to determine dispersion of soluble copper when chalcocite was exposed to acidic ferric sulfate solution. Mapping of the filters surface with SEM–XRD shows a decreasing concentration of copper salts with distance, having the highest levels where chalcocite spots were placed. These results are in accordance with those predicted by the Fick's Law (salt concentration is inverse to the distance from the origin); they also show that solutions are not homogeneous and have big variations on copper concentration depending on distance from the source. The number of cells of both strains ( The cells directly attached to the pyrite surface reached higher number than the cells attached to the chalcocite fragment ( Those results are consistent with a toxicity response of bacteria against Cu ( In general, adhesion dynamics to pyrite follow a similar pattern for both strains ( The number of cells on the chalcocite surface shows similar stages as those presented on pyrite fragments. The results confirmed the occurrence of cell detachment through the quantitative reduction in the number of cells on the mineral surface. Cell detachment from pyrite surface has been suggested through microscopic observations (cell numbers were not available on the surface of the mineral) and has been explained because of the increase in the Fe(II) concentration due to mineral oxidation ( Cell growth onto the mineral surface was also confirmed by cell number determination and by colony formation ( In the presence of chalcocite, the effect was completely different. Chalcocite lixiviation depends largely on the presence of catalytic microorganisms attached to the mineral surface ( More studies are necessary to determine the effects in copper recovery using mixed industrial minerals, considering mineral–microorganism affinity and reactivity. The behavior of bioleaching microorganisms and their interaction with each of the minerals present in an ore are extremely important, but have hardly been studied. Using various approaches to understand the factors that affect leaching processes at microscopic level will help to establish the fundamental knowledge for studying the phenomena observed at the industrial level. This investigation has assessed the effect of intrinsic factors of microorganisms and properties of minerals. It is necessary to consider the combined effect of both kinds of factors, since none of them could explain the phenomena separately. From the mineral point of view, hydrophobicity was found to be one important factor in the early stages of the bacteria–mineral interaction because it determines the free energy of the adhesion process. After this stage, the fluctuations and differences observed between bacterial adhesion to pyrite and to chalcocite are related with differences in the ionic contribution of each mineral and, in the case of chalcocite, the dissolution kinetics and release of the oxidation products. From a biological point of view, bacterial properties such as chemotaxis, motility and copper resistance, determine the grade and the stability of the attachment. This work has been supported by