The scale-up of laboratory grinding data to industrial milling operations generally relies on tests carried out in cylindrical ball mills run in batch mode. This approach imposes no restriction on the diameter and length of the laboratory mill.
                  In this work, the breakage characteristics of a copper ore were measured using two batch mills of different designs. For each mill, a number of feed samples of similar size distributions were prepared for testing under various conditions. Product size distributions were then measured after predefined milling time intervals. Finally, the selection function and breakage function parameters of the copper ore were back-calculated from the milling data.
                  Results showed that the breakage function parameters from the two mills are statistically similar indicative of a normalisable copper ore. It was also found that the scale-up equations for batch grinding data described well the effect of mill diameter on the selection function parameters.selection function parameter calculated for the Bond design mill [min selection function parameter measured for a mono-sized media charge of diameter selection function parameter calculated for the laboratory design mill [min selection function parameter corresponding to the reference ball diameter cumulative breakage distribution function for particles of size diameter of grinding balls corresponding to ball size class diameter of grinding balls used in the Bond design mill [mm] diameter of grinding balls used in the laboratory design milling [mm] reference ball diameter used as the baseline in allowing for the effects of ball size distribution in a ball charge mix [mm] diameter of the Bond design mill [m] diameter of the laboratory design mill [m] mass fraction of the initial feed in size class number of grinding ball size classes [–] mass fraction of balls of diameter number of particle size classes [–] total number of data points making up a full batch test series [–] number of parameters searched for by back-calculation [–] parameter in Eq. parameter in Eq. parameter in Eq. parameter in Eq. mass fraction of the final mill product present in size class mass fraction of the final mill product present in size class theoretically calculated product size distribution [–] selection function of particles of size selection function of particles of size grinding time used in each batch mill [min] upper limit of particle size interval selection function parameter [–] breakage function parameter [–] breakage function parameter [–] selection function parameter [–] selection function parameter dependent on milling conditions and calculated for the Bond design mill [mm] selection function parameter measured for a mono-sized media charge of diameter selection function parameter dependent on milling conditions and calculated for the laboratory design mill [mm] selection function parameter corresponding to the reference ball diameter breakage function parameter [–] The benefits of accurate mill scale-up are widely acknowledged in the minerals industry and reported in the literature Austin et al. Compared to other techniques such as the Bond method or the drop weight test, one-size-fraction tests are not prescriptive of the design and size of the batch mill The experimental programme followed to meet the objectives of the work is presented in this section. It entails the sampling and preparation of feed material for batch testing, the series of batch tests considered with the purpose of measuring the selection function and breakage function parameters, and the specifications and experimental conditions of the two batch mills. The feed material used in this work is the copper-molybdenum ore from the Ozdogu plant, in Turkey. The sulphide ore of a specific density of 2.85 g/cm A large volume of material was cut across the inlet feed stream to the primary mill of the Ozdogu processing plant. The collected feed material was large enough to accommodate 16 and 12 batch milling tests on the small and large mills respectively. In this work, the small mill is called Bond Design mill or BD mill while the large mill is named Laboratory Design mill or LD mill. Details of the two mills and their respective batch tests are provided in the subsequent sections. However, in terms of sample preparation, it should be stated that two different size distributions were used. A coarser feed was used for the LD mill while a finer one was prepared for testing in the BD mill as illustrated in In order to prepare the two feed size distributions, the bulk material from the primary mill feed was split into two fractions using a Jones riffle. One fraction was then sieved in small batches through a 5 mm laboratory screen. The undersize material was then combined for later use in the LD mill. In a similar fashion, the second fraction from riffling was passed through a 3.35 mm screen while the undersize material was collected for BD mill testing. The two fractions constituted the finer and coarser feeds mentioned earlier. Finally, each fraction underwent gradual rotary splitting to obtain small batches of feed sample of appropriate mass, that is, 1.144 kg for BD milling and 8.75 kg for LD milling. Throughout the handling process, care was made to properly label batch feed samples after preparing them as described above. This ensured that the feed samples destined to each mill were of similar size distributions and were correctly allocated. The first series of batch grinding tests were performed using a laboratory mill of Bond design referred to as Bond design mill or BD mill. This is because the mill has the same internal diameter and length as that of the original mill for Bond work index testing Note that ball charges considered in Both mills were operated dry under similar conditions of rotational speed, ball filling, powder filling, and absent lifters. The notable differences are in the design (i.e. mill diameter and length), the ball diameters considered, the density of grinding media used, and the total grinding times. The last two factors are generally assumed to have little to no effects on the selection function and breakage function parameters After completing the batch tests in To sum up, two mills were used for dry batch testing: the Bond design (BD) mill and the laboratory design (LD) mill. In the BD mill, similar less than 3.35 mm feed samples were used. Four batch tests were carried out on the feed samples for three mono-sized and one composite ball charges. In all four tests, experimental conditions of ball filling, powder filling, and grinding time intervals remained the same. And for the LD mill, feed samples were of a coarser size less than 5 mm while total grinding times were shorter for otherwise similar experimental conditions to those of the BD mill tests. Three mono-sized and one composite ball charges were considered with coarser diameters and composition. With both mill, standard sieving was performed on the feed before batch testing and on the product after each grinding time interval. The analysis of the particle size distributions and the extraction of the selection function and breakage function parameters are presented in the next section. Presented succinctly in this section are the mathematical equations descriptive of the size reduction process as it happens in a batch mill. The back-calculation method for batch grinding data advocated by Austin et al. Assuming that a sample of feed size distribution The transfer function The terms The breakage function The primary objective of batch milling tests following the one-size-fraction method is to accurately measure the breakage parameters in Eqs. The basic principle of the back-calculation technique consists in identifying initial values for the breakage parameters in Eqs. The objective function Austin et al. One challenge arising from breakage parameters estimated using feed size distributions is their limited accuracy compared to those from mono-sized feeds. One way of gaining confidence in the back-calculated breakage parameters is to perform additional batch tests with media charges made of a mix of grinding balls of different diameters. The grinding data produced can then be used in an effort to validate the back-calculated parameters. Various studies have shown that a mix of balls of different sizes behave as if the selection function is the result of the weighed contribution of individual balls The breakage function for a ball charge mix is still calculated using Eq. This brings us to talk about the comparison of breakage parameters measured from batch mills of different diameters. The description focuses specifically on the selection function. This is because the ore is assumed to be normalisable; and therefore, Eq. Let us consider Note in Eqs. In this study, scale-up is to be performed between the BD and LD mills operated under the conditions listed in It should be underscored that Eqs. The idea now is to assess the extent to which the default values of the exponent parameters This section presents the results of the back-calculation technique applied to both the BD and the LD mills. The back-calculated parameters are then validated using batch grinding data corresponding to the various charge mixes considered. This finally paves the way for an assessment of the relationship between the two mill designs in terms of their selection function parameters. The back-calculation method presented in It can be seen from  Results similar to those presented in the previous section are reported in Comparison is finally done between theoretical and experimental product size distributions for the 40 mm ball charge. A comparison between From the above, it was decided to average The following average values were obtained for the identified material-dependent breakage parameters: The results of the endeavour is summarised in It can be seen that Let us now test the quality of the selection function and breakage function parameters in Good agreement between measurements and predictions can be seen from The last portion of this section reports on the dependency of selection function parameters with mill design. To this end, the values of The fitting parameter A match between the fitting equations in The graphical evidence in Before concluding this section, a comparison was deemed necessary between predictions obtained using default values of  The observations noted above as well as under previous results headings are discussed in the next section. The need for precise measurement of ore breakage properties for the purpose of modelling and simulation of milling circuits is undeniable. Batch grinding tests are widely used to this end following well-established protocols (see for example It was undertaken in this work to run batch tests concomitantly in two batch mills of different diameter and length. The same ore was used for testing while mill charges of different ball sizes and ball size distributions were considered. In doing so, the effects of ball size, ball size distribution, and mill diameter on batch milling were investigated. The underlying idea was to determine how well the selection function and breakage function parameters of the same ore measured using two different mills compare. In terms of the breakage function parameters reported in The selection function parameters in Based on the above interpretation of the results in The next topic for discussion is the effects of ball size and ball size distribution on the selection function parameters Turning to the effects of ball size on parameters On another note, Deniz Finally, the effect of mill diameter on the selection function parameters Gupta et al. In summary, results in Batch testing is critical to the accurate and precise characterisation of ore feeds meant for ball milling. The results of the exercise can be used to predict the behaviour of the ore in a full-scale milling set-up. The key advantage of batch milling tests resides in the possibility of executing them in a ball mill of any practical size and under normal operating conditions. The aim of the present work was to measure the breakage parameters of a copper ore using two batch mills of different diameter and length. Then, the selection function and breakage function parameters from the two mill designs were compared. The copper ore was found to be normalisable for either mill; in other words, the breakage function parameters ( It is proposed for future work to investigate the effects of mill diameter using one-size-fraction feeds. In doing so, the uncertainty of breakage function parameters such as The authors wish to express their gratitude to the University of South Africa, Urmia University of Technology, and Urmia University for encouraging this collaborative work. The second author wishes to thank to Prof. Dr. Levent Ergun for his valuable comments and guidance.