A methodology is presented to assess the sensitivity of a complex model involved in integrated assessment and modeling approaches to spatial factors. The application considers the spatially-distributed agro-hydrological model TNT2, and its sensitivity to soil characteristics and their spatial distribution (soil pattern). The final goal is to identify soil input data that require more accurate description (measurement) and the relevant spatial resolution for soil information. Based on methods commonly used for non-spatially-distributed models (Morris method and a fractional factorial design with ANOVA), the proposed approach is innovative in the way that spatial input factors are considered in the global sensitivity analysis. The global sensitivity analysis is performed in three steps (i) screening among soil input data to identify those that most affect model outputs, (ii) quantifying the sensitivity of TNT2 to the dominant soil input factors and their interactions when considering a single soil and (iii) incorporating the soil pattern into the global sensitivity as an explicit input factor. The results indicate differences in the hierarchy of influential input factors between the screening and quantitative methods. The model's low sensitivity to spatial patterns provides recommendations for further field sampling campaigns. The hierarchical approach developed in this paper is based on sensitivity analysis methods with relatively low computational demand. The approach is generic and applicable to any complex spatial model.To cope with water quality degradation and promote environmental planning, integrated assessment and modeling approaches are useful to determine the effects of prospective scenarios ( Agro-hydrological models are complex and include a broad array of processes related to farm practices, N biotransformations and surface and deep hydrology ( Sensitivity analysis (SA) methods are critical in developing complex spatial models, for which input data or parameters cannot be fully or accurately measured ( A number of SA techniques have been developed, ranging from the simplest class of One factor At a Time (OAT) screening techniques to global sensitivity techniques. The screening technique proposed by Morris provides qualitative sensitivity measures by ranking the input factors in order of importance ( In spatially distributed models, performing a spatial SA (SSA) may enhance understanding of model response to not only the variation in model inputs or parameters, but also their spatial distribution. Several approaches to include maps as input factors in SSA have been tested. For example, The effects of spatially-distributed input factors are usually assessed by analyzing the variance of non-spatially-distributed model output, but The aim of this study was to develop an approach for an SSA analysis (i) suitable for spatially distributed watershed models with high computational run times, (ii) in which the spatial distribution and resolution are explicit input factors of the SSA. This development is illustrated with the assessment of the sensitivity of the TNT2 model (Topography-based Nitrogen Transfer and Transformations) ( TNT2 was developed to study N fluxes in small agricultural watersheds (<50 km The TNT2 model is part of the large family of the agro-hydrological models, composed of distributed ones, as for example HSPF ( TNT is mainly based on the assumptions of the hydrological model TOPMODEL ( TNT2 inputs and parameters include (i) a DEM in raster format; (ii) a landscape pattern in raster format delineating the agricultural plots, roads, hydrological network and landscape features (wetlands, hedgerows, etc.); (iii) a soil map in raster format; (iv) a climate map in raster format enabling potential climate gradients within the watershed; (v) daily climate data in each climate area; (vi) 20 soil characteristics for each soil type represented on the soil map and (vii) agricultural practices (mineral and organic fertilization, sowing date, etc.) and crop sequences in each plot during the simulation period. Among input data and parameters, those related to soil characteristics may be difficult to access and distribute spatially. At a scale of 1- to 50-km² watersheds, moderate gradients of soil properties are observed, but soil types typically are not markedly different. Soil data are usually inferred from existing regional 1:250,000 soil maps (25,000-km The model runs on a daily time step. Water balance and N transformations are computed in each cell of the raster grid, and a drainage network determines the direction of transfers between cells. Main outputs are daily hydrological fluxes and N concentrations and fluxes in the river at the watershed outlet, and hydrological and N budgets in different landscape locations. We focused on the sensitivity of TNT2 to soil input factors and their spatial distribution. Since the model has 21 soil input variables (1 map of soils distribution over the catchment, and 20 variables describing the properties of each soil type) and high computational run times, we first performed an SA of the TNT2 model to soil input factors considering a single soil type, i.e. spatially-homogenous soil properties over the watershed. This non-spatial SA aimed at screening soil input factors for those with most influence on model outputs and at quantifying the sensitivity of model outputs to the selected input factors and to their interactions. Then the method was applied considering one more qualitative factor corresponding to the soil pattern, to perform a spatial sensitivity analysis (SSA). The Morris method provides qualitative sensitivity measures that allow input factors to be ranked (  An FFD with ANOVA was used to quantify the sensitivity of model outputs to the soil input factors and interactions selected by the Morris method, since a complete factorial design or variance-based methods are computationally too expensive considering the number of factors and computational run times of the TNT2 model. The major assumption underlying the FFD is that interactions at higher orders (3 or more) are negligible relatively to the lower-order effects of a parameter; so, FFD is suitable when first- and second-order parameter effects dominate ( The sensitivity indices were computed by ANOVA, dividing the total variance among contributions from each factor and interactions between factors ( For the input factor (with The total variance ( The FFD method was then applied considering one more qualitative input corresponding to the soil pattern. For the SSA, we explicitly considered the soil pattern as an input factor so as to assess the contribution of the soil-map resolution and its interactions with input factors to variance in the outputs. Then, we determined whether the contribution of the spatial distribution of soil inputs varied when the range (i.e., uncertainty) of soil input factors decreased. The soil-map resolution was introduced as a factor in the factorial design and its influence on model outputs were quantified using the FFD method as described in the previous section. The soil-map resolution was considered a qualitative input factor, whereas other input factors were quantitative. SA was performed using input data from a 3-km² watershed located in Brittany, France ( In the screening SA with the Morris method, the effect of the 20 soil input factors on the model outputs was tested ( In the quantitative SA with FFD and ANOVA, the input factors corresponded to the 6 dominant input factors and ranges selected in Five theoretical soil patterns were generated that differed in resolution and, consequently, in the number of soil types and their distribution in the watershed. The number of levels ( The range of input factors was then decreased, which is similar to reducing their uncertainty. The first range (the widest) was similar to that used in the previous step ( Twenty outputs of the models for main hydrological and N compartments were analyzed ( The SA indices were computed with R software ( By considering 6 input factors at 5 levels for hydrological and N outputs, a complete factorial design would have required a set of 5 For the SSA, the FFD with 6 factors, 5 levels, 3 repetitions and a resolution of 5 led to a set of 9375 simulations and computational run times of 36 days. The TNT2 input data not considered in the sensitivity analyses were inferred from available data on actual topography (1 input data), climate (7 daily input data homogenous on the watershed), land use and agricultural practices (88 input data and parameters on each field of the watershed) over the simulation period. From 2 to 4 input factors per output had normalized Input factors with a higher effect on hydrological outputs were related to lateral flow modeling ( For N outputs at the watershed scale, only factors controlling N transformations had an effect ( The ranking of input factors according to the FFD analysis quantified main and interaction effects ( Whenever The normalized total index of the spatial input factor remained low compared to that of other input factors ( Reducing the range of input factors ( The expected increase in the total index of the spatial input factor when ranges of input factors decreased did not occur ( For agronomic outputs, the ranking of the total index of the input factor did not change when decreasing the input range, with Selection of the most influential input factors with the Morris method reduced to one quarter the number of inputs to analyze further with the FFD method. At this stage, outputs at the watershed scale were shown to be sensitive to the factors driving mineralization processes ( The comparison between the qualitative and quantitative methods exposed discrepancies in rankings of the sensitivity index. The quantitative approach emphasized sensitivity of The sensitivity of the spatial distribution of input factors was low, even when reducing the range of other input factors. Since the hydrological model is based on the model TOPMODEL, future work is needed to evaluate the specific sensitivity of TNT2 to the soil spatial organization in relation to topography. Together with the spatial application, the effect of decreasing the initial range of input factors was assessed. When reducing their range, few differences appeared in the ranking of factors' main effects on output variables. Only a large decrease in the rank influence of This is especially interesting because In this TNT2 application, our three-step SA brought out some points to consider when undertaking further TNT2 modeling: (i) the most influential soil parameters have been identified, a specific attention on them should be paid during model calibrations, especially when their ranges of values are not well known; (ii) further field investigation should specify the mean value of measurable influential input factors ( The objective to propose a methodology for spatial sensitivity analysis suitable for complex models with high computational run times has been reached by adapting classical sensitivity to integrate a qualitative spatial input factor. From this methodology, in addition to the results useful for further TNT2 applications, some prospects to optimize the computation time and to strengthen the results of the SA can be put forward at this stage. The first concern is that, even if FFD was selected for its low computational times, the duration of our SSA exceeds a month, limiting the use of such SSA for application to larger catchments. Since the spatial input factor is qualitative, we have chosen an FFD with a high number of levels. Reducing the computational run times would be possible by considering a mixed-level design, still with the five levels for the spatial input factor but with two levels only (low and high) for the quantitative input factor of soil properties ( Sensitivity analyses are relevant tools for exploring complex models involved in integrated assessment and modeling approaches, such as TNT2. Global methods are essential for understanding how model outputs react to input parameters over their entire range of values. In this paper, to investigate the influence of soil characteristics and their spatial distribution on hydrological and geochemical outputs of an agro-hydrological model at the watershed scale, we used classical sensitivity-analysis methods commonly used for non-spatially-distributed model analyses. Since complex environmental models have many input factors and requires high computational run times, we developed a hierarchical approach that considers spatially-distributed input factors and that consisted in: (i) applying the Morris method to screen for input factors with the greatest influence on hydrological and geochemical output variables, (ii) applying the FFD method with ANOVA to quantify model sensitivity to the selected input factors and (iii) explicitly considering the spatial distribution of the selected soil properties as an input factor in sensitivity analyses. Although the Morris method did not quantify sensitivity indices, it was well-adapted to screen for the most influential among the large number of inputs. The main drawback of the FFD with ANOVA method is that it does not explore all combinations of input factors. However, FFD was a relatively simple and suitable method to perform global sensitivity analyses of the complex model. It quantifies the effect of input factors and, importantly, their interactions, on the variability in output variables. This study is innovative in the way that spatial input factors were considered in the global sensitivity analysis. To assess model sensitivity to the resolution of the soil input data, we constructed contrasting soil patterns that correspond to different aggregation levels of soil input data. The influence of inputs describing agricultural systems, however, would require adapting the method since it considers their spatial resolution but not the spatial distribution of the crops in the watershed. Unlike the spatial distribution of soil properties, crop rotations induce yearly changes in the spatial distribution of crops. Nonetheless, this method of addressing sensitivity to soil-map resolution and thus soil input factor distribution can be transferred easily to other spatially-distributed complex environmental models and to other inputs. Considering different statistical values for a given output provides useful information on the behavior of a dynamic spatial model. In our results the ranking of the factors and the sensitivity indices were slightly different between the cumulated or mean value of a given output and extrema. Analyzing trends of extreme values (deciles) can indeed be useful in operational context when respecting a threshold is mandatory, as for instance the threshold 11.3 mg L Even if the results were discussed for a specific model in a site-specific application, the method of spatial sensitivity analysis is general and applicable to any spatially distributed model. The specific interpretation will differ from model to model but precious information on the model response and/or on the need for additional field information can be obtained from the spatial SA. The next step will be to include in the SA the temporal scale in addition to the spatial distribution so that maps indicating where and when the parameters are most sensitive can be created ( This work was funded by the