Between October 1995 and December 1998, 16 patients with A–O type A3, C2 or C3 supracondylar femoral fractures were treated by open reduction and internal fixation using indirect reduction and bridge plating. Seven (44%) patients had open fractures. The patients were followed for a mean of 46 months (range 24–71). All fractures healed. The average time for fracture healing was 18.5 weeks (range 12–28). Four primary bone grafts and three secondary bone grafts were performed. By using the modified Schatzker rating scale, the result of 13 patients (81%) were rated as excellent or good. Complications included two implant failures that were due to full weight bearing before bone healing, and one superficial delayed wound healing. No deep infections were found in this series. The open fracture group needed longer time to heal and had a higher rate of receiving bone grafts. We conclude that indirect reduction and bridge plating with a 95° dynamic condylar screw (DCS) or condylar blade plate can produce favourable results for complex distal femoral fractures. We suggest primary bone grafts or early secondary bone grafts for comminuted open fractures using an indirect reduction technique.Comminuted fractures of the distal third of the femur are difficult to treat. Surgical treatment is favoured because of its superior results in the literature Between October 1995 and December 1998, sixteen supracondylar fractures of the femur were treated with open reduction and internal fixation using an indirect reduction and bridge plating technique in our hospital by one surgeon (H.-T. Huang). According to the A–O classification system of supracondylar femur fracture Four primary bone grafts (one allograft and three autografts) were done in four patients due to segmental bone defects. The defects were found over the lateral and anterior cortex during operation. Rehabilitation was started on the second post-operative day with quadriceps setting and continuous passive motion of the knee joints. After discharge, the patients were encouraged to do straight leg raising and active flexion of their knees with a hinged knee brace. Non-weight bearing was recommended until fracture healing occurred. Only one patient had long leg cast protection for 1 month after removal of stitches because of osteoporosis, and she regained satisfactory ROM of her knee after removal of the cast. All patients were followed monthly by X-ray examination until the fractures showed continuous callus. Full weight-bearing was then permitted. The post-operative results were rated using a modified Schatzker rating scale The only patient with a poor result was a case with a type IIIA open fracture. He had a severe quadriceps tendon injury during the trauma and the flexion of his knee never reached 90° post-operatively. The two patients with fair results were both older than 65 and had symptoms of knee osteoarthritis before the trauma, so their knee pain and limited ROM might be secondary to the pre-existed osteoarthritis. Delayed wound healing was noted in one patient, but after intensive wound care it healed uneventfully. No deep infection was found in this series. Two patients sustained failure of implants at 14 weeks, and 18 weeks post-operatively due to premature full weight bearing before bone union. They received new plates and bone grafts, and the fractures united 10 and 13 weeks later. ( The average post-operative knee flexion of all patients was 115°, with only two patients under 100°, both of whom were cases with open fractures. When compared with the closed fracture group, the open fracture group required a longer time for union (22 versus 15.8 weeks), less post-operative ROM (113 versus 117°), and had a higher rate of bone grafts (58 versus 22%). The lateral approach group required a shorter period of time for union (15.2 versus 20.5 weeks) and had better average ROM (123 versus 112°) as compared with the anterior approach group. The concept of indirect reduction was intended to spare the soft tissue envelope around the fracture and to achieve a stable and satisfactory reduction. In the present series, with an average follow up of 36 months, 81% of the patients were rated as excellent or good by a modified Schatzker rating scale. For a group of patients that suffered from severe comminution of supracondylar femur fractures, the results are satisfactory. There were two implant failures (12.5%), both of which were due to premature full weight bearing before union of the fracture was obtained. Both of them went on to union after a revision plating and bone grafting. We believe that avoidance of full weight bearing is necessary before definite union of the fracture. There are various definitions of fracture union but our definition of union was that bridging callus must be identified between all fracture lines on X-rays. This is probably the reason why our average time to union was 3 and 5 weeks longer than reported by some authors Bone grafts were not used in the series of indirect reduction reported by Bolhofner et al. The anterior approaches were used in cases with anterior open fractures and older patients and the lateral approaches were used for remaining patients. In this study the lateral approach group had a shorter time to union and better post-operative ROM as compared with the anterior approach group, however the original condition of the patients was quite different, so the inferior results of the anterior group could not be attributed solely to the approach. We tried to debride the anterior open fractures through a lateral approach but we found that the soft tissue violation was too excessive and tended to result in poor healing. Poor ROM of the knee was the major contributing factor to our three unsatisfactory results, (mean knee flexion 83°). The open fracture group gained less post-operative ROM than the closed fracture group. We felt that the leading reason for less knee flexion in the open fracture group was injury to the quadriceps tendon by anterior protruding fragments. The implants used in the present series were either 95° dynamic compression screws or 95° angled blade plates. The two implants worked well for both reduction and fixation. We identified that the key point to obtain good alignment with the implants was the correct insertion of the condylar screw or blade, which must parallel to the anterior and posterior femoral condyles. When the condylar screw or blade was inserted correctly, the alignment of the distal femur was automatically obtainable. Applying the implants percutaneously Using indirect reduction and bridging fixation with either a 95° angled blade plate or a 95° DCS we achieved an overall 81% excellent or good results. This technique has the advantage of avoiding further destruction of the soft tissue envelope, which is very important for fracture healing. The complications were minimal, with no deep infection, one delayed union and two implant failures. Patients with open wounds needed special consideration when using an indirect reduction technique, and early bone grafting is suggested for these patients. The best time to start weight bearing is a difficult decision since full weight bearing before definite bone union can lead to implant failures, and should be avoided.