We present a series of 44 consecutive patients with 46 distal femoral fractures, who were treated with a retrograde intramedullary nail (Distal Femoral Nail (DFN)). Operational data, per- and post-operative complications and the outcome were studied retrospectively after a mean follow-up of 9 months. The final union rate was 95%, with a mean union time of 17.5 (8–68) weeks. Restoration of the limb axial alignment and length was inadequate in two cases, whereas three losses of reduction and one non-union were observed. Two cases of distal locking screw breakage were also observed. Moreover, one patient suffered from an iatrogenic lesion of the branch of the deep femoral artery. No deep, but three superficial infections were observed. In conclusion, our results suggest that DFN is a reliable alternative in distal femoral fracture treatment with a low complication rate.Operative treatment is nowadays considered as the treatment of choice in distal femoral fractures, resulting in anatomic reduction and early mobilisation combined with early weight bearing. Previously, stabilisation was usually achieved with a condylar screw and plate. However, blade-plating has been associated with a relatively high complication rate, including a fairly high incidence of infections. Retrograde intramedullary nailing has been developed in order to avoid some of the previous problems associated with distal femoral fractures. The Distal Femoral Nail (DFN, Stratec Medical, Oberdorf/BL, Switzerland) is a retrograde femur nail made of titanium, which is locked in the proximal femur with two screws and distally with either a twisted blade and one screw or with two screws. Retrograde intramedullary nailing has been used in our department in the treatment of distal femoral fractures, and occasionally in femoral shaft fractures. In this paper, we present a series of 44 patients with a total of 46 distal femoral fractures treated with a DFN. The patients were followed up until union of the fracture was observed. Forty four patients with a total of 46 displaced fractures of the distal femur (17 right and 29 left) were treated in our department with a Distal Femoral Nail (DFN, Stratec Medical, Oberdorf/BL, Switzerland) between December 1999 and June 2001. Sixteen patients were men with an average age of 52.3 years (S.D., 18; range, 20–86 years) and 28 women with an average age of 66.5 years (S.D., 15.9; range, 20–93 years). Thirty-seven patients had an AO-type A (extra-articular) and nine an AO-type C (intra-articular) fracture. B-type fractures are not treated with this method at our department. Four of the fractures were open and they were classified by Gustilo-Anderson (three grade II and one grade III A). Thirty-seven operations were performed by a senior orthopaedic registrar (19 surgeons), and nine by a specialist in orthopaedic surgery (six surgeons). All patients were operated on a supine position. Spinal anaesthesia was used in patients with an isolated femoral fracture and general anaesthesia in multiple injured patients. An image intensifier was used in all the patients. A transligamentar approach through the patellar tendon was used in 14 cases, and a medial parapatellar approach in 32 cases. An open reduction of the fracture was performed in 40 cases, with 14 of them being performed through an additional lateral approach. In 12 cases, the fixation was secured with Dall-Miles wires. Bone grafting was used in three acute cases and in four re-operations of failed previous DCS fixation. The duration of an operation was considered to be the period between the first cut and the last closing skin suture. The volume of peroperative blood loss was estimated by the operating surgeon. Post-operative radiographs were obtained on the first day, and assisted mobilisation was started as soon as possible. Weight bearing was restricted to approximately 5 The first post-operative review was at 6 weeks. Subsequent appointments were at every 4–6 weeks until fracture consolidation was observed. Callus formation on 3/4 cortices and fading of fracture lines on radiographs was considered as signs of fracture consolidation. Delayed union was defined as consolidation time more than 24 weeks. The alignment of the distal femur was measured on peroperative, postoperative and on the final follow-up radiographs (shortening, varus–valgus, antecurvatum–retrocurvatum). The measurements were scored and the radiological outcome was assessed as showed in Values are presented as means, with standard deviation (S.D.) and range. When differences of means are compared, they are presented with 95% confidence intervals (CI). Intervals excluding 0 are considered as statistically significant. Odds ratios (OR) between different groups of patients were calculated for the factors evaluated, using logistic regression analysis. Ninety-five percent of confidence intervals were calculated for crude odds ratios, and values excluding one were considered as statistically significant. The operation time averaged 151 The mean union time of the fracture was 17.5 weeks (S.D., 10; range, 8–68 weeks; The mean score of the radiological result at final follow-up was 11.0 (S.D., 1.6; range, 3–12). Only one of the patients with a poor radiological score (<10) was under 60 years of age, whereas this was observed in four of the 24 patients over 60 years ( Anterior knee pain was observed in 10 patients, with no correlation to the approach used (odds ratio, 1.7; 95% confidence interval of 0.3–9.8 between transligamentar and parapatellar approach), the type of the fracture (OR, 2.9; 95% CI of 0.6–14.5 between type A and C), or the type of reduction (OR, 0.5; 95% CI of 0.1–3.6 between open and closed reductions). No restrictions in range of motion (ROM) at the final follow-up was observed in 24 patients, in the rest of the patients restrictions 5–15° from the full ROM was observed. Treatment of displaced supracondylar femoral fractures with a blade-plate has been associated with a relatively high complication rate. The Distal Femoral Nail (DFN) has been used in our department in the treatment of distal femoral fractures. The DFN provides equal or increased stability of the fracture, and increases the bone–implant interface surface, with a consequent positive effect in fractures of osteoporotic bone. The positive effects of an intramedullary implant in the treatment of distal femoral fractures are possibly associated with limited devascularisation of periosteum at the fracture site. However, an open reduction, which endangers vascularisation and healing of the fracture, may be required even when using an intramedullary device due to extensive comminution of the fracture, which does not allow adequate closed reduction. An open reduction of the fracture was performed in 40 of our 46 cases, usually due to complex fragmentation of the fracture (type C fractures). Open reduction, performed either from a parapatellar or lateral approach, was associated with a longer union time, compared to closed reduction ( The long-term effects and complications of retrograde femoral intramedullary nailing on knee joint function and disorders are yet unidentified. Previous clinical and cadaver studies have, however, suggested that the position of the nail may be the main factor associating to a possible development of knee disorders. Patients younger than 50 years generally regained normal ROM of the knee, whereas elderly patients showed various degrees of reduced ROM. Due to the retrospective nature of our study, we are not able to analyse the effect of DFN in these patients, since several of them had tibio-femoral arthrosis already in the initial radiograph, and may consequently have had limited ROM of the knee prior to the fracture. A periprosthetic femoral fracture above a previous knee arthroplasty challenges the skills of even an experienced trauma-surgeon. Although we used the DFN with success in seven such cases, cortical fragmentation at the site of distal locking may endanger the outcome of these operations. Careful preoperative evaluation and planning should be performed when choosing the optimal treatment of periprosthetic femoral fractures. However, the DFN may, in suitable cases, be considered as one possible method in these complex fractures. An arterial lesion during proximal locking may arise from two different mechanisms; by an avulsion which may occur several centimetres away from the drilling and is presumably caused by a muscle fibre entangling around the drill bit, and by a direct lesion. In conclusion, our results suggest that the DFN is a reliable alternative, when options in the treatment of supracondylar femoral fractures are considered. Despite the fact that 25 different surgeons in the start of their learning curves performed the 46 operations in this series, the average clinical and radiological results were encouraging. Union of the fracture was achieved in our series in most cases within a reasonable time, and the complication rate was fairly low. However, little is known about the long-term effects of trans-articularily inserted retrograde femur implants. One possible factor, which may cause future deficiencies in the knee joint, is bone debris, which originates from the insertion canal of the nail. We feel it is of vital importance to perform a thorough irrigation of the knee before wound closure. The results from the present series also suggest that the DFN may be used successfully in selected cases with a periprosthetic fracture. However, careful preoperative planning should be performed.