A field-scale experiment was conducted to evaluate various organic C sources as amendments for passive treatment of tailings pore water. Varied mixtures of peat, spent-brewing grain (SBG) and municipal biosolids (MB) were assessed for the potential to promote dissimilatory sulfate reduction (DSR) and metal-sulfide precipitation. Five amended cells and one control were constructed in the vadose zone of a sulfide- and carbonate-rich tailings deposit, and the geochemistry, microbiology and mineralogy were monitored for 4 a. Increases in pore-water concentrations of dissolved organic C (DOC) and decreases in aqueous SO4 concentrations of >2500mgL−1 were observed in cells amended with peat+SBG and peat+SBG+MB. Removal of SO4 was accompanied by shifts in δ34S-SO4 values of >+30‰, undersaturation of pore water with respect to gypsum [CaSO4·2H2O], and increased populations of SO4-reducing bacteria (SRB). Decreases in aqueous concentrations of Zn, Mn, Ni, Sb and Tl were observed for these cells relative to the control. Organic C introduction also supported growth of Fe-reducing bacteria (IRB) and increases in Fe and As concentrations. Enhanced Fe and As mobility occurred in all cells; however, maximum concentrations were observed in cells amended with MB. Subsequent decreases in Fe and As concentrations were attributed to DSR and metal-sulfide precipitation. The common presence of secondary Zn-S and Fe-S phases was observed by field emission-scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDS) spectroscopy. Selective extractions indicated that large decreases in water-soluble SO4 occurred in cells that supported DSR. Furthermore, amendments that supported DSR generally were characterized by slight decreases in solid-phase concentrations of extractable metal(loid)s. Amendment of tailings with organic C amendments that supported ongoing DOC production and DSR was essential for sustained treatment.Mining and processing of economically-important minerals often generate waste materials that pose a risk to the quality of adjacent water resources. Negative impacts on water quality are most commonly associated with sulfide-bearing tailings and waste rock deposited in subaerial impoundments. These impacts are often associated with the oxidation of sulfide minerals, which generates acidity and contributes SO Passive treatment of AMD using organic C to support dissimilatory SO The generation of carbonate alkalinity enhances acid neutralization and the production of H Decreases in aqueous concentrations of Fe, Zn, Ni, Pb and Cu due to metal-sulfide precipitation are well documented ( Various organic C sources, such as wood dust, wood chips, livestock manure, crop residues, winery waste, municipal compost, pulp-mill waste, organic soil, and sewage sludge, have been utilized for passive AMD treatment ( Passive treatment systems which promote DSR for AMD remediation include anaerobic wetlands ( Sulfate-reducing bacteria are commonly observed in sulfidic tailings deposits; however rates of SO The Greens Creek Mine is located on Admiralty Island, approximately 30 Six field-scale experimental cells were constructed and instrumented in October and November of 2004 ( Pore-water samples were collected into the N Measurements of pH (Thermo Orion Ross 8156BNU; Oakton 35811-71) and Eh (Thermo Orion 9678BNWP) were performed immediately on unfiltered samples in sealed cells. The pH electrodes were calibrated regularly to NIST traceable pH buffers, and performance of redox electrodes was checked against ZoBell’s ( Concentrations of inorganic anions, including S Tailings core samples were collected using a direct-push piston-coring technique ( Enumerations of SRB, iron-reducing bacteria (IRB), and acid-producing (fermentative) bacteria (APB) were performed using a 5-tube most probable number (MPN) method. Growth of SRB was promoted using a modified version of Postgate medium C described by Field emission-scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and standardless energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were employed to examine mineralogical controls on metal(loid) mobility. Sub-samples of microbiology cores were dried in a vacuum desiccator located in the glove box. These samples were then mounted on Al sample holders using C tape, and Au coating was applied to a thickness of 8–10 Sub-samples of 2008 cores were subjected to a series of selective extractions. Extractants were prepared in the glove box by dissolving ACS-grade reagents (Sigma–Aldrich Ltd.) in Milli-Q® (18 The elevation of the phreatic surface adjacent to the field cells was monitored using two vibrating-wire piezometers (Slope Indicator, USA) located at depths of 12.4 and 19.2 Mineral saturation indices (SIs) were calculated using the geochemical equilibrium/mass-transfer code MINTEQA2 ( The mean annual precipitation at the tailings facility was 1380 Unsaturated hydraulic conductivities within the field cells ranged from <10 Initial pore-water pH values were slightly alkaline with a mean value of 8.0 Initial alkalinity values commonly exceeded 200 Increases in alkalinity were observed in all organic C amended cells (TC3–TC7) and the control (TC2). Despite relatively low DOC concentrations in TC2, alkalinity increased to 900 Initial NH Pore-water o-PO Dissolved SO Large increases in SO Pore-water within TC4, TC6, and TC7 became undersaturated with respect to gypsum in zones where extensive SO Removal of SO Complete removal of S Initial total Fe concentrations were generally below analytical detection limits ( Increases in dissolved Fe concentrations were observed for all cells between 2004 and 2006. However, concentrations >15 Removal of Fe also accompanied DSR in some organic C-amended cells. In 2006, decreases in Fe concentrations with depth in TC7 generally accompanied SO Pore-water Zn concentrations generally remained low at depths >2 Initial Mn concentrations in pore-water were elevated in all organic C amended cells (TC3–TC7) relative to the control (TC2; Depth-dependent trends in pore-water Ni concentrations generally were similar to Mn ( Initial aqueous As concentrations were consistently below analytical detection limits. The precipitation of Fe(III) (oxy)hydroxides and coprecipitation or sorption of As, likely contributed to As attenuation following cell construction. Elevated Sb concentrations, ranging from 37–102 Increases in aqueous As concentrations were observed at locations where the reductive dissolution of Fe(III) (oxy)hydroxides is inferred. The reduction of As(V) to As(III), which exhibits greater mobility in groundwater systems, is thermodynamically favored under Fe-reducing conditions ( The mobility of Sb varied substantially from that of As. Maximum aqueous concentrations of Sb were generally observed at the onset of the experiment. Effective removal of Tl was observed only in organic C amended cells that exhibited decreases in aqueous SO Fermentative bacteria (APB) were absent in initial samples collected from TC2 and TC3 ( Populations of SRB generally were <10 Initial MPN populations of IRB were lower in TC2–TC4 than TC5–TC7. Populations of IRB were consistently <10 The removal of SO Precipitates composed primarily of Fe and S were also observed on organic C and mineral surfaces ( Variations in solid-phase masses of water-soluble SO Iron and Zn generally were not associated with water-soluble phases ( Mean Zn contents ranged from 800 to 1200 Manganese and Ni were generally absent in filtrates from the DI extractions while the 0.5 Arsenic and Sb were below detection in filtrates from the DI water extraction. Similar As and Sb concentrations were observed for individual samples subjected to ascorbate and 0.5 Thallium distribution differed from that of Fe, Zn, As and Sb. The majority of Tl was associated with the acid-soluble fraction; however, small concentrations of Tl also were observed in the water-soluble fraction and the ascorbate-reducible fraction. Low concentrations of Tl observed in these fractions indicate that water-soluble phases and amorphous Fe(III) (oxy)hydroxides were not a primary controls on Tl mobility in the tailings pore water. The highest Tl contents in the acid-soluble fraction were observed in TC2 and TC3, which suggests that low pH conditions would lead to enhanced aqueous Tl mobility. Amendment of tailings with organic C has potential to decrease the mass transport of SO Elevated populations of fermentative bacteria were observed in cells amended with SBG (i.e. TC4, TC6, and TC7). These cells generally exhibited the largest populations of SO This technique for tailings pore-water treatment can effectively limit the transport of sulfide-mineral oxidation products in mine tailings impoundments. However, amendments that contain a large proportion of labile organic C compounds should be used sparingly, as rapid development of reducing conditions can lead to enhanced mobilization of Fe and associated trace elements. The utilization of high amendment rates may have a similar impact on Fe mobility; however, lower amendment rates may be ineffective at supporting SO This research was supported through funding provided by Greens Creek Mining Company, Hecla Mining Company Ltd., and Rio Tinto Ltd. and the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Canada Research Chair and Discovery Grant programs. Additional support was awarded through a NSERC Industrial Postgraduate Scholarship awarded to M. Lindsay. The organic carbon sources used in this study were contributed by the Alaskan Brewing Company, and City and Borough of Juneau, Alaska. We thank D. Gould, C. McDonald, K. Lear, M. Moncur, M. Morales, B. Nelson, J. Saran, K. Sentance, J. Tordiff and J. Whitlock for their contributions. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 