A study has been carried out to establish the effectiveness of various membrane systems for the separation of anolyte (aqueous FeSO4
                     +H2SO4) and catholyte (aqueous CuSO4
                     +H2SO4) in a lab-scale copper electrowinning cell based on reactive electrodialysis. With a single anion membrane, there was a small but significant unwanted transport of both copper and iron through the membrane. Separation effectiveness increased by increasing the number of membranes, but so did the cell voltage, which implies a higher energy cost. For the most effective system (2 type B membranes), the unwanted transport rates were 4×10−4 molh−1
                     m−2 for Cu and 17×10−4 molh−1
                     m−2 for Fe. The corresponding cell voltage was 0.774 V. The difference in the transport rates for Fe and Cu may be explained by the ion transport mechanisms in the studied systems.This work attempts to determine the effectiveness of electrodialytic membranes in separating anolyte from catholyte in a lab-scale copper electrowinning (EW) cell based on reactive electrodialysis (RED) ( The objectives of the present work are to study the effect of the type and number of membranes used in the cell on: (a) the unwanted transport rate of copper from catholyte to anolyte; (b) the unwanted transport rate of iron from anolyte to catholyte; (c) the cell voltage. Electrodialysis (ED) is a relatively new but well established separation and concentration technique for the treatment of electrolytic solutions ( Separation and concentration of metallic species by ED in aqueous acidic electrolytes has been studied by several authors ( When the final aim of the ED process is not the separation or concentration of species, but the production of chemicals by reactions at the electrodes, the technique is known as reactive electrodialysis, RED. This technique has been used to produce copper ( A lab-scale reactive electrodialysis (RED) cell was used to carry out the experiments. It was made of 15 mm thick acrylic plates and consisted of two compartments, one for the anode and the anolyte and a second one for the cathode and the catholyte. The cell was held together by seven 5-mm diameter stainless steel bars bolted at both ends. The cathode was a 3.6 The RED cell was operated, in all cases, with an anolyte composition of 56 g/l Fe (from ferrous sulphate) and 180 g/l sulphuric acid. The catholyte composition was 40 g/l Cu (from cupric sulphate) and 180 g/l sulphuric acid. The source chemicals were analytical grade CuSO The test membranes (Ionac MA-3475 and Tokuyama ACS), which separated anolyte from catholyte, were fitted in a 4 Membrane properties are given in The tested membrane systems were: 1, 2 and 3 type A anion membranes 1, 2 and 3 type B anion membranes Before the experiments, the membranes were first immersed in a 50 g/l sulphuric acid solution at room temperature during 24 h (the first 5 h, under agitation); then, the solution was discarded and the membrane was immersed in a fresh 50 g/l sulphuric acid solution for another 24 h; finally, the solution was again discarded and replaced and the membranes were left immersed for a third 24 h period. This procedure was carried out in order to replace the Na The electrolytes were separately recirculated at a flow rate of 900 cm The cell current density was 300 A/m Electrolyte samples were taken at the beginning and end of each experiment and then analysed. Cu concentration was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy and Fe concentration, by the sulfosalicylic acid method ( The results for transport rates and cell voltages as a function of type and number of membranes are presented in Results for cell voltage as a function of time are presented in Results in The energy (  The cell voltage ( The electrolyte resistance is Catholyte and anolyte conductivities, measured at 40 °C, are presented in The cell voltage increase with time shown in Contributions to the cell voltage (Eq.    It is worth noting that copper produces one cation (Cu The thermodynamic speciation model predicted a decrease in the concentration of free ions (H For the best case (2 type B membranes) the unwanted Fe transport rate was 4 times higher than the unwanted Cu transport rate. The causes of this difference can be found in the mechanisms of ion transport in these systems. Ions are transported by migration, diffusion and convection, where the driving forces are electrical potential, concentration and density gradients respectively. Given the fact that there is agitation by recirculation, and that it is of the same magnitude in anolyte and catholyte, convection is unlikely to explain the difference in the unwanted transport rates of Fe and Cu. The influence of migration is different: as cations migrate towards the cathode and anions towards the anode, cations in the catholyte tend to stay on the cathode side of the membrane, while cations in the anolyte tend to cross the membrane towards the catholyte. Although the anion membrane is meant to prevent cation transport, its separation effectiveness is less than 100%, so that migration is likely to contribute to the difference in the unwanted transport rates of Fe and Cu. Diffusion can also contribute to the Fe–Cu unwanted transport rate difference, as Fe concentration is about 1 M in the anolyte, whereas Cu concentration is about 0.63 M in the catholyte. As a result, the concentration gradient between anolyte and catholyte is greater for Fe than it is for Cu. The fact that, unlike Cu, Fe produces an anion (Fe(SO Quantification of transport phenomena in these systems is currently being studied and it will be published elsewhere ( For the separation of catholyte and anolyte by means of membrane systems in a lab-scale RED cell, the following conclusions can be drawn: For both type A and type B membranes, the unwanted Cu and Fe transport rates decrease drastically when two membranes are used instead of one: the decrease is between 75% and 85% for type A and between 85% and 88% for type B membranes; this improvement is achieved at the expense of cell voltage increases of 23% and 15% respectively. When three membranes are used instead of two, the decrease in the unwanted Cu and Fe transport rates is far less than the one obtained by going from one to two membranes, whereas the cell voltage increase is similar. The best overall separation performance was afforded by two type B membranes. The unwanted transport rate was 4 For the best case (2 type B membranes), the unwanted transport rate for Fe was four times higher than the unwanted transport rate for Cu. This difference may be qualitatively explained by the ion transport mechanisms in the studied systems. This work was funded by the National Committee for Science and Technology (CONICYT, Chile) via FONDECYT project no. 101 0138. Thanks are due to Gloria Crisóstomo and Rodrigo Glasner for their help with the experimental work. Continued support from the Departments of Mining Engineering and Chemical Engineering, Universidad de Chile, is gratefully acknowledged. Financial support from Placer Dome to the Chair of Environmental Studies in Mining is also acknowledged.