 Fractures that cannot be reduced with closed methods Fractures that remain unstable or exhibit loss of reduction after successful closed reduction (failure of nonoperative treatment) Fractures that require fixation beyond Kirschner wires, for example: Open fractures with soft tissue injury Fractures requiring more rigid fixation for early rehabilitation Fractures with increased comminution  See Open fractures will require thorough debridement and careful assessment of the soft tissue injury, with repair of structures as indicated (  Standard radiographs are taken in three views (posteroanterior, oblique, and lateral) ( Computed tomography may assist in evaluating comminuted fractures, but is usually unnecessary.  The extensor mechanism incorporates both longitudinal and transverse components, covering most of the dorsal and lateral sides of the digit. Incisions and exposures must be planned carefully to avoid damage to important structure(s) ( The central slip inserts at the dorsal base of the middle phalanx and serves to extend the proximal interphalangeal joint. The lateral bands are formed at the sides of the finger, with contributions from both extrinsic and intrinsic muscles. They come together distally to insert at the dorsal base of the distal phalanx.  Dorsal, dorsolateral, or midaxial incisions may be used for proximal and middle phalangeal fractures. To access the fracture site, the extensor mechanism must be breached at some point. The interval between lateral band and central slip may be incised; this does not require repair at closure ( The extensor tendon may be split longitudinally at the midline (middorsal) over the proximal phalanx; long splits should be repaired at time of closure. With a lateral approach, the transverse retinacular ligament may be divided to provide access; this does not require repair at closure. Over the middle phalanx, the triangular ligament can be longitudinally incised to allow access between the two lateral bands. Deep to the extensor mechanism, the periosteum is incised and stripped minimally to expose the fracture site.  Divisions of thin, transverse fibers of the extensor mechanism, such as the interval between lateral band and central slip, or the transverse retinacular ligament, do not require repair. A small portion of the sagittal band may also be divided for exposure, but major disruptions should be repaired to prevent displacement of the extensor tendon with metacarpophalangeal flexion. Extensive longitudinal splits in the extensor tendon should be repaired at closure. In acute fractures, the periosteum is often thickened and swollen, but careful elevation of this layer may allow it to be closed over the internal fixation, creating a protective boundary between tendon and hardware.  At the base of the middle phalanx, be mindful of protecting the central slip insertion to the periosteum during tendon splitting. Likewise, take care to protect the very thin, flat terminal tendon as it inserts onto the dorsal base of the distal phalanx.  The fracture site should be cleaned of clot, debris, and any foreign material to allow detailed evaluation of fracture geometry and improve ease of reduction. Open fractures should be debrided with meticulous care to prevent osteomyelitis. Reduction is accomplished by gentle distraction and/or direct fracture manipulation. Reduction can be maintained by use of various reduction clamps and/or temporary K-wires.  Preserving periosteal attachments can help maintain better blood supply to bone fragments, and may help with reduction via ligamentotaxis. Temporary K-wires should be placed at different points from where the screws will be inserted.  Phalangeal fixation is typically performed with 1.5- to 2.0-mm diameter screw sets. Smaller screws (1.0- to 1.3-mm diameter) may be indicated for smaller hands, small fracture fragments, or for lag screws, where larger screws might be too big.  Lag screws provide interfragmentary compression and are ideal for long oblique or spiral fractures ( The near cortex is drilled with a drill bit that has the same diameter as the The far cortex is drilled with a drill bit that matches the core diameter of the screw, creating a threaded hole when the self-tapping screw is inserted (e.g., for a 1.3-mm screw, a 1.0-mm drill bit is used for this step). Some instrumentation sets include a special drill guide that fits into the gliding hole to assist with this step. Some surgeons choose to reverse this process, drilling both cortices with the smaller drill bit first, then overdrilling the near cortex as needed. Measure screw length and insert the screw. The screw will slide through the near cortex, and engage the far cortex with the screw threads. Because most screws designed for this application are self-tapping, a separate tapping step is not required. As the fully threaded screw is tightened in this lag configuration, the fracture site is compressed between the head of the screw and the distal threads (refer to Three or more lag screws are ideal to obtain multidirectional stability. Short oblique fractures may only accommodate two screws (  Given the small size of the phalanges, compression plating is not practical. Plates conceptually fall into three other (noncompression) categories. Bridging plates: Plates that span an area of comminution to prevent collapse during bony healing. Tension band plates: Plates placed dorsally across a fracture with apex-dorsal deformity serve to redirect the deforming forces into compressive forces at the volar cortex. Neutralization plates: Plates used to reinforce lag screws by providing additional stabilization against bending at the fracture site. Phalangeal plates may incorporate holes in more than one plane, or ovoid holes that can be adjusted for rotation and position. Given the proximity of flexor and extensor tendons, it is difficult to hold the plate to the reduced fracture with a clamp while alignment of the digit is checked. Instead, the plate should be fixed to bone with a single screw on either side of the fracture line for provisional fixation, alignment should be checked, and then the remaining screws inserted. The thin plates used for phalangeal fractures can be carefully bent or twisted to improve finger alignment, or alternatively, plates with ovoid holes will allow for adjustments in alignment before final screw tightening.  For complicated fractures, plates with screws in more than one plane (3D plate, H-plate, or Z-plate) can aid in stability. These plates can fix a number of fragments from multiple directions ( If access points to the fracture are limited, one can sometimes exchange out provisional K-wires for screws. However, keep in mind that the hole drilled by the tip of the K-wire may be irregular and/or thermally damaged due to the drilling technique.  The phalangeal cortex is so thin that the countersink for screw heads should not be used. Screws placed dorsally cannot project beyond the volar cortex, as the flexor tendons lie immediately adjacent to the volar surface of the phalanges.  Passive motion (tenodesis effect): With passive wrist flexion, the digits should extend due to extrinsic tendon attachments; with passive wrist extension, the digits should flex toward the scaphoid tubercle. This allows the surgeon to evaluate for any residual rotational malalignment. Active motion: An awake patient can demonstrate flexion actively, but this can be simulated in an anesthetized patient by applying pressure to the volar forearm at the musculotendinous junction, which causes the fingers to flex and allows alignment to be judged ( Periosteum is repaired to cover the plate or screws if possible. The extensor mechanism is repaired as indicated. Deflate the tourniquet and achieve good hemostasis before skin closure. The skin is closed using nonabsorbable sutures. A well-padded splint is applied to maintain the interphalangeal joints in extension, the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints in moderate flexion, and the wrist in slight extension.  Reliable patients with rigid fixation can start early active finger motion of all joints within 1 week to improve tendon gliding and tissue edema. A removable forearm- or hand-based orthosis that maintains MCP joint flexion and interphalangeal joint extension can be used for protection during the first several weeks. Once fracture healing is evident around 6 weeks, the splint can be weaned and strengthening exercises may begin. Most patients should recover near-normal motion and strength. Despite early active motion, adhesions between plate and extensor tendon are quite common with dorsal plating. Tenolysis and/or proximal interphalangeal joint capsulotomy are required in a significant number of patients. 