Misreported pyrite into copper concentrates dramatically declines copper grade and recovery. Copper flotation can be also more complicated if flotation feed comes from an elevated-pyritic copper ore. In this investigation, the effect of two different ore types (high pyritic and low pyritic feeds) was studied on rougher stage of industrial copper flotation circuit. Samples were taken from different streams and the structure of chalcopyrite within the pyrite and non-sulfide gangue minerals was examined in various size fractions for mentioned ore types. Results indicated that 72% and 56% of the total floated pyrite was transferred to concentrate in first four cells in the low and high pyritic feeds, respectively. Whereas, this proportion for floated SiO2 in last ten cells was detected as 72% and 71%, respectively. A detailed interpretation of the effect of locked particles in different size fractions on rougher flotation cells is studied from industrial point of view.Flotation is a significant mineral processing technique used for selective separation of valuables from gangue minerals. Industrial practice of froth flotation is widely recognized to be a complex process Aside from hydrodynamics circumstances and physicochemical properties, particle size is an important parameter in flotation processes. The relationship between particle size and flotation recovery has been the subject of several studies. It is reported that the behavior of fine and coarse particles in flotation follows different trends In practice, non-valuable iron sulfides (mostly pyrite) are often associated with valuable sulfide minerals (chalcopyrite, covellite and chalcocite) in copper flotation concentrate. These iron sulfides play a significance role especially in porphyry copper flotation concerning their devastating effect on quality of product (concentrate grade) and efficiency of the process (mineral recovery) Basically, in flotation of complex sulfide ores, a higher pH is generally used to separate valuable sulfide minerals from pyrite or pyrrhotite in the presence of xanthate collectors Despite decades of research on activated and bare pyrite surface in porphyry copper flotation process, there is still a considerable lack of industrial investigation and data in this area. The motivation of the current study is to understand floatation response of high and low pyritic copper ore types as well as a detailed industrial study in variety of size fractions regarding mineralogical aspects and liberation factors. In addition, a comparison of results in terms of copper grade and recovery for the mentioned ore types have been provided. In this work, mineralogical and metallurgical data are analyzed and reconciled in various size classes for two both feeds of low and high pyritic contents. In addition, locked and liberated particles of concentrate streams of each cell in rougher circuit have been evaluated with the aim of transferring liberated chalcopyrite concentrate directly to recleaner section instead of cleaner cells to avoid its unnecessary regrinding. To determine the role of free and locked minerals (chalcopyrite, pyrite and silicate) in two mentioned feed types, liberation degree analysis was established. Moreover, contribution of each mineral in different particle size fractions of concentrate streams for each cell has been investigated in the rougher flotation stage. Sarcheshmeh concentration plant is the largest copper concentrator in Iran which is located in Kerman province. Reserve contains one billion tons of 0.70% copper and 0.03% molybdenum in average. Its flotation circuit is producing 50,000 tons copper concentrate per month with an average grade of 28–32% of copper in final recleaner banks. A schematic diagram of flotation circuit of Sarcheshmeh concentrator is presented in Rougher cells in this plant are expected to produce a concentrate of 7.6% Cu with a recovery of 96%. In fact, rougher tailings contain 80% of final tailings of the flotation circuit. Therefore, it is very important to reach a maximum possible recovery in rougher banks in order to avoid misreporting of valuable copper minerals to tailing stream. Nevertheless, due to some reasons recovery of rougher cells has been decreased to 88% recently, whilst, the layout is designed to satisfy a recovery of 96%. In recent years, with regard to the increase of open pit depth, content and proportions of associated gangue minerals were changed in mine products and consequently in flotation feed. It leads to some problems such as enhancement of pyrite’s proportion in gangue minerals, over-consumption of reagents, declination of ultimate copper grade, the increase of SiO In addition, desired particle size in studied rougher flotation cells is expected to be 70% passing 74 μm according to optimization studies conducted in process design. Particle size distribution analysis in the circuit reveals that the variation of feed characteristics, non-optimized operating conditions, and increase of throughput from 225 tons per hour to 300 tons per hour led to an increase in particles size (62% passing 74 μm) as reported by previous studies To evaluate the rougher flotation circuit, one of the above mentioned eight parallel rougher feed rows was selected for sampling. Separate samples were taken from each low and high pyritic feeds on six different days. The sampling was carried out in different streams. Totally, 21 samples were taken in each run from different points as shown in During a six-month period, composite samples of feed and tailing streams of flotation circuits for each month were collected. Firstly, polished samples were prepared and later liberation degree, locking type, and spatial configuration of valuable minerals were determined. Liberation degree was defined as a ratio of the number of free particles of a commodity to the total number of particles containing it    In the case of the low pyritic ore type, almost for all cells, it can be seen that for particles coarser than 100 µm, the amount of the CP/PY locked particles decreases (    The main reason of increasing pyrite recovery by increasing cell number, in the low pyritic feed, is related to time dependent surface activation and electrochemical sub-processes which promote pyrite flotation. In other words, pyrite activation takes place in connection with dissolution degree of copper species from chalcopyrite. These ions boost formation of hydrophobic species such as sulfides and collectors (e.g., xanthene) on the pyrite surface, upon which its flotation is being promoted. Since dissolution of copper ions enhances by dispersion within flotation cells during agitation, pyrite activation is expected to increase through the flotation bank by increasing cell number. This trend is also valid for the high pyritic feed where a decrease in very last cells can be due to lack of presence of pyrite because a huge portion of CP/PY particles have already been recovered in previous cells. Although its value is extremely high, the recovery of CP/G locked particles also follows the same trend as CP/PY particles does. It is well known that the presence of a large number of CP/G particles in concentration can result in some problems such as overconsumption of collector and frother, plunge in copper grade, increasing of SiO  Taking the contents of tailing streams into account, it shows significant loss of copper in terms of both free and locked chalcopyrite particles which is presented in detail in Variation of copper grade in concentrate streams of rougher cells is presented in To rise the process efficiency, collector and frother should be distributed in different steps and points to provide more dispersion and uniform supply of chemicals in cells. In studied process, however, collector was added to first stage with no further distribution (single point dosing). Consequently, coarser particles are not expected to be recovered in last stages through cells 10–14 with respect to the lack of required flotation agents. Furthermore, in case of the high pyritic feed type (SN.1 and SN.4), copper grade is relatively poor compared with the low pyritic feed especially in the first cells (  Copper recovery in different size fractions of rougher flotation is determined and shown in  Grade and recovery of rougher cells for copper, iron, and silicate for both ore types are listed in Another important gangue mineral in the process is silicate. Content of chalcopyrite locked with silicate minerals (CP/G) is increased in plant feed and consequently in flotation concentrate with regard to increasing depth of mine pit in recent years. As seen in  In this work, performance of rougher flotation circuit of Sarcheshmeh copper concentrator was studied in order to reveal the effect of locked particles on flotation efficiency in two low and high pyritic feeds. Results of mineralogical analysis showed that in finer sizes (<38 µm) surface activation and entrainment is the main mechanism for misreported pyrite particles. For the coarser classes (>100 µm), however, pyrite was preferentially recovered to the concentrate as locked particles. In the high pyritic feed, considerable amount of pyrite is recovered to concentrate which is detected in cells 5–9. While, in the case of the low pyritic feed, proportion of pyrite increases by rising cell numbers. In addition, most of SiO Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of