The Total Grain-Size Distribution (TGSD) of tephra deposits is crucial for hazard assessment and provides fundamental insights into eruption dynamics. It controls both the mass distribution within the eruptive plume and the sedimentation processes and can provide essential information on the fragmentation mechanisms. TGSD is typically calculated by integrating deposit grain-size at different locations. The result of such integration is affected not only by the number, but also by the spatial distribution and distance from the vent of the sampling sites. In order to evaluate the reliability of TGSDs, we assessed representative sampling distances for pyroclasts of different sizes through dedicated numerical simulations of tephra dispersal. Results reveal that, depending on wind conditions, a representative grain-size distribution of tephra deposits down to ∼100 μm can be obtained by integrating samples collected at distances from less than one tenth up to a few tens of the column height. The statistical properties of TGSDs representative of a range of eruption styles were calculated by fitting the data with a few general distributions given by the sum of two log-normal distributions (bi-Gaussian in Φ-units), the sum of two Weibull distributions, and a generalized log-logistic distribution for the cumulative number distributions. The main parameters of the bi-lognormal fitting correlate with height of the eruptive columns and magma viscosity, allowing general relationships to be used for estimating TGSD generated in a variety of eruptive styles and for different magma compositions. Fitting results of the cumulative number distribution show two different power law trends for coarse and fine fractions of tephra particles, respectively.
                  Our results shed light on the complex processes that control the size of particles being injected into the atmosphere during volcanic explosive eruptions and represent the first attempt to assess TGSD on the basis of pivotal physical quantities, such as magma viscosity and plume height. Our empirical method can be used to assess the main features of TGSD necessary for numerical simulations aimed to real-time forecasting and long-term hazard assessment when more accurate field-derived TGSDs are not available.Volcanic explosive eruptions are typically studied, characterized, and classified based on physical parameters associated with eruption dynamics and their deposits (e.g. plume height, mass eruption rate, erupted volume, and deposit dispersal). Out of all Eruption Source Parameters (ESPs), the size distribution of tephra at the vent, i.e. all particles injected and dispersed through the atmosphere, commonly defined as Total Grain-Size Distribution (TGSD), retains fundamental information on fragmentation mechanisms (e.g. Existing models of magma fragmentation commonly assume a threshold criterion for magma fragmentation, simply using a critical vesicularity ( Other processes, such as comminution due to particle collision above magma the fragmentation level (both within the eruptive jet and within pyroclastic density currents) and water–magma interaction, further increase the complexity of TGSDs (e.g. The complexity of magma fragmentation and the interplay of multiple eruptive phases and processes that characterize many explosive eruptions imply that analytical descriptions of TGSDs are difficult to constrain and generalize. Nonetheless, TGSDs represent a crucial input parameter of tephra transport models used to produce long-term hazard assessments and real-time forecasting, and, therefore, an accurate description and discussion of associated uncertainties is necessary. At the moment, although their number is increasing fast, there are still a limited number of reliable TGSD of tephra deposits available in the literature. These data do not have uniform characteristics in terms of number of sampled outcrops, computing techniques, and extent of sampling. Here we select a dataset limited to the most representative distributions, for which statistical analysis was performed to identify complexities and common features and to define statistical models that can be used to describe their general properties. Finally, in order to develop a practical method to estimate TGSDs generated in a variety of eruptive styles and for different magma compositions, we propose an empirical method based on the strongest correlations between the statistical parameters of the best fitting distributions and two parameters routinely assessed relevant to the fragmentation process: the magma viscosity and the height of the eruption column of the main explosive phase of the eruption (that is a function of the mass eruption rate). TGSDs are typically reconstructed from the deposit GSD (commonly expressed as wt.% of particles in The reliability of the reconstructed TGSDs strongly depends on sampling spatial distribution and sampling density ( Finally, it is also important to highlight that both the method chosen to reconstruct the TGSD and the distribution of outcrops can significantly affect the final outcomes (e.g. The analysed dataset comprises TGSDs of 20 explosive eruptions of different style, magnitude, and intensity selected for their completeness out of all TGSDs available in the literature, both in terms of extent of the sampling area, number, and distribution of the sampling sites ( Four of the selected eruptions (i.e. Etna 2007, Etna 2011, Fuego 1974, Vesuvius 1906, and S. Vincent 1979) were fed by mafic magmas, eight by intermediate magmas (Eyjafjallajökull May 2010, Ruapehu June 1996, Mt Spurr August and September 1992, Soufrière Hills 1997 and 2005), four by dacitic to rhyolitic magmas (Mount St Helens 1980, Cordón Caulle 2011 – Unit I, Askja 1875 phases C and D), and the remaining four by alkaline magmas (Astroni U6, Agnano-Monte Spina B and D units). Their eruptive styles range from Strombolian to Hawaiian, violent Strombolian, Vulcanian, sub-Plinian, and Plinian. Eruption intensities range by 5 orders of magnitude, from 10 TGSDs were reconstructed using the Voronoi tessellation method ( Based on a qualitative analysis of the selected dataset, only three TGSDs are clearly unimodal (i.e. Etna 2007 and 2011, Fuego 1974, Askja C), while eight show two clearly distinct populations (i.e. Vesuvius 1906, Astroni, Agnano-Monte Spina B1 and D1, Mt Spurr August and September 1992, Mt St Helens 1980, and Soufrière Hills Volcano 27 July 2005) ( According to the results of Section The lognormal distribution has been largely used over the last century to describe several observational and experimental data of tephra deposits. As discussed in TGSDs should be described based on an appropriate statistical distribution representative of the associated physical processes (e.g. magma fragmentation). Considering We are also introducing a bimodality index, For the sake of comparison, we also fitted the data assuming a mass distribution derived by the sum of two Weibull distributions (hereinafter bi-Weibull for brevity) as ( With respect to the cumulative distribution of the number of particles, TGSDs have been also described as fractal distributions by analogy with fragmentation of solid rocks ( For the best-fit analyses we used the nonlinear function Least-Squares fitting algorithm of the free software Gnuplot. The skewness and bimodality of TGSDs can be described using generalized statistical distributions that consider at least two different subpopulations. Any of the tested distributions (i.e. bi-lognormal – and bi-Weibull-like for particle mass distribution and log-logistic-like for cumulative number distribution) can accurately fit the data (parameters are listed in The main parameters obtained from the bi-lognormal fitting for the studied dataset are listed in The mode of the coarser population ( The distance between the two modes ( The standard deviation of the coarse population ( The characteristic grain-size above which 99.7% of the coarse population is contained, i.e. The Weibull distribution parameters of equation Concerning the parameters characterizing the distribution Moreover, we found quite remarkable that the mean value of the exponent characterizing the coarse population, Exponents characterizing the fine population, Among the analysed distributions, Based on the results described in the previous section, we propose the following empirical method to estimate parameters of the distribution considering the trends of the standard deviation, once the standard deviation of the fine sub-population, that shows a low variability (<30%) and almost no correlation, is set to its mean value plus or minus its standard deviation: we can estimate plausible range values for Following this method, given a column height and a magma viscosity it is possible to determine an approximated TGSD (including an estimation of the associated uncertainty). Note that the empirical relationships Simulations of tephra deposits produced by synthetic single class grain-sizes (see As we discussed above, for a given wind field the sedimentation distance normalized with respect to the maximum plume height almost collapses in a single curve suggesting the strong control of the maximum wind intensity on the travelled distance. In addition to the estimations for the mid-latitude, Obviously our results are based on a few assumptions including the particle distribution within the eruptive column, particle settling velocity, and wind field (see The statistical analysis of the selected TGSDs show that, for any of the distributions tested, it is necessary to account for the contribution of at least two sub-populations. The occurrence of two distinct grain-size populations is likely due to different processes. Each population can correspond to distinct eruptive processes, such as primary magma fragmentation deeper in the conduit, comminution of particles in the conduit and in the jet, elutriation of fine material of the PDC which is then entrained in the eruptive plume (e.g., Mt St Helens 1980), or could derive from significant fluctuations in the eruptive intensity or main changes in the magma properties (e.g. composition, crystallinity, vesicularity, permeability) which can have a primary effect on the fragmentation process (e.g., Finally, as mentioned above, when the variation of eruption and atmospheric parameters (e.g. plume height and wind direction) is faster than particle sedimentation, the cumulative TGSD might not be representative of individual phases. All of these observations suggest that there is no univocal correspondence between the shape of the TGSD and eruptive dynamics. As a result, even though empirical correlations of TGSDs cannot provide useful insights into eruptive processes, they can still help reconstruct the main features of particle distributions necessary for numerical modelling and hazard assessment. Any of the proposed models (bi-lognormal, bi-Weibull for particle mass, and log-logistic-like for cumulative number distribution) can adequately fit the data although the bi-Weibull distribution shows a slightly better performance (with lower relative root mean square errors). However considering the uncertainties associated with the data and the fact that the adjustable parameters have generally lower correlations with column height and magma viscosity, from a practical point of view it is more convenient to use a bi-lognormal rather than a bi-Weibull distribution. As discussed above, each of these distributions provides complementary information on fragmentation processes but a deep discussion of the meaning of the associated parameters and their relationship with the fragmentation dynamics and eruptive complexities require a larger dataset comprising a relevant number of eruptions with similar eruptive features which is not available at the moment. We propose an empirical method to assess TGSD based on the estimation of the five independent parameters of the bi-lognormal distribution ( However we need to highlight that the reliability of the relationships among the statistical parameters with magma viscosity and column height is affected by For these reasons, the application of the model is not straightforward as each eruption can be affected by several contemporaneous phenomena and some significant deviation from the proposed trend can occur. Among the estimated parameters, Moreover, great care should be used also when estimating magma viscosity; our method takes into account the effect of phenocryst crystallinity and could likely be improved by also considering groundmass crystallinity and magma vesicularity at fragmentation, which were not available for all eruptions of our dataset. Our tests using viscosity estimates based on bulk composition showed much worse correlations, suggesting that such a rough assumption should be avoided when applying the proposed method. We tested the method on eruptions whose TGSDs were not included in the dataset. As an example, the results of two case studies are shown in Finally, the proposed empirical strategy for the reconstruction of TGSD based on plume height and magma viscosity represents a valuable step forward towards a better evaluation of ESPs when more rigorous data are not available, e.g. real-time forecasting during volcanic crisis and fast hazard assessments. Due to the large plume height and viscosity ranges explored by the analysis, the model is of general application, but, because of an uncertainty of at least 50% on Our statistical analysis of selected Total Grain Size Distributions (TGSDs) associated with variable eruptive styles and Eruption Source Parameters (ESPs) have shown that: Representativeness of TGSD depends on many factors including sample number, sampling spatial distribution, and distance from the vent. In particular, we showed that it is necessary to integrate the grain-size of individual samples collected at distances from TGSDs of tephra deposits often show at least two sub-populations, likely due to the combination of multiple eruptive processes, heterogeneity of eruptive materials, and potential biases in the averaging of individual sample sites. TGSDs can be described in terms of mass fraction using a statistical distribution given by the sum of either two lognormal distributions or two Weibull distributions. Both these distributions describe well the reconstructed TGSDs (with the Weibull distribution having a lower RMSE), but, for practical purposes, we focused on the lognormal distribution that is the most straightforward to apply. In terms of cumulative number distribution, in order to explore whether there is the fractal behaviour of TGSD, the correlations of the fractal exponents with ESPs were explored by fitting the data with a generalized log-logistic distribution having two distinct power-law ranges. The exponent characterizing finer particles ( The TGSD parameters of the bi-lognormal distributions of the reconstructed TGSD correlate with eruptive plume height (which is a function of mass eruption rate) and magma viscosity. In particular, regardless of the processes producing the two subpopulations, the relevance of the two subpopulations (as measured by the parameter Using the strongest correlations we propose an empirical method based on the bi-lognormal distribution for the reconstruction of TGSD that is able to capture main grain-size features and can be used for numerical simulations aimed to real-time forecasting and long-term hazard assessment when accurate field-derived TGSDs are not available. AC was partially supported by the In terms of particle number distribution we can use a distribution given by the sum of two Weibull distributions: Expressing particle mass as function of particle diameter, in terms of mass distribution from Results of fitting TGSD data with Concerning cumulative number distribution, exponential-like distributions describe reasonably well fragment size distribution of ductile materials, but their application to brittle solids has been shown to be more problematic ( For the reconstruction of a fractal-like distribution, the number of particles was calculated from wt.% by multiplying it by the average volume of the particles in each phi class and the particle density. The density of each particle was calculated taking into account the DRE density and assuming a constant average porosity of the pyroclastic fragments. Results of fitting cumulative number distribution of our dataset with Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.