Locked intramedullary nailing provides a useful adjunct to the armamentarium of surgical treatment options for skeletally immature patients. It is particularly useful for older and heavier patients who are not well stabilized by flexible nails. New lateral entry nails and techniques enable safe nailing without a risk of avascular necrosis of the capital femoral epiphysis. Special consideration must be given during placement because the insertion point is not collinear with the axis of the femoral intramedullary canal.Fractures of the femoral shaft are very common in children. The most common fracture requiring hospitalization in children is femur fracture. These fractures may result from high-energy injuries, such as those sustained in motorized vehicle accidents, or low energy injuries, such as those sustained while falling during play. Many methods of treatment have been developed for femur fracture and all of them work. The prognosis is generally very good. Permanent impairment is unlikely and complications are rare. The classification of femoral shaft fractures in children is relatively simple. They can be described by the following: Open or closed Location of fracture-subtrochanteric, diaphyseal (proximal, mid, distal third), supracondylar Pattern—transverse, spiral, oblique, comminuted Amount of shortening Degree of angulation Young children (<6 years old) can be successfully treated by reduction and spica casting. Children aged > 6 years are able to master crutch-walking and are best treated by surgical fixation. In special circumstances (polytrauma or skin problems), surgical fixation may be indicated at any age. The popularity of surgical fixation of femur fractures in children has increased since the late 1980s. The advantages are a low rate of malunion and short period of recumbency. Children are able to return to school soon after surgery, thereby enabling parents to return to other activities or work. There may be some cost savings for payers, as inpatient stays in surgical fixation are markedly decreased as compared with traction methods. The potential disadvantages include surgical scars, bleeding, infection, hardware removal requirement, and risk of damage to the physis or epiphysis. There are also additional costs associated with operating room charges and implants. Fractures of the femur in children and adolescents can be managed in a variety of ways. There are several surgical options, including external fixation, fixation with plate and screws, flexible nailing, and locked nailing, with or without reaming. At present, external fixation is rarely used, except in cases that involve severe femoral shortening, polytrauma, associated wounds, or skin problems. Fixation of the femur with plate and screws has been recommended in children, Flexible nails for fractures of the femur in children are of great utility because of their ease of insertion and relatively low morbidity. This is the best method for younger and thin children with transverse and short oblique fracture patterns. Long oblique, spiral, and comminuted fractures are prone to shortening when fixed with flexible nails and may be best treated by another method or kept in traction after nailing until the fracture becomes sticky. Flexible nails are best suited for fractures in the middle rather than near the ends of bone. Fractures in larger children (aged > 11 years or heavier than 49 kg) are prone to complications with flexible nails. Locked intramedullary nailing is suitable for older and heavier children (aged > 11 years and heavier than 49 kg) who still have open growth plates. Locked nailing should also be considered for younger and thin children who have fractures that are likely to shorten—long oblique or comminuted patterns. The canal must be large enough to accept the nail >8 mm, unless reaming is contemplated. Insertion should not be through the piriformis fossa because of the well known risk of damaging blood supply to the capital femoral epiphysis with resultant avascular necrosis. Several techniques and devices have evolved for nailing through or lateral to the greater trochanteric apophysis. Preoperatively radiographs must be measured to ensure the canal is wide enough to accept the nail. If the fracture is comminuted or has a long oblique pattern, a measurement of the length of the opposite femur will be helpful as a guide to restoring the length of the injured side. The technique generally involves positioning of the unconscious patient on a radiolucent or fracture table. The surgeon may prefer either a supine or lateral position. There must be free access to the greater trochanter, in line with the axis of the femur. The surgeon must have access to the thigh and knee to obtain closed reduction. Fluoroscopy is required which must be able to image the femur in 2 planes. It is wise to ask the anesthesiologist to relax the patient to facilitate reduction. The author prefers to place the patient in the lateral decubitus position, with fractured side up ( After the limb has been prepped and draped, the greater trochanter is localized by palpation and fluoroscopic imaging. It is helpful to find the axis of the femur with a guide wire, and mark it on the overlying skin ( Access is gained to the intramedullary canal by drilling over the short guide wire with a cannulated bit or awl into the proximal femur ( Nail length can be determined in various ways, depending on the nature of the implant used. The nail should stop short of the distal femoral physis and should be left relatively “long” proximally so it can be found and extracted despite continued growth of the greater trochanter. Some nail systems have an enlargement of the proximal end of the nail for coupling with the insertion handle and to accept interlocking devices. Additional reaming of the proximal femur may be required to accommodate the enlarged portion of the nail ( The passage through the greater trochanter is not usually collinear with the axis of the intramedullary canal ( Reaming is optional in children. If the nail can be inserted without reaming, it should be done. The reasons to ream are (1) the canal is not large enough to accept the smallest nail or (2) the canal will accept a larger and stronger nail if the isthmus can be expanded. It is considered prudent to ream at least 1 mm larger than the diameter of the nail that will be inserted. It is better to leave the proximal end of the nail above the radiographically visible bony trochanteric apophysis to facilitate extraction later. Otherwise, the fact that the cartilaginous anlage of the greater trochanter extends above the radiographically visible apophysis and appositional growth is ongoing will result in overgrowth of the nail. If the tip of the nail appears “level” with the ossified tip of the trochanter, it is actually buried beneath the cartilaginous anlage of the trochanteric apophysis, and will be difficult to find at the time of hardware removal. Interlocking screws are inserted proximally with the help of an outrigger attached to the proximal nail ( The fracture must be reducible for nailing to proceed. If the facture does not reduce by usual means, there are several techniques that can be used. First, it is wise to ask the anesthesiologist to relax the patient which may make it easier to get the fracture out to length. The use of an externally applied femoral distractor may be helpful. If the fracture still cannot be reduced, open reduction may be necessary. Exploding the proximal femur is the worst possible scenario. Remember that the tip of the greater trochanter is not collinear with the axis of the intramedullary canal. It is better to over ream the proximal femur, especially if the implant is enlarged proximally to accommodate interlocking screws. If the nail hangs up during insertion, it should not be forced in, but should be taken out. The obstacles should be reconsidered before passage of the nail. Additional reaming may be necessary, or consider reverting to a nail of smaller diameter. Angular malalignment after intramedullary nailing is not uncommon and is most likely to occur with proximal fracture location, distal fracture location, and unstable fracture patterns. Discrepancy caused by over or undergrowth should be managed by the usual methods. Acute lengthening or shortening because of malreduction is best treated by planning. In long oblique or comminuted fractures, it may be well to template the nail on the basis of radiographs of the uninjured femur to select proper nail length and to check appropriate relationships to known bony landmarks tip of trochanter and distal femoral physis to obtain the right length after nail insertion. Hardware breakage may require clever maneuvers or specialized instrumentation for removal. If the nail bends but does not break, the options include (1) attempting to straighten the nail under anesthesia or (2) extraction and repeat nailing. Derangement of growth of the proximal femur because of violation of the apophysis of the greater trochanteric apophysis has been feared since hardware placement there has been contemplated. Specifically there has been fear of shortening of the neck, valgus of the neck, and relative elevation of the trochanter. To date, significant or symptomatic deformity has not been described, The patient should use crutches postoperatively. It is the author's choice to maintain non–weight-bearing at first, because fixation is nonrigid with these relatively small diameter nails. Weight bearing is allowed when callus formation is seen on radiographs. The decision to proceed with hardware extraction after full healing should arise from a discussion between surgeon and family. If it is to be done, it should be before the greater trochanter grows well above the top of the nail. The technique of placement of a lateral entry nail is a useful development in the spectrum of surgical treatment for femoral shaft fractures in the immature. It is particularly useful in the older (aged > 9 years) and heavier (>50 kg) children who are not good candidates for flexible nails. It is further a good method of avoiding avascular necrosis of the capital femoral epiphysis—a feared consequence or standard femoral nailing. The surgeon's familiarity of the nuances of the techniques will be helpful in avoiding the complications and pitfalls.