In this study we have investigated the protocol to produce CsAlSi5O12 (CAS), a potential host for radioactive cesium, starting from clinoptilolite, a natural zeolite employed in cesium decontamination. A clinoptilolite-rich rock sampled in Sardinia (Italy) has been subjected to a beneficiation process, to obtain a powder with a higher zeolite content. The enriched material (90 wt% clinoptilolite) has been previously Na-, then Cs-exchanged. Both forms have been analyzed by ICP-AES and ICP-MS. Thermal treatments of 2 hours between 800 and 1250 °C have been performed on different aliquots of the Cs-exchanged material. Samples heated at T ≥ 1150 °C are composed basically only by CAS, as determined by XRD analyses, and their high crystallinity has been also confirmed by SEM observations. Ideally, the nucleation of CAS follows the reaction Cs6Al6Si30O72·nH2O → nH2O↑ + 6CsAlSi5O12. DTA analyses indicate that the transformation has occurred at 1145 °C. TG analyses, coupled with XRD data, lead to exclude a cesium volatilization during the synthesis of CAS.The cesium aluminosilicate CsAlSi CAS has been synthesized for the first time by Ito On the basis of the above mentioned considerations, the present research has been addressed to evaluate the possibility to obtain CAS through heating of a Cs-exchanged clinoptilolite. A clinoptilolite-rich rock collected in Sardinia (Italy), already characterized in previous studies (sample “LacBen” in Refs. To obtain a Cs-clinoptilolite, the material has been first Na-exchanged. The enriched powder has been contacted with a 1 M NaCl solution (VWR Prolabo salt; purity 99.9%) performing a sequence of eleven exchange cycles executed in batch at 65 °C under continuous stirring, with a solid/liquid ratio of 30 g/l. The Na-exchanged material has been rinsed with deionized water until complete removal of chloride solutions (test performed on elutes with AgNO Chemical analyses of Na- and Cs-exchanged materials have been conducted at the Activation Laboratories Ltd (Ancaster, ON – Canada). Major elements have been determined after lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion of the samples through Inductive Coupled Mass Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES), performed with a Varian Vista 735 ICP. Cs contents have been determined by ICP Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS; Perkin Elmer Sciex ELAN 9000) after sodium peroxide fusion of the samples. Aliquots of 250 mg of the Cs-exchanged material have been submitted to thermal treatments of 2 hours at 800, 900, 1000, 1100, 1150, 1200 and 1250 °C, performed in a muffle furnace (Vittadini mod. FS.3) using high-alumina crucibles (Coors™). Further experiments have been performed at 1100 °C heating two aliquots of 250 mg of sample for 4 and 8 hours. The enriched material, the Na- and Cs-exchanged forms, and all heated samples have been investigated employing a Bruker D2-Phaser and the following conditions: 30 kV, 10 mA, CuKα radiation, LynxEye detector with an angular opening of 5°, 2θ range 6–70°, step size 0.020°, time per step 2 s, spinner 15 rpm. Before the measurements, all the samples have been micronized using a Retsch MM400 mill (ZrO Thermogravimetric and Differential Thermal Analyses (TG-DTA) of Cs-exchanged material have been carried out using a TA-Instrument Q600 simultaneous thermal analyzer. Amounts of about 15 mg of sample have been heated up to 1300 °C in an alumina crucible at the following operating conditions: 10 °C/min; air flow 100 ml/min. Analyses have been replicated seven times to improve the statistic of observations. The software TA-Universal Analysis has been used to evaluate the results. Morphological observations have been carried out on clinoptilolite-rich rock, zeolite-enriched material and heated samples. The materials, placed on aluminum stubs, have been gold coated (AGAR automatic sputter coater B7341) and observed using a ZEISS EVO LS-10 Scanning Electron Microscope. In order to check the effect of seed CsAlSi The beneficiation process has allowed to obtain a powder with a clinoptilolite content of about 90 wt.% ( The chemical compositions of the Na- and Cs-exchanged materials are reported in the The XRD patterns of the Na- and Cs-exchanged materials are reported in The TG-DTA curves of the Cs-exchanged material are reported in The XRD patterns of the heated samples, reported in In In the formula CsAlSi However, a perfect stoichiometric composition is not mandatory to obtain a zeolite with the structure of CAS. Indeed, it has been obtained with Si/Al ratio from 4.95 to 6.06 Another critical aspect in the nucleation of CAS is the temperature. The presence of some incipient peak of this compound in the XRD pattern of the sample heated for 2 hours at 1100 °C ( The possibility to synthesize CsAlSi Data here reported indicate that during the synthesis of CsAlSi The production of a ceramic matrix, basically composed only by CAS, starting from clinoptilolite, is here reported for the first time. Clinoptilolite has actually been used to reduce cesium radionuclide levels in contaminated waters Future developments of this research relate: The chemical analysis (by electron microprobe analysis in energy and/or wavelength dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy) and the structural refinement of the CAS obtained (by Rietveld method); The comparison between the cesium leaching from the CAS with respect to the leaching from the glass obtained using the same Cs-clinoptilolite heated at 1100 °C. This research shows, for the first time, the production of a crystalline matrix, basically constituted only by CsAlSi Ideally, the reaction that leads to CAS formation by thermal treatment of a Cs-clinoptilolite is the following This research has been supported by “