Although roping in hydrocyclones is a problem that has been studied by many researchers, we do not yet have a theory that relates all the variables involved. Several experimental works with different approaches such as mechanical energy balance, work on hydrocyclones with water only and hydrocyclone air core measurements with different instruments in the laboratory and plant have attempted to explain the roping phenomenon. They have addressed design variables such as apex to vortex diameters and different cone angles as well as operating variables such as inlet solid concentration, particle size, pressure and overflow and underflow flow rates and concentrations in order to understand their effect on the roping condition. In this paper we intend to verify some of the conclusions of these studies and establish inlet pressure and particle diameter as the variables that, in combination, lead from spray to roping. We present a computational model using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) to study a 75-mm laboratory hydrocyclone operating at a variable flow rate and with three different particle diameters. The Reynolds Stress Model and Eulerian multiphase model were used to model the turbulence and interaction of phases, respectively. The solid particles are described with the kinetic theory of granular flows (KTGF). Physical coherence and accuracy were compared with experimental data, where errors are within the expected range for an engineering prediction. The results indicate that transition from spray to roping generates an increase in the inlet flow pressure and/or particle diameter at a constant solid concentration in the feed flow. For 20-µm-diameter particles an increase results in a decrease in the discharge angle, although it always has a spray shape, for 34-µm diameters increasing the inlet pressure generates a semi-rope discharge and for 70-µm-diameter particles a small increase in the inlet pressure generates a roping condition. Transition to roping is characterized by a decrease in the air core diameter and discharge angle due to slow rotational velocity when particle diameter increases or higher accumulation of the solid fraction in the apex when inlet pressure increases. The passage from spray to roping occurs with a change in the frequency spectrum of the pressure oscillations in the walls of the hydrocyclone, with high amplitudes at low frequencies for spray discharge and noisy signals in all spectrums and damped low frequencies for roping.Although roping in hydrocyclones is a problem that has been studied by many researchers, we do not yet have a theory that relates all the variables involved. Several experimental works with different approaches such as mechanical energy balance, work on hydrocyclones with water only and measurements of air core in hydrocyclones with different instruments in the laboratory and plant have tried to understand the roping phenomena. They have studied design variables such as apex to vortex diameters and different cone angles as well as operating variables such as inlet solid concentration, particle size and pressure and overflow and underflow flow rates and concentrations to understood the effect of them in the roping condition. Roping in hydrocyclones is a well-known phenomenon in the mining industry and in spite of studies by many researches, theories do not relate all the variables involved and it is still difficult to estimate (      To detect the onset of roping they used several instruments: a laser beam for detecting the shape of the discharge, a capacitance sensor for the on-off detection of spray-roping, a gravimetric instrument to weigh the solid material accumulating inside the hydrocyclone and an acoustic sensor to detect hydrocyclone wall oscillations. In the range of low frequencies <100 Hz, spray discharge presents a higher oscillation intensity for roping then for spray discharge, while for the high frequency range, 100 < Hz < 1000, the situation is inverted and the intensity is heavily damped. In a second paper, using a 150-mm hydrocyclone,  Following the idea of The study of hydrocyclone behavior has incorporated two types of working tools: experimental and numerical studies. Experimental studies have established flow patterns in hydrocyclones and become the validation methods of numerical methods. They have also established several flow parameters and restrictions. Because laboratory experiments with hydrocyclones are lengthy, difficult to perform and expensive, numerical methods have become more attractive. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is a powerful tool to solve and study the flow inside the device with the appropriate models required ( Research on hydrocyclone simulation models has demonstrated that the Reynolds stress model (RSM) and Large Eddy Simulation (LES) are suitable for describing the velocity field and turbulence. Most research has aimed to evaluate the classification curve of the hydrocyclone. The Lagrangian approach, also known as Lagrangian Particle Tracking (LPT), has been widely used (   Based on a literature review and personal experimental and simulation studies, we can present the following observations related to the type of underflow discharge. We consider the The  Measurement of oscillation in the base of the hydrocyclone indicates that, in the range of low frequencies, <100 Hz, spray discharge presents higher oscillation intensity than roping, while in the high frequency range, 100 < Hz < 1000, the situation is inverted and the intensity is heavily damped. Our hypothesis is that the mechanism of transition from spray to roping is as follows: when the pressure in a hydrocyclone is increased, the three-dimensional flow pattern produces negative pressure within the hydrocyclone, which sucks air through the apex. Increasing the inlet pressure increases the air core as well as the pressure in the pulp and the tangential velocity at the apex, resulting in the compression of the air core, which decreases in size at the apex. As the pressure increases, reaching a value at which the pulp occupies all of the apex diameter, the pulp begins to accumulate at a high concentration at the bottom of the hydrocyclone, slowing the tangential velocity to a minimum, causing the pulp to evacuate through the apex with a tangential velocity lower than the axial velocity in the form of a rope. From this moment on, the evacuation of the pulp through the apex becomes intermittent, producing oscillation of the hydrocyclone wall that can be easily seen by the naked eye and measured with instruments. The increase in particle size and concentration in the feed accelerates this effect, as do other variables such as pulp volume partition and overflow pressure. In this work the Eulerian multiphase model is implemented to study the effect of feed inlet pressure and particle diameter as the variables generating the transition from spray to roping discharge for a constant apex-to-vortex diameter ratio in a hydrocyclone. Solid flow and concentration, slurry discharge angle, air core diameter, velocity profiles and pressure fluctuations in the walls of the hydrocyclone were analyzed to define the changes in the hydrodynamics behavior that induce the shift from spray to roping. Pressure fluctuations are focused on future monitoring and control of hydrocyclone performance. A multiphase model takes into account the three phases inside the device: gas, liquid and solid. All phase interactions are modeled with the Eulerian multiphase model, treating them as interpenetrating continua. Particularly, the solid phase is modeled with the granular description according with the kinetic theory of granular flows. The turbulent flow is described with the Reynolds stress model (RSM) and the wall effect is treated as standard wall function. The Eulerian model solves the conservation of mass and momentum equations for every   For liquid-solid interaction, solid-fluid interphase exchange was defined according to the Gidaspow model ( For granular flows in the compressible regime ( The kinetic energy of particles associated with velocity fluctuations is described by the granular temperature derived from the kinetic theory ( The Reynolds stress model is a second-order turbulence model. It solves an additional conservation equation for each component of the Reynolds stress tensor, that is, it describes the anisotropic turbulence flow. These components are then used to close the Reynolds-averaged momentum equation. The geometry used corresponds to a 75-mm laboratory hydrocyclone used by The computational domain was divided into about 180,000 unstructured hexahedrical grids and, in addition to the geometry, a section of the atmosphere domain outside of the hydrocyclone was included next to the apex (see A velocity inlet boundary condition was used in the transverse area of the feed pipe, a pressure outlet at the exit of the vortex finder and atmospheric pressure at the bottom of the atmosphere domain outside the apex. An air velocity inlet at the 0 m/s boundary condition was considered in the lateral and top surfaces of the atmosphere section. No slip wall boundary condition was considered for any of the surfaces of the hydrocyclone. The simulation was conducted using the commercial CDF software ANSYS Fluent 14.5. An unsteady solver was used with a time step between 1 × 10 To check the physical coherence and accuracy of the predictions of the CFD model, the velocity field on the 75-mm hydrocyclone measured by Hsieh was compared with the simulation model. Another comparison was made for the selectivity function with data from Series VI of We compare the air core diameter predicted by our numerical simulation with the experimental data of Finally, a comparison of the experimental and simulated solids in the feed in the overflow and in the underflow was made. The results are shown in The underflow discharge was studied to show the effect of inlet flow parameters (particle diameter and pressure) on the slurry flow and solids concentration that influence the air core diameter, which is directly related to the spray-to-rope discharge and the decrease in the associated angle when the transition takes place. The velocity field was shown to characterize the hydrodynamics of the transition to roping. The velocity field in the interior of the hydrocyclone is influenced by the interaction of solid particles when they are present in a high solid fraction in the inlet slurry. A combination of these variables allows us to elucidate the mechanism that produces roping when inlet pressure and particle diameter vary and geometry and solid feed concentration are constant. Finally, pressure fluctuations in the walls of the hydrocyclone were obtained from the simulation results, which show the behavior of the pressure on the body of the hydrocyclone, generating vibrations that could be used as a control based on the spectrum graph. This research needs experimental testing in future works. The type of the hydrocyclone discharge is shown in In all cases the discharge angle diminishes as the inlet pressure increases. Cases I and II show spray discharge only. In Case II above 50 psi we find semi-rope and in Case III the transition from semi-rope to rope discharge occurs starting from 4.7 psi and leading to rope at values above 8.6 psi. Also, in all cases the volume fraction of solid particles increases with the pressure, with the extreme accumulation of solids at the bottom of the hydrocyclone in Case III. The data on solids concentration, solids volume fraction and flow rate in the overflow, underflow and feed are presented in  In The three-dimensional velocity field inside the hydrocyclone responds to inlet pressure with an increase in pressure, generating increases in all velocity fields. For the purposes of this work, we are interested in the tangential and axial velocities. Three inlet velocities was measured for every case: 2.3, 4.6 and 6.9 m/s for Case I and II and 2.3, 3.45, and 4.5 m/s for Case III, where roping is fully developed.  For all cases an increase in inlet pressure generates higher axial and tangential velocities, even in the case of roping, as can be seen in the For a given hydrocyclone design, the air core diameter responds to the operating conditions and has a direct relationship with the type of discharge.  The diameters in both the middle and apex zones of the air core decrease with an increase in the inlet pressure. In Case I there are decreases of about 3 mm and 1.5 mm in the middle and apex zones, respectively, with an increase of 60 psi. In Case II the air core diameter varies 1.5 and 1.8 mm in middle and apex zone with an increase of 50 psi. Finally, Case III shows decreases of about 1 mm and 2 mm in the middle and apex zone. Bigger particles generate greater decreases in the air core diameter in the apex section. As shown previously, larger particles have more impact on the velocity field, generating low rotational velocities near the apex section, and a decrease in these velocities generates the conditions for dissolving the air core and producing a rope discharge. In some cases, an increase in inlet pressure increases the velocity field; however, an increase in the mass flow rate of solids toward the underflow tends to collapse the air core. Finally, Pressure was measured at the middle height of the cylinder and cone of the hydrocyclone and at the apex. We used a CFD model of a laboratory hydrocyclone based on ANSYS Fluent using RSM and the Eulerian multiphase model for modeling the turbulence and phase interaction, respectively. We studied the flow fields in the hydrocyclone, the air core and the discharge shape for different feed pressures and particle diameters. Comparison of simulations with the experimental data of two independent researchers validates the ability of our model to predict the behavior in the flow field of the studied hydrocyclone. In order to check if our selection of hydrocyclone shape, operational parameters and results were within the range stated in the hypothesis of this work, we see that the ratio of apex-vortex was The underflow discharge angle is the highest – 30° – for pressures less than 19 psi and a particle size of 20 The air core diameter in the apex sections decreases with an increase in inlet pressure in the hydrocyclone, leading to roping at 8.6 psi and 70- The velocity field in the hydrocyclone increase with an increase in the inlet pressure and decreases when larger particles are present in the slurry. Increasing pressure, low velocities, bigger particles and high concentrations of particles in the conical section induce the transition from spray to roping. A simple way to detect the transition from spray to roping is to detect the change of the spectrum frequency of the pressure oscillations. High amplitudes at low frequencies correspond to spray discharge. High peaks in pressure fluctuation in the waveform, damped high amplitudes at low frequencies and noisy signals in all spectrums correspond to a roping regime. Research on vibrations in the hydrocyclone body needs to be done to confirm the pressure fluctuation results. We acknowledge financial support from Conicyt/Fondap Project-15130015 at the University of Concepción.