Surface tension is one of the most important factors in a flotation process, normally being understood to mean surface tension at the pulp surface. In most cases this is enough, but when we try to process materials which have low surface energies, we also have to take into account the surface tension between the air bubbles and the liquid (water) in the flotation cell. This paper reports preliminary study results on this subject.A prerequisite for flotation is that the surfaces of the floatable particles are hydrophobic and the Gibbs free energy change (Δ The plastic materials were first crushed with a laboratory shredder (Fritsch Pulverisette) and then divided into size fractions using vibrating sieving (Fritsch). The preliminary tests were made with shredded bottles (2–4 mm) which were probably polyethyleneterephthalate (PET), but the material in these tests may have varied. Three plastics, the densities of which were higher than that of water, were chosen as the actual test materials. These were polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polycarbonate (PC) and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). PVC is also a raw material used in industry, which must be separated in recycling processes. The materials were crushed with the shredder and sieved to 0.5–1, 1–1.4, 1.4–2 and 2–2.8 mm fractions for testing. Flotation tests were carried out using a column type cell. The cell comprised two cylindrical columns cemented on the circular bottom plate and the inner column was the actual cell ( After the preliminary testing, flotation experiments were made with 10 g samples and The work was started by performing flotation tests on shredded plastic bottles (2–4 mm) using commercial frothers (Flotol, Flotanol, Montanol, Dowfroth) and ethanol as reagents. As the formation of a froth bed was negligible in the flotation of coarse plastic particles, due to the absence of the stabilizing effect of fine particles, the froth product was collected by other techniques. In the preliminary testing particles were mostly picked from the pulp surface. For the same reason, the cell design was such that the floated particles could be collected at the outer cell compartment if both of the compartments were filled with water, and the liquid level was lifted above the inner cell. In principle, this solution does not necessitate the usage of a frother at all. Using both of these methods plastic particles were collected in the first tests. All the frothers floated particles already at low frother concentrations, the floatability of particles being better in acid than in alkaline liquid, this obviously being a consequence of higher surface tension at acid pH. The floatability was also dependent on the characteristics of the frother and complete flotation recovery was achieved at slightly different dosage. As is well known, ethanol is not a very surface active compound, being more evenly distributed in the liquid. Therefore, ethanol additions increased the formation of small air bubbles and clearly improved the flotation of particles, especially with frother. It seems that in conventional flotation, frother is added to form the froth bed but its role as a surface active reagent is often forgotten. When commercial frothers are the only surface active reagents used, the surface tension between air and liquid is obviously different deep in the pulp and at the surface of the pulp. The effect of these changes on flotation has obviously been ignored so far in practice, but it could be studied, for example, by comparing samples from large cells or columns at different depths. On the basis of the preliminary tests, it was concluded that it would be important to have constant surface tension between liquid and air in plastic flotation. Therefore, Testing with amyl alcohol also showed that low surface tension has a significant effect on pulp properties. In conventional flotation, air bubbles usually rise through the pulp and, due to the high concentration of frother molecules, form a froth bed on the surface of the pulp. There are thus two different phases in the cell, pulp phase and froth phase. With amyl alcohol, however, the froth phase filled the whole cell, so that at the start the concentration of amyl alcohol molecules was higher in the upper part of the liquid, but after froth phase formation the molecules were more evenly distributed in the whole cell. Thus, flotation of particles with this procedure actually takes place in the froth. The formation of the froth phase is dependent on surface tension so that at the highest concentration the froth phase was formed in a few seconds but at the lower concentrations it took about 1 min. The first tests have already shown that the flotation procedure is different compared to conventional flotation and may have an effect on the floatability of particles. PVC is a common material used in building and construction, for example, for pipes, fittings and various profiles. It was chosen as a test material due to its high density (1.4) compared with many plastics, to assess the floatability of heavy plastic particles. The flotation of PVC was studied in all the four size fractions between 0.5 and 2.8 mm and the results are presented in The tests showed that the coarse PVC particles (2–2.8 mm) floated relatively well at the highest surface tension with this technique. This is to some extent surprising because the floatability of plastic particles has been found to deteriorate fast with increasing particle size in conventional flotation ( As can be seen, low surface tension decreased the floatability of particles in all the size fractions, but the floatability of particles in the two finest fractions was quite similar. The low recoveries are clearly indicative of surface tension in the flotation tests approaching the so-called critical surface tension of PVC, where Δ PC is used for many purposes, for example, in lenses, goggles, bottles, computer parts and automotive plastics. It is also used in blends and alloys with other plastics (ABS, PMMA, PBT). The test material was shredded mobile phone covers, which were sieved to 1–1.4, 1.4–2 and 2–2.8 mm fractions. The flotation results are presented in Coarse particles (2–2.8 mm) also floated well with this material at the highest surface tensions, confirming the observations made with PVC. PC is a more hydrophobic material than PVC and the size fractions between 1 and 2 mm were readily floatable with the method. Considering the results, it is obvious that the critical surface tension of PC was not approached in the tests. Due to the floatability of the PC particles the finest fraction was not tested. PMMA products are also known as acrylic parts and can be used to replace glass in lenses and covers. The test material was shredded Plexiglas that was divided to 1–1.4 and 1.4–2 mm fractions. As the thickness of the Plexiglas plates was about 1 mm, the shape of the particles was obviously more spherical in the finer fraction due to the shredding. However, the shape of the particles in the size fractions was not determined. The flotation results are presented in As the results show, PMMA particles also floated quite well with the method, but it can be concluded that the recoveries also reflect the effect of particle shape on flotation. The floatability of PMMA particles decreased strongly in the coarse fraction at low surface tension, obviously being affected by both particle size and shape. Flaky particles were not as floatable as more spherical particles. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the recoveries in the finer fraction when comparing the test materials. In The floatabilities of PVC, PC and PMMA were assessed in different size fractions with amyl alcohol using a column type cell. The flotation method used is different to the conventional procedure. As amyl alcohol was evenly distributed, the froth phase was formed in the cell. As a consequence, Δ Although the formation of the froth phase is considered here in a column type cell in dilute suspensions, a similar mechanism may be effective in conventional flotation. In most cases minerals, such as sulfides, are floated with low dosages of collectors and frothers, so that the formation of both pulp and froth phases is obvious. However, with some ores high dosages of emulsifying reagents (fuel oil) are also used and their effect on pulp behaviour can be similar. This would explain the improved floatability, and particularly the increased recovery, of coarse particles in conventional flotation.