Sintering behavior of W–15wt%Cu nanocomposite powders was investigated. The sintered composite with high heating rate showed a more homogeneous microstructure than that with low heating rate. Microstructural characteristics depending on heating rate were explained by the different sintering, the effect of powder agglomerates, and exuded Cu from agglomerated powders.W–Cu composite materials have been applied in various industrial fields such as ultrahigh-voltage electric contact materials, blocking materials for microwave packages of microelectronic devices and heat-sink materials for high density integrated circuits due to low thermal expansion coefficient, high arc-resistance of W and high electrical/thermal conductivity Recently, the mechanochemical process (MCP) using a mixture of W- and Cu-oxide has been applied to fabricate the W–Cu nanocomposite powders. These powders, with homogeneous distribution of fine W and Cu particles, have excellent sinterability by enhanced W particle rearrangement during liquid phase sintering Elemental W (99.94%, 1.82 μm, TaeguTec., Korea) and CuO (99.9%, 1.5 μm, Kojundo Chemical Lab., Japan) powders were milled by a high energy horizontal attrition mill in Ar atmosphere with a speed of 400 rpm for 20 h. The ball-milled W–CuO powders were reduced in H The W–Cu nanocomposite powder was compacted under a pressure of 100 MPa and its Green density was about 50% of the theoretical density. The powder compacts were heated up to 1200 °C in H The sintered density was measured and the microstructure homogeneity was quantified by hardness measurements of sintered composites using Vickers microhardness test. The test was done 100 times for each sample. The microstructure homogeneity was estimated by the homogeneity index (HI) defined as the ratio of the standard deviation to the average hardness number  The shrinkage rates for the W–Cu nanocomposite powder during the heat-up process to 1200 °C with a different heating rate are shown in It is reported that the W–Cu nanocomposite powder can induce solid state sintering by the diffusion of Cu  The difference in microstructural homogeneity can also be characterized by quantitative analysis of hardness values for the composites sintered at 1200 °C for 1 h. The reason why the microstructure of sintered composites was changed by the heating rate can be explained by the sintering characteristics of nanosized powders with hard agglomeration. Recently, Leite et al. The heating rate in the W–Cu nanocomposite system can affect the microstructure evolution by the segregation of the Cu phase This work demonstrated the effect of heating rate on the sintering behavior of the W–15wt%Cu composites prepared from W–CuO powder mixtures. In dilatometric analysis, the shrinkage behavior in the temperature range of solid state and its dependence on heating rate were observed. The presence of shrinkage was explained by the solid state sintering of exuded Cu phases from W–Cu aggregates. The microstructure of the composite sintered with low heating rate was characterized by the formation of agglomerated particles and large Cu pools, while the composite with high heating rate showed homogeneous microstructure with fine particles. The inhomogeneous microstructure in low heating rate was mainly caused by the formation of W-rich aggregates and Cu pool during heat-up stage. These results suggest that the heating rate strongly influenced the microstructure of sintered composites; thus, W–Cu composites with homogeneous microstructure can be prepared using the sintering process with high heating rate more effectively. This work was supported by Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2002-042-D00062).