The laser surface alloying technique was used to form wear resistant layers on nodular cast iron rolls with C-B-W-Cr powder. The microstructure, element distribution, crack propagation, phases, microhardness distribution and wear behaviors of the layer were investigated. Results indicate that the alloyed layer had pores and cracks, composing of dendrites and eutectics with a hyper-eutectic structure. Solid solution, martensite, retained austenite and a lot of carbides co-existed in the alloyed layer, improving the microhardness from 500HV0.05 of the substrate to an average of 1201HV0.05 of the alloyed layer. Wear results at ambient and 500°C indicate that the wear resistance of the layer was almost 1.6times of that of the nodular cast iron substrate after sliding for 904.32m. The improvement in wear resistance is believed to be the combined results of the grain refining effect, the solution strengthening effect, the distribution of the hard phases, the work hardening effect of the retained austenite, and the good bonding between these hard phases and the Fe-based matrix. Comparisons among different alloyed layers (different powders alloyed on different rolls) indicated that rolls with a low content of carbon and alloying elements, and alloying powders with tough bonding components are good to obtain a dense and defect-free alloyed layer and a large wear resistance improvement of the substrate.Nodular cast iron rolls (NCIR) are widely used in steel mills because of their low price, good castability and good machinability, which are desirable features in the production of machine parts The authors did some systematic research on strengthening or repairing rolls with laser surface alloying technique The substrate used in this investigation was a nodular cast iron roll (500HV The microstructure of the NCIR substrate is shown in The microstructure varies along the cross section of the alloyed layer as shown in  The calculated values for the Gibbs formation energies for Cr Crack propagation in the alloyed layer, bonding zone and the substrate is shown in When considering practical rolling work conditions, real contact between the roll and the rolling materials must be taken into consideration. It is worth emphasizing that according to Limodin et al.'s study The schematic view of the crack propagation along the nodular graphite and in the alloyed layer is shown in The crack propagation in the alloyed layer is schematically shown in The microhardness distribution along the depth in the cross section of the alloyed layer is shown in Comparison of the wear weight loss of the roll substrate and the alloyed layer after different wear times is shown in The wear morphology of the worn surface of the substrate and alloyed layer after wear for 904.32 In contrast, the worn surface of the laser alloyed layer appeared smooth after sliding for 904.32 First, the increase in the microhardness and wear resistance of the alloyed layer mainly contributed to the solid solution strengthening of the austenite and the martensite and the grain refinement introduced by the laser treatment. Second, it is well known that, retained austenite is always found in laser treated layers on steels as the result of the fast cooling rate. It was found that the stress-induced transformation of austenite into martensite played an important role in improving the wear resistance of the material with increasing load under ambient conditions The factors influencing the wear resistance depend upon several factors such as hardness and thickness of the coating, coating material, type of the substrate, operating conditions and coating process This work has investigated the microstructure, phases, microhardness distribution and wear resistance of the laser surface alloyed NCIR with C-B-W-Cr powders. Comparisons among the laser alloyed layers on different rolls with different alloying powders were also discussed. The major results are as follows: The alloyed layer which was composed of dendrites and eutectics has pores and cracks in it. XRD results indicated the existence of solid solution, retained austenite, martensite and a lot of carbides, improving the microhardness from 500HV Wear test results at 500 Comparisons among different alloyed layers indicated that rolls with a low content of carbon and alloying elements, and alloying powders with tough bonding components are good to obtain a dense and defect-free alloyed layer, and a large wear resistance improvement of the substrate. This work was supported by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 20100471383), Research Foundation for Talented Scholars of Jiangsu University (No.10JDG048) and Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (No. BK2007512). Shenyang Dalu Laser Whole Set Equipment Limited Company (Shenyang, Liaoning, China) and Northeastern University (Shenyang, Liaoning, China) are appreciated for the preparation for the laser alloyed specimens.