In this research, the ferrosilicomanganese powder was synthesized via mechanical alloying and SHS methods. Silicon oxide, manganese oxide, iron and aluminum powders were used as starting materials. SHS process was initiated by oxyacetylene flame. The activated and inactivated powder mixtures were used for producing ferrosilicomanganese grade 26%Si-53%Mn-21%Fe. The powder mixtures were characterized by X-ray diffractometry, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Thermodynamic analysis showed that aluminothermic reduction of MnO2 is more thermodynamically favored as compared with aluminothermic reduction of SiO2. Adiabatic temperature of MnO2 and SiO2 reduction by Al was calculated about 2946 K. It was found that no reaction took place during mechanical alloying. After annealing and SHS processes, first MnO2, then SiO2 oxides were reduced by Al and ferrosilicomanganese and Al2O3 phases were produced. Due to the high adiabatic temperature, all products were formed in liquid state, leading to produce sintered ferrosilicomanganese and isolated Al2O3 particles.Most of metallic and some of non-metallic elements are dissolved in molten iron and forms solid solutions that are called ferroalloys. Ferroalloys have generally lower melting points as compared with alloy elements. Therefore, these compounds dissolve easily during adding to the molten steel. While, most of the alloying elements have higher melting point as compared with steel and oxidize before complete dissolution in molten steel. By regarding the amount of production, ferroalloys are divided into two groups; general and especial alloys. About 90% of ferroalloys production in European Union is dedicated for producing of general ferroalloys (ferrochrome, ferrosilicon, ferromanganese, ferronickel), while the production of especial ferroalloys (ferrovanadium, ferromolybdenum, ferrotungsten, ferrotitanium, ferroboron and ferroniobium) is less. These especial ferroalloys are usually used in iron, steel, Al and chemical industries Ferrosilicomanganese is a solid solution of Si and Mn in Fe with different Mn/Si ratios and is used in steelmaking instead of ferrosilicon and ferromanganese. This compound like other ferroalloys is produced in submerged electric arc furnace with cock as reduction agent The self-propagating high temperature synthesis (SHS) method is one of the important and useful methods for synthesizing advanced materials such as carbides, borides, nitrides, oxides, intermetallic compounds and composites. In SHS method by occurring reaction in low fraction of starting materials, considerable heat is generated. This generated heat can supply the activation energy for reacting in next layers Mechanical alloying (MA) is a solid state process for producing of stable and unstable materials. This process has some benefits such as: the ability of uniform distribution of second phase particles in composites, creating nanocrystals, quasi-crystal and amorphous materials, creating order and disorder solid solutions and ability to extend solid solubility of elements. The properties of milled powders depend on particle size distribution, degree of ordering/disordering of milled powders and milling conditions Some of the self-propagating reactions are independent from mechanical activation or local heating As ferroalloys are important in steelmaking industries, it is necessary the study of production of these alloys. Regarding the mentioned studies and evaluation of literature, it was found that there are a few studies about production and characterization of these alloys. Also, no study was found about the production of ferrosilicomanganese compound in the literature. Therefore, in this study the reaction pathway in MnO In this research, SHS of ferrosilicomanganese using activated (as-milled) and inactivated (as-blended) powders was investigated. For this purpose, the path of reactions and the effect of MA on SHS process and final properties of powders were evaluated. Based on Indian standard In all samples the stoichiometry mixtures were used. Thermodynamic analysis of the reactions and calculation of T In these formulas, ΔH In thermal synthesis, activated (mechanically alloyed samples) and inactivated samples were used. The experiments and the coding of the samples are presented in The initial powder mixtures for producing ferrosilicomanganese were blended according to reaction As can be seen, reaction For better thermodynamic evaluation of reaction Based on presented thermodynamic data for reactions XRD patterns of stoichiometry powder mixture at different milling times are presented in   The concentrations of Fe and Mn elements in the porosities are high indicating the accumulation of these elements inside the holes. As mentioned before, Mn presents in two states in the matrix, solute atoms and distinct phase. As seen in In this research the reaction pathway for producing 26%Si-53%Mn-21%Fe ferrosilicomanganese from Al, Fe, MnO MA of initial powder mixture were not led to the reaction between Al and oxide phases. MA only led to the activation of powder mixtures. Also, it was found that 15 h of MA was not enough for occurring combustion reactions between Al and oxide phases. It was found that after annealing, the reduction reactions of MnO SHS process with oxy-acetylene flame led to the occurrence aluminothermic reaction and formation of ferrosilicomanganese and Al After annealing and SHS processes, first MnO