In this study, the application of models to predict the steady state and dynamic behaviour of the pressure leaching stages at a Base Metal Refinery (BMR) is discussed. Part I of this communication provides background about the context of the study, and presents a complete overview of the process concerned and the model development strategy. The steady state model allows the prediction of the operating temperature and the slurry composition in the different autoclave compartments as a function of pressure, feed rates, and the flow rate of the flash recycle stream. The dynamic response of the temperature and stream compositions to changes in the above mentioned process variables can also be predicted. It has been illustrated how interdependencies between process variables can be determined and an improved understanding of the process can be developed by means of the process models. The importance of controlling the relative leaching rates of digenite and covellite to minimise precious metal leaching, for example, was illustrated by modelling the system behaviour at different operation conditions.Part I of this communication provides an overview of the work performed by The consistency of the results achieved for the steady state calculations was verified by performing elemental species balances for the overall process using the model calculated flow rates and compositions. The values that were assigned to the variables that had to be specified by the user are summarised in As discussed in part I of this communication, the process variables that are typically manipulated to achieve the desired operational objectives include the leaching temperature, the leaching pressure, the autoclave residence time, and the acid concentration in the leach solution. The effect that varying these variables would have on the percentage metal dissolution was evaluated by means of the steady state model. The values of the user specified variables that were kept constant were assigned based on the operating conditions typically employed at the Western Platinum Ltd. BMR, while the values of the abovementioned process variables were varied around these values. The results are discussed with reference to the copper, nickel and rhodium behaviour in the second stage leach. Although the exact concentration and percentage dissolution values of the ruthenium and iridium differed from that of rhodium, the general trends and behaviour were observed to be the same. A distinct change in the trend of the line representing the percentage copper leaching in the third compartment as the leaching temperature decreased can be observed in Several factors contribute to the fact that the percentage copper dissolution differed at the instant when Cu The effect of temperature on the relative leaching rates depended on the total pressure and solution composition. As discussed in part I of this communication, the reaction rate constant of Cu  Depending on the values of several operating variables, it was possible for OPM leaching to commence earlier at decreased temperatures compared to increased temperatures, which resulted in a higher extent of OPM leaching at decreased temperatures despite the slower leaching rates. Comparing In order to maximise Cu leaching and minimise OPM dissolution, leaching conditions must be selected such that the cationic substitution reactions are faster relative to the acid leaching reaction to increase OPM precipitation and to reduce the formation of CuS as an intermediate species. The reaction rate of covellite leaching must furthermore be enhanced relative to the acid leaching rate of digenite by increasing the pressure, increasing the temperature, and decreasing the acid concentration to ensure that CuS leaching has progressed significantly by the time that the digenite leaching has been completed. The residence time will subsequently have to be adjusted accordingly so that limited time is available for OPM leaching to proceed. The acid feed rate did not affect the nickel leaching noticeably, as would be expected given the fact that the rates of the majority of the nickel leaching reactions are only dependent on the dissolved oxygen content of the leach solution and not on the acid concentration. For the conditions illustrated in At higher acid feed rates, the rate of acid leaching of digenite was higher relative to the leaching of covellite and the cationic substitution leaching reactions than at low acid feed rates. As a result, more CuS was produced as an intermediate product, while the rate of CuS leaching was slower relative to the rate of digenite leaching, resulting in decreased copper dissolution by the time that digenite leaching had been completed. These were then also the conditions at which significant rhodium leaching started to occur for the respective acid feed rates, as shown in The optimum operating conditions are dependent on the rates at which the respective feed streams enter the pressure leaching stage. With reference to The effect that variations in the solid feed rate had on the leaching behaviour of copper is shown in The general trends and effects observed for the second stage leach were also valid for the third stage leach. There are, in general, numerous interactions between the various variables. For the third stage leach, the performance of the second stage leach will also be important in determining the appropriate operating conditions given the dependency of the third stage leach on the composition and flow rate of the second stage leach residue. For the range of conditions investigated, achieving metal and acid concentrations in the third stage leach solution similar to that produced by the second stage leach proved challenging. In most instances, more than 90% of the copper and 70% of the nickel in the first stage leach residue were leached in the second stage leach. This resulted in a small amount of second stage leach residue with relatively low base metal contents. To achieve high base metal concentrations in the third stage leach solution, the flow rates of the liquid components to the third stage leach had to be kept small, which subsequently resulted in long residence times and high extents of OPM dissolution in the third stage leach. The process flow sheet does, however, make provision for the third stage leach solution to be recycled to the second stage leach. The primary objective when selecting the operating conditions for the third stage leach should hence be to achieve the desired base metal leaching while minimising OPM dissolution rather than producing a leach solution that can be sent to the downstream processing units. The composition of the third stage leach solution recycled to the second stage leach would be similar to the composition of the spent electrolyte. Although validation of the accuracy of the dynamic model was not possible due to the limited availability of online analysis of different process streams, the observed responses conformed to the process behaviour expected based on the results discussed in Section An increase in the acid feed rate resulted in a slight increase in the copper concentration in the first compartment, indicating that the effect of the increase in the acid concentration on the rate of digenite leaching was more significant than the effect of the reduced oxygen solubility as a result of the higher acid concentration. Leaching of covellite, which contributes significantly to the increase in the dissolved copper concentration once digenite has been leached, is only dependent on the dissolved oxygen concentration and not on the acid concentration. As a result, the copper concentration in the second and third compartments, where digenite had leached completely, decreased due to the slower covellite leaching rate resulting from the reduced oxygen solubility. The smaller extent of this exothermic reaction also resulted in a decrease in the temperature of these two compartments. The rhodium concentration in the first autoclave compartment increased as a result of the increase in the acid feed rate. This can be ascribed to the change in the rate of the cationic substitution reactions relative to the rate of the acid leaching reaction as well as the dependence of the precipitation reactions on the dissolved oxygen concentration, as discussed in Section The amount of covellite that had not been leached in the second stage leach increased because of the slower covellite leaching reaction at the higher acid concentrations. As a result, the extent of the covellite leaching reaction in the third stage leach was larger, resulting in an increase in the both the copper concentration and the temperature in the fourth compartment. The higher temperature also resulted in faster rhodium leaching and hence higher dissolved rhodium concentrations in the fourth compartment. Decreasing the flow rate of the acid feed stream had the opposite effects on the temperatures and compositions in the different compartments. In general, the interaction between the temperature, acid concentration, pressure, and oxygen solubility makes the prediction of the autoclave performance challenging. The model that was developed allows the prediction of the operating temperature as well as the compositions of both the solid and the liquid phases in the different autoclave compartments as a function of the flow rates of the water, spent electrolyte, acid, first stage residue, and oxygen, as well as the recycle stream sent to the flash recycle tank and the autoclave pressure. Although the actual values predicted by the steady state model and dynamic model might differ from the actual plant data under certain operating conditions, the knowledge about the pressure leaching process encompassed in the model is of primary importance. It has been illustrated how interdependencies between different process variables could be determined and an improved understanding of the process can be developed by means of the process model. The importance of the relative leaching rates of digenite and covellite was, for example, illustrated by generating model predictions for different operation scenarios. Material and financial support provided by Lonmin Plc is gratefully acknowledged.