This paper investigates the production of stable nanoparticle suspensions. The experimental set-up allows the online measurement of the most important electrochemical properties and the particle size distribution of the product suspension as well as an adjustment of the pH-value for stabilization during the comminution process. Electrostatic stabilization is a strong tool to produce stable nanoparticle suspensions for sparingly soluble oxide components. In this contribution the influence of different operational parameters at stable suspensions properties on the grinding result in the nanometer size range is presented. In addition to alumina, the concept of electrostatic stabilization during wet grinding of nanoparticles is also applied to tin oxide.The fabrication of products with higher homogeneity, solubility or strength and thus higher product quality requires the use of nanoparticles. Especially the chemical and pharmaceutical industry as well as the ceramic or the microelectronic industry demands more and more suspensions of nanoparticles with high storage stability. A new way to produce such suspensions is wet comminution in stirred media mills as published recently ( In the sub-micron particle size range the behavior of the product suspensions is more and more influenced by increasing particle–particle interactions. Due to these interactions often spontaneous agglomeration of product particles occurs and the viscosity of the product suspension increases ( In this paper, the influence of different operational parameters on the grinding process are examined for electrostatically stabilized product suspensions. The results are applied to the concept of energy transfer and energy utilization which was first introduced by  In order to reduce the amount of wear of the materials of the mill the grinding chamber is lined with ceramic walls (SiSiC) and the stirrer is equipped with discs of polyurethane (PU). The experimental set-up provides a circuit mode comminution of the product. The suspension is pumped from the grinding chamber into a stirred vessel and from there through the ultrasonic spectrometer (Dispersion Technology) ( The ultrasonic spectrometer is specially developed for solid concentrations in a range of 1–50 A highly pure (99.9%) fused corundum ( A commercially available tin oxide ( For the adjustment of pH-values commercially available nitric acid ( Due to a slow fragmentation rate compared to the needed analysis time online particle size analysis and characterization was done by the ultrasonic spectrometer mentioned above. Samples for further powder characterization (15 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recovered using a Philips PW 1730/1316/19 unit to analyze the crystal structures of the ground powder. Dynamic scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were performed in a DSC 2920 cell (TA Instruments) at a modulated heating rate of Low temperature nitrogen adsorption isotherms were measured at 77.4 Rheological measurements of the milling suspensions were performed in a rotational rheometer CVO 120 (Bohlin Instruments) immediately after the samples were taken from the stirred vessel of the milling circuit. A coaxial cylindrical system (C25) was used for the shear rate controlled experiments at shear rates between 1000 and 0.001 In the first part of the paper the results of the influence of different operating parameters on the grinding result are presented. For this purpose the suspension was stabilized throughout the experiment by means of potential determining ions at pH = 5 ( To investigate the influence of the grinding media size on the grinding result In In Identical results can be reached regardless of the mode of comminution. For specific energy inputs higher than Due to decreasing product particle sizes particle–particle interactions, the viscosity of the product suspensions and problems with the grinding media separation at the end of the comminution experiments increase. Therefore, the solid mass fraction of the product suspensions was reduced from 0.2 down to 0.1. As a result (see To further investigate the influence of the suspension viscosity on the grinding results the solid mass fraction of the suspension was increased and experiments were performed at There is an influence of the used solid mass fraction on the grinding results. With increasing solid mass fraction finer median particle sizes Depending on the solid mass fraction the suspension viscosity increase starts at lower specific energy inputs Therefore the obtained average particle–particle distance of around 41 To investigate the influence of the stirrer tip speed on the comminution result experiments with With increasing specific energy input and decreasing stirrer tip speed a finer product can be achieved at identical specific energies when grinding media with diameters of 800 and The stress number, SN is the total number of stress events and the stress energy, SE is the energy transferred to a product particle during one stress event. From earlier investigations at the Institute of Mechanical Process Engineering at TU Braunschweig—mainly by The stress energy of the grinding media is the maximum energy which can be transferred from two colliding grinding media to the particle being caught by the media. The stress energy of the grinding media is defined as the product of the grinding media diameter to the power of three, the grinding media density and the stirrer tip speed to the power of two as follows: The figure clearly shows that also in the nanometer-range optimal values for the stress energy of the grinding media exist. To find this optimum also for specific energy inputs higher than In the second part of this paper the concept of electrostatic stabilization during the wet grinding process was transferred to the wet grinding of tin oxide (  Having these results established grinding experiments at different suspension stability conditions were conducted by keeping three different pH-values (11, 5.3, 4) constant throughout the experiment. For these experiments Yttrium stabilized The evolution of the median particle size In the following the evolution of the One can clearly see a shift of the isoelectric point (i.e.p.) between the freshly prepared sample (distilled water) and the sample milled at pH=11. The i.e.p shifts from pH=5.0 to 6.2. As the results at two different concentrations of Finally possible mechanochemical changes of The full-width at half-maximum B was determined from the diffraction curves in In summary the above observations show that the concept of electrostatic stabilization is applicable to the wet grinding of alumina as well as to that of tin oxide. In contrast to alumina no mechanochemical changes (e.g. hydroxide formation and dissolution) could be detected for tin oxide thus the measured median particle size The control of increasing particle–particle interactions with decreasing particle size plays a crucial role in wet grinding of nanoparticles in stirred media mills. In this contribution it was shown that besides suspension stability parameters like concentration of potential determining ions the operational milling conditions can influence the grinding behavior of nanoparticles in stirred media mills. It is shown that with appropriate suspension stability and milling conditions, median particle sizes lower than 10 Further grinding experiments show that better grinding results can be achieved at the same specific energy input when higher solid mass fractions are used. However, due to viscosity reasons experiments with higher solid mass fractions had to be stopped earlier leading to larger median particle sizes In the second part of the paper it was shown that the concept of electrostatic stabilization during wet grinding in stirred media mills is also applicable to tin oxide. Stable suspension stability conditions are necessary to produce particles in the nanometer size range. Depending on the adjusted suspension stability conditions during the grinding experiment different final median particle sizes are obtained for tin oxide as well. Best values of around 10 Financial support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and by International Fine Particle Institute is gratefully acknowledged (IFPRI).