The dewatering of iron ore is a high tonnage application in general requiring high energy input. Choosing a ceramic capillary action disc filter can offer decreased specific energy consumption in addition to a fully regenerable filter medium. The aim of this study was to obtain new information on the fouling of the filter medium in an iron ore process to enhance and develop the regeneration process of the medium in the future. X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy were used to characterise the chemical composition and the morphology of the different chemical components, respectively, of the filter media used in the dewatering of magnetite. Two types of media blockages were found to play an important role in an acidic iron ore dewatering process: fouling by slurry particles and by in-situ crystallisation of calcium oxalate, of which the latter originated from the combination of process water and process chemistry. The scale was dissolved with hydrochloric, nitric, and sulphuric acids, and with potassium hydroxide. The best results, i.e. highest quantity of dissolved calcium and increase in permeability of the filter medium, were achieved with 2mol/L nitric acid.Ceramic membranes are commonly associated with crossflow membrane filtration but they have found their purpose in dead-end cake filtration, too. Ceramic capillary action disc filters provide energy efficiency through the use of an air impermeable (p In the dewatering of iron ore the decrease in the filtration capacity is not only due to the particle blockage but also due to the growth of unwanted scales onto the surface of the medium. Complicated chemistry of industrial processes commonly gives rise to unanticipated precipitation of different chemical compounds. Managing the process chemistry of an ore concentrator can be especially challenging due to impurities in the ore itself and in the process water in addition to the actual chemicals used in the upgrading process. The accumulation of alkali and alkaline earth metals, e.g. calcium, in process water cycles has been shown to cause unwanted precipitation and scaling in process equipment. Calcium oxalate scales, amongst other precipitates, have been shown to form e.g. when water cycles are closed in the pulp and paper industry ( As scaling has previously not been observed in pilot scale experiments with magnetite, the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of longer operating periods, i.e. full scale operation, on the blinding of the ceramic filter medium used in the dewatering of a magnetite concentrate. Samples of ceramic filter elements from an operating plant site were investigated by collecting characterisation data with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscope coupled with energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM-EDS). The samples were then washed with different acids to establish their regeneration efficiency towards the identified calcium deposit. Ceramic filter elements were acquired from an industrial partner after being used for three to five years in the dewatering process of a magnetite concentrate. The particle size distribution of the concentrate ( During the operation time of 3–5 The filter media was characterised by using XRD and SEM-EDS. A Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer was used for the XRD analysis to study the chemical composition of the samples, after which a Hitachi S3400 VP-SEM was employed to characterise the particles and scales on the surface of the filter medium. The XRD data were collected from 10 to 90°2θ with a step size of 0.016°2θ. Operating the SEM at a low vacuum with the backscatter detector with an acceleration voltage of 15 The dissolution of the found scale was done in 1 All experiments were conducted at 20 Two types of samples were identified with XRD: (1) samples consisting only of the filter medium and magnetite ( The oxalate is not inherent to the concentration process of magnetite nor does it originate from the filter material. Most likely the unanticipated precipitation is caused when the oxalic acid, used for the regeneration of the filter medium, encounters calcium rich liquid, e.g. low quality process water. Further determination of the morphology and extent of surface coverage of different chemical components was taken on with the SEM. Particle adhesion was found to blind the filter medium to a relatively low extent ( Contrary to the magnetite particles, the calcium scale seemed to cover the whole surface of the samples where it was found ( The water permeability of all scaled samples was essentially zero indicating that the scale had blinded the surface of the samples completely. The dissolution of the scale seemed most successful with HNO The quantity of dissolved calcium demonstrated the effect of different dissolving agents in decomposing the calcium scale, but the differences in process performance between individual samples could only be observed by determining the changes in the water flux through the filter medium after the scale was dissolved. The largest increases in the water flux were observed with 1 Explicit conclusion on whether HNO Potassium hydroxide yielded no significant improvement in the flux and only a few mg/L of calcium were dissolved using the alkali, meaning that higher concentrations of alkali should be used to dissolve the scale. Whereas acids are also more effective in dissolving iron oxides in comparison to alkalis, deciding on an alkali would most likely not produce desired results in the regeneration of the ceramic filter medium used in iron ore dewatering. In addition, high alkali concentrations can result in health, safety, and environmental problems and put strain on equipment material. These risks would also apply with increasing acid concentration, but according to the results here, acids in the range of 0.5–2.0 When considering the total solution volume and the filtration area of the laboratory samples, 150 The samples were qualitative characterised to ensure similarity of the samples, and to eliminate any uncertainties originating from different chemical composition of the samples. However, inherent differences in the initial water flux, resulting from the manufacturing process of the ceramic elements, and in the chemical structure of the filter samples are still the most likely causes for any discrepancies in the data presented here. In addition, varying times in operation and even fluctuations in process conditions could have resulted in differences in the samples and in the nature of the precipitated scale. Despite their similar chemical composition, the thickness of the scale layer most likely varied and could not be estimated based on the characterisation data. The thicker the layer, the longer time is needed to dissolve the layer and observe increase in permeability. Ceramic filter media used in the dewatering of iron ore over operating periods of 3–5 The decline of long-term performance of the ceramic filter medium was found to be a result of particle adhesion and, to a larger extent, of calcium scaling. As this type of scaling has, to the best knowledge of the authors, not been reported earlier for iron ore applications, the information can prove useful in the future to specialist working in minerals processing. The results of the characterisation need not be merely ore specific as the components of the calcium scale could be found in several other ore concentration processes and in other industries, too. As the results of the characterisation suggested that the full scale filter elements are affected by scaling more on the peripheral area than at the centre, measurements of permeability from the corners rather than the centre could give earlier indication of a developing scaling problem. The filter elements have a distinct flow profile where the centre has the highest flow velocities which then decrease towards the corners. Increased flow velocities mean increased mixing and less stagnant layers where local concentration gradients can form and result in precipitation. Other factors can, however, also have contributed to the formation of the scale and estimating the underlying cause for the scaling, based on the data presented here, is difficult. According to these results, the accumulated calcium scale can quite effectively be removed with acids. All the studied acids here performed adequately but HNO Increasing the time for dissolution from 120 to 360 The presence of extraneous alkali and alkaline earth metals combined with process chemistry can cause unwanted precipitation of salts. Thus the management of e.g. process water quality is of high importance, especially if the use of fresh water is to be reduced and water cycles closed. In addition, liberation of metals from the ore itself, due to pH changes and use of chemicals in the concentration, can also increase the risk for unexpected precipitation. With effective control of accumulation of ions in process streams, the high performance of the ceramic filter medium could more easily be maintained and the need for any additional chemical regeneration could be avoided. The study and understanding of long-term scaling in an industrial filtration process can ultimately lead to significant cost improvements, in addition to an increased degree of material efficiency. The Graduate School in Chemical Engineering is kindly acknowledged for their financial support. In addition, the authors wish to thank Mr Julian Tolchard at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology for his assistance with the analytical work.