Background
                  Radial head implant sizing can be based on the maximum head diameter (D-MAX), the minimum head diameter (D-MIN), or the articular dish diameter (D-DISH). The purpose of this study was to assess the reliability of the different radial head sizing techniques and to investigate the effect of radial head fracture comminution on measurement accuracy.
               
                  Methods
                  Ten observers measured 11 cadaveric radial heads with 3 radial head features (D-MAX, D-MIN, and D-DISH diameter). Radial heads were then fractured into 2, 3, and 4 parts, and the measurements were repeated. Variability was assessed by intraclass correlation. The measurements were compared with the intact state to assess the effect of radial head fracture comminution on sizing accuracy.
               
                  Results
                  D-MAX and D-MIN measurements were the most reliable among all observers (intraclass correlation coefficients, 0.980, 0.973). The D-DISH measurement was less reliable (intraclass correlation coefficient, 0.643). Radial head comminution did not significantly affect the reliability of any measurement (P > .2). Fracture comminution, however, significantly affected measurement accuracy with D-MAX and D-DISH. With fracture comminution, D-MAX underestimated radial head diameter (−0.4 ± 0.3 mm; P < .001), whereas D-DISH overestimated diameter (+0.5 ± 0.4 mm; P < .001). Comminution did not significantly affect D-MIN (−0.1 ± 0.3 mm; P = .13).
               
                  Discussion
                  The D-MAX and D-MIN measurements were more reliable than D-DISH for diameter sizing of intact and comminuted radial heads. Overall, increasing comminution did not significantly affect measurement reliability. However, the accuracy of the D-MIN technique was least affected by comminution, suggesting that D-MIN should be used in selecting the diameter of a radial head implant.Radial head fractures account for 2% to 5% of all fractures in the adult population. They are the most common fracture of the elbow, accounting for approximately 33% of all elbow injuries. Implant size is commonly determined by measuring the reassembled radial head fracture fragments. Radial head implant sizing can be based on a variety of radial head features: the maximum radial head outer diameter (D-MAX), the minimum radial head outer diameter (D-MIN), and the diameter of the articular dish (D-DISH) ( The purposes of this basic science study were (1) to determine the reliability of measuring D-MAX, D-MIN, and D-DISH of the native radial head; (2) to determine if fracture comminution affected the reliability of these measurements; and (3) to investigate the effect of fracture comminution on radial head measurement accuracy. We hypothesized that use of D-MAX, D-MIN, and D-DISH would be equally reliable in measuring both the native and comminuted radial heads, whereas progressively increasing fracture comminution would decrease measurement accuracy. Eleven intact cadaveric radial heads, from 5 male and 6 female donors (mean age, 85 ± 7 years), were thawed and denuded of all soft tissues. Ten observers—3 upper extremity orthopedic surgeons (G.S.A., K.J.F., and G.J.W.K.), 4 upper extremity clinical fellows, and 3 senior orthopedic surgical residents—were asked to measure the intact radial heads with digital vernier calipers (Digimatic CD-6; Mitutoyo, Tokyo, Japan). Each observer was asked to measure each radial head by 3 different techniques: the maximum outer diameter (D-MAX), the minimum outer diameter (D-MIN), and the radial dish diameter (D-DISH) as described in The measurements of the fractured radial heads were then compared with the value obtained for each respective intact state to calculate the difference in measurement as fracture comminution increased. Interobserver reliability was calculated by the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). A 3-way (measurement type, number of fractures, observer) repeated-measures analysis of variance was performed for all the measured radial head diameters. Pairwise comparisons and analyses of interaction effects were performed for significant effects ( The average radial head measurements at each fracture state by different measurement techniques can be seen in On examination of the effect of increasing radial head fracture comminution on measurement accuracy compared with the native unfractured radial head, the D-MAX measurement underestimated the radial head diameter compared with the native state for all fracture states (−0.4 ± 0.3 mm; One of the most important considerations in radial head arthroplasty is the surgeon's ability to choose an appropriately sized implant. The failure to select an implant that best approximates the native radial head dimensions leads to an alteration in joint architecture and mechanics, which may lead to poor clinical and radiologic outcomes. When sizing the radial head, we found that the D-MAX and D-MIN diameter measurements had excellent reliability. We found them to be more reliable than the D-DISH measurement technique. The reliability of D-DISH measurements, although less reliable than the D-MAX and D-MIN measurements, was still found to be strong. This is likely due to the fact that both the maximum and minimum radial head diameters present physical landmarks on which to place the jaws of the vernier calipers, whereas the dish diameter requires the user to visually assess (1) where the dish starts at each diametric edge and (2) if the calipers are indeed on this edge. Both of these factors add to the variability of this technique as each observer may identify these differently. Furthermore, because the radial head is not a perfect circle, the surgeon is able to physically rotate the radial head to help identify the largest and smallest diameter, making it easier to identify D-MIN and D-MAX. When radial head fracture comminution was introduced, the reliability of the 3 measurement techniques investigated in our study (D-MAX, D-MIN, D-DISH) was not significantly affected. These findings demonstrate that the variability between observers is greater than the variability introduced by the fractured state of the radial head. This effect was unchanged for the different observer subgroups. We had originally postulated that increasing radial head comminution would decrease measurement accuracy. Whereas this was the case for the D-MAX and D-DISH measurement techniques, we were surprised by the direction of the measurement bias. The D-MAX measurement technique undersized its measurements, whereas D-DISH oversized its measurements. When comminuted radial head fractures were measured by the D-MIN technique, there were no significant differences in the sizes compared with the intact state. The differences in measurement bias for the D-MAX and D-DISH measurement techniques are somewhat confounding. It is reasonable to expect that both measurements would be offset in the same relative direction. Undersized diameter measurements would be expected if the error was introduced by the comminution and ejection of bone fragments from the fracture plane, reducing the overall diameter when the fracture fragments were reduced. Although undersizing was observed for the maximum radial head diameter measurement (D-MAX), the measurement based on radial dish diameter (D-DISH) was found to increase. Oversizing could be a result of fracture fragments remaining attached to the fracture plane or deformation of the fracture plane such that when the pieces are reduced, they do not fit as tightly as in the intact state. This study demonstrates that compared with the dish diameter of the radial head (D-DISH), maximum and minimum radial head diameters (D-MAX and D-MIN) offer a more reliable measurement in assessing intraoperative sizing of the radial head. This was found to be true not only when the native radial head was measured but also when radial heads were comminuted and then remeasured after reduction. Furthermore, because increasing the degree of comminution did not significantly alter the accuracy of the measurements when D-MIN was used, surgeons can be confident that the radial heads are sized appropriately when D-MIN is used for measurements intraoperatively. Radial head sizing is an important aspect of radial head arthroplasty. In this study, using D-MAX to measure a comminuted radial head is on average 0.5 mm less than the measurement of the intact radial head, whereas using D-DISH is on average 0.5 mm greater than the measurement of the native head. Although these overestimations and underestimations of size are relatively small compared with the standard 2-mm sizing increments of many commercially available radial head implants, it is important for surgeons to be aware of the bias in the measurement technique used (D-MAX vs. D-MIN vs. D-DISH), particularly if they find their measurement to be between 2 implant sizes. A 0.5-mm bias could mean the difference between sizing up and sizing down, a decision that, made incorrectly, could possibly have clinical implications for the patient. The results of this study demonstrate that D-MAX and D-MIN measurement techniques are more reliable than the D-DISH technique in sizing comminuted radial head fractures. The accuracy of the D-MIN technique was least affected by radial head fracture comminution; the D-MAX technique on average underpredicted radial head diameter, whereas the D-DISH technique overpredicted diameter compared with the intact state. In the presence of comminuted radial head fractures, the D-MIN measurement technique should be considered to assist in sizing a radial head implant diameter as it is the most reliable and accurate of the measurement techniques commonly used. Graham J.W. King is a consultant for Wright Medical Technologies and receives royalties for implant development related to the subject of this article. Wright Medical Technologies had no input into this research project in any manner. All the other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.