Particle stabilised thin films are key to the froth behaviour in flotation systems and affect the performance of the whole process. However, the interaction between the particles in the film is difficult to observe experimentally due to the highly dynamic nature of the system. Particle shape, hydrophobicity and packing arrangements all distort the shape of the liquid vapour interface of the film. This in turn affects the forces acting on the particles. It is possible to simulate this film shape using the Surface Evolver (Brakke, 1992) program, which can be used to calculate the forces acting on the particles and model their behaviour in the film. This approach has been used to investigate the behaviour of cubic particles in a film and their propensity to adopt different stable orientations depending on their contact angle and shape.Particle stabilised films arise in a range of processes including the treatment of waste water, the concentration of low grade ores and the de-inking of recycled paper. However, this research is primarily concerned with the particle stabilised films that are found in froth flotation. Froth flotation has been used by the mining industry for over 100 A slurry of the ore containing the desired mineral is pumped into a tank and air is bubbled in at the bottom. As the bubbles rise, the valuable mineral particles attach to their surface and are carried to the top of the slurry, where a mineralised froth forms. The froth then overflows in the form of un-burst bubbles, carrying the concentrated ore away for further processing, some air is also lost through burst bubbles at the top surface of the froth. The shape, positions, packing density and surface properties of the particles all play a role in the film stability but due to the dynamic and unstable nature of the froth it is difficult to examine these effects experimentally. It is therefore necessary to conduct lab scale experiments and to develop models of the particle stabilised films to gain better insight into some of the fundamental aspects of this complicated system. A series of experiments conducted by Experimental investigation of film and foam stability on a larger scale has shown that there is sharp drop in foam stability when it contains particles with a contact angle above of 90° ( 2D analytical studies of circular particles in a thin film have shown that the lower the contact angle and closer the particles the higher capillary pressure required to rupture the film ( Flotation froths do not contain spherical particles and whilst it is useful to use this approximation to gain insight into the system, the ability to simulate non-spherical particles is desirable. Simulations of individual, non-spherical particles at interfaces have allowed more fundamental investigation of their effects on film stability. It is useful to simulate singular non-spherical particles at interfaces and this has been done previously using the The superquadric modelling method introduced in The approach used in this manuscript allows the quasi dynamic modelling of an orthorhombic particle at an interface. By using The construction of a A cubic particle is placed in a thin film, bridging both sides. The film radius is five time the radius of the particle as shown in Surface tension is defined in the model using Young’s equation (Eq. All length, pressure and force parameters are non-dimensionalised by The particle surface is represented using the superquadric equation (Eq. Particle orientation is enabled by multiplying the superquadric equation with rotational matrices about the  The change in energy landscape with contact angle can be discerned easily when the surface energy of the model is plotted as a function of Local energy minima correspond to stable orientations, the locations of which depend on not only contact angle but shape as well. Here only a cubic particle is used, which has two stable orientations ( The moments acting on the particle are calculated using the direction of the film surface at the three point contact (TPC) where the film meets the particle surface. The particle is rotated to the desired orientation in the film which is then evolved using The total moment acting on the particle in the The moment acting on a particle due to pressure in the liquid and vapour phases is calculated as the sum of all the individual moments acting on each of the particle facets (Eq. Once the total moment about the The orientation of the particles and shape of the film is saved at regular time steps denoted by The described model was run for cubic particles with a user prescribed contact angle in a thin liquid film of radius 5 The energy surface for the particle at In all cases when The total surface energy decreases to the same value and when the orientations in terms of  The same initial orientations were used for a particle with a contact angle of 70°. Here, when the particle starts in a flat orientation it stays there and when it starts in a rotated orientation it stays there. However when in a diagonal orientation it would be expected to move to a rotated orientation, but after 120 time steps both the surface energy and rotation angles remain roughly constant ( However only a small perturbation acting on the diagonal particle should move it out of the energy minimum causing it to rotate away from the diagonal orientation to one of the other more energetically stable ones. Similarly, a perturbation, applied to the rotated particle will temporarily upset it, but it will still return to its original orientation.  For all contact angles above 80° a cubic particle is only energetically stable in the rotated orientation ( The change in This modelling approach has been shown to reproduce the results obtained from energy surfaces used to identify energetically stable orientations in G. Morris gratefully acknowledges Rio Tinto and the EPSRC for their support in this project.