In order to attract investors or entrepreneurs to invest in the solid minerals sector of Nigeria in line with the current federal government requirements, this paper used the discounted cash flow micro-economic assessment to evaluate the large-scale dimension stone production from marble in Nigeria. The project has an initial investment (or first) cost of US$2,304,564.74, annual expenditure and benefit of US$1,856,493.18 and US$4,900,000, respectively. The net present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), benefit–cost ratio (B/C) and payback period of financial analysis at 100% capacity utilizations are US$9,489,714.73, 137.32, 2.68 and 2.0 years, respectively. The economic study also shows positive NPV at both 60 and 75% capacity utilizations. This indicates that the dimension stone project in Nigeria has good economic potential.Organized mining in Nigeria began to crystallize between 1902 and 1923 following the commissioning in 1903 of mineral surveys of the southern and northern protectorates. Organized mining activities were initiated by the Royal Niger Company in 1905. The Ministry of Solid Minerals Development was created in 1995 with a mission to formulate policies and action that would ensure an orderly development of the solid mineral resources through private sector participation ( Marble is a metamorphic rock and its occurrence has been established at Jakura, Ajaokuta, Igbo in Kogi State and Igbeti in Oyo State ( The purpose of engineering economic studies is to establish whether a technically feasible project is also economically viable ( This paper assessed a large-scale production plant for the production of dimension stone from marble in Nigeria. Facilities for the project were identified and their cost estimates were obtained from equipment fabricators and suppliers. The operating costs (equipment running, field consumables, maintenance, repairs, labour costs, office overheads and other administrative charges) were estimated and categorized as production and overhead costs. The equipment running cost is made up of energy, lubrication, water and transport expenses. The gradient series model was used to estimate the annual operating cost over the economic life-cycle ( The cut-off discount rate (or MARR), Royalties payable (at 7.5% of the output), surface rent (at 200.00 Naira/acre to the state government), and mineral rent (at 200.00 Naira/acre to the federal government) applicable in the solid mineral sector of Nigeria as of 1999 were used to estimate the cost of the raw material, marble, for the project at 100% capacity utilization. The number of employees required for the enterprise at various capacity utilizations were evaluated and their wages estimated on the basis of experience, qualifications and situations at the Nigerian labour market. All estimates were made in local currency (Naira) and then converted to US dollars (US$) because of the instability of the Naira. Evaluation criteria were based on 100 Naira=1 US$. The output expected from the plant is the sales of dimension stone. This and the salvage value at the end of the project life cycle, which was put at 10 years, will generate revenue for the enterprise. The financial estimate of output was based on the prevailing market price. The discounted cash flow micro-economic analysis was used in this paper. The financial analysis was used to analyse and calculate the benefit and cost of the project, and inspect its ability to make a profit from the perspective of the entrepreneur/investor in order to assess its economic viability. The main evaluation criteria used in this paper are as follows. This model was used to determine the profitability of the dimension stone project before tax, after If NPV is positive, then the project can be accepted ( The IRR method solves for the interest rate that equates the equivalent of cash inflows to the equivalent worth of cash outflows ( The IRR criterion reflects the profitability of the project ( This model is defined as the ratio of the equivalent worth of benefits to equivalent worth of costs ( This concept determines the period of time, starting from the first day of the investment period, required to fully recover the investment and operation cost ( Payback as a decision tool is used to measure how risky a project is (  The production technique entails the separation of a large monolith from the massif and the subsequent dressing of the monolith for commercial purposes. Primary drilling and cutting activities are carried out after the pre-drilling operation. Cutting of marble makes use of a diamond wire sawing machine which creates a free face for proper displacement of the bench during blasting. The depth and length of the cut depends on the bench height. The cutting and drilling activities take place simultaneously. The diameter of the drill holes varies from 3 to 27 ft at a burden and spacing of 15×15 cm The project is estimated to have a production capacity of 48 h/week, with an optimal production capacity of 14,000 m The initial investment (or first) cost, US$2,304,564.74, is made up of pre-production expenses, which include site allocation (including mining lease) and prospecting activities and capital investment cost including installation expenses ( The dimension stone project will require 16 skilled workers (one production manager, seven technicians and eight operators) and 80 unskilled labourers. Their wages in the first year will amount to US$26,785.75, while overhead costs were estimated at US$253,333.33 at 100% capacity utilization in the first year ( The profitability analysis as seen from The project IRR is 137.32%, which is greater than the present cut-off discount rate (or MARR) of 22.7%. This shows that the project is worthy of investment and has a good ability to make a profit. The benefit to cost ratio of 2.68 shows that the investment opportunity is a worthwhile investment as it has excess revenue over expenses. The dynamic payback period after gross earnings tax is only 2.0 years, which shows that the project has a good feature of not being a risk as first and operating costs of the project can be recovered under a short duration of 2.0 years when compared with the economic life cycle of the project of 10 years. The economic indicators in The sensitivity of the dimension stone project in Nigeria was tested in relation to its effect on profitability. Two factors affecting the IRR were chosen to carry out the sensitivity analysis at 100% capacity utilization with the NPV model ( From the results of this micro-economic analysis, investment in this large-scale dimension stone project in Nigeria becomes infeasible in finance terms if IRR The This study has confirmed that the production of dimension stones from marble deposits in Nigeria is economically viable. With the advent of a non-renewable period of a 5-year tax holiday on corporate income in Nigeria, the micro-economic profitability of the project is expected to increase, making investment in the enterprise more worthwhile to investors or entrepreneurs.