Eco-materials are materials which can minimize environmental impacts, can be manufactured from recycled materials, or are beneficial for human wellbeing. This paper will illustrate these three aspects on mineral-based eco-materials through research that has been developed in our ceramic institute: preparation of dense tapes of cementitious materials at room temperature by tape casting, valorization of dam sediments as raw materials for synthesis of Portland clinker, monitoring the microstructure of plaster boards for improving the acoustical insulation in houses.If one looks for ‘eco-materials’, the Mostar Bridge in Central Europe is a superb example. In order to replace a wooden bridge, Suleiman the Magnificent in the 16 In the late 90′s and at the beginning of the 21st century, eco-materials were defined as materials that could enhance environmental improvement through the whole life cycle, while maintaining accountable performances [ For those who are not familiar with cementitious materials, The idea of our research was to see whether it was possible to make a dense aluminous cementitious material that could have some properties of ‘classical’ alumina but without a firing step. We prepared a slurry that could be used in tape casting or surface coating. The first requirement was to make a well dispersed suspension. The next step was to examine the setting time when increasing quantities of acetic acid were added in the water ( The second set of data concerns the density and the open porous volume as a function of acetic acid content after 4 days or 6 months ageing ( Tape casting was used to prepare calcium aluminate cement tapes and the steps are described in This first example on a cementitious material shows it is possible to obtain at room temperature a fairly dense material which can find applications for making substrates or coating surfaces. This second example will illustrate how dam sediments, instead of being disposed waste, could be valorized in the cement industry. Hydroelectric power generation represents 71% of renewable electricity all around the world [ Due to watershed erosion, solid particles are transported by the watercourse. The biggest particles can deposit in the highest part of the reservoir while the finest particles (silts and clays) are transported in suspension and can accumulate with time. These accumulation of fine particles can have several potential impacts: for the operator, a reduction of the reservoir capacity and on the recreational activities. To avoid these impacts, it is necessary to have an adequate and sustainable management of these sediments. Apart from the downstream transfer of the sediments, which is usually managed by the dam operator, there is an incentive to find alternative solutions because these sediments have to be considered as waste when they get extracted from a reservoir and are on-land-managed. Among the possible uses, a specific route we explored in a circular economy approach was the use of these sediments in the cement industry either as alternative materials for the manufacture of clinker (which is the raw material for cement production) or as pozzolanic addition to ordinary Portland cement. Using waste material in Portland cement clinker production is a relevant eco-friendly solution: it limits the mineral extraction in quarries (clays and marls mainly) and, at the same time, it alleviates the tonnages of landfilled waste [ In this respect, we studied sediments extracted from dams operated by Electricité de France (EDF). They contain different minerals, typically quartz, carbonates, clay minerals and feldspars ( Therefore, we mixed the sediments with limestone in order to synthesize a clinker at 1450 °C, which is the typical temperature for Portland clinker manufacture [ The average percentages of each of these phases – determined by a Rietveld analysis - for a suitable Portland clinker should be 60–65 wt%, 20–25 wt%, 8–12 wt% and 8–10 wt% for C This second example of eco-materials shows that the valorization of mineral waste is technically feasible and avoid the exploitation of new quarries. Nevertheless, for a large scale implementation, the sediment source should not be far from a cement industrial kiln since transport in this industry should be minimal. According to a survey, a fair number of persons are bothered by noise in their housing [ The second parameter is the critical frequency. For a specific frequency of noise called the critical frequency (f In this respect, we prepared gypsum specimens with additive to modify the microstructure. The gypsum boards (thickness: 14 to 18 mm, width: 60 mm and length: 610 mm) were prepared from a mixture of calcium sulfate hemihydrate (CaSO The effect of citric acid is remarkable since it shifts the critical frequency towards high values, further away from the human ear sensitive range. The microstructures are also different: gypsum with no additive presents the usual needle like crystals, while citric acid leads to platelets like crystals. Citric acid molecules present interatomic distances between the oxygen atoms of 4 Å, which is the interatomic distance between calcium in (120) and The consequence on the shift of the critical frequency can be explained as follows: the critical frequency, f To conclude on this example, it shows that monitoring the microstructure enables to obtain gypsum boards with improved acoustic insulation capabilities. These three examples show prove that the concept of ‘eco-materials’ offers interesting technical solutions to manufacture products. The example of calcium aluminate cement tape shows it is possible to obtain at room temperature a material close to sintered alumina tapes. Dam wastes, whose composition is close to clay minerals, could be valorized as raw materials in the cement industry, thus lowering the carbon footprint of cement manufacture. The third example shows that the presence of an additive modifies the microstructure of gypsum crystals and gives a material with improved acoustical insulation compared to gypsum with no addition. These three examples illustrate that these materials could fulfill some needs, like energy savings, waste management, and comfort in housing. Nevertheless, to go further into their wide implementation, there is a necessity to go beyond these scientific solutions and to build network between different actors: academic laboratories, industries, governmental agencies and above all the citizens who will be the consumers of these products [ The authors would like to thank all the contributors to these three topics. They are cited in the corresponding references.