Bisphosphonates constitute a class of drugs that act primarily act by inhibition of bone resorption. These agents are widely used in the treatment calcium and bone metabolic disorders including osteoporosis, Paget's disease, hypercalcemia, and metastatic bone disease. This article will provide an overview of the pharmacology of these compounds.Bisphosphonates constitute a class of drugs that act primarily act by inhibition of bone resorption. These agents are widely used in the treatment calcium and metabolic bone disorders including osteoporosis, Paget's disease, hypercalcemia, and metastatic bone disease. This article will provide an overview of the pharmacology of these compounds. Bisphosphonates are chemically stable analogs of inorganic pyrophosphates. Like pyrophosphates bisphosphonates have two phosphate moieties, but the phosphates share bonds with a central carbon atom rather than an oxygen atom. All bisphosphonates have this P-C-P structure: but have distinct “R” groups attached to the carbon atom ( First synthesized in the 1800s, bisphosphonates were initially used in industry mainly as antiscaling agents and corrosion inhibitors ( Owing to the P-C-P structure and capability to chelate calcium ion, bisphosphonates rapidly attach to hydroxyapatite binding sites in the bone. The two phosphonate groups mediate the targeting of this molecule to bone as well as play an essential role in molecular mechanism of action. The R groups also have an important role in binding of bisphosphonates to bony surfaces. R1 is always a hydroxyl group in the prescribed bisphosphonates. The hydroxyl acts as a triple binding hook to calcium in hydroxyapatite, thus enhancing binding to bone ( The intracellular effects of simple bisphosphonates are distinct from those of nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates. Simple bisphosphonates, such as clodronate and etidronate, are metabolized by osteoclasts to metabolites that exchange with the terminal pyrophosphate moiety of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). With this exchange, ATP becomes resistant to hydrolytic breakdown and release of phosphate rendering it ineffective as a source of energy for the osteoclast. The accumulation of this nonhydrolysable ATP moieties appears to impair a range of intracellular metabolic enzymes which can both hinder cell function and promote apoptosis ( Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates, unlike simple bisphosphonates, are not incorporated into ATP. They instead act primarily by inhibiting the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway in osteoclasts ( Of interest is the fact that HMG CoA-reductase inhibitors, also known as statins, also disrupt the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway. By targeting HMG CoA reductase, statins lead to reduction in mevalonate. The net effect is, decreased protein farnesylation as well as reduction in cholesterol, similar to bisphosphonate targeting of FPP. Thus it is possible that statins would have an antiresorptive effect and potential benefit in treating osteoporosis. Statins can inhibit osteoclast formation and bone resorption ( The bisphosphonates can have important actions in bone outside of their effect on osteoclasts. Bisphosphonates, as calcium-chelating agents, have potential to promote demineralization of bone and this would be expected to negatively impact bone strength ( Preclinical studies demonstrate bisphosphonates also exert antiapoptotic effects in both osteoblast and osteoclasts. These effects appear to be mediated via connexin Cx43 hemichannels. It also appears these effects occur independently of bisphosphonate action in osteoclasts ( Current formulations of bisphosphonates are administered orally or intravenously. Bisphosphonates given orally are absorbed throughout the gastrointestinal tract. At physiologic pH in the intestine, these compounds are completely ionized and hence are very poorly lipophilic ( Attempts to improve the bioavailability have thus far been unsuccessful. It should also be noted that most oral bisphosphonates are available in generic formulations which may have different bioavailability ( Once absorbed into circulation, bisphosphonates are cleared relatively quickly from the plasma with a half-life estimated at approximately 1 Labeling studies have shown that bisphosphonate binding is not evenly distributed in the skeleton ( Elimination of bisphosphonates occurs primarily in the kidney through glomerular filtration. A very small amount is excreted in bile ( Another consideration in patients with chronic kidney disease, particularly those with end stage renal disease, is the risk of adynamic bone disease. Adynamic bone disease in an incompletely understood state of diminished bone turnover associated with chronic kidney disease. It is characterized by low bone specific alkaline phosphatase and relatively low parathyroid hormone levels ( The elimination of bisphosphonate from the skeleton is very slow as they can only be released from bone with subsequent resorption. Bisphosphonates can in fact remain in bone for up to several years ( The pharmacodynamics of bisphosphonates with regard to their antiresorptive active plays a key role in development of therapeutic regimens. Bisphosphonates are first screened for antiresorptive potency using the Schenk test. In this test bisphosphonate is given to growing rats which leads to remodeling of the metaphysis and results in a club shaped appearance and increased radiographic density ( While such studies suggest a correlation between suppression of bone turnover markers and improvement in BMD, there remain significant limitations to their interpretation. Collagen breakdown products are not released uniformly through the skeleton and thus may not capture differences in antiresorption between cortical and trabecular bone ( Although bisphosphonates are generally well-tolerated, they are known to cause certain symptoms, while the association of bisphosphonates with other symptoms is less clear. Certain symptoms such as GI upset ( Oral bisphosphonates have long been known to have the potential to cause GI upset ( Bisphosphonates also have been known to cause an APR, especially when intravenously given. These reactions can include fever, diffuse arthralgias, myalgias, and transient lymphopenia ( It is possible that the uveitis reported after bisphosphonate use may be a variant of the APR response mentioned above, although much less common. Uveitis had not been reported to be more common on IV zoledronic acid or ibandronate compared with placebo in the original randomized studies ( While oral bisphosphonates are not known to be nephrotoxic, high doses of IV bisphosphonates have been thought to have the potential to damage the kidney based on animal studies, and on human studies where bisphosphonates were rapidly infused ( The first reports of patients with delayed healing of the jaw with persistently exposed bone (osteonecrosis of the jaw, or ONJ) ( Soon after the description of ONJ, series of cases reported a paradoxical increase in certain fractures after prolonged bisphosphonate use ( The large Phase 3 trial of zoledronic acid for osteoporosis showed an unexpected slightly higher risk of serious atrial fibrillation with drug (1.3%) compared with placebo (0.5%) ( In 2009, a representative of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) sent a letter to the Full discussion of clinical utility and efficacy of bisphosphonates is covered separately. But we will here provide a brief overview of the clinical utility of these agents.   Many types of cancer are osteotropic and can metastasize to the bone. In addition, multiple myeloma grows primarily within the bone. The involvement of bone is a substantial cause of morbidity manifesting as hypercalcemia, severe bone pain, bony destruction, and fractures, and bisphosphonates are a mainstay of therapy in both multiple myeloma as well as solid tumors with bony metastases ( In vitro studies have demonstrated bisphosphonates act by a variety of mechanisms to counteract bony metastases. These mechanisms including impeding tumor cell adhesion and invasion of bone as well as hindering proliferation and promoting apoptosis of tumor cells ( It should be noted that oncologic dosing of bisphosphonates is generally several fold higher than dosing for other indications such as osteoporosis and Paget's disease. This is in part as the antiresorptive effects wear off much more quickly in the presence of oncologic disease, particularly in the setting of hypercalcemia of malignancy ( Intravenous bisphosphonates are used in treatment of acute and subacute hypercalcemia. Bisphosphonates, by impairing osteoclast activity, impede release of calcium cations from the bone to the circulation ( Bisphosphonates have become the mainstay of clinical antiresorptive therapy. Despite very limited absorption from the GI tract, when given according to precautions they are effective for osteoporosis and Paget's disease, and have a favorable side effect profile. For patients intolerant of the oral preparations, the intravenous preparation is highly effective. For patients requiring more intensive suppression of bone resorption, such as those with bony metastases, high doses of intravenous preparations are well tolerated in the short run, but may interfere with bony healing in the long-term. The strong affinity of bisphosphonates for bone underlies its efficacy as a specific therapy for bone. This property also allows for administration as infrequent as yearly, and enables cessation after completing a course of treatment (drug holiday), with persistent drug effects. Details about the indication, optimal use, duration, and follow-up of treatment with bisphosphonates will be covered in an article on the clinical uses of bisphosphonates.