This study presents data regarding the synthesis of binding materials through the alkaline activation of waste glass (bottle glass cullet) with NaOH solution. As addition was used red mud, a residue resulted in bauxite processing, due to its high alkalinity and aluminum content. This paper presents the influence of processing parameters (composition of solid component, curing time and temperature) on the compressive strength and hydrolytic stability of this type of alkali activated cements. The effect of red mud addition on the hardening processes, reaction products and material's microstructure was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and thermal analysis (TG & DTA). The main reaction products are sodium silicate or/and sodium silicate aluminates hydrates with amorphous to crystalline morphologies. The amount of reaction products increases with the increase of the initial curing time at 60°C and consequently it was achieved an increase of the compressive strength values. As a negative side effect the hydrolytic stability of these materials is affected by the increase of the initial curing time at 60°C. Despite the fact that addition of aluminum to sodium silicate hydrates improve their hydrolytic stability, the expected positive influence of red mud addition to the studied binding systems was not observed. This can be due to the low amount of supplementary aluminum brought in the activator solution by the red mud as well as the high amount of iron phases present also in this waste.Inorganic polymers also known as geopolymers or alkali activated cements are environmentally friendly materials that can be produced starting from a wide range of industrial wastes (  Red mud is a waste generated in Bayer process during the treatment of bauxite with caustic soda for alumina extraction ( No information was found regarding the influence of red mud on the hardening processes and reaction products formed in binding systems based on cullet glass waste. For this reason the second objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of red mud addition on the hardening processes, reaction products, microstructure and main properties (mechanical strength and hydrolytic stability) of glass cullet-based alkali activated cements. Waste glass (cullet) from a glass bottles production plant was used as solid component for alkali activated cements synthesis. Glass cullet was milled in a ball mill for 10 Red mud sludge received from alumina plant was dewatered by filtration and dried. The dried red mud (R) was disaggregated in a ball mill for 5 For the preparation of alkali activated binders the following solid components were used: green glass powder (G), with Si to Al ratio of 22.12; mixtures of glass powder and red mud; two substitution levels of green glass powder with red mud were used — 10% (GR10) corresponding to Si/Al ratio of 9.65 and 25% (GR25) corresponding to Si/Al ratio of 4.65. The activator solution was NaOH 5 With the formulations based on the above presented solid components, two types of specimens were prepared: pastes with liquid to solid ratio of 0.3; mortars with binder to sand ratio of 0.5 and different values of liquid to solid (G or G The aggregate was siliceous sand and fulfilled the requirements of European and corresponding Romanian norm ( For mortar specimens preparation the solid component (glass powder or mixtures of glass powder and red mud) was mixed with sand and alkali activator solution; the resulting material was cast in rectangular molds (15 Chemical composition of soda lime silicate glass was assessed using the analytical procedures stipulated in The elemental composition of red mud was assessed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (S8 Tiger Bruker). The mineralogical compositions of red mud and alkali activated binders were assessed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using a Shimadzu XRD 6000 diffractometer. The XRD patterns were obtained using a monochromatic CuKα radiation (λ The particle size distribution of the glass powder and red mud were assessed with a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser particle size analyzer. SEM analyses were performed on selected mortar specimens coated with Ag, using a Hitachi S2600N microscope. Compressive strength was assessed, using a Tonitech machine, on mortar specimens (15 The durability of studied compositions was assessed by the immersion of mortar specimens, cured in different conditions, in demineralized water (water to solid ratio of 1.3) ( Mass variation of mortar specimen immersed in water was calculated with the Formula Compressive strength (Cs) variation of mortar specimens after 28 Mass variation and compressive strength values are the average values of at least three individual values assessed on specimens cured in similar conditions. The thermal analysis were performed with a Shimadzu DTA-TG-50H instrument. The analyses were conducted in air in the temperature range: 20–400°C with a heating rate of 10°C/min. The components of waste glass, assessed by chemical and analytical procedures stipulated in The density of R powder determined by pycnometric method was 1.69 The main mineralogical compounds, assessed by X-ray diffraction of red mud (  The SEM micrographs of green glass powder presented in The data presented in The lower values of compressive strength recorded for the composition with red mud (GR25) as compared with the one based only on glass (G) could be due to the substitution of reactive glass with red mud, which contains less reactive crystalline compounds. Also, the geopolymerization process, which determines this material hardening, could be hindered by the high amount of iron compounds supplied by the red mud; according to The decrease of the red mud amount from 25% to 10% does not have a major influence on the compressive strength values recorded up to 28  For the specimens based on glass powder (G), cured the first 3 For the composition with 25% red mud (GR25), cured for 3 In order to identify the influence of red mud addition and curing conditions on the reaction products formed by alkaline activation of green glass with/without red mud, XRD and thermal analysis were performed on pastes. The XRD patterns presented in XRD patterns of the material resulted by the alkaline activation of glass powder and red mud mixture ( DTA curves presented in As it can be seen ( The DTA curve of red mud ( For glass powder activated with NaOH 5 For the composition based on glass powder and red mud ( The hydrolytic stability of alkali activated materials based on glass powder with/without red mud (25%) was appreciated by mass and compressive strength changes of mortar specimens immersed in demineralized water, for different periods of time. As it can be seen from These data are confirmed also by the values of electrical conductivity of the immersion solutions (leachants) — The pH of the immersion solutions has high values for all studied compositions ( Strength losses of 30–45% (with respect to the compressive strength of mortar specimens with similar composition cured in air at 20°C for the same time) are recorded for all studied compositions ( The presence of red mud in GR25 formulation do not exerts the expected improvement of the hydrolytic stability. This can be explained by the low amount of supplementary aluminum brought in the activator solution — after 24  Soda–lime siliceous waste glass or mixtures of waste glass and red mud can produce binding materials by alkaline activation with NaOH solution and thermal treatment at 60°C. For the alkali activated materials based on waste glass, compressive strengths of about 15 The lower values of compressive strength recorded for the composition with red mud after 7 The main reaction products are sodium silicate hydrates or/and sodium silicate aluminate hydrates with amorphous to crystalline morphologies. The amount of reaction products increases with the increase of the initial curing time at 60°C. Hydrolytic stability of materials based on waste glass decreases with the increase of the initial curing time at 60°C, due to the formation of soluble sodium silicate (aluminate) hydrates in a higher amount. The addition of red mud to alkali activated cements based on glass cullet, did not produced the expected improvement of hydrolytic stability; this can be due to the low amount of supplementary aluminum brought in the activator solution by the red mud used in this study. Optimization of these formulations is still needed. Taha H. Abood Al-Saadi gratefully acknowledges the financial support of