This paper derives alternative analytical expressions for classifier product distributions in terms of Gauss hypergeometric function, 2
                     F
                     1, by considering feed distribution defined in terms of Gates–Gaudin–Schumann function and efficiency curve defined in terms of a logistic function. It is shown that classifier distributions under dispersed conditions of classification pivot at a common size and the distributions are difference similar. The paper also addresses an inverse problem of classifier distributions wherein the feed distribution and efficiency curve are identified from the measured product distributions without needing to know the solid flow split of particles to any of the product streams.passing particle size (μm) feed maximum size also called size modulus of GGS function (μm) cut size of efficiency curve (μm) pivot size of the classifier distributions (μm) actual efficiency curve in terms of particle size corrected efficiency curve in terms of particle size feed distribution in density form feed stream size distribution expressed in cumulative percent passing form sharpness index in Eq. distribution modulus of GGS function fine stream size distribution expressed in cumulative percent passing form sharpness index in Eq. by-pass fraction solid flow split fraction to coarse stream coarse stream size distribution expressed in cumulative percent passing form variance of a variable or a parameter that are indicated in the subscript Classification of particles in mechanical and centrifugal classifiers is an important unit operation practiced in mining and mineral processing, chemical, ceramic, food and oil industries ( The performance of classifiers is measured in terms of the efficiency curve, which represents the fraction of particles recovered to the coarse stream from the feed for specified size or discrete size class of particles. Efficiency curve is represented generally by a smooth sigmoid function and is a significant measure from the process standpoint as it decides the effectiveness of classification. Any change in the separation efficiency curve influences the downstream operation and product quality. The mathematical representation of efficiency curve as a function of particle size involves three parameters, namely, sharpness index, by-pass fraction and cut size. The consistency of classifier performance becomes more critical especially in situations where one of the classifier product streams is re-circulated back into the process like in grinding–classification circuits, as circulating load and subsequent performance of the circuit significantly depend on classifier performance ( The classifier operation is influenced by operating and design variables such as flow rate of the feed stream, slurry viscosity, slurry density, physical dimensions of the unit, etc. These effects are incorporated in the mathematical model through empirical relations by considering their effects on efficiency curve parameters, namely, sharpness index, by-pass fraction and cut size. To this end a number of empirical relations have been established in the literature ( For a steady state classifier with unit solid feed flow rate, the mass balance of solid particles over its input and output stream particle distributions can be written as In normal practice, the size distributions are measured in terms of discrete size classes, obtained by sieving the representative samples of the three streams of the classifier. Therefore Eq. Eq. A plot of partition coefficients as a function of representative particle size gives a sigmoid curve. The nature of sigmoid curve is mathematically represented by Eq. Efficiency curve is an operator and when combined with feed distribution gives the product size distributions of the classifier. Till recently, the product distributions have been obtained from the feed distribution and efficiency curve using the discrete approach represented by Eqs. Product size distributions in Eqs. Lately, an analytical solution to classifier distributions has been proposed as a continuous function of particle size under restricted functional forms of feed distribution and efficiency curve represented by Gates–Gaudin–Schumann (GGS) function and Plitt efficiency function, respectively ( Additionally, the obtained analytical expressions for feed and product size distributions have been shown to be difference similar that makes the distributions independent of their initial profiles by way of collapsing all the modified distributions on to a single curve and the distributions when expressed in density form pivot at a common size called “ This paper derives alternative functional forms for evaluating classifier product distributions in terms of Gauss hypergeometric function, Substituting Eqs. The hypergeometric function defined in Eq. The cumulative feed distribution is obtained by integrating Eq. It is noticed that product size distributions given by Eqs. The flow split of particles to the coarse stream can be calculated by integrating the denominator of Eq.  The pivot size corresponds to that size where feed distribution intersects with the finer or coarser size distributions when expressed in density form. The pivot size,  From the rearrangement of mass balance Eq. Eq. The proposed analytical expressions for classifier feed and product size distributions have been validated with 11 sets of data taken from the works of An inverse problem is to identify the cause from its measured effect. Generally the inverse problems are ill posed. That is, inverse problems may not have a solution in the strict sense: solutions may not be unique and/or may not depend continuously on the data. The aim of an inverse problem of classifier is to identify its feed distribution and the efficiency curve from measured product size distributions. Since this problem has infinitely many solutions which thus make it an ill-posed problem as discussed below, an additional hypothesis is needed regarding the functional form of the product distributions in terms of hypergeometric functions in order to address the problem. In this section we explore the possibility of identifying feed distribution and the separation efficiency curve that produce the product size distributions in the absence of any information regarding the solid flow split to one or both the product streams. This problem is an inverse problem as there are infinitely many combinations of feed distribution and efficiency curve that produce the same fine and coarse product distributions depending on the value of solid flow split factor considered. Eqs. However, in the forward approach, the product size distributions have been obtained by combining feed distribution with the efficiency curve as represented by Eqs.  Since the parameter estimation in the inverse model is influenced by the errors in the measured product distribution data, a sensitivity analysis has been carried out. It shows which parameters affect the feed distribution and efficiency curve prediction significantly. The combined uncertainty in the evaluation of feed distribution and the efficiency curve is attributed to uncertainty in the estimation of parameters that represent these curves. Assuming that these parameters are independent of one another, the variances of feed distribution and efficiency curve for a specified particle size due to variances in their parameter estimation are given by The squares of the partial derivatives are referred to as sensitivity coefficients and can be evaluated by partial differentiation of Eqs.  The product distributions defined in Eqs. Although, the proposed product expressions are capable of addressing the inverse problem of identifying the feed distribution and efficiency curve, better analytical expressions under more general feed distribution and efficiency curve representations are needed. However, the present approach does not limit the principle of extracting the information of the feed distribution and efficiency curve of operating classifiers to a fair accuracy from the measured product distributions. Analytical expressions for product distributions in terms of Gauss hypergeometric function, The author is grateful to Mr. Shivaram Kamat and Dr. Phanibhushan Sistu, EIS R&D, TCSL, Pune, India for their support and encouragement in this work. The author acknowledges Prof. G. H. Luttrell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA for initiating the interest for investigation of classifier inverse problem.