In this study the hydrometallurgical processing of EAF steelmaking dust (Paul Wurth S.A.) is investigated on a laboratory scale under normal temperature and pressure conditions. The behaviour of zinc and iron under the influence of sulphuric acid as the leaching agent is discussed. The dependency between the temperature and the liquid/solid ratio is investigated. The main aim is the transfer of zinc into the solution while iron ought to remain as a solid residue.
                  The hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from EAF dust is feasible with a relatively high recovery yield, while iron mostly remains in the solid phase. Calcium, too, is transferred to the solution with a relatively high recovery yield. This results from the use of a low concentration of sulphuric acid. In such a way, it is possible to set up the conditions for the leaching of EAF dust, namely sufficient sulphuric acid concentration in order to achieve an optimum zinc yield to the solution without an iron dissolution. However, the problem is that the chemical and mineralogical composition of each steelmaking dust is individual. Therefore, it is necessary to study the processing conditions for each one of them.One of the most important issues with which steel producers are faced is the question of environmental protection. It refers e.g. to the necessity to utilise dusts resulting from the process of steel production from scrap in electric furnaces, containing mainly of Zn, Fe, Pb and a considerable amount of harmful elements, such as Cd, As, Cr and F. The composition of EAF dusts depends on the following aspects: on the scrap processed, on the type of steel to be produced, on operating conditions and on the degree recirculation of the dust to the process. The contents of the main elements in EAF dusts may vary between: 30% of Zn, 0.3–6% of Pb, 0.01–0.2% of Cd, 20–35% of Fe, 0.2–0.7% of Cr, 1–10% of Ca, etc. ( The mineralogical analysis indicates the presence of iron in an oxide form, mostly as hematite Fe Treatment technologies of zinc-bearing wastes represent various levels of development both of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes. A brief overview of the methods, which have been used for the treatment of this material, was presented in our previous work ( In study ( According to the results obtained in this work, the high pressure hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from EAF dust is feasible at a reasonable recovery yield, while iron mostly remains in the solid phase. The latter is due to the use of the low concentration of sulphuric acid of approximately 0.4 mol H  These results show promise. However, it is necessary to compare such results with those obtained by the same hydrometallurgical route but under normal conditions concerning both temperature and pressure. This is the concept of the present study. The main factors investigated are the effects of temperature on the dissolution of Zn, Fe and Ca by use of sulphuric acid as the extractant at an atmospheric pressure of 0.1 MPa. The materials used in these experiments are the same as in study ( The results of the X-ray diffraction qualitative analysis show the presence of compounds such as franklinite Zn Leaching tests are performed in the apparatus, of which a scheme is given in The leaching experiments are performed in a glass reactor of 600 mL provided with a Teflon cap in the central hole in which the axis of a glass stirrer for adjustable revolutions is placed. Openings for a mercury thermometer, a sampling liquid specimen, and an input of the powdered sample are situated in the perimeter of the cap. The reactor is placed in a water bath controlled by a thermostat. This allows to conduct the leaching at the desired temperature. Leaching tests are performed with a solution of 300 mL of 0.4 M H The samples for the chemical analysis are taken according to a fixed-schedule after 2, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min. Then the samples are filtered into test tubes and, thus, a clear solution is obtained. Like during the pressure leaching described in work ( The chemical analysis, carried out in order to determine Zn, Fe, and Ca, was made by means of an AAS Varian Spectrometer AA 20+. Moreover, the amount of free acid as well as the pH is measured. All results are recalculated because of the change of the pulp volume due to the sampling and evaporation. As already described in Reaction In The temperature has a considerable effect on the yield of the zinc extraction. This is valid for each solid/liquid ratio being studied, as demonstrated in  The temperature effect on iron extraction is shown in Although the amount of dissolved calcium is rather high, it is considerably decreased by the increase of the charge, as it is demonstrated in The concentration of H The results reveal that the a/d ratio, i.e. the charge amount, plays an important role in the metal extraction. pH values were increased according to the increase of the a/d ratio due to a higher consumption of sulphuric acid during leaching. Since small charges are used, the zinc extraction is considerably high. The maximum value for zinc extraction The increase of the charge amount results in the decreasing of the zinc extraction. In these cases, however, temperature plays a less important role. This probably means that the sulphuric acid concentration is a limiting factor for the dissolution of zinc. This applies to iron and calcium, too. The maximum of iron dissolved is less than 10%, ( Comparing of the results obtained in this work with those obtained in the study of high temperature/pressure leaching ( Furthermore, in regard to iron, the study shows that the maximum value of iron dissolved under normal leaching conditions is about 10%, in contrast to high temperature/pressure leaching in which, at the worst, more than 20% is achieved. In high temperature/pressure leaching at best around 1% of dissolved iron is achieved. Under normal leaching conditions, regarding both temperature and pressure, the minimum value for the iron dissolution is about 2%. The quantity of dissolved calcium is rather high. With a sulphuric acid concentration of 0.4 mol·dm  According to the results obtained in this work, the hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from EAF dust is feasible with a relatively high recovery yield, while iron mostly stays in solid phase. A similar conclusion can be drawn in the case of high temperature/pressure leaching under equivalent experimental conditions. Comparing the results of this work with those obtained by high temperature/pressure leaching manifest that, concerning the zinc extraction, the last is more effective. Yet, this does not relate to iron. Additionally, calcium permanently remains in the solution. Although in high temperature/pressure leaching calcium is dissolved first, it later precipitates as calcium sulphate. This does only relate to temperatures up to 150 °C and pressures up to 4.1 bar. Even in higher temperatures/pressures leaching calcium permanently remains in the solution. This behaviour results from using a low concentration of sulphuric acid. This also causes in fact a decrease in the zinc yield, yet the amount of dissolved iron is low. In such a way, it can be possible to set up the conditions for an optimum zinc yield into the solution with a minimised iron dissolution. However, the problem persists that the chemical and mineralogical composition of each steelmaking dust is individual and that for each one the conditions of processing have to be studied. The authors wish to express their gratitude to Slovak grant agency VEGA (Grant 1/9379/02) for financial support.