A low temperature sulfuric acid baking and mild acid leaching process was explored for maximum dissolution of metal values from a spent Ni–Mo/Al2O3 hydro-processing catalyst obtained from a Korean refinery. The spent catalyst was found to be a matrix of γ-Al2O3. containing 27.1% Al, 11.6% Mo, 2.5% Ni, 9.7% S, 4.8% C, 1.9% P, 0.4% Si and trace amounts of Co and Fe. Various baking parameters such as baking temperature, sulfuric acid concentration and baking duration were optimized according to 23 full factorial method for maximum dissolutions of Mo, Al and Ni during leaching. Under optimum baking conditions (400 °C; 1.28 stoichiometric H2SO4; 1 h), >96% Mo, 99% Al and 95% Ni were readily dissolved from the spent catalyst by 2% v/v H2SO4 at 80 °C. Carbon and sulfur analyses of the baked samples and leaching residues indicated only 10–15% of residual hydrocarbons reacted during acid baking, while most of the sulfur (assumed to be metal sulfides) was converted into soluble sulfates/oxy-sulfates. By comparison, direct sulfuric acid leaching of the catalyst resulted in poor dissolution of Mo and Al, even with large excess of acid, thus demonstrating the beneficial effect of sulfuric acid baking.Petroleum refining is a catalyst intensive process that generates large quantities of solid waste catalysts from different unit operations such as cracking, reforming, hydro-treating etc. ( One of the attractive options for spent hydro-processing catalysts is to reclaim their metal values. A literature survey indicates that processes based on (i) alkali or salt fusion at high temperature followed by leaching and (ii) mineral acids leaching after a suitable pre-calcination step (de-coking) are successful in completely solubilizing the metals from spent catalysts. Some of these reported methods include: alkali roasting at 750 °C followed by leaching in alkaline and sulfuric acid medium ( Sulfuric acid baking of spent catalysts has not been explored so far to increase metal leachability. Depending on the phase composition of the catalyst host matrix (such as alumina), sulfuric acid baking could be effective at much lower temperature than alkali or salt fusion methods. Furthermore, lower chemical consumption of acids, neutralizing agents, etc. and enhanced reaction kinetics are the other expected benefits of this route over reported pre-oxidation–leaching processes. Therefore, the main objective of this study is to explore an alternate spent catalyst process route based on low temperature sulfuric acid baking followed by mild leaching using a typical Ni–Mo/Al The spent Ni–Mo/Al Baking tests were carried out by using a Muffle Furnace (Thermo Lyne) having a temperature accuracy ± Leaching tests were carried out inside a three-necked 500 ml round bottom flask. Heating and stirring were provided by a temperature controlled mantle heater (accuracy ± The chemical composition of the spent Ni–Mo/Al Direct sulfuric acid leaching of the spent Ni–Mo/Al The percentage dissolutions of Mo, Al and Ni from the spent catalyst after 3 h sulfuric acid leaching at 95 °C for 3 h with different acid concentrations (5–20% v/v) are shown in Low temperature (200–300 °C) sulfuric acid baking was tried in order to improve the leaching efficiencies of Mo and Al from the spent catalyst. The effects of various baking parameters on the dissolution of Mo, Al and Ni were studied statistically under the following fixed leaching conditions: In the present work, a 2 On evaluation of the model coefficients by the standard procedure (using the data from The adequacy of Eqs From these regression equations, the influence of baking parameters on dissolution extents of Mo, Al and Ni can be summarized as: (i) all baking parameters have significant effect on Mo extraction. Sulfuric acid concentration and baking temperature showed synergistic effects; (ii) simultaneous increase of baking temperature and duration have negative impact on Al extraction; and (iii) baking temperature has positive impact on Ni extraction, while acid concentration and baking temperature showed negative synergism. It was observed that although Ni and Al extractions are quite high under the present baking conditions, the maximum Mo extraction achieved was 92.5%. In order to further increase the Mo extraction, baking parameters were optimized according to the steepest ascent method ( This study showed that low temperature sulfuric acid baking can be effective for quantitative dissolution of a spent Ni–Mo/Al This work was supported by the Korea Foundation for International Cooperation of Science & Technology (KICOS), through a grant provided by the Korean Ministry of Science & Technology (MOST) in 2007 (No. K20602000004-07E0200-00410). One of the authors, DM is grateful to KIGAM for the award of a postdoctoral fellowship.