An industrial taconite facility, ‘Plant F’, processed both magnetite and hematite ores during the year. The concentrates were pelletized with a binder, bentonite. Plant personnel believed less bentonite was required to make hematite pellets. Thus, the authors intended to quantify in-plant observations through bench-scale pelletization tests. As-received magnetite and as-received hematite were pelletized and tested for wet-drop number and dry-crush strength. Hematite pellets exceeded industrial minimum wet-drop and dry-crush values of 5 drops and 22N/pellet without bentonite addition, while magnetite pellets exceeded industrial minimum values at a bentonite dose of 6.6kg/t (0.66%). It is known that finer particles increase pellet strength, so additional magnetite was ground to a similar particle size distribution as the as-received hematite. The ground magnetite was pelletized and tested for wet-drop number and dry-crush strength. Wet drop and dry crush values increased after grinding the magnetite concentrate. However, they were significantly less than hematite pellets at similar bentonite doses. Consequently, particle size effects were not the dominant cause for higher strengths in the hematite concentrate.In the U.S., iron ore is predominantly used in blast furnace iron making. Approximately 53.6 Bentonite has historically been the standard binder for taconite agglomeration. Bentonite helps control water content during pelletization, and generally eases the agglomeration process. Bentonite doses of 0.5–1.0% by weight are usually added prior to agglomeration. These doses result in pellets with sufficient physical and metallurgical properties. However, bentonite contaminates iron ore pellets with unwanted silica and alumina ( Iron ore processors are interested in reducing bentonite dosages. Recently, personnel at a local iron ore concentrator and pelletizing plant have observed cyclical bentonite usages corresponding to the iron concentrate being pelletized ( It is well known that agglomeration performance, or ballability, and green and dried pellet strengths depend on characteristics of the particles being pelletized. Particle size ( Agglomeration performance also depends on the presence of surfactants on ore particles ( Many factors could contribute to the pelletization differences observed at Plant F. The authors' first objective is to pelletize unmodified hematite and magnetite concentrates. In other words, plant observations will be quantified experimentally. Additionally, the magnetite particle size distribution will be reduced to replicate that of the hematite concentrate. The second objective of this study is thus to determine whether different ores will have similar pelletizing characteristics–if they have similar size distributions. Can particle size alone explain the different pelletization performance between a hematite concentrate and a magnetite concentrate? Two iron-ore filter cake concentrates were provided by local iron ore concentrators. Except for moisture adjustment, the concentrates were unmodified as-received. Concentrates were not washed to remove processing reagents remaining from the plant. The hematite concentrate used was provided by Plant F. The concentrate was received dry and divided into approximately 2.5 The magnetite concentrate used was provided by a taconite processing plant, Plant D. The concentrate contained ~ The bentonite used in these experiments was provided by Bentonite Performance Minerals, LLC. The bentonite was a sodium bentonite, with a PWA value of 850. The development of the pelletization procedure used in these experiments was outlined in literature ( The concentrate was placed in an orbital kneader–mixer and mixed slowly while moisture and binder were added. Magnetite concentrate was used as received, while the hematite concentrate was adjusted to 9% moisture with distilled water. The mixture was then mixed for 5 The pellet wet-drop number was used to evaluate green pellet performance, and compared to an industrial accepted value of 5 drops to fracture. Individual pellets were dropped 18 Dry-crush strength was used to evaluate dry pellet performance. Individual, dry pellets were compressed between two plates at 40 Pellet porosity was found gravimetrically following an ASTM standard method ( The inverse relationship between pellet strength and particle size is well known. Consequently, the magnetite concentrate was further ground to a similar size distribution as the hematite concentrate. 5 Wet drop results from hematite and magnetite pellets are shown in Hematite and magnetite pellet dry crush strengths are seen in It is interesting that hematite pellets exceeded both industrial minimum values without binder; magnetite pellets were not sufficient until 6.6 Pellets were produced from the ground magnetite concentrate at bentonite dosages of 0 and 6.1 At a bentonite dose of 6.1 Interestingly, the moisture content of green dry-ground magnetite pellets was nearly 1% less than the original magnetite pellets (7.8% compared to 8.7% moisture). Less distilled water spray was required for dry-ground magnetite pelletization. The dry-ground magnetite had a wider distribution than the original concentrate, which may have allowed particles to pack more densely during tumbling. However, as dry grinding may create hydrophobic particle surfaces ( Combined, these results suggest that particle size alone cannot explain the initial pelletization differences between the magnetite and hematite concentrates. Magnetite pellets improved minimally on grinding to a similar size distribution as the hematite concentrate. Why then, was there such a large difference between the two types of pellets? The detrimental effects of processing reagents on magnetite pelletization are known ( Pelletization behaviors of hematite and magnetite concentrates were investigated. Hematite pellets required less binder than magnetite pellets to meet industrial minimum values for wet drop and dry crush strength. Hematite pellets exceeded 5 drops and 22 The magnetite concentrate was ground to a similar particle size distribution as the hematite concentrate (which increased particle fineness) in order to eliminate particle size as a factor affecting pellet strength. Grinding the magnetite minimally increased the pellet wet drop and dry crush strength values. However, the ground-magnetite strengths did not increase to be equal to the hematite pellet strengths. It was concluded that factors other than particle size were the dominant contributors to higher hematite pellet strengths. These factors could include effects of mineralogy (e.g. particle shape) and the presence of residual reagents from the concentrator. Thanks to the