This chapter introduces the theoretical basis of the electrochemical methods and the technique of powder manufacture. The physical and chemical principles of electrolytic crystallization of dendrite deposits as well as the thermodynamics, kinetics, and mechanisms of electrolysis processes are discussed. Electrolysis of aqueous solutions, including metal precipitation in galvanostatic and patentiostatic conditions, production of multicomponent alloy powders, powder production using the method of zone electrochemistry, reduction from solution through film of surfactants, and special methods of production of metal powders recovered from spent solutions are considered. Technologies of powder production by electrolysis from melts are described. Processes of electrolytically precipitating metals with forming dendrite deposits by the contact displacement method are considered. The amalgam metallurgy method involving metal precipitation on the liquid mercury cathode and amalgam cementation is discussed. Usable equipment for electrolytic powder production, including schematics and working conditions, is characterized.   Copper Precipitation in Industrial Electrolysis Reduction from Solution Through Film of Surfactants Special Methods of Production of Metal Powders Recovered From Spent Solutions Production of Metal Multicomponent Alloy Powders Powder Production Using the Method of Zone Electrochemistry      cross-section of bulk concentration of discharging metal ions in the solution, mol/m bulk surfactant concentration instant and initial concentrations of discharging ions in the solution, mol/m instant ion concentration of dissolving metal, mol/m cathode current efficiency anode current efficiency current efficiency in the cells with insoluble anodes diffusion coefficient, m mechanism of diffusion-limited aggregation of metal particles electrode potential, V the equilibrium potential on the interfacial boundary Me standard potentials, a local standard potential (depends on curvature radii of the surface) Faraday constant, A current load on the electrolyzer, A current load on the electrolyzer with insoluble anodes, A current changing in galvanodynamic electrolysis by linear mode, A current of metal M reduction current of metal M dissolution current of M rate constant for the contact displacement reaction of the first order, s empirical rate constant for elongation of silver dendrites electrodeposited from the melts m/(sV empirical united rate constant for accumulation of ions-cementator depletion factor effective depletion factor–quotient of current density on the surface of the growth front to i dendrite distribution density on area unit of dendrite deposit growth front, m number of columns per unit electrode surface formed as a result of electrolytic precipitator contactwith the solution, m universal constant, J/(vol electrode surface, m thermodynamic criterion for stability of the flat growth front stability, Ohm field criterion for stability of the flat growth front stability, V/m specific volume surface of dendrite deposit, m temperature, K molar volume of the metal, m electrolyte volume in electrolyte oscillation of electrolyte concentration in bath, mol/m the effect of depolarization, shift of the equilibrium potential of the activity of metal ions in the solution, mol/dm metal activity in amalgam quantity of electricity consumed to reduce the metal on the deposit growth front within the time interval dt time period corresponding to one of initial diameter of cylindric cathode, m height of growth block, m current density or current per unit area of initial electrode surface, A/m kinetic current density controlled by slow charge transfer through interfacial boundary, A/m exchange current density on equilibrium interfacial boundary Me standard exchange current density, A exchange current density for metal M exchange current density for metal M limit current density, A/m limit current density of the spherical diffusion equation current density of hydrogen emission on M current density of hydrogen discharge on M exchange current density of hydrogen emission on M exchange current density for hydrogen emission on M exchange current density for metal-precipitator M exchange current density for crystallizing metal M current density on tips of growing dendrites, A/m number of equal intervals constant for the given metal ( quantity of electrolyzers with soluble anodes quantity of electrolyzers with insoluble anodes, which are necessary to keep material balance in electrochemical equivalent, A radius of compact film spreading over the surface during contact displacement, m radius of dendrite tip, m time, s, h a number of cation transfers (the share of ion conductivity among a summary solution conductivity) period between corrections of electrolyte concentration, h dendrite length; the height of dendrite layer on electrode, m metal ion charge standard concentration, mol/m transfer factor for reaction on interfacial boundary apparent transfer factors for cathode and anode reactions share of the dendrite deposit with the tip radius r rate of current rise in galvanodynamic electrolysis, A/h thickness of the diffusion layer, m specific surface energy of interface boundary, J/m overpotential, η rate of dendrite elongation at overvoltage η, cm/s solution resistivity, Ohm deposit resistivity, Ohm transient time interval, s Electrochemical methods ( The main qualities of these powders are purity, the dendritic shape of particles ( Electrochemical methods make feasible control crystallization (shape and size of powder particles) by selecting the process parameters: concentration of the metal and hydrogen ion exponent pH of the electrolyte, cathode potential, current density, temperature and rate of circulation of the electrolyte, type and size of the anode and cathode and their distance from each other, type and quantity of addition agents, and conditions of removing deposits at the electrodes. The use of some techniques (permanent anodes, electrochemical reduction from the solid phase, electrodes with highly developed surface) enables us to utilize production waste and to achieve complete recovery of the metal as powder. Electrolytic powder alloys do not require chemical homogenization; moreover, some alloys are produced only by the electrochemical method. Nanoparticles display a unique catalytic activity. Electrolysis of aqueous solutions is used for scale production of copper, nickel, cobalt, cadmium, zinc, and silver powders. This method is differentiated by the electrodeposition properties: the first method, namely “direct deposition” of a friable or spongy deposit that can easily be disintegrated mechanically into fine particles, and the second method, called “brittle process” deposition of a dense, smooth, brittle layer that can be ground into powder A great number of metal powders are manufactured by electrolysis of melts. The possibilities of making a wide list of metal powders are provided by amalgam metallurgy. In the course of electrolysis, the metal is crystallized in dendrites due to the disturbed stability of the flat front of growth of the newly formed metallic phase particles that occurs by positive values of the thermodynamic criterion In many cases, metal deposition is controlled by material transfer toward the phase boundary. The maximum rate of such an electrochemical reaction is characterized by limited current density ( As a rule, the resistivity of the solution ρ The structure of particles of the dendritic deposit depends on the nucleation mechanism and the dynamics of the dendrite growth ( Subsieve dendritic particles (up to 1–10 Diffusion limitations are provided by a high depletion factor An anisotropic shape of dendritic particles is connected with the difference between the electrolytic crystallization rate at the tips ( Dendrite growth dynamics completely depend on the conditions of the electrolysis as well as the potentiostatic and galvanostatic conditions. In the potentiostatic condition If dendrite height exceeds the diffusion layer thickness, then the maximum current of the spherical diffusion is calculated as the following: The tip shape that is closest to parabolic can be approximated by a semisphere with the radius Thus, the dendrite growth rate is defined by the overvoltage value η, the nature ( In potentiostatic conditions, uniform dendrite growth is determined by the establishment of a constant curvature radius of the dendrite tips that is correlated with the applied overvoltage. The spherical diffusion rate determined by the surface curvature radius (6) is low on flatter tips while very sharp tips remain unstable. Their equilibrium potential Such electrolysis conditions provide for the crystallization of the dendrite deposit's uniform structure during long-term electrolysis. At that, the size and morphological characteristics of dendrites are determined and regulated by the value of the applied overvoltage. This prospective way to obtain dendritic deposits of uniform and regulated structure is not implemented currently due to a lack of industrial potentiostats. Because in galvanostatic electrolysis the set current is many times higher than the limit current, hydrogen is formed at the cathode together with the metals that do not possess a high exchange current (in precipitation from an aqueous solution). If hydrogen is not coreduced together with the metal, then the change of the dendrite length within an interval Due to a decrease of Uniform dendritic deposits can be obtained in galvanostatic electrolysis too, when the deposit growth front area is constant. For instance, in the aqueous solution together with the dendrite layer growth, the current load must be increased. Then, the initial current value and its rates of increase will determine the structural and technological parameters of the powder Simulation of the electrolytic dendrite deposit growth is meant for the description of a relation between powder technological properties and electrolyte composition and electrolysis conditions. In the course of processing, after electrolysis the powder properties (particle size distribution, apparent density, and specific surface) are significantly changed depending on drying, milling, and screening conditions. However, the basis of particle structure is formed in the electrolysis stage. While simulating the process, it is assumed that the key structural parameters are the dendrite tip curvature radius r The distribution of the obtained dendritic deposit over the dendrite tip radii is a prototype of electrolysis product distribution by particle size. The average density of tip distribution on the growth front characterizes a dendritic form of the loose deposit and is proportional to the reciprocal apparent density of the powder. The share of the dendrite deposit with the tip radius The use of activation control or ohmic control instead of transfer control can result in a radical change of the type of dendrite deposit that is weakly connected with the degree of diffusion limitations. Another kind of control (for example, activation or ohmic control) instead of a transport one can result in a radical change of the mode of the dendrite deposit. In such cases, the deposit structure is controlled by other technological parameters, for example, a change of discharge activation parameters (introduction of surfactants, complexing ligands) or an increase of electrolyte conductivity. Electrolytic dendrite deposits produced under the diffusion control conditions possess fractal properties so that the structural characteristic of such deposits is the value of the fractal dimension Nanopowders are produced under the condition of the enforced removal of metal nuclei that develop within the period of short-term current impulses from the cathode surface Electrical precipitation of metal as a loose dendritic deposit is performed from diluted solutions under a high current density. The possibility of powder precipitation on the cathode from an aqueous solution is defined by the relation of electrochemical parameters of metal and hydrogen. Intensive emission of hydrogen is observed for the majority of metals (except mercury) by potential ranging from (− All the factors that contribute to the destabilization of the flat growth front result in comminution of powder particles. The stability is disturbed ( Escaping together with metal hydrogen stirs the cathode layer, making the diffusion layer thinner and facilitating the dendrite coarsening (lowering After energizing, the sediment is formed within the transient time interval т and, at the end of this interval, the metal ion concentration Then, the dendrites can crystallize in two ways depending on the ratio of equilibrium potentials and the exchange currents of the metal and hydrogen: either by means of the cathode process (discharge of metal ions) or by a combined reduction of metal and hydrogen ions. The noble metals with the equilibrium potentials are much more positive than the ones of hydrogen as well as metals with high overvoltage of hydrogen release on them (lead, cadmium, tin from simple electrolytes) are related to the first group. The dynamics of dendrite growth in the first group are described by Eqs. The second group comprises the remainder of the metals as well as metals of the first group precipitated from solutions of complex compounds or in the presence of surfactants. In these cases, dendrite deposit growth is accompanied by hydrogen release, the dendrites grow more slowly, and the cathode potential is determined by the current density of hydrogen reduction until the condition of dendrite growth The trends of different distribution of the dendrite deposit in dendrite radii of dendrite tips under new electrolysis conditions are equal for electrolytic crystallization of all metals (see Electrical crystallization of the structurally uniform deposit that grows with a constant rate is provided with potentiostatic electrolysis. However, the galvanodynamic mode with a linear change of current in time is more technically simpler: By selection of the values of The impulse mode of electrolysis is elaborated to affect the particle structure directly and enables a change of particle size distribution and powder particle shape, depending on the amplitude and duration of the impulse. Constant electrolyte composition is one of the main conditions of process stability and of permanent powder quality. The requirements for the electrolyte are the following: absence of impurities able to coreduce together with the metal; high conductivity to reduce the specific power consumption; a minimum rate of hydrogen release that decreases cathode current efficiency; and the lowest possibility of chemical dissolving of the precipitated metal. Soluble anodes are manufactured from refined metal and the solution is prepared from pure reagents. Potentiostatic conditions allow selective recovery of powders of different metals from multicomponent electrolytes. The necessary conductivity of the electrolyte is imparted by salts, alkali, or acid. The concentration of the latter is selected according to the current efficiency because it decreases at high acidity. Approximately neutral electrolytes should be prepared with a sufficient buffer capacity to avoid quick increasing of the pH of the cathode layer and connected with this cathode contamination due to hydrate formation. The current efficiency of the dendrite deposit is always < Accompanying escaping hydrogen. Interaction of cathode and anode products if insoluble anodes are used. Reduction of metal ion only to intermediate valency. Chemical dissolving, especially when powder falls down from the cathode. The following measures contribute to the increase of the current efficiency: Maintenance of optimal parameters of electrolysis (metal ion concentration, background, current density, agitation mode). Installation of a diaphragm if permanent anodes are used. Extension of the interval of cathode deposit growth. Rapid powder removal of the electrolyte and its washing to reduce secondary dissolution. Measures to increase the current efficiency should be balanced with their effect on powder dispersivity and powder particle shape. During increasing current density, the current efficiency passes through a maximum. At first, the proportion of current for dendrite deposit precipitation increases due to a decrease of the quantity of the compact precipitate and multibranch dendrites formed if current densities are comparable with the limit density. An accelerated hydrogen release decreases the cathode current efficiency The anode current efficiency in the case of soluble anodes is, as a rule, higher than the cathode yield and can exceed 100%, taking into account the chemical dissolution of the metal. In a number of electrochemical systems, anode passivation and decreasing of anode current efficiency are possible. To align current efficiencies, depassivators (for example hydrochloric acid in nickel powder production) are introduced in solution. The inequality of cathode and anode current efficiencies changes the electrolyte composition. Metal ions are gradually accumulated; a saturation by gas of the solution close to the cathode and a growth of the concentration of metal ions in the near-anode space lead to electrolyte separation into layers. More dense solution from the near-anode space sinks to the bottom of the electrolyzer while in its upper part, the solution with a lowered concentration accumulates. This effect is overcome by a periodic withdrawal of a part of the electrolyte respectively with the introduction of a fresh correction solution or the introduction of insoluble anodes. Denoting the electrolyte volume in n-cells as The required quantity of cells with insoluble anodes ( If such a cell is one in the series, then its current load will be: Electrolyte circulation (approximately 0.4 Electrolytic cells of box type with plain (disk) or cylindrical cathodes (bars or in the form of a drum) are used by water-solution treatment. In electrolytic cells, devices of electrolyte input and output are provided. Powder is removed in the form of sludge through the bottom union. The electrolyte temperature is maintained using heat exchangers installed in the circulation scheme. The type of device depends upon the duration of precipitate buildup and the strength of its binding with the cathode. Shaking off the friable precipitate ( In the cells with disk cathodes, a quick shifting of cathode sections in the air, automatic powder cleansing from the cathode, and powder washout into the collector are provided. Cathodes are placed between anodes and are made in the form of sections; they are fixed on the shaft and are able to rotate independently around its axis. When a cathode goes from solution, each section of it is separated from others and, using a mechanism, is quickly transferred to a chamber where the powder is cut from the cathode with a knife and flushed with water into the collector. The bath for collection of the powder from the cylindrical cathodes is installed on a platform moved in the vertical plane by a screw using a drive ( If a duct cathode is used, the electrolyte is supplied into it under pressure through a fitting. The electrolyte is released through holes and falls onto plates. It is reflected from them and flows along the cathode surface. In this process, ultrasonic fluctuations with a frequency of 100 To intensify the process of electrolysis and to simplify powder discharge, the electrolyte is fed by impulses of 5–300 If a vibrating ribbed cathode is used, the process of powder precipitation is accelerated 50–100 times (the amplitude is 0.8 Impulse gas feeding through holes of a hollow cathode ( In terms of manufacturing, the galvanostatic conditions versus the potentiostatic The authors The transfer of results obtained from laboratory research on the continuous electrolysis process to industrial production is difficult. The known method of full-scale experiment consists of periodically removing the cathode bar from a cell section, followed by photographing the deposits formed. However, this method is inadequate because pauses disrupt the kinetics of the electrolysis process. An advanced control method that could be used on an industrial scale utilizes a video recording of the copper deposit growth A schematic illustrating the installation of a continuous electrolysis process on a commercial scale with a submersible web camera is shown in Formation of dendritic copper sediment is accompanied by the release of hydrogen: Hydrogen is especially intensively emitted after energizing, as can be seen in The intensive gas flow mixes the near-electrode space, thus abruptly increasing the limiting current density. The rapid gas release ceases quite soon and changes into periodic liberation of quite large bubbles from the growing dendritic deposit. The successively measured diameter of the electrode with the growing deposit allows determining the dependence of the length Osipova et al. The deposition period without formation of dense built-up deposits may be established by analyzing the dynamics of deposit growth and the variation in cathode overpotential Osipova et al. The authors Metal particles with a grain size of 0.1–10 In the process of crystallization of ultrafine elongated whiskers and strands precipitated from the two-layer bath, several stages are distinguished: Formation of a strong passive layer on the electrode surface. Metal ions discharge through the absorbing film by overcoming a high potential barrier. Development of three-dimensional nuclei on the electrode surface. Development of crystals inside the thin passive layer of the organic liquid. Growth of dendrites outside the film in the aqueous phase. Under conditions of increased concentration of metal ions in the water phase, the discharge through the film of organic liquid occurs with overcoming a high energy barrier and is controlled by the parameters of the changing reaction. When diluted solutions of the water phase are used, diffusion factors control dendrite growth rate and qualitative links between particle structure and mass transfer parameters remain the same: particle size decreases when water solution is diluted, current density is increased, and temperature is reduced. Surfactants influence the electrocrystallization process: whiskers and needles of constant section are formed due to the localization of electroprecipitation on their end surface, as crystal side faces are blocked by the layer of absorbed particles of the surfactant. The process is controlled by surfactant diffusion because of continuous nucleation and movement of growth steps with competing surfactant absorption. In the case of precipitation from solutions saturated by surfactants, the value of the current density on the strand end is practically close to constant. According to Krichmar Introducing into the water layer a surfactant other than oleic acid that is usually present in the organic phase in the amount of 2–5 Current efficiency of ultrafine disperse precipitation goes through a maximum with growing current density, decreasing at too high current densities due to intense hydrogen emission. An excess quantity of the acid added to the water phase to increase its electric conductivity leads to prevailing hydrogen discharge and reduces the current efficiency. In alkaline media, an excessive increase of pH causes the formation of hydrates and a passivation of the electrode surface. A growth of metal ion concentration in the water layer leads to an increase of the current efficiency of the disperse precipitate. In electrolyzers, to produce metal organic sol, devices for continuous removal of the disperse phase are provided ( A promising method for production of ultrafine metal powders is based on the use of emulsion devices with fixed electrodes. The method of a running magnetic field is proposed for production of ultrafine powders with the participation of nonequiaxed ferromagnetic particles ( High-efficiency methods of metal recovery from dilute solutions are based on the application of electrodes with a developed surface together with an increase of the mass transfer coefficient that is achieved under respective hydrodynamic conditions in the electrolyzer. Metal electroprecipitation under such conditions occurs with the formation of powder. In the Eco-cell process (Ecological Engineering Ltd. company design), a cathode in the form of a horizontally rotating cylinder ( Series installation of several chambers with each of them working at a certain cathode potential allows a selective recovery of different metals from solutions ( The process is activated due to the high mass transfer coefficient in the interelectrode space of two electrodes, the anode being rotated at a high speed and the cathode being fixed ( The electrolyzer with a rotating cylindrical layer of particles consists of two concentric perforated nonconducting cylinders ( In the electrolyzer with hammering rods ( Both electrolyzers with a moving particle layer are designed for cadmium recovery from solutions containing cyanide. Metal precipitates on the cathode in the form of powder and cyanide ions oxidize on the anode to carbon dioxide. The cathode current efficiency starts to decrease significantly when the metal concentration reaches 10 The condition for the precipitation of metal alloy powders is the equality of discharge potentials of metal ions on dendrite tips. The electrocrystallization of the dendrite deposit proceeds under diffusion control and is located at the tips of growing dendrites. The conditions of mixed electrochemical kinetics with a semispherical character of diffusion are realized: The content of the component in the alloy is proportional to the current density of its reduction at the growing front So far, diffusion limitations are not released from the growing front, the current densities on tips The combination of Eqs. In aqueous solutions, the effective diffusion factors for different ions are close to each other, so that for During electrolysis, the depth of diffusion limitations on the growth front of the dendrite deposit is gradually decreased while the potential shifts to the field of more positive values. In this case, the alloy component with a more electronegative potential may prove to be under conditions of activation discharge control; then the linear connection between ( To provide diffusion control, alloys are precipitated from dilute solutions (the total concentration of metal salts is not higher than 0.2 The methods of supporting constant solution composition depend on the nature of the anode reaction. When using insoluble anodes, it is necessary to make up the loss of reducing components in the electrolyte while an accumulation of ballast salts in the electrolyte is possible. If the soluble anodes are used, a periodical correction of electrolyte composition is required because of the difference of cathode and anode current efficiencies and uncontrolled current distribution between soluble anodes. The most reliable method is the application of combined anodes ( Alloy components can interact with each other with the formation of chemical compounds. A change of the partial mole Gibbs energy by the entrance of the The kinetics of electrochemical reduction of metal ions depend on the nature and the character of the cathode surface that changes for each metal during alloy formation in comparison with individual discharge. If diffusion limitations on the growth front are released for any component, these effects are manifested in the change of alloy composition in comparison with one calculated according to Eq. Dispersivity, grain-size distribution, and the apparent density of alloy powder depend on the total concentration of metal ions and on the parameters of electrolysis (current density, temperature, hydrogen ion exponent, stirring mode), as in the case of precipitation of a single component powder. The dispersivity of powders from multicomponent alloys increases, their apparent density lowers, and the flowability deteriorates with growing depletion factor K The method is based on a combination of zone chemistry and electrochemistry, and this allows the manufacture of nanopowders because of the following effects: Substance transportation to the reaction zone is uninterrupted. Electrode surface is cleaned and degassed. The rate of the electrochemical process is increased. The idea of the method is that, after each electrochemical impulse of constant current, during which metal nuclei form on the electrode surface, an ultrasonic (zone) impulse follows, the energy of which is located in the reaction zone. It separates nuclei from the cathode surface and throws them into the solution. In this method, the characteristics of impulse and zone electrolysis (interval between ultrasonic impulses, parameters of cathode-sample electrode, capacity of ultrasonic impulse) are added to the traditional factors that determine particle size and shape (solution composition, current density, electrolysis duration). As under other electrolysis modes, the dominating particle size decreases with the growth of current impulse amplitude, with the dilution of the solution, when the time period between ultrasonic impulses is reduced, and noticeably depends on their wattage. If the energy of ultrasonic impulses is low, then metal clusters formed on the cathode-sample electrode are not able to overcome the adhesion forces and strip the deposit from the electrode into the solution. The clusters remaining on the surface affect every subsequent current impulse so that the nanoparticle yield is lowered. If the impulse energy is excessive, the temperature goes up immediately in the reaction zone. This leads to the disappearance of the transport control and to undesirable particle aggregation. By means of zone electrochemistry, dendrite clusters consisting of branches like pearl necklaces can also be produced. Such formations are obtained if the zone electrolysis is lengthy. One of the mechanisms of the formation of such structures is similar to the model of diffusion-limited aggregation. According to another model, particles suspended in the solution after contact with the cathode get a negative charge and act as a part of the cathode. The dependence of particle quality on a large number of parameters leads to especially high requirements to determine the range of their optimum values to provide a high yield of particles of the prescribed shape and size. Electrolytically precipitated powder may be produced by the displacement of one metal To provide a high rate of this heterogeneous reaction, a large area of the cementing metal (precipitator) is provided by using it in the form of powder, chips, and lumps and the intensity of the solution flow is increased. Complete deposition of the precipitated metal is attained by the excess of the cementing metal. After electrolytic precipitation, the solution is washed from the product and the precipitator surplus is eliminated (by acid solution treatment, by magnetic separation, etc.). The possibility of spontaneous proceeding of the process is estimated by the decrease of Gibbs free energy − The basis of electrolytic precipitation is corrosion ( Metal is located on the tips of growing dendrites with tip location density at the growth front Around The precipitable metal The formed dendrite deposit has a volumetric specific surface The dendrite growth rate and the expansion rate of areas covered by the precipitated metal are described by Faraday's law in differential form: On the area of the tangentially spread film, the metal is precipitated during diffusion control, as the effective value of the diffusion layer for the film is increased up to the value δ The cementing metal dissolves according to the mechanism of delayed ionization: The hydrogen emission rate is determined by its exchange current on the metal that is connected with the parameters of the kinetic equation as well as by its equilibrium potential The сharge balance in this process is retained: The dynamics of the electrocrystallization of the dendrite deposit are calculated by the solution of the system of differential equations that describes the behavior in the time of its structural characteristics ( As all surface of the cementing metal is covered by the tangential film of the precipitate, the anode current density increases and the electrode potential becomes more positive. When The solution of this task makes it possible to observe the behavior in the time domain of the dendrite tip radius and the current of metal M The diffusion control of the process absolute at the moment of metal M All factors contributing to the instability of the flat growth front (see If both processes take place on the unchangeable equal surface of the cathodes The cases of delayed discharge of cathode and anode reaction are described most completely by the Rotinyan-Heifez equation A chemical treatment of the product is most effective for cleaning the produced powder from precipitator residues. Sometimes such treatment is conducted in an inert atmosphere to prevent the produced powder from oxidation, or magnetic separation is applied. Electrolysis from melts is used for producing electronegative metal powders. Their precipitation from water solutions is noneffective because of intensive hydrogen emission. High values of rate constants of electrochemical processes at high temperatures cause an insignificant polarizability and, as a result, the flat growth front becomes unstable long before the achievement of the limit current density. As a rule, metals from melts are crystallized in dendritic form. To prevent the electrolyte from the absorption of moisture and metal oxidation at high gas temperatures, the dendrite deposit is discharged from the electrolyzer in the form of solid dispersed bulk metal together with electrolyte salts. Further treatment of the powder consists of separation of powder and electrolyte by mechanical milling, air separation, salt leaching, or vacuum distillation of the electrolyte. High electric conductivity of salt electrolytes allows the use of high current densities that provide high efficiency of the process of metal takeoff and high current efficiency because of the absence of cathode hydrogen emission. All the factors that lead to positive values of At controlled potential conditions, the experimental dependence for silver dendrite elongation  At high cathode current densities, fine crystals of secondary powders are formed due to metal reduction by subions of precipitated basic metals. When selecting the solvent salt, it is necessary to take into account the possibility of achieving a lower electrolysis temperature and a higher thermodynamic stability than the reduced metal compound. As a rule, equimolecular mixtures of metal chlorides (NaCl It is necessary to supply periodically or continuously the salt of the precipitated metal to the electrolyte and to add solvent salts carried away by the discharged cathode deposit. Metals and conductive metal-like compounds (carbides, nitrides, oxycarbides, carbonitrides) are used as soluble anodes. The following factors can cause a decrease of powder yield in relation to current: Chemical dissolution of precipitated metal interaction with the solvent. Disproportionation reaction accompanied by the formation of low-valency ions. Reaction of reversed oxidation of metal in the anode area as a result of its convection or diffusion transfer. Recombination of the products of cathode and anode processes. Reduction of metals with more negative potential. The following measures promote the increase of powder yield with current efficiency: Addition to the electrolyte of salts with cations having more negative potential and decreasing metal solubility in the electrolyte. Separation of anode and cathode areas by a diaphragm. Maintenance of temperature and current density at the optimum level. As the temperature rises, current efficiency passes through a maximum. An excessive temperature increase intensifies chemical dissolution and facilitates the diffusion and convection transfer of active substances to the anode area. At low temperatures, the maximum process rate defined by the limit current density is decreased. Thus, the lower the temperature, the lower the melt electroconductivity and the larger the specific power consumption. The current efficiency increases when current density increases to At a “critical” current density, there is the possibility of an “anode effect” (abundant gassing on the anode that leads to reducing the contact of the electrolyte with the anode, spark formation, and an increase of the resistance, especially when the electrode is wetted poorly by an electrolyte), which is undesirable. To increase the “critical” current density, the surfactants improving anode wettability, the chlorides of basic metal, and the oxides of the reduced metal (if oxygen is permissible in the melt) are injected into the electrolyte. If the metal oxide is considered to be an electroactive substance, the anode effect is permitted to appear with a certain regularity as the index of the oxide concentration factor in the melt. The parameters of producing disperse precipitates of various metals are generally the same; normally sodium chloride or its eutectics with potassium chloride are used. The melt contains 10%–20% of metal chlorides (usually between 3% and 7% calculated for the metal). The electrolysis temperature is between 970 and 1140 High densities of metal exchange current in molten media cause a rapid increase of the area of the precipitate growth front and cancel the diffusion control. This causes a corresponding coarsening of dendrite crystals during electrolysis and the deposition of the product in the form of large powder particles. Statistical models that relate the average particle size ( The following statistical ratio between the average particle size and electrolysis conditions is valid for metals indicated in The values of constants The ratio (38) can be used to estimate the average size of powder particles in new conditions referred to the interval mentioned above. Particles are distributed regarding the average size under the Gauss law. The fraction of particles of the size In this case it is simpler to calculate the α Calculations of formulas (Eqs. By simulating the dendrite crystallization from the melt, the growth front on the cylinder end can be presented in the form of a hemisphere with radius length The dendrite growth rate decreases in time and leads to a nonhomogeneous structure of the product. But, at any moment, dendrites can be lengthened linearly (see The electrolyzer with soluble anodes and immovable cathodes is a vessel with anodes and cathode core and an inlet for inert gas injection. The graphite sleeve in the electrolyzer fulfills simultaneously the function of anode current supply in the cell with the diaphragm. A design of an electrolyzer with the transfer of the cathode precipitate to a water-cooled chamber is known ( Dendrites are crystallized in a mercury electrode as a result of the formation of oversaturated amalgams after achieving the metal solubility limit in mercury ( When the metal is precipitated in the form of amalgam, continual use as the anode means that more positive impurities are left in the amalgam anode and more negative impurities remain in the solution. The Volta series for amalgams differs from that for pure metals and depends upon the amalgam phase composition. The following presented for a single-phase amalgam Nernst equation is of the form: In surface layers of the mercury, a supersaturated solution of metal being reduced is formed and conditions for homogeneous crystallization of metal nuclei of a size defined by the degree of amalgam oversaturation are created. Nuclei crystallization leads to amalgam depletion by metal atoms near the newly formed surface; reduced particles flow through the “solution mercury” phase boundary. This flow is determined by the set current density. Dendrites are crystallized under conditions of substance diffusion delivery through the amalgam layer to the surface of growing crystals. The rate of dendrite lengthening is defined by current density on the boundary “solution mercury” by the number of nuclei Factors increasing particle flow (increase of the current density, growth of temperature, mixing of mercury and solution) cause dendrite coarsening. Amalgams are formed by electrolysis and metals are precipitated on solid cathodes in cells with rotating disk anodes ( Electrolyzers with amalgam bipolar electrodes are used to produce high-purity powders ( For contact displacement (cementation) by amalgams, there are in use units in which amalgams and solution are strongly mixed with an agitator. Drum precipitating devices are used to recover metals from flowing solutions. These units operate in the conditions of countercurrent flow of amalgam by means of centrifugal or magnetic pumps. Fine powders of copper, gold, silver, cobalt, niobium, molybdenum, chromium, vanadium, tantalum, zirconium, hafnium, and other metals hardly soluble in mercury are produced by precipitation from an aqueous organic medium on a rotating cathode ( An oily solvent film with mercury dispersed in it is applied to the cathode surface with a roller. The electrolysis takes place in an inert atmosphere; the gas is supplied separately to the anode and cathode areas separated by a diaphragm. The cathode deposit is removed from the cathode by a scraper after oil is applied to the cathode surface with a grease gun. The amalgam is filtered in a nutsch filter or filter press and treated in a distillation furnace. The amalgam is moved into the furnace by a screw conveyer. Inert gas or hydrogen is supplied by countercurrent flow and carries mercury fumes to a cooler. In the predistillation zone, a temperature of 670–770 Metallic mercury is a highly toxic agent. Elemental mercury and inorganic compounds in liquid and vapor conditions have an effect when they are inhaled and adsorbed through the skin. Contact irritates the eyes, nose, throat, and lungs. Represented exposure can cause mercury poisoning with tremors, personality changes, damage to the kidneys, and gum problems. The workplace exposure limits established by Mercury reacts with acetylene to form explosive acetylene. Mercury can form explosive compounds with ammonia and will explode when mixed with chlorine dioxide, oxidizing agents (such as perchlorates, pereoxides, permanganates, chlorates, nitrates, chlorine, bromine, and fluorine), strong acids (such as hydrochloric, sulfuric, and nitric), and methylazide. Mercury is not compatible with combustible materials (such as aluminum and copper), calcium, sodium carbide, amines, lithium, and rubidium. If mercury is spilled or leaked, it is necessary to fulfill in turn the following Evacuate personnel and secure and control entrance to the area. Eliminate all ignition sources. Cover with a sulfur compound to keep from vaporizing and collect with a charcoal filter vacuum by special apparatus for the clean up of mercury spills (do not use a regular vacuum). Use zinc or copper flakes and a flashlight to check for remaining mercury after clean up. Ventilate and wash areas of spill or leak (not wash into sever). Implementation of enclosed operations, local exhaust ventilation, and general ventilation must proceed from the requirements of ensuring the workplace exposure limit. Store in lightly closed containers in a cool, well-ventilated area.