Plastics flotation used for recycling of plastic wastes receives increasing attention for its industrial application. In order to study the mechanism of plastics flotation, the interfacial interactions between plastic particles in flotation system were investigated through calculation of Lifshitz–van der Waals (LW) function, Lewis acid–base (AB) Gibbs function, and the extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek potential energy profiles. The results showed that van der Waals force between plastic particles is attraction force in flotation system. The large hydrophobic attraction, caused by the AB Gibbs function, is the dominant interparticle force. Wetting agents present significant effects on the interfacial interactions between plastic particles. It is found that adsorption of wetting agents promotes dispersion of plastic particles and decreases the floatability. Pneumatic flotation may improve the recovery and purity of separated plastics through selective adsorption of wetting agents on plastic surface. The relationships between hydrophobic attraction and surface properties were also examined. It is revealed that there exists a three-order polynomial relationship between the AB Gibbs function and Lewis base component. Our finding provides some insights into mechanism of plastics flotation.The global production of plastic, therefore, has grown sharply over recent years. The increase in plastic consumption is largely responsible for the increase in solid wastes, which has a great impact on waste management. Due to the environmental, economic and social factors, recycling of plastic wastes receives increasing. At present, the key problem of recycling plastics is separation, and froth flotation, as a promising method, has received increasing attention and been the focus of considerable researches ( Basařová et al. studied the influence of flotation reagents on the wettability and floatability of polystyrene and further discussed the adhesion mechanisms on plastic surface ( In this paper, virgin plastics were chosen as research object to investigate the interfacial interactions between plastic particles in aqueous medium through calculation of the extended Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek (EDLVO) potential energy profile. The effects of wetting agents on the interfacial interactions between particles as well as the relationships between hydrophobic attraction and surface properties were further studied. This study provides some insights into mechanism of plastics flotation, for example what force dominates between plastic particles and how wetting agents affect interfacial interactions. And this aids industrial application of this relative new technology. Virgin plastics obtained from commercial source, including polystyrene (PS), acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS), polycarbonate (PC), polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC), were taken as research objects. Plastic particles were spherical with radius of approximate 2 The surface energy was calculated using the Lifshitz–van der Waals/acid–base approach ( According to the EDLVO theory, the relationships between Gibbs function and action distance can be shown as Eqs. PS and PVC polymer films (20 Supposed the plastic particle is spheroidal particle with radius of 1 As shown in In the case of chemical conditioning ( Supposed the particle is spheroidal particle with radius of 1 From The LW–AB interaction is shown in At the stage of pneumatic flotation, the strong hydration repulsion between PS is changed into strong hydrophobic attraction. Wang et al. pointed out that adsorption of wetting agent on plastic surface is not stable and suffers from such factors as turbulence of medium and aeration rate ( The diagram of flotation process can be shown in Since the AB Gibbs function between particles is the dominant interparticle interaction (see As illustrated in The interfacial interactions between plastic particles in aqueous medium were investigated through calculation of LW and AB Gibbs function. The results show that the van der Waals attraction, resulted from the LW interaction, is attraction force. The large hydrophobic interaction caused by the AB interactions is the dominant force between plastic particles in aqueous medium. Moreover, there exists a three-order polynomial relationship between hydrophobic attraction and Lewis base component. The hydrophobic attraction is prone to occur at non-polar or weak polar interfaces in aqueous medium, and increasing the polarity of plastic surface benefits reducing the hydrophobic attraction. Wetting agents have significant effects on the interfacial interactions between particles. It can be found that adsorption of wetting agents promotes dispersion of plastic particles and decreases the floatability. Selective adsorption of LS (wetting agent) on plastic surface can be achieved by pneumatic flotation, and this may improve the recovery and purity of separated products. Our finding provides some insights into mechanism of plastics flotation. This study was supported by the