Continuous precipitation with a compressed fluid antisolvent (PCA) has been used to produce fine particles of tartaric acid. Liquid solutions of tartaric acid in acetone, ethanol and methanol/ethanol mixtures have been sprayed into supercritical carbon dioxide used as antisolvent. Among the process parameters, pressure, temperature, flow rate of solvent and different nozzles have been tested. Furthermore, the effect of solute concentration was under investigation.Many product properties that are relevant in the industrial use can be adjusted by changing the particle size and particle size distribution of the powder. This statement is valid in several fields ranging from polymers to pharmaceutical and inorganic powders. Generally, micronization is mostly carried out in industrial production by two commonly used techniques, recrystallization from solution and comminution. However, these two methods have some drawbacks such as wide particle size distribution, high thermal and mechanical stress, and environmental pollution problems associated with the use of large amounts of organic solvents. Therefore, it is desirable to explore alternative methods, which at least partially overcome those problems. As an alternative to the traditional techniques, various supercritical fluid based precipitation processes have recently been proposed. The characteristics of compressed gases allow to vary the morphology of solid particles in a wide range. The first known precipitation process based on supercritical technique is known as Rapid Expansion of Supercritical Solutions (RESS) Solids, which are insoluble in a compressed gas, can be processed by applying the Precipitation with a Compressed Antisolvent (PCA) process. For this, a solution consisting of an organic solvent, which has to be completely miscible within the compressed gas and a solid material dissolved in this solvent is sprayed through a nozzle into a high-pressure vessel filled with a compressed gas. The formation of the particles is based on two mechanisms, which take place simultaneously. On the one hand, the solvent evaporates in the compressed gas and on the other hand, the compressed gas penetrates into the droplets where it acts as an antisolvent for the dissolved material so that precipitation occurs. A distinctive characteristic of supercritical fluids is the diffusivity that can be up to two orders of magnitude higher than those of liquids. Therefore, the diffusion of the supercritical fluid into a liquid solvent can produce a fast supersaturation of solute dissolved in the liquid and its precipitation in micronized particles. Operation is either batchwise or semi-continuous with promising scale-up perspectives and particle sizes ranging from submicron to few microns. The key operating parameters are pressure, temperature, solution flow rate and initial concentration. These parameters control product quality through their effects on thermodynamics, hydrodynamics and kinetics on mass transfer and precipitation Despite numerous experimental and theoretical work, the fundamental processes in the PCA process are not sufficiently understood so far. The objective of this study is to describe the effects of process conditions (pressure, temperature, flow rates and concentration) on the quality (e.g. particle size and morphology) of the solid product. Tartaric acid dissolved in ethanol, methanol/ethanol mixture and acetone is used as model substance for pharmaceuticals and carbon dioxide as antisolvent. Tartaric acid is used as food preservatives and as reductive in the textile industry. The experimental work was performed in a high-pressure pilot plant consisting of the CO At the beginning of the continuous PCA process, CO Tartaric acid (purity: 99.5 %) and the solvents (methanol, ethanol and acetone, purity: 99.5 %) were all supplied by Merck (Germany). The used carbon dioxide had a purity of 99.95 % and was bought from AGA (Germany). The solubility of tartaric acid in the different solvents at 293 K decreases from methanol (30 wt.%), ethanol (5 wt.%) to acetone (3 wt.%). Acetone, methanol and ethanol were used as solvents due to their complete miscibility with supercritical CO The PCA process shares many similarities with classical spray-drying techniques. The major difference lies in spraying the solution into a compressed gas instead of into heated air as the external phase. Compressed CO During the spray process the particle size and morphology are dependent on many factors, such as the jet breakup, mass transfer rates between the droplet and antisolvent phase, nucleation kinetics, and particle growth rates. Especially, the jet breakup in a compressed gas phase differs from the breakup in atmospheric spray processes We performed PCA experiments from three different solvents varying the antisolvent pressure. The precipitation temperature was constant at 313 K, the initial solute concentration was 3 wt.%, the solution temperature was 293 K and the mass flow rate ratio between the antisolvent and solution was 12.6. The achieved saturation in the droplets differs from solvent to solvent due to the different solubility of tartaric acid. If the saturation of the initial solution would have an influence on the particle size, precipitation from methanol should result in larger particles than precipitation from ethanol. This tendency is not observed in the experiments so that saturation has only a secondary effect on the particle size. In The influence of solute concentration and solution flow rate was investigated using the methanol/ethanol mixture as solvent. The experiments were carried out at a constant precipitation and solution temperature of 313 and 293 K, respectively, and two different precipitation pressures (10 and 20 MPa, respectively). The mass flow rate of CO A higher flow rate results in a larger Capillary number ( In the more diluted system, the droplet formation process becomes more determinant than in the concentrated solution. Thus, the decreasing particle size can be explained by the formation of smaller droplets effected by increasing the flow rate. If the concentration is high a reduction of droplet size caused by an increase of flow rate affects a high particle concentration in the droplets so that coagulation processes become more important and therefore the particle size increases. The influence of nozzle type and dimension was investigated from acetone solutions. In It is found that the particle size is more or less independent of the nozzle diameter if similar nozzles are used. Changing the nozzle type from a Laval nozzle to a two-flow nozzle the mean particle size is reduced. Using the two-flow nozzle the atomization energy is enhanced and the mixing is improved. Therefore, smaller droplets are formed and the mass transfer is increased. In contrast to atomization processes under atmospheric conditions it has to be mentioned that the pressure drop across the nozzle does not effect the droplet size if the atomization is taken place in compressed gases Precipitation of tartaric acid particles can be made through the continuous PCA process. The particle size can be manipulated by the precipitation pressure, solute concentration, mass flow ratio between solution and antisolvent and nozzle type, however the precipitation temperature has no influence on the particle size. The particles precipitated from acetone solutions are smaller compared with the ones from alcoholic solutions. This different behavior can be explained by the differences in thermodynamic properties of the solvents (e.g. vapor pressure) and by the different phase behavior of the binary systems. The industrial applications of this process are so manifold due to the enhancements of the process in comparison to conventional processes especially in the pharmaceutical, food industry and for energetic materials.