While it is widely recognized that fluids influence fault strength and earthquake nucleation, propagation and arrest, their effects on co-seismic sliding friction are only conjectured. To shed light on these effects, 55 high velocity (>1ms−1) friction experiments were conducted at room temperature on Carrara marble samples in the presence of pore fluid (up to 15MPa pore pressure), room-humidity and “vacuum” (10−4
                     mbar) conditions. In all the experiments, the friction coefficient evolved from a peak value of 0.6–0.8 to a steady-state value of 0.1 in about 1–1.5m of slip. However, experiments performed in the presence of pore fluid had a large and more abrupt decrease in friction at the initiation of sliding (65% after 20mm of slip), whereas experiments performed under vacuum and room humidity conditions showed initial velocity-strengthening behavior followed by a more gradual reduction in friction. This indicates that calcite-bearing rocks are more prone to slip in the presence of water. Under room-humidity conditions, CO2 was detected during the entire duration of the experiment. In the presence of pore fluid, HCO3
                     − and Ca2+ were detected for slips >0.1m. The lack of decarbonation products (HCO3
                     − and Ca2+) in pore fluid experiments for slip <0.1m implies that the abrupt weakening is not related to decarbonation (or that the abundance of the reaction products is below the resolution of the analytical methods). Given the modest thermal expansion of water, the estimated thermal pressurization during the abrupt weakening appears to be negligible. Instead, we suggest that abrupt weakening is due to subcritical crack-growth, hydrolytic weakening and brittle failure of the asperities on the sliding surfaces. Modeling shows that the occurrence in nature of co-seismic (water-present) decarbonation reactions similar to those triggered in the laboratory could yield sufficient reaction product to be detected in aquifers located in the proximity of active faults.Fluids play a fundamental physical (pore fluid pressure, temperature buffering, etc.) and chemical (dissolution, hydrolytic weakening, etc.) role in controlling fault strength and earthquake nucleation, propagation and arrest ( Until now, technical challenges related to pore fluid confinement impeded to investigate the role of water in experiments that reproduce deformation conditions typical of earthquakes moderate to large in magnitude (i.e., slip rates of ∼1 Experiments were performed with SHIVA (SHIVA: Slow to HIgh Velocity Apparatus), which uses two brushless engines (maximum power 300 The procedure for experiments performed in the presence of pore fluid consisted of the following steps ( Experiments were performed on hollow cylinders of Carrara marble (grain size ∼300 Sealing of fluids inside the vessel was achieved by inserting O-rings (covered by a Teflon film) between the vessel walls and the aluminum jackets. The fluid used in the experiments was a saturated solution of calcite prepared by adding several grams of CaCO To perform experiments under environmental-controlled conditions, SHIVA was equipped with an environmental/vacuum chamber (minimum pressure of 10 Rock and fluid samples were recovered for post-experiment microstructural and geochemical analysis to determine deformation mechanisms and the processes responsible for any measured changes in fluid composition. Fluid samples collected at ambient pressure after the experiments were filtered (0.45 Under vacuum and room humidity conditions, gas (CO After all the experiments, the rock samples were impregnated with epoxy and cut perpendicular to the slip surface and tangential to the slip direction for thin sectioning. Thin sections were examined under the optical microscope, the Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy-equipped Scanning Electron Microscope (EDS-SEM, INGV, Rome) and the Electron Probe MicroAnalyzer (EPMA, INGV, Rome). Experiments were performed at slip rate ( In the presence of pore water, the evolution from peak friction to steady-state friction can be divided into two steps and two weakening distances: During the first step, friction decreased abruptly and linearly with slip, achieving about 65% of the final weakening over a weakening distance Instead, experiments performed under room humidity or “vacuum” conditions showed an initial slip-hardening behavior (before peak friction) followed by a more gradual, continuous weakening with no clear break in slope. However, under identical acceleration (e.g., 7.8 The different evolution of the friction coefficient with slip in the pore fluid experiments with respect to the room humidity and vacuum experiment resulted in large differences in fracture energy, defined as the integral between the friction curve and the minimum frictional level reached ( In summary, under the above-mentioned identical normal stress and slip rate conditions, we find that the main systematic differences due to fluids are:  the initial abrupt decrease in friction was about 65% of The maximum temperature measured by the thermocouple immersed in the fluid was 90 In the case of experiment s264 performed at In the presence of pore water, the fine grained gouge material produced during sliding was flushed away with the water when the valves were opened at the end of the experiment. As a consequence, SEM and EPMA investigations were conducted only on the wall rocks. In experiment s229 (effective normal stress of 10 Instead, the fine grained gouge material in the slipping zone was recovered in the case of room humidity and vacuum experiments. BSE-SEM images in Analytical data are reported in We could not measure the fluid composition during the experiments. To determine the timing of calcite decomposition with respect to the frictional evolution with slip, we stopped experiments s460 and s463 (target Under room-humidity conditions, CO In all the environmental conditions investigated in the 55 experiments described here (pore-fluids, vacuum and room-humidity) the peak friction, In the presence of pore water, experimental results are consistent with the Terzaghi effect ( But what is the mechanism responsible for such dramatic weakening in calcite-bearing rocks in the presence of water? And can decarbonation reactions associated with seismic slip be detected at the earth surface? Large and abrupt weakening was observed only for experiments performed with pressurized fluids. Because there is no evidence of abrupt variations in fluid pressure and normal stress (  Reaction ( The appearance of Ca     In summary, brittle failure of asperities is boosted in the presence of pore fluid pressure, relative to room humidity or vacuum conditions. In the case of pore-water experiments, once the sample was accelerated, the presence of water buffered the bulk increase of temperature in the slipping zone and made the asperities more brittle which resulted in a near-instantaneous weakening. With subsequent slip, the bulk temperature in the slipping zone gradually increased and decarbonation reactions were triggered. The above mechanism differs from the usual interpretation of flash heating, where weakening is assumed to be induced by plastic yielding and melting of asperities and requires a critical velocity to be overcome ( Although we did not clearly unravel the weakening mechanism responsible for the abrupt initial weakening in calcite-bearing rocks in the presence of pore fluids, if the co-seismic slip is of a few tens of centimeters, the amount of Ca  Consequently, we infer that the geochemical fluid signature observed in laboratory experiments could be detected in aquifers located in proximity to active faults after large magnitude earthquakes propagating in carbonate-bearing rocks. Importantly, similar chemical changes to those observed during our experiments were observed in water springs after the L'Aquila earthquake. For example, The abrupt and large decrease in friction at the initiation of slip observed in the presence of fluids indicates that calcite-bearing rocks interacting with pore-water are prone to earthquake nucleation and seismic rupture propagation. Abrupt weakening in the presence of pore fluids may be related to subcritical crack-growth in calcite and hydrolytic weakening leading to brittle failure of the asperities on the sliding surfaces, while decarbonation is triggered only after larger slip and once weakening has already kicked-in. The geochemical composition of water-rich fluids from experiments that reproduce seismic slip conditions in calcite-bearing rocks records the signature of the physico-chemical processes associated with dynamic weakening (at least once decarbonation occurs). Similar chemical changes were observed in water springs after moderate to large magnitude earthquakes propagating in carbonate-bearing rocks suggesting that the physico-chemical processes triggered in the experiments might occur in nature. A simplified model allowed us to constrain the maximum volume of aquifer allowing to develop a measurable geochemical anomaly of [HCO This work was funded by the