The Master Sintering Curve (MSC) has received much attention in recent years due to its ability to predict sintering behaviour of a given powder and green body process regardless of its thermal history. In this paper MSC, based on the combined stage sintering model is constructed for one of the most important lead-free piezoelectric viz. lithium sodium niobate, Na1-x
                     Li
                        x
                     NbO3 (x=0.12, LNN-12), ceramic using shrinkage data. The present study has been carried out to understand and control the densification behaviour during pressureless sintering. Two distinct stages of densification have been observed en route to the upper limit to sintering temperature. The activation energies of densification for the two temperature ranges viz. 800–1150°C and 1150–1300°C were found to be 365kJ/mol and 2530kJ/mol, respectively, through the construction of MSC. The MSC should be useful in predicting the densification behaviour and the final density and for designing a reproducible fabrication schedule for the LNN-12 ceramics.In recent years, demand for the new, lead-free piezoelectric materials for technological applications has increased because of environmental concerns. Among the many lead-free piezoelectric ceramic systems investigated, alkali niobate piezoelectric ceramics have been found to be attractive due to their excellent piezoelectric properties ( The model of MSC, in the recent past, has been applied successfully to many of the ceramic oxides such as ThO All the LNN-12 samples in this study were prepared from the reagent-grade Nb For the samples, clean single phase (orthorhombic) polycrystalline LNN-12 formation was confirmed from the XRD pattern wherein all the peak positions matched well with the JCPDS#033 1270 Both, the relative density (%) and normalized linear shrinkage (Δ In view of the discussion in the preceding section, the activation energies of densification in the two discrete stages were determined separately via the construction of MSC as there is freedom in constructing MSC over several consecutive stages, based on either the temperature For LNN-12 composition, the activation energies for a two step process of densification were determined with the help of MSC. The MSC was successfully constructed for the LNN-12 ceramic. An appropriate representation of densification behaviour was possible by applying two stage MSC approach for the two different temperature ranges. The MSC should be useful to the ceramic industries to predict and control the densification evolution at a given sintering/thermal profile for the realistic desired density of their sinterable products. Thanks are due to Prof. Mao-Hua Teng for providing the computer programme of master sintering curve model to facilitate predicting accurately the sintering results.