Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is associated with a multifactorial dysregulation of bone and vascular calcification and closely linked to increased cardiovascular mortality and concomitant bone disease. We aimed to investigate specific microRNA (miRNA) signatures in CKD patients to find indicators for vascular calcification and/or bone mineralization changes during CKD and after kidney transplantation (KT).
                  A miRNA array was used to investigate serum miRNA profiles in CKD patients, then selected miRNAs were quantified in a validation cohort comprising 73 patients in CKD stages 3 to 5, 67 CKD patients after KT, and 36 healthy controls. A spectrum of biochemical parameters including markers for kidney function, inflammation, glucose, and mineral metabolism was determined.
                  The relative expression of miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p was down-regulated in patients with CKD stage 4 and 5 compared to healthy controls. This down-regulation disappeared after kidney transplantation even when lower glomerular filtration rates (eGFR) persisted. MiR-223-3p and miR-93-5p were associated with interleukin-6 (IL-6) and eGFR levels, and by trend with interleukin-8 (IL-8), C-peptide, hematocrit, and parathyroid hormone (PTH).
                  This study contributes new knowledge of serum miRNA expression profiles in CKD, potentially reflecting pathophysiological changes of bone and calcification pathways associated with inflammation, vascular calcification, mineral and glucose metabolism. Identified miRNA signatures can contribute to future risk markers or future therapeutic targets in bone and kidney disease.Chronic kidney disease (CKD), in particular end-stage renal disease (ESRD), is frequently associated with disorders of mineral and bone metabolism (CKD-MBD) CKD-MBD is a systemic disorder of mineral and bone metabolism due to CKD, manifesting as either one or a combination of abnormalities in the metabolism of calcium, phosphorus, parathyroid hormone (PTH) and vitamin D, as well as abnormalities in bone-turnover, bone mineralization, bone volume, and extra-skeletal calcification relevant to the cardiovascular system MiRNAs have been proposed to be involved in different aspects of CKD development and deterioration of the disease, but also in systemic effects such as CKD-MBD and vascular calcification Distinctive patterns of circulating miRNA levels have been described as biomarkers for disease, such as coronary artery disease (CAD) and diabetes mellitus (DM) The aim of this study was to use human CKD serum samples to identify a pattern of systemic deregulated miRNAs which have a putative involvement in mineral metabolism and calcification and which are changed during CKD progression and potentially after kidney transplantation. These miRNAs are thought to be involved in key pathways of disease-associated complications such as CKD-MBD and may serve as biomarkers and targets for subsequent diagnostic and putative therapeutic studies in CKD patients. Seventy-one patients with CKD stages 3 to 5 (without renal replacement therapy (RRT)), sixty-six CKD patients after KT (mean time since transplantation: 7 This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Graz, Austria, (23-056 ex 10/11) and is registered at MiRNAs were isolated from serum using the miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). 1200 The digital multiplexed nanoString nCounter human miRNA expression assay (nanoString Technologies, Seattle, USA) was performed with 10–30 The 12 selected miRNAs were analyzed using quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR, polymerase chain reaction) in a discovery group of random samples from all 5 available groups (CKD 3–5, KT, controls). Based on reproducible results for 4 miRNAs (miR-223-3p, miR-93-5p, miR-142-3p, and miR146a-5p), a subsequent qPCR analysis of these miRNAs was performed in all samples. The qPCR was performed using TaqMan miRNA assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). 3 Biomarkers were measured in serum and/or plasma according to the different manufacturers' instructions. Levels of IL-6, TNFα, IL-8, and IL-10 were measured using FlowCytomix™ Multiplex Technology (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA). IL-6R (human IL-6R Platinum ELISA, eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA) and MPO (Myeloperoxidase ELISA K6631B, Immundiagnostik, Bensheim, Germany) where measured with standard ELISA technology. bALP, CRP, iron, ferritin, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), glucose, calcium, magnesium, sodium, phosphate, and potassium were measured on an automated system via the Cobas® 8000/6000 modular analyzer series, PTH, OC, and CTX on the Cobas® 4000 analyzer series (Roche Diagnostics, Rotkreuz, Switzerland). C-peptide was determined by the ADVIA Centaur XP Immunoassay System (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). Hematocrit was measured by ABL800 FLEX blood gas analyzer (Radiometer GmbH, Willich, Germany). 25(OH)vitamin D (25(OH)D) levels were assessed via an automated chemiluminescence immunoassay on the iSYS automated system (Immunodiagnostic Systems, Boldon NE35 9PD, UK). To predict possible miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p targets which might play a role during CKD-MBD and vascular calcification, the online resources miRWalk 2.0 ( Patient characteristics and biomarker levels are reported as mean Quantitative qPCR data are reported as mean To evaluate the associations between specific miRNA concentrations and biological markers, univariate linear regression analyses were used. Standardized coefficients B and their standard errors (SEs) were obtained. In all cases, a To discover changes in miRNA expression 171 recruited patients were divided in 5 groups including CKD stages 3–5, KT patients, and controls ( Levels of surrogate parameters for inflammatory processes (IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNFα), glucose metabolism (glucose, C-peptide), electrolyte homeostasis (calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, phosphate), hematocrit, PTH, 25(OH)D and further parameters are shown in IL-6 was significantly elevated in CKD stages compared to healthy controls ( TNFα and CRP showed no significant differences between CKD, KT or control groups. Hematocrit decreased significantly with the reduction in eGFR. Phosphate as well as urea, creatinine, magnesium, and PTH showed a significant increase parallel to the decrease in kidney function. The bone turnover markers OC and CTX were increased in late-stage CKD compared to early CKD stages. Additionally, OC was also increased compared to the KT group ( In a primary discovery step, 12 miRNAs (Suppl. Table 1) were selected for further analysis based on expression differences seen in a miRNA array and their putative involvement in bone and calcification during CKD according to existing knowledge and databases. These 12 miRNAs were analyzed via qPCR in a small discovery group of random samples selected from all available groups (CKD3–5, KT and controls). Based on reproducible results of 4 miRNAs (miR-223-3p, miR-93-5p, miR-142-3p and miR146a-5p) a subsequent qPCR analysis of these 4 selected miRNAs was performed in all samples. Systemic expression levels of miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p were significantly reduced in CKD patients in stages 4 and 5 compared to CKD stage 3, healthy controls, and KT recipients ( MiR-223-3p was down-regulated in CKD stage 4 ( MiR-93–5p showed a stable down-regulation in all three CKD stages with a significant decrease in CKD 4 ( The expression differences in the miRNA array experiments initially seen for miR-142-3p and miR-146a-5p were mitigated in qPCR experiments in all CKD and KT groups. Nevertheless, miR-142-3p showed a small, but significant down-regulation in CKD 4, compared to healthy controls ( To exclude a confounding effect of T2DM on miRNA expression, differences in expression for all 4 miRNAs were analyzed according to manifestation of T2DM ( To exclude a confounding effect of T2DM on miRNA expression, differences in expression for all 4 miRNAs were analyzed according to manifestation of T2DM (Suppl. Figs.s 1 and 2). However, there was no overall change of the results except for decrease in statistical power due to decrease in sample size. Univariate linear regression analyses for miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p showed significant associations of these miRNAs with kidney function, hematocrit, inflammation, PTH, 25(OH)D, and glucose metabolism ( MiR-223-3p was significantly associated with eGFR in CKD stage 5 with a trend towards an association in CKD stage 4. In patients with CKD stage 4, miR-223-3p was significantly associated with levels of IL-6 and CTX. Furthermore, in this stage, miR-223-3p showed a trend towards an association with IL-8 and 25(OH)D ( MiR-93-5p was significantly associated with eGFR in CKD stage 5 and with levels of IL-6 and hematocrit, both in CKD stages 4 and 5. In CKD stage 5, miR-93-5p showed an association with C-peptide and a trend towards an association with PTH. A trend for an association with PTH was also seen in CKD stage 4. OC was significantly associated with miR-93-5p in CKD stage 4 and showed a trend towards an association in stage 5 ( Based on miRWalk 2.0 predictions, miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p were found to interact with IL-6, TGFβ, Wnt-signaling, and osteoblast differentiation. Genes which showed a connection to these miRNAs were further investigated using TargetScan 7.0. MiR-223-3p was predicted to regulate the following genes, CHUK (conserved helix-loop-helix ubiquitous kinase; IKKα), RPS6KB1 (ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1) and IL6ST (interleukin 6 signal transducer) (detailed results in Suppl. Table 2). MiR-93-5p was predicted to regulate STAT3 (Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3), TNFSF11 (tumor necrosis factor superfamily member 11, RANKL), SMAD5 (SMAD family member 5), SMAD6 (SMAD family member 6), BMR2 (bone morphogenetic protein receptor type 2), PPARD (peroxisome proliferator activated receptor delta), and NFAT5 (nuclear factor of activated T-cells 5, tonicity-responsive) (detailed results in Suppl. Table 3). Using miRTarBase we evaluated targets for miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p outside of the CKD-MBD spectrum, which have already been confirmed via molecular methods in other studies (Suppl. Tables 4 and 5). When comparing selected CKD 4 patients with an eGFR of 15–29 to KT patients with a similar eGFR level (eGFR 15–29), the expression of miR-223-3p ( In this study, we report a significantly lower systemic expression of two specific miRNAs, miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p, during later stages of CKD and a reversal of this effect after kidney transplantation. Expression levels tended to normalize after kidney transplantation for both miRNAs, even exceeding expression levels found in healthy controls. MiR-223-3p and miR-93-5p levels were significantly associated with CKD stages, parameters of inflammation and kidney function, and indices of glucose metabolism. Target predictions indicated miRNA involvement in bone metabolism via different pathways which makes them interesting as putative biomarkers for CKD-MBD, vascular calcification, and other osteogenic diseases connected to CKD. In accordance to the expression differences of miR-223-3p in our study, miR-223 deregulation was recently associated with vascular calcification processes, osteoclast differentiation, VSMC phenotype switch, but also with inflammation via various targets We detected a down-regulation of miR-93-5p during deterioration of CKD. MiR-93 has previously been suggested as a potential regulator of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a key regulator for angiogenesis and vascular homeostasis. A down-regulation of miR-93, similar to our findings, has been associated with higher levels of VEGF and IL-6 in T1DM The down-regulation of miR-93-5p in our study might also indicate an enhanced calcification process, as miR-93 has been shown to be inversely correlated to Sp7, an important transcription factor for osteoblast mineralization, where higher Sp7 levels are maintained by down-regulated miR-93 In osteoporotic patients with normal kidney function, miR-93 and other miRNAs were differentially expressed in serum and bone tissue samples In renal biopsies of progressive CKD patients, miR-142-5p, miR-223 as well as miR-146b were upregulated compared to stable CKD patients, indicating a role during deterioration of the disease We found no differences in miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p expression between CKD patients with and without T2DM, although an earlier study found decreased miR-223 plasma levels in T2DM patients compared to healthy controls, with a possible effect of miR-223 already early in T2DM disease manifestation We see IL-6, an inflammatory marker, to be associated with decreased miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p expression. There is already some evidence for regulatory effects of miR-223 on IL-6. The production of IL-6 promoted by STAT3 was shown to be regulated via miR-223 but vice-versa, IL-6 was found to inhibit miR-223 via a negative feedback loop MiR-223 has been described as a regulator in the NF-κB pathway and the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-pathway, both important for the development of CKD OC is a well-known indicator of bone turnover and bone formation and was shown to be elevated during renal failure as an indication for high bone turnover The association of miR-93-5p with hematocrit seen in CKD stages 4 and 5 are in line with a previously published hypothesis that circulating miRNAs are potentially excreted from red blood cells When looking at putative targets for miR-223-3p using TargetScan we identified IKKα, RPS6KB1 and IL6ST, the latter two active in the IL-6 signaling pathway. RPS6KB1, an effector of the PI3K (phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase) pathway important for ROS downstream signaling, was increased in a CKD rat model on a high calcium-phosphate diet, developing vascular calcification and VSMC differentiation to osteoblast-like cells in combination with IL-6 and TNF We also looked at several predict targets for miR-93-5p. Predicted genes of interest were STAT3, TNFSF11 (RANKL), SMAD5, SMAD6, BMR2, PPARD, and NFAT5, well-known regulators of mineral and vascular changes in CKD. Influences of RANKL on osteoclastogenesis and calcification of VSMCs link bone and vasculature To minimize the effect of kidney impairment we analyzed CKD and KT patients with a similar eGFR and found significant differences for miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p expression, with higher levels in the KT group. This indicates a regulation of the circulating amount of both miRNAs, which appears to be independent of kidney function. Other miRNAs analyzed in our study, such as miR-142-3p, showed a similar trend of expression, which was not statistically significant, probably due to pronounced scattering and the restricted sample size of the subgroups. MiR-142-3p was indicated as an important factor during osteoblast differentiation via the Wnt-signaling pathway In our study, miR-146a-5p and other miRNAs previously reported to be involved in calcification and mineralization processes during normal kidney function Differences of miR-146a-5p in serum samples were detected during our primary array experiment, but subsequent qPCR results were no longer significant. This is in line with a study that only found downregulation of miR-146a plasma levels during CKD when patients underwent acute exercise, not during normal physical activity Despite increased inorganic phosphate levels in CKD patients there was no association of miR-223-3p or miR-93-5p with systemic phosphate levels probably due to a contribution of tissue or intracellular phosphate. The importance of high phosphate levels was described for bone mineralization in CKD Our study focused on serum to detect overall miRNA changes because it is a material commonly used, it is easy to handle and minimally invasive. The stability of miRNAs in serum is probably achieved due to their transport in exosomes and binding to several proteins Strengths of our study are the overall large sample size and the presence of all late CKD stages without the confounding influence of RRT and the inclusion of a large control group with a variety of parameters measured during the development of the disease and after KT. A number of important serum parameters including interleukins and markers of glucose and bone metabolism have been investigated in this study. Furthermore, miRNA array screening results have been confirmed by individual qPCR validation. However, smaller group sizes in several CKD subgroups might have reduced the detection of underlying regulatory associations and the possibility of multivariate analyses, but subgrouping via eGFR was necessary due to the distinct characteristics of each CKD stage. Based on our findings, miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p should be further investigated as systemic markers for CKD, their role in bone metabolism, vascular calcification and potential VSMC differentiation. Due to various effects on different pathways miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p are of great interest for CKD disease development, both because of inflammatory effects and effects on mineral metabolism. Various potential downstream targets of miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p do point to an involvement in osteoblast and VSMC differentiation during CKD-MBD with possible diagnostic and therapeutic potential. In conclusion, this human CKD and KT study shows significant changes of systemic miR-223-3p and miR-93-5p levels, associated with CKD stage as well as inflammation and bone parameters. Further in-vivo and in-vitro experiments to validate these pilot results are necessary to provide more detailed insights into the regulatory network of CKD. MiRNA signatures might help to assess pathophysiological changes during CKD and potential bone specific and vascular risks as well as therapy aspects in CKD patients. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at All authors state that they have no conflicts of interest. This study has been funded partially by the The author thanks all the supporting team members of the Medical University Graz and the ZMF Graz, in particularly Lisa Lindheim, MD, Mag. Dr. Selma Mautner and Verena Zachhuber, BSc. Authors' roles: Study design: MU, BOP, VS; Study conduct: MU, BL, SL; Data collection: VS, BL, SL; Data analysis: MU, BL, SL; Data interpretation: MU, BOP, VS, AK, KE, BL; Drafting manuscript: MU, BOP; Revising manuscript content: MU,BOP, AK, BL, SL, JM, NS, DH, OT, ARR, HM, KE, VS; Approving final version of manuscript: MU, BOP, AK, BL, SL, JM, NS, DH, OT, ARR, HM, KE, VS; MU and BOP take responsibility for the integrity of the data analysis.