As a case study to quantify the flotation response, Cu activation of pyrite was examined. Two particle sizes, 106/150 and 37/74 μm (surface area 304 and 901 cm2/g), were used. Micro-flotation was performed to determine the rate constant, k, as a function of surface concentration of copper, [Cu]surf. The [Cu]surf was determined by EDTA extraction and controlled by contact with Cu salt solution or with chalcopyrite and chalcocite particles. The rate constant relative to zero copper, k
                     Cu/k
                     0, followed the same trend against [Cu]surf for both particle sizes. Chalcocite gave a surface concentration about 40 times higher than chalcopyrite, corresponding to their relative ion production (the b-values in Part I). An estimate of mineral grade likely to cause activation was made assuming the grade was inversely dependent on b and taking the critical grade of chalcocite as 0.1% (Petruk, 2000). This gave a critical chalcopyrite grade of ca. 2%.The study of accidental activation involves the release and transfer of metal ions and the subsequent flotation response. In Part I the production of Cu ions from two Cu-minerals, chalcopyrite and chalcocite, was modeled ( The pyrite was obtained from Ward's Natural Science Establishment. The sample was crushed in a ring pulverizer and screened to obtain two size classes, 37/74 and 106/150 μm. The surface area, measured by BET, was 901 and 304 cm Chalcopyrite and chalcocite samples were obtained from Ward's Natural Science Establishment. Each was crushed in a jaw crusher. Handpicked specimens were ground in the pulverizer and wet-screened to obtain a selected size fraction, 25/37 μm. The minerals were passed on the Mozley Table to remove impurities, washed twice with a dilute hydrochloric acid solution (pH 2), rinsed with acetone and stored under acetone.  Stock solutions of copper sulphate, ranging from 100 ppm Cu (1.57×10 The micro-flotation cell was a version of the For conditioning with solution, a 1 g sample of pyrite was mixed for 10 min on an orbital shaker at 250 rpm in 100 ml of a given Cu concentration at natural pH. The solution was decanted and the solids conditioned in 100 ml of 1×10 For conditioning with Cu-minerals, 1 g 106/150 μm pyrite samples were used and mixed with 0.05 g chalcopyrite or 0.002 g chalcocite for 10 min in 100 ml distilled water at natural pH. The samples were screened at 37 μm to separate the pyrite from the Cu-minerals. The pyrite was then conditioned in SIPX and transferred to the flotation cell in the manner described above. Flotation was conducted as a function of time up to 8 min for the 37/74 μm size class and up to 2 min for the 106/150 μm size class. All products were dried, weighed, and the cumulative recovery ( Samples of pyrite were conditioned in the same manner as for flotation. The solution was decanted, the solids washed and treated with 25 ml 0.05 M EDTA solution for half-an-hour (cf. Part I). The suspension was filtered, and the extract analysed (by atomic absorption spectroscopy) to measure the amount of Cu extracted. This is taken as a measure of Cu on the surface, and knowing the surface area of pyrite gives surface concentration, [Cu]   In the tests with chalcopyrite and chalcocite, the flotation rate constant (of the 106/150 μm pyrite particles) was ca. 1.6 and 9.5 min  Contact with chalcocite gave a surface concentration of ca. 2–4×10 The method of presenting the flotation response in  The Cp grade, ca. 2% (equivalent to ∼0.75% Cu), is in line with the experience that chalcopyrite ores do not generally pose activation problems compared with those containing chalcocite. The contact tests mirror these grades: the 1 g pyrite sample mixed with 0.002 g Cc and 0.05 g Cp corresponds to “grades” of ∼0.2% Cc and 5% Cp.   For two particle sizes, the rate constant of pyrite with and without Cu ( Presenting the flotation response in this manner reduces the dependence on machine and particle size. The relative surface Cu concentration derived from chalcocite and chalcopyrite, ca. 40, was of the same order as their relative An estimate of mineral grade with potential to cause accidental activation was made assuming the grade was inversely dependent on Parts I and II both emphasize the significant threat of accidental activation posed by chalcocite compared with chalcopyrite. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Canadian Mining Industry Research Organization, CAMIRO (representing Rio Algom, Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting, Les Mines Selbaie, Mine Louvicourt, Noranda, Westmin Resources, Breakwater Resources, and Agnico-Eagle) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) under the NSERC Collaborative Research and Development program.