This paper presents a neural network model to predict the effects of operational parameters on the organic and inorganic sulfur removal from coal by sodium butoxide. The coal particle size, leaching temperature and time, sodium butoxide concentration and pre oxidation time by peroxyacetic acid (PAA) were used as inputs to the network. The outputs of the models were organic and inorganic sulfur reduction. Feed-forward artificial neural network with 5-7-10-1 arrangement, were capable to estimate organic and inorganic sulfur reduction, respectively. Simulated values obtained with neural network correspond closely to the experimental results. It was achieved quite satisfactory correlations of R
                     2
                     =1 and 0.96 in training and testing stages for pyritic sulfur and R
                     2
                     =1 and 0.97 in training and testing stages, respectively, for organic sulfur reduction prediction. The proposed neural network model accurately reproduces all the effects of operational variables and can be used in the simulation of Tabas coal desulfurization plant.Artificial neural network (ANN) is an empirical modeling tool, which is analogous to the behavior of biological neural structures The use of neural networks to predict coal final sulfur content, after desulfurization with Acidithiobacillus bacteria, was reported by Acharya et al. The aim of the present work is the assessment of Tabas coal with reference to the organic and inorganic sulfur removal by sodium butoxide, as leaching agent, and possible variations with change of coal particle sizes, leaching temperature and time, sodium butoxide concentration and duration time of peroxyacetic acid (PAA) pretreatment of coal (to enhancing of coal desulfurization by sodium butoxide), using experimental data obtained at a laboratory level and simulated data by means of a neural network, MATLAB software package. To our knowledge, this is the first time that ANNs have been used to predict both of organic and inorganic sulfur removal from coal in a chemical desulfurization process. The use of high-sulfur coals for energy production requires a cleaning stage to meet environmental regulations. Sulfur in coal occurs in organic and inorganic forms. The organic form is about 50% of the total sulfur that cannot be removed by physical coal cleaning methods Well known desulfurization processes include: caustic treatment The use of PAA as oxidative reagent for the desulfurization of coal has been reported by Palmer et al. The structural properties of coal, such as porosity, surface area and pore size, play an important role in chemical desulfurization. Coal contains moisture in its pores and this moisture can be removed by heating at 100 Borah et al. Pietrzak and Wachowska The other chemical method of coal desulfurization is leaching with straight-chain aliphatic or aromatic organometallic compounds R can be benzyl, methyl and In this work the optical microscopy investigation shows that pyrite is present in forms of discrete grains, fracture and cavity filling, regular and irregular framboidal with particle size ranging from 1 to 40 The bulk sample 600 PAA oxidation was carried out by dispersing 8 Sodium butoxide was prepared by adding the requisite amount of sodium to 1-butanol (0.8 The desulfurization experiments were carried out in an 80 Since the 1940s, artificial neural networks (ANNs) have been used in various applications in engineering and science The main advantages of the ANN models are: (1) no particular knowledge is needed about the system being modeled, unknown effects could be involved through a proper design of the input–output patterns; (2) relative simplicity of neural network architecture These application processes of an ANN model design include the steps below Collecting the whole data in one place. Determining the train and test sets. Converting the data into the ANN inputs. Determining, training and testing the network topology. Repeating the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and the 4th steps as long as it is required to determine the optimal model. Application of the optimal ANN model. An ANN can be considered as a black box (hidden layers) consisting of a series of complicated equations for the calculation of outputs based on a given series of input values A parameter The most popular ANN is the feed-forward multi-layer ANN which uses back-propagation learning algorithm. This type of network consists of three layers of nodes namely an input layer, hidden layers and an output layer. Feed-forward neural network usually has one or more hidden layers, which enable the network to model non-linear and complex functions. Scaled data are introduced into the input layer of the network and then is propagated from input layer to hidden layer and finally to the output layer  The values of the interconnection weights are determined by a neural network training or learning procedure using a set of data. The objective is to find the value of the weight that minimizes differences between the actual output and the predicted output in the output layer in order to minimize the mean square errors (MSE), the average squared error between the network predicted outputs and the target outputs In this work, the ANN model have been developed by considering two hidden layer in MLP architecture and with training using the EBP algorithm. The 5-7-10-1 ANN model ( Neural network training can be made more efficient by certain pre-processing steps where The mean and standard deviation for pre-processing of input variables are given in A total of 36 sets of data were used in the predictions by ANN; 25 data sets were used for training and 11 sets for testing the network, for both organic and inorganic sulfur reduction prediction. The training process was stopped after 10 epochs ( The testing set which actually tests how good the model is, shows that the models could estimate the sulfur reduction quite satisfactorily. The correlation coefficient (  The effects of time of oxidation with PAA, as pretreatment process, particle size, leaching agent concentration and leaching temperature and time on coal desulfurization with an organo metallic compound, sodium butoxide, were investigated in laboratory. In the experiments, the pretreatment time of 40 The produced data, on laboratory optimization process, were used to the simulation by means of artificial neural network. A feed-forward artificial neural network with 5-7-10-1 arrangement was capable to estimate both of organic and inorganic sulfur reduction. In testing process the used model could estimate the sulfur reductions quite satisfactorily. The correlation coefficient ( These studies on chemical removal of organic and inorganic sulfur from coal constitute new unexamined conditions that where ANN have never been used to predict the amount of organic and inorganic sulfur removal from coal. The used method and its related results can further be used as an expert system in Tabas coal desulfurization plant, in order to optimize the process parameters and to evaluate the parameters interactions, for the expected sulfur removal without having to conduct the new experiments in laboratory.