Size and composition specific — i.e., distributed — efficiency of particle separation systems is calculated by exploiting measurements of particle composition in low dimension — i.e., areal grade. A stereologically based framework for the mass balance around the separator was set out and an original regularization criterium was used for its solution. It allows retrieving the distribution of volumetric grade of the streams entering and exiting the separator from the respective areal grade distributions, and makes possible the calculation of the distributed efficiency. Synthetic data are used to demonstrate the method proposed.Physical processes are used to separate multiphase particles based on their different compositions. The goal is to isolate particles with a high fraction of valuable phase, thus upgrading the fed particulate. The concentration is achieved by exploiting the different behaviours of composite particles. Either mass or surface properties are used. As an example, particles with a high fraction of a heavy valuable phase can be separated based on their average density. In The overall efficiency of a separation can be evaluated in terms of recovery in valuable phase and grade of the concentrate product. These depend on both the performance of the separator and the characteristics of the particulate fed. It is desirable to parcel out the contribution of the separator performance from the influence of the feed characteristics. A very efficient separation unit is capable of a perfect splitting based on the controlling property. Turning to the previous example, a perfect density separator directs to the heavy product all the particles with average density above a set cut density. (In general, one adjusts the separator to have the best compromise between concentrate grade and valuable phase recovery for the revenues are related to the quality and quantity of concentrate and the goal is to maximize operating profits.) Industrial separators are not capable of perfect separations and particles are misplaced. Thus, in the case of a separation based on density, a fraction of particles lighter than the set density are misplaced to the heavy product, and vice versa, some heavier particles are reported to the light product. The more efficient the separator is, the lower the fraction of misplaced particles. The particles with average density close to the set separation density are more likely to be misplaced than particles with average density sensibly different than the separation density. The performance of the separation unit can be expressed as an efficiency curve giving the probability of the particles to be reported to the concentrate as a function of their composition. These are “S” shaped curves as cumulative probability functions. The separator with a steeper efficiency curve will give a sharper separation. A perfect separator has a step-shaped curve. The efficiency values corresponding to given particle compositions are referred to as distributed efficiencies. The particle composition is quantified in terms of (volumetric) grade, ratio between the (volume) weight of the valuable phase and that of the particle. The volumetric composition of particles cannot be measured directly. X-ray tomography capable of penetrating high-density material and with the resolution needed for sub millimetric particles is not available today. Traditionally, the weight distribution in classes of grade has been measured by fractionating the particulate in classes of density with heavy liquids. Indeed, there is a linear relationship between grade and density for a two-phase material. The laboratory procedure is so tedious and has so many drawbacks that it is rarely applied in practice. Thus, a system of particles cannot be characterized easily by its grade distribution, which gives the fraction of particles within a narrow composition interval. The distributed separator performance can be calculated based on the grade distributions and the solid troughput of the streams entering and exiting the unit. Indeed, by simple mass balance: The ratio concentrate- to feed-troughput is the process weight recovery, which is also termed yield. The distribution of composition of the streams can be recovered from the areal measurements accessed on polished sections of a sample of particles embedded in an epoxy resin. In a section, the particle expose its internal and an areal grade can be measured: this is defined as the ratio between of area of the valuable phase within a particle transect and that of the transect. The conversion from areal grade distribution to volumetric grade distribution is needed because the areal compositions are distorted estimates of the true volumetric grade; sections and linear probes — i.e., projections in lower dimension — are poor samples of the volumetric composition having a high probability of intersecting one phase only of a composite particle. Stereological methods are used for the conversion. Accurate measurement is necessary due to the high sensitivity of the stereological inversion methods to the errors in the data due to the ill-conditioned nature of the problem. In this paper, we present a method for inferring the performance of a separator. The distributed efficiency is calculated by solving an inverse problem. The complete system of equations includes the stereological equations for recovering the distributions of volumetric grade of the particle streams exiting the separator from the areal grade distributions, these equations are supplemented by the equation for mass balance around the separator. The overall problem is solved with methods for regularized inversion. The regularity of the grade distribution of the feed and the two separation products and a suitable reference solutions are assumed; details are given elsewhere Samples of particles from the streams to and from the separator are embedded in an epoxy resin matrix. After hardening, a planar section is cut, which reveals the particle transects that is the particle interior. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) is used for the areal measurements on each particle transect. Back-scattered electrons produce grey scale contrast that depends on the average atomic weight of the phases on the specimen-spot under the electron beam. The ratio of the area of the valuable phase to the area of the particle transect is the areal grade. Distributions of areal grade can be collected from the samples of the feed and the two separator products (concentrate and tails). Image analysis tools can be used to automate the collection of the areal grade distributions. These three distributions of areal grade are denoted as Both the plain distributions of the areal grade occurrences, For a particle assembly in a narrow size — i.e., particles having roughly the same volume — the inversion problem can be set out as an inhomogeneous Fredholm integral equation of the first kind By disoretization, the The system of equations cannot be solved for This solution If we introduce a reference solution 〈  In The expectation of the The recovered distribution is stochastic; thus, f̃ Negative For the grade distributions of the particulate entering the separator (feed) and two exiting (tails and concentrate), the stereological relationships between volumetric and areal distributions are: The following linear equation relates the feed distribution to that of the concentrate and tails, and expresses the principle of conservation of particles with a given composition: The volumetric recovery The matrix to be inverted to recover the volumetric grade distributions In a more compact fashion, The associated weight matrix that incorporates the three sampling statistics is: A detailed discussion on the selection of an appropriate reference solution for the distribution of the volumetric grade of a natural feed particulate — i.e., produced by a size reduction process — and the evaluation of the different performances obtainable with alternative approaches is reported in Regularization results in “washing-out” the solution details, which are hardly recoverable. The number of the unknowns effectively resolved is given by the number of degrees of freedom, ndf, of the problem solution (not to be confused with the degrees of freedom of the residuals, It is reasonable to assume that the separator efficiency: This is a nonlinear condition for The priori information, that In our experiments, we have found that the optimal For practical uses, The reconstruction capabilities of the WDLS method — modified by the proposed regularization strategy — for recovering the distributed efficiency of a separation unit is tested on synthetic data. A virtual mineralized rock is generated using a Poisson flat process for the stochastic generation of the non-convex three-dimensional Poisson polyhedral textures. This is also referred to as mosaic texture by The kernel matrix was measured from areal grade measurements made on these synthetic particles; both the plain and the area weighted kernel matrices are reported by the authors in a very recent article on this same journal Size by size, the particulate produced is separated into a concentrate and a tailing product; a normal cumulative distribution function (NCDF) splits the particles according to their volumetric composition. The parameters of the separation curve are the sharpness of separation and the value of composition at which it is equal, probably for the particle to be reported in either one of the two products, For each narrow size, An example of reconstructed efficiency is shown in The method succeeds in recovering, with a sufficient resolution, the efficiency coefficients, even if a smoothing effect, intrinsically related to the regularization method, is visible; this is the tribute to pay for a sensible solution. However, this solution is much more realistic than the meaningless apparent efficiency that one recovers using the biased areal grade distributions in a narrow size class: The smoothing is more evident for sharp separations. The objective function penalizes only decreasing separation efficiency solutions, but this condition is not imposed on the solution. Notably, the actual separation coefficients are based on the distribution of grade of samples of particles separated according to a normal cumulative probability curve. Thus, the actual separation efficiency is sampled, and it is not strictly increasing.  The difference between recovered and actual efficiency is reported in An approach to the solution of the problem of disaggregating the contribution of the separator unit performance from the influence of the feed composition to the overall efficiency of a separation process is presented. This is an important achievement. The behaviour of the separator in terms of efficiency curve can be calculated in isolation from other masking side effects related to feed composition. These results pave the way to the derivation of rate constants for individual type of particles. The distributed efficiency can be used to improve the separation unit design and applications, and contribute to the understanding of the separation phenomena. The capability of the method is demonstrated on synthetic generated data. Earlier experiments carried out by the authors Finally, it should be pointed out that in the application presented here a virtually error free kernel — i.e., derived from the slicing a great number of synthetic particles — has been used. However, the data is not error free, and the disturbance of areal data distributions is related to particulate sampling. In applications to real mineralogical systems, also errors in the reading of the areal grades with the image analysis system occur to further perturb the data. As far as the statistics of the areal grade sampling of the feed and of the two separation products is concerned, In spite of the demonstrated capacity of the method to retrieve the efficiency coefficients with poor sampling statistics, applications to real world data are necessary to finally validate the method presented. The financial contributions of the Italian Ministry of the University and the Scientific and Technological Research (MURST) is gratefully acknowledged.