The paper provides a review of the studies performed, starting from the 1970 up to today by Italian National Council’s Mineral Processing Institute, to develop application for the use of chelating reagents in the flotation of metallic minerals.
                  A summary is given of the various phases through which the studies progressed, starting by employing commercial reagents and then moving on to the synthesis of new long-chain chelate collectors for the flotation of sulphide and oxidized Pb, Zn, and Cu minerals.
                  In particular a description is presented of the thermodynamic and structural criteria to be followed in designing and synthesizing chelate-type collectors with optimal structure for a given metallic mineral.
                  A theoretical method has been developed for choosing chelating groups that exert selective action on one metallic mineral rather than others. The theoretical approach is based on thermodynamic data of the chemical equilibria in solution.
                  Moreover, the flotation results obtained in the flotation of oxidized and mixed Zn–Pb ores, by using chelating reagents with a mixed aliphatic–aromatic structure, provided interesting pointers for designing the non-polar portion. The structural criteria identified via these studies were interpreted on the basis of chemical and steric considerations.
                  Recently, the thermodynamic approach was adopted to identify selective reagents for the removal of minor elements and for the separation of copper from zinc in the xanthate flotation of complex sulphide ores.Flotation is well known as the most common process in mineral separation to recover valuable minerals from gangue. Recently flotation has been also applied to separate the components of waste materials, in order to recover valuable products. Owing to the limitation of sources and supplies of mineral raw materials and the need to treat ores of lower grades, increasingly fineness and mineralogical complexity, new flotation technologies have been developed. Collectors generally employed in flotation are surfactants that link to the surface of useful mineral by Van der Waals or electrostatic bonds ( Difficulty therefore arises when a particular metallic mineral has to be separated from an ore of complex composition or when the surface properties of the mineral are such as to make the flotation response extremely poor. To overcome this basic drawback in metal ore flotation, the possibility of using compounds capable of linking selectively with given minerals has been investigated. Selective linkage is possible if the collector structure incorporates active groups having strong specific affinity for certain cation characteristics of the mineral surface. Attention has been focused on chelating reagents in view of their ability to form stable, selective compounds with the cations present in mineral surface ( Chelating reagents are a particular class of complexing reagents consisting of large organic molecules capable of bonding to the metal ion via two or more functional groups, with the formation of one or more rings. Such ring compounds are called chelates. The chelates are characterized by a remarkable high stability and by the selectivity and specificity of their formation reaction. The reason for their high stability and selectivity depends on electronic and steric factors. In fact every chelating reagent is characterized by the presence of at least one group capable of donating a pair of electrons to the metal to which it bonds. This leads to the formation, besides a covalent bond, also of a dative bond with formation of a ring. Moreover, often the chelating groups are also inserted in an aromatic ring. Therefore, these give rise to the formation of four to six membered rings, which are very stable. Chelating compounds form a class of reagents that can be used in flotation of metallic minerals, due to their ability to react with the heavy metals and the transition metals. On the contrary their inability to form bonds with silicon, aluminium, sodium and potassium (due to the electronic configuration of these elements which on the loss of one or two electrons have the configuration of the nearest rare gas and thus have no tendency to accept a pair of electrons) guarantees their complete selectivity as regards siliceous and silicate gangues, whilst their slight tendency to link calcium also ensures good selective action where carbonate gangues are concerned. Chelating reagents were proposed as flotation collectors by Italian CNR researchers in 1971 ( However, although the chelated particle is fairly hydrophobic, it is nevertheless not sufficiently hydrophobic to ensure flotation, because the chelating reagents available are almost all without long hydrocarbon chains ( In order to envisage ideal chelating collectors it was necessary to state thermodynamic and structural criteria to be followed in designing new chelate type collectors. These criteria concern the composition of both the polar and apolar portion of the molecule, i.e., the nature of the chelating groups and the structure of aliphatic chain. The criteria for the selection of chelating groups theoretically provided with a selective collector capability for a given mineral with respect to another have been established on the basis of a thermodynamic calculation ( The premise was that phenomena, occurring in solution and involving chemical reactions and those occurring on the surface, are closely correlated ( In principle, the greater the stability of the metal–ligand compound, the more stable will be the adhesion of the reagent to the mineral surface and the greater its efficiency as a collector. Moreover, a complexing reagent can be considered to be selective toward a given mineral if the metal–ligand compound that is formed on its surface is more stable than other possible complexes formed with the cations of accompanying metallic or gangue minerals ( The stability of a metal–ligand complex, ML, at a given pH, is defined by the conditional constant In particular, it can be assumed ( The validity of this method has been proven in many systems by flotation tests in Hallimond tube and laboratory cell: in fact pure minerals showed a total flotation with the selected reagents. Many systems have been considered, namely: cupferron for hematite, dimethylglyoxime for niccolite ( Two examples of chelating reaction of these reagents with the mineral cations and the results of flotation tests on pure minerals are reported as follows. In The collecting power of dimethylglyoxime on nickel mineral is shown in  The collecting power of 8-hydroxyquinoline on Zn Thus, in both cases the chelation leads to the formation of a chemisorbed surface film which is responsible for the collecting action ( Though the results obtained with these systems fully confirm the soundness of the basic theoretical premise, some problems made it difficult to use commercially available chelating reagents on plant scale and over all the lack of a long-chain hydrocarbon in the molecule. Moreover, there are some limitations to the functionality of a reagent selected as flotation collector by theoretical prediction on the basis of chemical equilibria in solution. In fact the theoretical study is based on aqueous solution equilibria, whereas the action of these reagents as collectors relates to a heterogeneous phase system: this implies the presence of forces of different types, which are not considered in the thermodynamic calculations. Another criterion has to be seeked which establish optimal correlation between thermodynamic and steric properties of the mineral and of the chelate compound in order to obtain maximum adhesion of this compound to mineral surface. To try to deduce the criteria for producing the ideal type of chelating collectors research has been conducted on the design and synthesis of new reagents having an alkyl or alcoxyl chain linked to the aromatic ring containing chelating groups for the mineral metals. Thus the work concerns On the basis of the cited thermodynamic calculation ( Flotation of oxidized minerals is a very difficult problem because there are not known direct-acting collectors capable of producing single-metal concentrates. The collectors generally used in beneficiation plants act only if the mineral has first subjected to sulphidization, an operation which is extremely delicate and critical. In fact in the case of oxidized lead and zinc minerals their surface – unlike that of the sulphide variety – is not easily rendered hydrophobic by the collectors generally used, to achieve efficient flotation. Furthermore, the solubility of these oxide minerals is high. Consequently, the collector also interacts with metal cations that have gone into solution, thus greatly increasing the amount of reagent required for flotation. It is therefore common practice to sulphurize such minerals prior to flotation so as to prepare their surface to receive xanthates, the collectors generally adopted for concentrating sulphides. However, sulphurization calls for careful dosage to avoid rendering the mineral surface inert. Since the collecting action of chelating reagents is directed towards the cation present on mineral surface, irrespective of the mineralogical class, it is expected that these reagents achieve flotation of zinc, lead, minerals either oxides or sulphides in the same way, i.e., it seemed logical that, by the use of a suitable chelating agent, it might be well possible to remove the barrier between base-metal sulphide and oxide minerals, which do not respond equally to the same conventional collectors. These two classes of reagents are MercaptoBenzoThiazole (MBT) and AminoThioPhenole (ATP) and have alkyl and alkoxyl chains of various length positions and structures. The MBT reagents act as collector only on Pb minerals, while ATPs are collectors for Pb and Zn. The structure and action of these reagents is reported in Reagents of the MBT type exert chelating action towards Pb ( The collecting action of MBT on Pb minerals is thus attributable to the formation of a surface film selectively chemisorbed on the mineral surface then rendered hydrophobic by the aliphatic chain. Where reagents of the ATP type are concerned, these (as the Schiff bases derived there from) exert chelating action towards Zn ( Single stage flotation tests were performed by using MBT and ATP reagents. The sample was conditioned for 5 Reagents without any alkyl radical on the aromatic ring are ineffective as collectors optimum flotation occurs when the alkyl chain has three carbon atoms. The oxygen between the aliphatic chain and the ring has a positive effect and improves selectivity. The best positions are 6 and 5, the worst is position 7 due to the negative conjugative effect on the reactivity of the functional group. The concentrate Pb grade reaches about six times that of the feed, with recoveries of around 88%. The results of cell flotation tests with ATP reagent on an ore grading 5.6% Zn (4.5% as smithsonite and 1.1% as sphalerite) and 1.3% Pb (as cerussite) demonstrate that ( Optimum flotation occurs with a chain length of 5 or 6 C atoms. The longer chain in comparison with MBT reagent is probably due to the presence of one aromatic ring instead of two. The presence of ether oxygen between the chain and the ring greatly enhances selectivity and it is more evident in the case of longer chain reagents. The The Zn concentrate grade reaches about five times that of the feed, with recoveries of around 83%. A new reagent containing chelating functional group for Cu was prepared by ITM CNR in cooperation with Enichem Company and patented ( The flotation results obtained at Sotiel Plant of Spain ( The oxygen atom of the oxazole ring favours chelation through an electron releasing conjugative effect. The results obtained provide interesting pointers on the criteria to be followed in designing mixed aliphatic–aromatic chelate type collector molecules ( Three structural requisites appear essential to ensure collecting power, namely: The position of the alkyl group on the benzene ring vis-a-vis the chelating functional group, with the optimal one having the aliphatic group diametrically opposite the electron-donor heteroatom. The structure of the alkyl group. This is the best when it is a straight chain with an ether oxygen atom at the point of attachment to the aromatic ring. The length limit of the chain necessary to ensure adequate hydrophobicity, which ranges between three and six carbon atoms. These observation were interpreted on the basis of steric factors and of the effect of the aliphatic chain on the reactivity of the functional group, namely: The limiting number of C atoms needed to achieve mineral flotation, 3–6, is half that of conventional collectors. As regards chelate type collectors with a partially aromatic structure, the hydrocarbon chain is shorter because the overall polarity of the polar end is lower owing to delocalization of the charges. The presence of ether oxygen where the aliphatic chain joins the aromatic ring guarantees chain fluidity. This favours solubility of the reagent in water and tends to ensure that the chains are arranged on the mineral surface in position, which statistically is the best for exertion of adequate collateral forces. Linearity is the condition where the lateral forces of attraction can be exerted between the chains in the adsorbed state, which are responsible for the hydrophobic effect. The In fact when studies are undertaken to identify reagents with a specific action vis-a-vis a particular mineral or when it is necessary to design molecules with theoretically ideal structure it is important to have information on the structure of crystal surfaces where the adsorption phenomena occur, in order to interpret the adsorption mechanism in flotation process and in order to have information on the degree of surface cover provided by reagent molecules. A computer program has been developed that uses the lattice characteristics of a mineral to generate a graphic representation of the atomic configuration of any lattice plane of the mineral. This program can be used to visualize steric aspect of the interactions between mineral surfaces and flotation reagents at a structural level ( An example is given in In On the basis of all the above considerations, recently the described thermodynamic approach was adopted to identify selective reagents for the removal of minor elements and for the separation of copper from zinc in the xanthate flotation of complex sulphide ores ( A vast range of reagents were selected from commercially available amino acids, amine and other organic ligands capable of forming stable complexes (log Of the reagents selected, those which were useful mainly for separation of Cu, Zn, Hg and Sb were chosen and flotation tests were carried out on pure CuS, ZnS, HgS and SbS in their presence using amylxanthate as collector. The results of flotation tests were generally in good agreement with thermodynamic calculations. Reagents were identified that in the presence of amylxanthate act as modifiers for individual cations:  Similar behaviour to that of the sugars for Hg activation with respect to Cu and Zn is shown by The selective activation of Cu with respect to Hg and Zn exerted by the reagents The work provides a guide for the synthesis of new molecules, which can be expected to behave with even better selectivity. It opens the way to the possibility of synthesizing new molecular structures more active than those now on the market. Such structures will contain the given functional groups and a hydrophilic or hydrophobic portion so as to be suitable for use as a selective dispersing or activating agent or, possibly, as collector for complex sulphide flotation. The studies performed to develop new chelating reagents for metallic mineral flotation have been progressed according to the following phases: Combined use of commercially chelating reagents and fuel oil for the flotation of various metallic minerals. Flotation tests performed on pure minerals, demonstrated the possibility of using chelating reagents as selective collectors for given metallic minerals. Development of a theoretical method of choosing chelating groups that exert selective action toward one metallic mineral rather than others. Design and synthesis of reagents containing selective chelating groups capable of separately floating Zn and Pb minerals from oxidized and mixed Zn–Pb ores without previous sulphidization. Development of a new synthetic chelate collector for the selective flotation of copper minerals from complex sulphide ores. Outline of general structure requisites, which confer collecting power to chelating reagents having a mixed aliphatic–aromatic structure. They are thermodynamic properties of functional group, and structural configuration of the apolar portion. Selection of selective reagents for sulphide mineral flotation.