Composition and properties of three different peat strata from “El Padul” peatbog have been studied and peat pastes have been formulated to prepare skin health care products. As for composition, the main phase of each stratum was constituted of smectites (outer stratum), organic matters (intermediate) or carbonates (inner). Pristine strata and their aqueous dispersed systems were characterized for such properties (pH, rheology and cooling kinetics) that are considered determinant in view of their topical application. Main phases of each stratum influenced pH and rheology but not cooling kinetics. Combination of the strata in different w/w ratios led to peat pastes with improved performance for skin administration.Peat pastes are semisolid systems used in medical hydrology and cosmetic treatments on the basis of chemical and physical mechanisms derived from their composition ( Peats are complex mixtures of organic and inorganic components. Organic fraction comes from vegetable wastes transformed under anaerobic and waterlogged conditions for extended periods and includes humic acids, humin and fulvic acids as principal compounds. Organic compounds have demonstrated biologic activities, which make them potentially useful in topical health care and cosmetology ( With these premises, the aims of the present study were i) to characterise three different peat strata from a deposit located in El Padul (Granada), ii) to prepare dispersed systems with the aforementioned strata in order to determine the technological properties and iii) to study dispersed systems feasibility as potential semisolid health care formulations. Peat samples were extracted from the peatbog “Turbera del Agia” located in El Padul (Granada, Spain). Peat is currently extracted from an area of approximately 20,000 Peat samples were dried at 40 Elemental analyses (EAN) were performed in order to determine the content of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur in P1, P2 and P3. These determinations were carried out once samples were dried after 24 Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA and DTG) of peat samples was carried out by using a METTLER TOLEDO mod. TGA/DSC1 with FRS5 sensor and a microbalance (precision 0.1 Raw peats and their mixtures in different w/w ratios were dispersed in purified water to obtain a final solid concentration of 60% (w/w) ( Values of pH for each peat strata and the aforementioned dispersed systems were determined by using a Crison 25 Rheological analysis was carried out by means a viscometer (Thermo Scientific HAAKE, RotoVisco 1; HAAKE RheoWin software) with a plate/plate combination (Plate Ø 20 Cooling curves were obtained following the procedure described by X-powder diffractograms and X-ray fluorescence results were used to identify the mineral composition of the samples. Main mineral phases in sample P1 were smectites, quartz and mica ( P2 presented high amounts of carbon and nitrogen, clear indicators of its organic composition (  Values of pH of the raw samples and the dispersed systems in purified water are shown in Dispersed systems S1 and S3 showed non-significant changes in pH values compared to the pH of the corresponding peat strata used for their preparation (P1 and P3), probably due to the presence of carbonates acting as buffers. On the other hand, S2 experimented an increase of two units in the pH value compared to that of P2 stratum. Suspensions from S4 to S7 showed acidic pH values since in all of them, stratum P2 prevailed as the main ingredient. Dispersed systems S4 and S5, which contain strata P1 and P2, showed pH values between those of S1 and S2 due to the mixture of the strata. The presence of P3 stratum in systems S6 and S7 could be noted by a slight increase on pH values (~ S1, S3 and S6 showed pH values which were above the tolerance range of the skin (4.5–6). Dispersions S2, S4, S5 and S7 possessed pH values that could allow their topical application in terms of pH tolerability. In particular, pH of S2 and S5 were closer to the most healthy human skin pH (approximately 4.7) which favours the skin microflora ( The studied dispersed systems showed non-Newtonian viscoplastic flow curves with spur points at low shear stress values ( The influence exerted by stratum P1 was noticeable in systems S4 and S5, showing rheopectic behaviour. In these dispersions, although P2 was the main ingredient, clear hysteresis areas were observed. Apparent viscosities and the yield values of the systems are shown in S2 showed very high viscosity and yield stress values, as a result of the interconnections between the lignin and other organic fibres ( Results of cooling kinetic studies are shown in Composition and properties of three different peat strata from “El Padul” peatbog greatly vary, making necessary their combination to formulate health care peat pastes with adequate features. Stratum P2 should always be present in the systems since it possessed the highest amount of organic matter, which are responsible for therapeutic effects of peat pastes. The addition of P1 allowed to control final pH and to modify rheological properties, although the addition of P3 stratum produced an undesirable decrease in viscosity. On the other hand, dispersed systems S2 and S4 possessed proper viscosities for topical applications, similar to pelotherapy formulations previously studied ( This study was supported by the Projects CGL2016-80833-R and RNM-1897, group CTS-946,