A novel approach was developed to enhance the efficiency of the dissolved air flotation (DAF) for biodiesel wastewater by acidification and coagulation. Firstly, Grease & Oil and Chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal efficiencies of biodiesel wastewater using acidification with pure hydrochloric acid and pure sulfuric acid at pH=3 and 1day retention time were more than 80%, and 50%, respectively. Secondly, Grease & Oil and COD removal efficiencies of biodiesel wastewater using alum, polyaluminum chloride and ferric chloride coagulants without acidification at 1.0g/L were more than 90% and 30%. Thirdly, DAF alone and DAF with acidification could not separate Grease & Oil from biodiesel wastewater. Thus, DAF with the acidification and coagulation is suggested for biodiesel wastewater treatment. Biodiesel wastewater treatment by acidification before alum coagulation allowed the alum concentration to be reduced by 60–90% compared to treating without acidification. In addition, the efficiency of Grease & Oil removal from biodiesel wastewater by DAF with alum and acidification was 85–95%. It can be concluded that the efficiency of Grease & Oil removal from biodiesel wastewater using DAF with acidification and coagulation was 10% greater compared to other processes.Increased demand for energy, crude oil price increase, global warming due to green house gasses missions, environmental pollution, and the fast diminishing supply of fossil fuels are the major key factors leading to the search for alternative sources of energy Biodiesel is produced from the transesterification reaction of triglycerides from vegetable oils or fats with alcohols like methanol and ethanol in the presence of a homogenous base catalyst like NaOH or KOH Presently, typical treatments of oily wastewater in Thailand employ a dissolved air floatation (DAF) technique, Grease & Oil trap unit or other Grease & Oil commercial removal units to separate oil and grease prior to biological treatment There has been no research on using DAF combined with acidification and coagulation for biodiesel wastewater treatment. Thus, the aim of this research was to investigate the optimization of operational parameters to enhance the efficiency of DAF for biodiesel wastewater treatment. In this study, biodiesel wastewater was pre-treated by acidification and coagulation. Biodiesel wastewater was obtained from Specialized R&D Center for Alternative Energy from Palm Oil and Oil crop, Faculty of Engineering, Prince of Songkla University, Thailand. This plant uses palm oil and oil crop as feedstock and an alkali-catalyzed tranesterification process. The characteristics of this biodiesel wastewater were analyzed according to the standard methods for examination of water and wastewater The experiment runs are presented in The results from microscope photograph presented in Grease & Oil removal efficiency increased with increasing retention time ( Grease & Oil sludge in the upper stratum of the biodiesel wastewater after acidification at pH The use of optimum acid concentration and retention time for acidification resulted in the demulsification of the wastewater. Then, big oil droplets of water rose to the surface and the bottom water became clear. The Grease & Oil and COD removal efficiency using both acids at pH Alum (Al With regard to the COD removal from biodiesel wastewater using coagulation, the concentrations of alum, polyaluminum chloride and ferric chloride affected the efficiency of COD removal. The efficiency of COD removal (more than 30%) varied with the concentration of alum and ferric chloride in the range 0.5 to 1.5 Grease & Oil sludge concentration in biodiesel wastewater after coagulation using alum, polyaluminum chloride and ferric chloride and pH Aluminum and ferric concentrations in the wastewater were analyzed before and after coagulation. Before coagulation, the use of 1.0 The use of optimum pH control, coagulant concentration and type in the coagulation process generated the flocculation of Grease & Oil in wastewater. The flocculation rise to the surface and the bottom water became clear. The Grease & Oil and COD removal efficiencies using three coagulants at 1.0 Many reports In addition, DO concentration slightly increased when the retention time increased to 4 Furthermore, the pressurization operation of the DAF system consisted of two systems: full-stream pressurization and recycle-stream pressurization The treatment procedure of the novel approach for biodiesel wastewater treatment consisted of third step. Firstly, the biodiesel wastewater was treated by acidification at pH The efficiency of sludge removal by DAF depended on the ratio of air to sludge (A/S ratio) and the suggested range of the A/S Ratio was 0.005–0.06 (kg/kg) Moreover, the retention time for flotation cell of DAF at 20 and 40% of the recycle rate was 7 and 9  The efficiency of Grease & Oil removal by DAF with alum from treated biodiesel wastewater with acidification was 85–95%. In addition, the efficiencies of COD removal by alum and DAF with 20% and 40% of the recycle rate were 20–30% and 40–50%, respectively and there was no remaining SS after treatment by DAF with ≥ The pre-treatment of biodiesel wastewater treatment by acidification and coagulation could be enhanced the efficiency of DAF and more economical for biodiesel wastewater treatment. This research was supported by the