Status epilepticus could be the first presentation of underlying epilepsy or may occur in patients with known epilepsy. The literature has reported many cases of seizures severe enough to cause dislocations or fracture-dislocations of the shoulder or hip joints and death from hemorrhaging. Although shoulder and hip injuries due to seizures are rare, such events are known to occur, especially in patients with a history of osteoporosis or other risk factors for fractures. We describe a case of a 35-year-old healthy male with no history of osteoporosis or reduced bone density. His first presentation of epilepsy manifested with status epilepticus. This prolonged seizure resulted in bilateral acetabular fracture with left proximal humerus fracture without any trauma or falls. Although fractures associated with seizures have been reported in the literature, dislocation and fractures from seizures involving both the hip and the shoulder joints have only been described in a few cases. Two of these cases involved patients with known epilepsy, osteoporosis and osteomalacia. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first described case of a patient with bilateral hip and one shoulder fracture that had no previous history of epilepsy or seizures, except for febrile seizure as a child, which did not requiring any treatment. He was also not taking any antiepileptic medications, which are known to reduce bone density. This case shows the severity of status epilepticus and the importance of screening for fractures in patients, especially in those with risk factors for reduced bone density.Status epilepticus (SE) is defined by continuous seizure activity for more than 10 This 35-year-old male developed a sudden episode of seizure while lying down in bed in the early morning as witnessed by his wife. The patient had a sudden onset of aggressive shaking of both sides lasting 10 SE could be the first presentation of epilepsy, as seen in our patient. According to many studies, fracture risk in epileptic patients is increased two to six folds Pearson and Hargadon described the mechanism for hip fractures due to convulsion in 1962 Nehme et al. reported 27 cases of acetabular fractures resulting from various seizure attacks in the literature from 1970 to 2007. Late diagnosis of central acetabular fractures may lead to sudden death due to massive blood loss. The mortality rate of such fractures in all reported cases is 18.5% Although fracture dislocation of the shoulder or the hip caused by status epilepticus is a rare phenomenon, it is important not to underestimate the forces that exist in such seizures. When accessing patients who had seizures, physicians should be aware of possible fracture-dislocations, and ask patients if they have any shoulder or hip pain. An auxillary X-ray or a CT scan of the shoulder or the hip can be a useful diagnostic tool if indicated. It is also important to note that patients of Northern European origin and post-menopausal women are known to be at a greater risk for osteoporosis and fractures.