Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) have attracted attention due to their high pollutant potential and increasing volume produced in recent years as function of the modernization and continuum substitution of the current equipment that quickly become obsolete. Among polymeric materials that make up the WEEE, acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) and high-impact polystyrene (HIPS) copolymers are the most important materials. However, it is not always possible the complete segregation of ABS and HIPS during the processes for mechanical recycling of these polymers. Thus, the formation of ABS/HIPS blends is often unavoidable. In this report, the relationship between morphology and mechanical/rheological properties of ABS/HIPS blends produced from WEEE recycling was investigated. Although the component polystyrene (PS) and polybutadiene (PB) are present in the composition of both ABS and HIPS, the blends ABS/HIPS are immiscible, showing complex morphology that directly affect the mechanical and rheological behavior of the material. On the other hand, the production of the ABS/HIPS blends is an interesting alternative for properties control of the recycled polymers from WEEE.Exponentially increase of consumption of electric and electronic equipment (EEE) represents a behavior of the actual society, providing access to the information, communication and making easier the execution of the everyday activities. Based on these consumer needs, nowadays the EEEs are produced in large-scale and quickly are updated. Thus, for example, a personal computer presents medium lifetime at around 5 years, while a cellular phone only 2 years. This leads to the formation of high amount of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) in a short period that represents a great source of pollution due to their toxic compounds as well as because of their heterogenic composition, containing metals, glass and polymers [ Polymeric materials represents 10-15 wt% of the WEEE and contain countless of thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers such as acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene copolymer (ABS), polycarbonates (PC), polyamides (PA), high-impact polystyrene (HIPS), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene (PS) and other [ Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) and high-impact polystyrene (HIPS) copolymers are the main polymers present in WEEE. ABS is morphologically composed by a matrix of styrene-acrylonitrile copolymer (SAN) and dispersed phases containing mostly polybutadiene rubber (PB), while HIPS presents polystyrene (PS) as matrix and dispersed phases containing polybutadiene (PB). Due to the chemical constitution and similar solubility parameter of the SAN and PS matrixes, ABS and HIPS could be considered as self-compatibilized [ Since ABS and HIPS not always can be fully separated during recycling processes, the formation of ABS/HIPS is an inherent condition and should be considered as alternative for production of the recycled polymers from WEEE. In this sense, studies have been performed to evaluate the mechanical properties of the ABS/HIPS blends from polymeric WEEE as well as their potential application as recycled polymers [ The aim of this study has been evaluate the effect of the morphology on the mechanical and rheological properties of recycled blends ABS/HIPS produced from WEEE in comparison to ABS/HIPS produced from virgin polymers ABS/HIPS, using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), mechanical testing and melting flow index (MFI). Virgin polymers acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene copolymer (ABS) and high impact polystyrene (HIPS) were kindly supplied by BASF S/A under trademarks Terluran ABS and HIPS waste from parts of personal computers were initially ground in a knife mill Momesso After extrusion molding, specimens for tensile and impact testing were simultaneously prepared by injection molding in a Spazio The melting flow index (MFI) of the polymers was determined using specimens for mechanical testing after analysis. For this, specimens were again ground in a knife mill to generate a particle size of around 5 mm in length. The material was then analyzed in an extruder plastometer Ceast 7021 For scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis, the test specimens were fractured in liquid nitrogen and then were immersed in an aqueous solution of 2 wt% osmium tetroxide by 24 h. Then, the specimens were washed, dried and sputter coated with gold to make the samples electrically conductive during SEM imaging. SEM analysis of the samples was performed using a LEO 1450 VP instrument. Secondary electron images of the materials were obtained by using an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. The original micrographics were highlighted by manipulating images with software of the equipment itself. In order to view clearly contrasts differences between the phases, the original SEM images were converted to negative images by using the software ImageJ The properties of virgin and recycled polymers are initially compared ( Impact resistance is an important mechanical property for ABS and HIPS in applications as electrical and electronic equipment that is mainly enhanced due to the presence of the polybutadiene in complex phase morphology in the material. However, in the thermo-oxidative degradation of the ABS, the polybutadiene phase suffers chemical changes that lead to the mechanical failure of the polymer [ The degradation processes that naturally occur during application and thermomechanical processing of the recycled polymer may also be reflected in values of the melt flow index. The higher value of MFI for recycled ABS indicates that the viscosity of this material is smaller than virgin ABS. This is caused by the scission of polymeric chains and consequent decrease of molecular weight of the polymer that occur during degradation reactions. Analogous comparison between the properties of the virgin and recycled HIPS has also been performed and presented in It is noted for virgin and recycled HIPS that tensile strength, Young's modulus, melt flow index and impact resistance present negligible differences, showing value around 24 MPa, 1600 MPa, 5.8 g/10 min and 5.5 kJ/m Elongation at break for virgin HIPS is higher when compared to virgin ABS ( Mechanical properties of both HIPS and ABS are strongly affected by theirs phase morphologies [ In the virgin ABS ( Since morphology of the polymers can also influence the rheological properties of the material in the melting state, the observed changes in melt flow index (  In the virgin HIPS ( The parameters for thermomechanical processing of the both HIPS and ABS have been standardized in this study. However, changes in thermomechanical processing conditions with variation of shear rate, for example, could improve the performance of the mechanical properties for recycled HIPS due to reduction of domains size of their dispersed phase. Moreover, it is also to be considered that the recycled polymers have several additives incorporated. There is a range of additive for polymers, including flame retardants, colorants, stabilizers, etc., whose presence of their particles in the polymer can influence in toughening mechanism of the HIPS and ABS, causing probable changes in mechanical properties. Due to the difficulty for waste separation in recycling process, the mixture of ABS and HIPS from waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is inevitable, resulting in the reciprocal contamination of the polymers. Therefore, the formation of the ABS/HIPS blends should be considered. Both ABS and HIPS are polymers with complex domain–matrix morphology, hence blends formed by ABS and HIPS should present morphologic complexity even greater, affecting directly the mechanical properties of the material. SAN and PS matrix are potentially miscible each other. However, physics parameters of mixture such as differences in molecular weight, melting viscosity and effectiveness of the mixing during thermomechanical processing can lead to the formation of distinct phases in the polymeric system.  The composition and viscosity of the polymeric system on thermomechanical mixing are fundamental parameters that influence the coalescence/comminution process and consequent formation of matrix and dispersed phase [  For ABS/HIPS blends containing ABS at low concentration (  According to the results of the mechanical properties of the ABS/HIPS blends containing ABS at low concentration ( In addition, the type of matrix present in each blend could influence the domain size. It is noted the decrease in the domain size as a function of the ABS content in ABS/HIPS blends. This can be caused by the difference between melt viscosity of the PS and SAN during the thermomechanical processing. According to eq. Ca = capillary number η R = drop (dominion) radius Ẏ = shear rate σ = interfacial tension Tensile strength and Young's modulus show higher value for ABS/HIPS blends produced from recycled polymers than that produced from virgin polymers. In the case of rubber-toughened plastics, the degradation processes occur mainly in rubber phase, usually lead to the increase of the material rigidity, affecting tensile strength and Young's modulus [ The composition for both recycled and virgin blends also affect the performance of their mechanical properties. In general, tensile strength and Young's modulus increase as a function of the ABS content in the blends. However, the results do not follow the mixing rule, showing values below line that connect the results of the isolated polymers ABS and HIPS (mixture curve), as shown in The mechanical performance of recycled blends for all composition are compatible with the mechanical properties of the isolated recycled ABS and HIPS (ABSr and HIPSr) as well as for virgin HIPS (HIPSv) such as shown in Mechanical and rheological properties of recycled ABS and HIPS from waste of electric and electronic equipment present differences when compared to the virgin polymers, respectively. The main mechanical depreciations are related to the decrease of elongation at break for recycled HIPS and impact resistance for recycled ABS. Recycled ABS show also considerable increase in melt flow index. The degradation or presence of addictive into recycled polymers may be probable causes for these differences. ABS/HIPS blends show complex phases morphology. Both SAN matrix for ABS and PS matrix for HIPS can become matrix or dispersed phase for ABS/HIPS blends, depending on the content of each polymer in the blend, while domains rich in polybutadiene are found in both matrix and dispersed phases. The shape and size of dispersed phases also depend on the system composition. For recycled ABS/HIPS blends, the stiffness as well as other mechanical properties of the material are directly affected by composition of the polymeric matrix. The production of the ABS/HIPS blends is an important alternative for mechanical recycling of polymeric waste from electric and electronic equipment, presenting application potential for substitution for recycled ABS and HIPS as virgin HIPS. The authors would like to thank the BASF S/A for supplying the materials and