In this technical note we have applied the law of additive reaction times for fluid–solid systems (Sohn's Law) to the experimental data of oxygen leaching of chalcopyrite from ore fragments. Good agreement between the applied model and experimental data for a wide range of operating conditions examined in this study is observed. Possible reasons for the deviation of the mode to experimental data are also discussed. The results of this study demonstrate the application of Sohn's Law to model mixed-controlled kinetics and the advantage of using a closed-form solution is realized.The depletion of high-grade ores and increasing global demand of metals has made it necessary to examine metal extraction of low-grade ore deposits. For example, chalcopyrite is the most abundant copper-containing mineral, accounting for approximately 70% of copper reserves worldwide ( Fluid–solid reactions (e.g., chalcopyrite leaching) involving porous solids where the porous matrix or a porous product layer is left behind after reaction are the basis of many pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processing and have generated considerable attention with regard to mathematical modeling. For a review of the fundamental concepts and governing equations that occur during fluid–solid reactions the reader is referred to the reference text ( Shrinking unreacted-core model for initial non-porous solid producing a porous product layer; Grain model for an initially porous solid made up of fine particles producing a porous product layer; Pore model for an initially porous solid where the pores are considered a continuous phase. Many of these models require numerical methods to solve the governing differential equations to obtain kinetic conversion data. When dealing with multiple particle systems, obtaining solutions becomes drastically more complex. To overcome the complexity of such systems, Sohn's Law of additive reaction times ( The aim of this study is to apply Sohn's Law to any rate equation that reasonably describes the intrinsic reaction kinetics (e.g. chalcopyrite leaching), whether they are global expressions or contain specific, detailed intermediate steps. The leaching mechanism elucidation requires in-depth kinetic experiments beyond the scope of this work. In a previous study, In this study, we have applied Sohn's Law to experimental data of chalcopyrite leaching ( Thus the time to attain a certain conversion under the control of pore diffusion ( Previous studies by Lin et al. ( For diffusion in porous media such as ore, the diffusion paths are not straight lines, but rather tortuous paths. The effective diffusivity in a porous solid is typically expressed as follows, taking into consideration the porosity and the tortuosity of the pores: There are experimental methods reported to measure the tortuosity of porous media, as well as empirical and theoretical relationships, which are reviewed in reference.( Using the expressions for the reaction times for both mass-transfer-controlled and reaction-controlled conditions in Eqs. Agreement between the model and the experimental data for nearly all conditions is observed. For many of the conditions with smaller particle sizes, the reaction-controlled component ( In conditions where the final fractional conversion is ~ A detailed discussion on the effects of diffusivity that varies upon reaction on a closed-form solution of a similar system is available in a previous study ( Often practiced in modeling heterogeneous chemical reaction systems is the application of the quasi-steady state (QSS) or pseudo-steady state (PSS) approximation. This approximation is applied to systems where different processes occur at different time scales (e.g. reaction vs. diffusion) or problems with moving boundary conditions. The approximation is applied to eliminate the unsteady-state nature of one of the steps ( Sohn's Law of additive reaction times was used to formulate a mixed-control kinetics expression for the oxygen leaching of chalcopyrite. The presented work demonstrates the usefulness of Sohn's Law in satisfactorily combining the effects of mass transfer with rate data obtained in the absence of such effects. This approach yields a simple rate relationship for the case in which mass transfer effects are present, such as for a large piece of ore, without the need for numerically solving complex and non-linear differential equations. It was found that the role of estimating the diffusivity influences the model estimation of the observed kinetics, whether through the use of more rigorous differential equations or through the application of Sohn's Law. The closed-form solution demonstrates benefit in ease of use while still satisfactorily describing the system. Further benefit of using a closed form solution can be realized when describing multiparticle systems. YRS is thankful for the financial support by the