The effect of surface roughness and shape factor on behavior of particles in flotation has been investigated. Surface roughness of various degrees was applied on spherical glass beads of −150 +106μm by means of acid etching. The same procedure was also performed on ground glass beads of the same size interval with different shape factors. The effect of these variations on surface morphology of particles was investigated in terms of flotation recovery, contact angle, and bubble-particle attachment. An Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) was used for surface roughness characterizations and a correction methodology on roughness measurements of spherical particles is proposed. A digital image analyzer was used for shape factor characterizations. It is shown that increase in surface roughness improves the flotation recovery, contact angle, and bubble attachment. Shape factor, however, was found to be more predominant in flotation and bubble attachment. This is attributed to the effect of sharp edges of ground particles which triggers the film rupture process and shortens the attachment time.Colloidal interactions play a crucial role in wide variety of processes particularly in mineral processing. Interfacial and colloidal forces become more significant in some sub-processes that deal with fine and ultrafine particles submerged in water stream such as flotation. Flotation is certainly the most significant, omnibus, and inevitable technique in mineral processing Different grinding methods impart changes in structure, enthalpy, and surface energies of solid particles during wet or dry comminution process leading to morphological changes in particles Hicyilmaz et al. Krasowska and Malysa Above mentioned points show the extent to which both shape factor and surface roughness have impact on mineral process operations especially on flotation processes. It is of significance to understand the mechanism through which these features affect the flotation process. In this work, the spherical glass beads were roughened through etching and ground to produce different shape factors. Their surface properties and shapes were characterized using atomic force and visual image analysis techniques. The effect of surface roughness and shape factor on contact angle and bubble-particle attachment efficiency both of which identify the success of flotation was elaborated in the light of experimental data. The Standard safety spherical glass particles used in this study were supplied by Potters Industries. The X-ray fluorescence elemental analysis of the sample show a composition of 61.3% wt. Si, 14.8% wt. Ca, 13.1% wt. Na, 6.0% wt. Al, 3.8% wt. Mg, 1.0% wt. Fe. The washing procedure described by Koh et al. Standard glass beads of −800 +90 Leica Qwin brand visual particle shape analyzer in which particle's 2D boundaries are selected by the user ( The calculated roundness values of some known geometries with detailed mathematical description given by Ulusoy and Yekeler In order to induce the required roughness on the surface of particles, 10% w/w Hydro Fluoric (HF) acid 40% Sigma–Aldrich was prepared. Polyethylene labware was used in all steps of etching process. The suspension was stirred using a plastic-coated magnetic bar in a polyethylene beaker for a desired time. Samples were immediately rinsed upon etching with plenty of DI-water to prevent further exposure to acid, dried and kept in a desiccator. It should be mentioned that very strict and appropriate safety precautions were taken during experiments in which HF acid was used. All glassware were replaced with adequate polypropylene equipment. SEM micrographs of different samples with varying magnifications are presented in Surface morphology and roughness of the samples were determined by a Park System XE-70 Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) in non-contact mode. The non-contact cantilever Mikromasch NSC-15 purchased from Park System Co., was used. Surface morphology of the plate shape samples is easy to determine by AFM, however, measuring the surface features on the samples with different shapes like spherical particles should be done in a certain way to decrease the possible associated errors as the shape of particle itself has influence on the results. In general, root mean square roughness of the samples is reported in the literature. In this study, in order to increase the accuracy, roughness of the particles is reported as arithmetic average ( Since the spherical particles of around 100 A mean line is calculated by AFM considering all measured points on cantilever path line, once the height of the coordination of measured points on particle surface is reported. Roughness of the surface is calculated based on the difference between the probing path line and average line. Since the produced average line differs from the probing path line, this difference will be reported as roughness with considerable associated error in the data. In order to prevent such error, we used non-contact oscillation method to measure roughness and reported it as both A micro flotation setup with flotation cell of 150 Flotation recovery in experiments was calculated based on the weight ratio of floated part to feed sample weight as shown in Eq. Various methods for contact angle measurements have been developed for different experimental conditions. Two methods for contact angle measurement of powder samples are suggested, namely, wicking, and powder tensiometry It is clearly shown that the bubble-particle interaction is the most important sub-process in flotation. Capture efficiency ( Collision efficiency ( In this study we kept the Attachment and detachment efficiency also affect the capture efficiency, flotation rate constant (kinetics) and in turn the total flotation recovery A special setup was arranged using high speed video camera to track the particles and measure the attachment efficiency ( Brabcova et . Various methods have been used in previous works in order to measure the induction and attachment time. Comparing alternative experimental methods, Verrelli and Albijanic In this study BKT-100 Induction Time Test Unit (ITTU) from Bratton Eng. Tech. Assoc. LLC, was used. Induction time values for the glass bead particles with different morphological characteristics were measured. First, the glass bead particles (1 The roughness values of Solubility and mass transfer strongly depend on the surface free energy of the particle. It is well known that the surface free energy is not uniform on different parts of the surface of a given geometry. Consequently the solubility and mass transfer of a plane face, edge and corner of this geometry differ from each other. Mutaftschiev The same approach is valid for smooth surfaces when they are exposed to acid. As described previously, the roughness of particles decreases after 150 Flotation experiments were carried out to observe any improvement in recoveries. The collector dosage was selected at moderate recovery levels such that any increase or decrease upon etching would be visible. In this context, the air flow rate of 60 cm Flotation recovery of both spherical and ground particles versus etching time is plotted in  Although Gao and McCarthy Busscher et al. Both grazing trajectory and attachment efficiencies were measured and calculated by high speed videography taken during the experiments. Three cases were selected to represent smooth spherical particles, roughened spherical particles, and ground particles. 25 particles for each case were tracked and average value for grazing trajectory is reported in Kouachi et al. Since the effect of particle morphology was determined in terms of flotation recovery, contact angle, and bubble attachment efficiency, evaluation of bubble-particle attachment time will provide a different approach for supporting these findings. In this study, bubble-particle attachment time measurements were conducted for both spherical and ground particles under relatively similar conditions. Of these, the number of samples was reduced to five etching times (0, 60, 120, 240, and 360 The results of induction times are shown in The measurements for ground particles, however, showed that not only attachment efficiency (as discussed in previous section), but also induction times are governed by the effects of shape factors. Therefore, decreasing angularity by etching of ground particles increased the induction time from 8.0 to 11.2 Various studies in the literature have adapted different methods to determine the bubble-particle attachment time in different particulate or surface systems These results further demonstrate the effect of morphological characteristics on flotation recovery and bubble-particle attachment time for glass bead particles. Thus, while etching of spherical particles improves induction times, modification of shape factor through etching of angular particles deteriorates attachment times. The effect of both roughness and shape factor of particles on surface properties and flotation characteristics of glass beads were studied. Both features were found to induce beneficial and adverse effects on flotation sub-processes. A new and corrected roughness measurement method for spherical particles has been introduced using AFM. Roughness calculation based on topographical height measurements contains considerable associating error as the essence of collected data embraces the spatial coordination of surface itself which has different heights in various points. The finer the particle size, the higher the associated error is. In order to eliminate this error, roughness measurements on spherical particles should be carried out using the proper “amplitude method” which is Z-stage abundant. Advancing contact angle of water on spherical glass beads, measured via wicking method, was found to decrease by increasing roughness. This trend was found to be vice versa in case of hydrophobized particles where contact angle was found to be higher in rougher hydrophobic particles. Moreover, ground particles were found to follow the same trend with a higher contact angle for all points. These results obey the theoretical approaches of previous works. Ground particles during flotation were found to recover more efficiently. This reveals that the effect of sharp edges on the particles (shape factor) in flotation. Sharp edges stimulate the film rupture around the bubble at the very first moments of attachment. Bubble attachment efficiency and attachment time outcomes corroborated flotation results in that particle shape particularly is pronounced in the first steps of bubble-particle collision (0–10 Grazing trajectory for rough particles was found to be lower than the smooth particles. The least grazing trajectory, however, was found for ground particles. This value has a significant effect on particle bubble interaction and attachment. Consequently, attachment efficiency of ground glass beads was revealed to be highest among all. Attachment efficiency was determined to be halved when it comes to rough spherical particles, while it was the lowest for smooth spherical particles among all. As an overall conclusion it can be asserted that the roughness affects particle's interaction with the surrounding media, while the effect of shape is more related to the micro-hydrodynamic properties of the particle. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: