Introduction
                  Stable reduction and rigid fixation of the sacrum and posterior ring structures are of paramount importance in the management of complex pelvic ring disruptions, Tile B and C. The major concern with the use of conventional methods, like iliosacral screws and iliolumbar fixations is the increased risk for surgical and implant-related morbidity, especially in difficult situations, such as comminuted, bilateral sacral fractures, and fractures in the dysmorphic sacrum. Although various biomechanical studies have reported the posterior trans-iliac plates to provide maximum resistance to distracting forces by the principle of tension band, the literature pertaining to this implication in clinical studies has been limited. The purpose of our study was to assess the efficacy of the trans-iliac plate in the management of unstable sacral fractures and its utility in pelvic disruptions associated with surgical site morbidity.
               
                  Methodology
                  The patients with unstable pelvic fractures (Tile B and C) between 2013 and 2017 were retrospectively analyzed at a trauma center. First, the anterior ring disruptions were stabilized, and then, the sacral fractures (Denis Zone 1–3) treated by posterior tension band plate osteosynthesis (3.5 mm reconstruction plate) were included. Demographic and perioperative data were assessed. The outcome variables studied were surgical morbidity, pain, loss of reduction, and union and implant-related complications. The outcomes were graded using Lindhal's (radiological) and Majeed (functional assessment) scores.
               
                  Results
                  Thirteen patients (nine male/four female) with a median age of 42 years, had sacral fractures in Denis zones 1/2/3 (four/ten/one, respectively), resulting from Tile pelvic injury B and C were included. The pelvis in five patients was stabilized only with the posterior plate due to the anteriorly-associated surgical site morbidity (Morel-Lavallee lesions and urinary tract injuries). The mean follow-up was 21.5 ± 2.8 months. All fractures had a radiological union by 22 weeks; Lindhal's grade A in ten patients and grade B in three patients. Two out of three patients recovered from preoperative neurological involvement. Two had complained of implant prominence (BMI<19 kg/m2) and there were no implant failures. Four had excellent, six had good, and three had fair or poor functional outcomes.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The posterior trans-iliac plate is a minimally invasive and safe procedure that can be used in a wide range of unstable sacral fractures with notably less implant failure rate. The rigid posterior construct restores the principle tension between the iliac blades and minimizes the secondary displacement of the anterior disrupted structures, thereby useful in managing ring disruptions with surgical site morbidity.Sacral fractures causing posterior pelvic ring disruptions result in a rotationally or vertically unstable pelvis. Various methods like iliosacral screws, trans-iliac bars, iliolumbar fixations, sacral plates are being used. To overcome the drawbacks and limitations, other methods for managing unstable sacral fractures, like the posterior trans-iliac plates have been in use. This study was conducted in a single center after obtaining the institutional clearance. We retrospectively analyzed a series of patients with unstable sacral fractures treated operatively with posterior tension band plate between 2013 and 2017. Comminuted and displaced sacral fractures (Denis classification) associated with vertical or horizontal instability of pelvis, bilateral sacral fractures, and fractures in a dysmorphic sacrum were considered for the posterior trans-iliac plating.  The patients were allowed to sit and turn in their bed without support, according to pain tolerance. The decision to allow weight-bearing was based on the associated injuries. The patients were followed up at 6 weeks, 3–4 months, 8–11months, and after 18 months with anterio-posterior (AP), inlet, and outlet view radiographs of the pelvis ( We had thirteen patients (nine male and four female) between the ages of 21–65 years (median- 42 years). Motor vehicle accident (pedestrian vs four wheeler) was the most common mode of injury in our cohort. Eight patients had Tile pelvic injury pattern type C, four had pattern B, and one had ipsilateral transverse fracture of the acetabulum. With regard to Denis pattern of sacral fractures, there were ten fracture lines in zone 2, four in zone 1 and one in zone 3 ( Eighty two percent of our patients had associated injuries, such as chest injury (50%), abdominal injury (25%), head injury (32%), long bone fractures (30%), spine factures, and calcaneum and clavicle (four patients). Complications related to fracture, injury, and immobilization were encountered in 65% of the patients. Two patients had Morel-Lavallee lesions in the anterior side, which was treated by debridement and dead space obliteration; three patients had foot drop, urethral rupture was seen in two and bladder injury in one patient for which anterior fixation was withheld and managed accordingly by urologists. Fat embolism was observed in two patients and was adequately managed. The mean follow up was 21.5±2.8 months. All fractures had radiological union by 22 weeks (Lindhal's grade A in ten patients and grade B in three patients). We had vertical displacement of < 10 mm in one patient, however the fracture united uneventfully. Two patients had recovery of foot drop by twenty four weeks. One did not recover and opted for functional rehabilitation. Three patients had bed sores, which was managed by serial debridement and dressings. Two patients had complaints of implant prominence (body mass index <19 kg/m The management of sacral fractures poses significant challenges for orthopaedicians in various aspects. In a severely traumatized patient, stabilizing these sacral fractures by a modality that has minimal surgically site morbid, least neurovascular injuries and ability to maintain reduction through the rehabilitation phase are the main considerations. The management of pelvic fractures associated with urological injuries has been controversial. Very high infection rates, urosepsis, the possibility of multiple urological procedures are major concerns that impede internal fixation. Nerve injuries are of major concern in sacral fractures. Implant-related complications using other modalities have always varied and higher rates were reported in comminuted and bilateral sacral fractures. Krapinger et al. in a similar study with 23 patients using 4.5 mm recon plates experienced implant prominence in four patients, loss of reduction to maximum of 10 mm in two patients, breakage of plates in two patients, and screw in one patient in their mean follow up of 20 months. The various complications reported in patients with pelvic ring disruptions include heterotopic ossification, infections, deep vein thrombosis, bedsores, and recurrent urinary tract infections. The use of the posterior trans-iliac tension band plate for unstable sacral fractures is a safe, minimally invasive procedure with less operative complications and radiation exposure. It can provide a more rigid fixation in a wide range of conditions that are limited by other techniques, like highly comminuted, bilateral, dysmorphic sacrum and obese patients. It provides a stable posterior construct and restores the tension in the osseoligamentous structures of the posterior pelvic ring and iliac blades and thereby limits anterior implant failures and loss of reduction, an implication useful in managing ring disruptions with anterior surgical site morbidity. Performed all the surgeries, follow up, manuscript editing and guidance. Assisted, took to data collection and analysis, manuscript preparation. Assisted in surgeries, follow up and data collection. Assisted in surgeries, follow up and data collection. Assisted in surgeries, follow up and data collection. Nil. None. Nil. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at