The purpose of this study was to compare imaging modalities in the diagnosis of occult radial head and neck fractures and to assess the diagnostic value of ultrasound in diagnosing occult fractures of the radial head and neck.
                  The study included 193 patients (101 male, 92 female) who were referred by trauma surgeons from January 2011 to July 2014 and presented with history of acute elbow trauma. The mean age of the patients was 37 years (range 15–82 years); 95 right and 98 left elbows were included in the study. Clinical examinations and standard radiograms were conducted. The anteroposterior radiographic view revealed no visible signs of fracture. The lateral radiographic view showed displacement of the anterior and posterior fat pads (fat pad sign) due to joint effusion, which is an indirect sign of fracture. In all 193 cases, ultrasound examination showed intraarticular effusion. In 176 cases (91%), there was effusion in both the olecranon bursa and the elbow joint. In 10 patients (5%), there was effusion only inside the elbow joint and in seven cases (4%) there was effusion only in the olecranon bursa. Cortical discontinuity (a direct sign of fracture) was clearly visualised in 157 cases (82%), in the radial neck in 108 cases and in the radial head in 49 cases. Ultrasound findings of fracture were questionable in 36 cases (18%). Step-off deformities, tiny avulsed bone fragments, double-line appearance of cortical margins, and diffuse irregularity of the bone surfaces were identified as auxiliary ultrasound findings (indirect signs of fracture).
                  Standard radiograms were repeated after 7–10 days. In 184 cases (95%), there was a clearly visible fracture: a fracture of the radial neck in 111 cases (58%) and a fracture of non-displaced radial head in 73 cases (37%). In nine cases (5%), radial fracture was not confirmed on radiogram and MRI was performed in these patients.
                  In conclusion, ultrasound imaging proved to be an effective method for diagnosing occult fractures of the radial head or neck when initial radiograms showed only intraarticular effusion. Ultrasound imaging is a cost-effective, easy-to-use and radiation-free method. For these reasons we recommend it for early detection of occult fracture in the emergency room.The elbow joint is highly susceptible to damage following trauma and even radiologically minor injuries can be associated with major disability. Fractures around the elbow joint typically occur when an axial force is applied to the forearm, causing the radial head to hit the capitellum of the humerus This was a prospective study comprising 193 patients (101 male, 92 female) who were referred by trauma surgeons from January 2011 to July 2014 and presented with history of acute elbow trauma. The mean age of the patients was 37 years (range 15–82 years); 95 right and 98 left elbows were included in the study. Patients had their full medical history taken, and were submitted to clinical examination, standard radiograms and ultrasound. Standard radiograms included two projections: anteroposterior and lateral view. Ultrasounds were performed on a SHIMADZU 2200 using a 7–15 In nine cases, control radiograms did not prove a fracture and MRI was performed in these patients (1.0-T system; Magnetom Expert; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Patients underwent imaging with the elbow in neutral position. Conventional MRI was conducted using dedicated flexi coil (small), 3 Statistical analyses of all data included Mann–Whitney A total of 193 patients who presented from January 2011 to July 2014 with history of acute elbow trauma were examined in this study. Physical examination revealed limited active and passive elbow flexion and extension range of motion because of pain. The anteroposterior radiographic view revealed no visible signs of fracture ( Ultrasound examination was performed after initial radiograms in all 193 patients; there was intraarticular effusion in all 193 cases (100%) ( Standard radiograms were repeated after 7–10 days. In 184 cases (95%), there was a clearly visible fracture: a fracture of the radial neck in 111 cases (58%) ( Sample size was calculated to prove that ultrasound was comparable to radiogram in locating the fracture and that the proportion of correctly located fractures was the same for head and neck fracture. With the assumed proportion of correctly classified cases by ultrasound of 80%, a significance level of 0.05 and power of 0.90, sample size was calculated as 95 subjects per group using methodology described by Chow Subjects with radial neck fracture did not differ significantly from those with radial head fracture in terms of sex ( The term ‘occult fracture’ is used for a fracture that is either radiographically undetectable or shows subtle abnormalities that were missed on the initial radiograms, even if the fracture is visualised retrospectively or confirmed by other imaging tests This was a prospective study with two aims: first, to evaluate the diagnostic value of ultrasound in diagnosing occult fractures of radial head and neck, and second, to compare diagnostic value of ultrasound with radiography in pinpointing the location of the fracture (i.e. head vs. neck). There was no control group included in the study for ethical reasons (one of the diagnostic procedures involves exposure to ionising radiation). For this reason, as well for the foreseen inclusion method (i.e. all subjects already having tentative diagnosis at referral), calculation of sample size for the primary endpoint would be erroneous. Consequently, sample size was calculated to prove that ultrasound is comparable to radiography in locating the fracture and that the proportion of correctly located fractures is the same for head and neck fracture. A total of 193 patients were analysed; three of these patients had bilateral fractures, but only the dominant side was included for consistency of the statistical analysis. The history and physical examination findings led the orthopaedic surgeon to suspect a possible radial head fracture and they ordered elbow radiographs (anteroposterior and lateral views). The anteroposterior radiographic view revealed no visible signs of fracture. The lateral radiographic view revealed lucencies anterior and posterior to the distal humerus, which indicated displacement of the anterior and posterior fat pads (a fat pad sign) due to joint effusion. Ultrasound is a helpful tool for the diagnosis of occult fractures and intraarticular effusion. In the current study, ultrasound proved to be 100% reliable as intraarticular effusion was found in all cases. Occult fractures can be relatively easily seen by ultrasound as cortical discontinuity, irregular shape of the cortex or cortical defect with dorsal enhancement. The value of ultrasound in locating the fracture site was assessed in this study. Subjects with radial neck fracture in the current study did not differ significantly from those with radial head fracture in terms of sex ( Cortical discontinuity was clearly visualised in 82% of cases and was questionable in 18%. Diagnosis was proved a week later on control radiograms where cortical demarcation became more visible in 95% of patients. In the other 5% of patients (nine cases), there was no visible fracture. These were the cases where ultrasound did not reveal a fracture or where the findings were questionable. In these nine cases, MRI was performed in three standard positions following a standard protocol. The results are described in This study has some limitation. Ultrasound was used to analyse only intraarticular effusion and cortical discontinuity and there was no analysis of soft tissue changes, or musculo-tendinous and ligament changes. The results of this study could be compared with MRI results, but the authors believe that ultrasound provides enough information about effusion and posttraumatic soft tissue changes. MRI is a better imaging method for evaluation of bone marrow oedema and intraosseal abnormalities. In conclusion, radiographically occult and subtle fractures of the radial head and neck are often a challenging diagnostic problem in daily clinical practice. When the fracture line is not clearly visible on standard radiograms and there are indirect signs of intraarticular effusion, additional imaging methods are required. CT can help with delineating the fracture line but cannot provide information about soft tissue changes or bone marrow oedema. MRI provides valuable information about soft tissue and bone marrow but sometimes fracture line can be difficult to analyse. Ultrasound imaging is a valuable method for joint effusion, soft tissue and bone surface and is very important for the early detection of occult or missed fractures. Ultrasound imaging proved to be an effective diagnostic method for diagnosing occult fractures in cases of occult radial head or neck fracture when initial radiograms show only intraarticular effusion. Ultrasound imaging is a cost-effective, easy-to-use and radiation-free method that is recommended for early detection of occult fracture in the emergency room. All authors declare they have no conflicts of interest.