Hot-wire chemical vapor-deposited silicon nitride is a potential dielectric material compared to glow-discharge-deposited material due to its lower hydrogen content. In several earlier publications we have demonstrated these aspects of the HWCVD nitride. However, to replace SiO2 with a-SiN:H as the gate dielectric, this material needs further improvement. In this paper we report the results of our efforts to achieve this through nitrogen dilution of the SiH4+NH3 gas mixture used for deposition. To understand the electrical behavior of these nitride films, we characterized the films by high-frequency capacitance–voltage (HFCV) and DC J–E measurements. We attempted to evolve a correlation between the breakdown strength, as determined from the J–E curves, and aspects such as the bond density, etching rate, deposition rate and refractive index. From these correlations, we infer that nitrogen dilution of the source gas mixture has a beneficial effect on the physical and electrical properties of the hot-wire a-SiN:H films. For the highest dilution, we obtained a breakdown voltage of 12 MV cm−1.To continue scaling in metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) technology, the anticipated high gate leakage current in the thermal oxide needs to be suppressed We have succeeded in developing ultra-thin ∼4-nm (<2 nm of EOT) silicon nitride by hot-wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) as a gate dielectric for metal nitride semiconductor (MNS) capacitors The a-SiN:H films were deposited by HWCVD using SiH The thickness of the films was measured using two different techniques. A surface profilometer (Dektak II) was used to measure the thickness of thicker films (>1000 Å), while the thickness of the ultra-thin films (<4 nm) was determined from  The high-frequency There are several observations to be made from the The thickness as determined from the The fixed charge density decreases from 5×10 A small hysteresis observed in the retrace The breakdown field increases with increasing N The leakage current density decreases from 4×10 From the results we observe that nitrogen dilution of the SiH We have looked at the effect of nitrogen dilution of silane on the physical and electrical properties of ∼4-nm-thick hot-wire-deposited a-SiN:H films. Nitrogen dilution is beneficial and leads to a significant decrease in the leakage current and fixed charge density. The small hysteresis observed in all the films indicates negligible border traps in these films. Finally, evaluation of the reliability of these MNS capacitors with ultra-thin HWCVD nitride deposited with different nitrogen dilution (∼2.0 nm of EOT) shows high breakdown fields and very little trap generation in the film during stressing at 10 MV cm One of the authors (Mr Samadhan B. Patil) acknowledges the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for financial assistance. This work was carried out with financial support from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi.