Two underground coal mines in the Sydney Coalfield, Nova Scotia, Canada have encountered gas outbursts from sandstone formations overlying the coal seams. These have consistently occurred while driving mine roadways into virgin ground at and below mining depths of 700 m. In this investigation, triaxial compression tests were conducted on samples of the outburst-prone sandstone from one of these mines, the Phalen Colliery, while simultaneously measuring gas permeability, acoustic emissions and ultrasonic P-wave velocity and attenuation. Experimental results characterized these sandstone properties over the full range of axial stresses up to compressive failure. These data were intended to assist with (i) evaluating the potential for degassing the sandstone and (ii) evaluating the results of in-seam seismic surveys, which were conducted to map the sandstone ahead of mining. At the estimated in situ conditions in virgin rock at 700 m depth, the sandstone permeability is expected to be in the 0.005 to 0.04 mD range, the P-wave velocity is approximately 4000 m/s and the attenuation quality factor in the 20 to 25 range. Near mine openings at 700 m depth, where the lateral confining pressures are reduced, the permeability can be several orders of magnitude higher in the 4 to 15 mD range, the P-wave velocity is 3800 m/s and the attenuation quality factor is in the 10 to 15 range. Experimental data suggests that microcracking in the sandstone prior to compressive failure does not significantly enhance permeability but there may be local pockets of higher permeability within the sandstone.Gas outbursts are the rapid ejection of gas and rock material from rock strata at underground mines. They are a major safety hazard because of the danger posed by the fragmented rock ejected into the mine opening and because much of the expelled gases are explosive, e.g. methane. Worldwide, these outbursts have been reported at several types of underground soft-rock mines, but the majority occur at coal mines when openings are excavated in close proximity to low permeability strata containing gas under high pressure and are more frequent when excavation is occurring in virgin rock such as near the face of an advancing roadway or tunnel ( At the No. 26 Colliery, 37 of these rock gas outbursts were recorded from 1977 to the mine's closure in 1984 ( The research described in this paper extends this earlier research by investigating the permeability, acoustic emissions and ultrasonic velocity and attenuation properties of the outburst-prone sandstone from the Phalen Colliery over a range of triaxial stress conditions up to compressive failure. The intended applications of this data were (i) to assist with evaluating the potential of degassing operations for the outburst-prone sandstone and (ii) to assist with the interpretation of in-seam seismic surveys ( A total of five sandstone-hosted gas outbursts occurred at the Phalen Colliery from 1994 to the mine's closure in 2000. All of these occurred during the advancing of the main slope roadways. The first outburst occurred on September 28, 1994 in No. 3 Slope when the roadway was being advanced at a depth of 697 m using a mechanical roadheader. This event ejected 20 m The outburst-prone sandstone is described as a river-channel sandstone that has eroded the upper portion of the coal seam ( The stress-flow-acoustic triaxial system used for this research was developed in-house and is described in detail in a related publication ( The acoustic measurement system is sketched in Acoustic emission (AE) detection. In this mode, the receiving sensor is configured to trigger on signal amplitude and passively detects and records the AE generated within the sandstone samples in response to applied stress. Ultrasonic transmission measurement. In this mode, a pulse-calibration unit strobes the lower sensor with a high voltage, short duration pulse that generates a source P-wave. This waveform propagates through the cell and sandstone sample and to the upper receiving sensor. Recording at the receiving sensor is triggered using a synchronization signal generated by the pulse-calibration unit. The sandstone samples were compressed to failure in the loading frames at constant displacement rates of 2 or 4 mm/h. These tests were conducted at confining pressures of 1, 5 and 10 MPa. The tests at 1 MPa simulated uniaxial compression tests since the 1 MPa pressure was just sufficient to seal the heat shrink tubing against the sample to prevent air flow along the outside of the sample but not high enough to significantly influence the compressive strength. The tests at confining pressures of 5 and 10 MPa simulated the behaviour of the sandstone under the in situ conditions expected at the outburst depth of 700 m in virgin ground. At this depth, the estimated overburden stress is 20 MPa and the estimated lateral stresses range between 5 and 10 MPa based on elastic plane–strain analysis using Poisson's Ratios ranging from 0.2 to 0.3. During these tests, the following measurements were recorded: Applied axial force at a rate of several readings per second. Measurements of upstream air flow pressure, downstream pressure and downstream flow rate at an approximate period of 10 s. For AE monitoring, digitized waveforms detected by the receiving sensor at a maximum rate of approximately 5 events/s. For ultrasonic transmission measurements, the digitized waveforms recorded by the receiving sensor at an approximate rate of one per second. All of these measurements were indexed with respect to elapsed test time to facilitate evaluation and comparison during post-test data analysis. The axial force and displacement measurements were converted to axial stress and strain by dividing through by the initial sample cross-sectional area and length, respectively. The flow measurements were used to compute gas permeability The acoustic emissions were evaluated by examining the pattern of cumulative AE recorded during a test. The rate of AE would be proportional to the slope of graphs of cumulative AE versus test time. Periods of little or no AE would be indicated by flat traces on these graphs. Prior to the computation of P-wave velocity or attenuation, the recorded waveforms were processed to improve the signal-to-noise ratio and to isolate the desired wave components. First, every 16 consecutive waveforms were checked to remove bad events (due to sporadic triggering errors) and then stacked. Each stacked waveform was examined and all waveform amplitudes after the initial P-wave arrival were zeroed to remove the later wave arrivals. The arrival time and a 128 point fast Fourier transform were then determined for each of these stacked, isolated P-waveforms. These processing steps are outlined in For each waveform, the group P-wave velocity The method used to compute the P-wave attenuation is the spectral ratios method ( The attenuation of the P-wave can be described using: Stress–strain curves for the tested samples are given in Permeability–stress data for the tested samples are given in Several additional observations can be made from the permeability–stress data. First of all, sample H5-V tested at 5 MPa confining pressure showed anomalously high permeability (with respect to the general permeability patterns noted above) with values 2 to 3 orders of magnitude higher than expected. This suggests that pockets of higher permeability may be present in the sandstone. Secondly, both of the samples recovered from borehole H5 show permeabilities that are less sensitive to changes in axial stress than the other samples. This is shown as the slope of the fitted logarithmic relationship for these two samples, which is less than the consistent slope for all other samples where stress–permeability data are available. Since borehole H5 was the only borehole drilled in-seam and parallel to sedimentary bedding ( The samples from boreholes PH403 and PH473 were tested with the acoustic monitoring system configured to record AE. The patterns observed for all of these samples was consistent with two distinct periods of AE activity: (i) during the first few minutes at the start of each test when confining pressure was applied and the stress–strain curve was curling upwards and (ii) during the final few minutes of each test when the stress–strain curve was beginning to roll over before sample failure. There were generally no AE detected outside these two periods. These patterns of AE are shown in The first AE period is interpreted as seating of the sample platens and the closure of recovery-induced microcracks, while the second period is interpreted as microcracking of the sample matrix or cemented grain contacts during the period of plastic deformation preceding failure. This interpretation is supported by the permeability measurements shown in The samples form the PH472 and H5 boreholes were tested with the acoustic monitoring system configured for ultrasonic transmission measurements. Due to a system configuration error, the waveforms recorded for sample H5-V had poor signal-to-noise ratio and no data for these waveforms are presented here. The computed P-wave velocities and attenuation quality factors for the remaining three samples are presented in At approximately 700 m depth, the P-wave velocity and attenuation quality factors in virgin ground are expected to be 4000 m/s and 20 to 25, respectively. Near openings, where lateral confining pressures are reduced, these parameters are expected to be somewhat lower at 3800 m/s and 10 to 15, respectively. From this investigation, the patterns of permeability, acoustic emissions, ultrasonic velocity and ultrasonic attenuation for samples of the outburst-prone sandstone have been characterized over a range of triaxial pressures and axial stresses up to failure. From these data, several observations can be made regarding the characteristics of the sandstone at approximately 700 m depth with an estimated overburden pressure of 20 MPa: The permeability in virgin ground is less than 0.1 mD and probably in the range of 0.005 to 0.04 mD. Near mine openings, where lateral confining pressures are reduced, the permeability can be several orders of magnitude higher in the 4 to 15 mD range. Horizontal permeability is less sensitive to changes in stress than vertical permeability. P-wave velocity is expected to be approximately 4000 m/s in virgin ground and approximately 3800 m/s under reduced lateral confining pressure near mine openings. P-wave attenuation quality factor is expected to be in the 20 to 25 range in virgin ground and in the 10 to 15 range under reduced lateral confining pressure near mine openings. Microcracking of the sandstone prior to compressive failure does not result in significant permeability enhancement. Local pockets of higher permeability may be present in the sandstone. The authors would like to thank former staff of the Phalen Colliery for collaboration in this investigation, in particular Stephen Forgeron, Senior Mine Geologist, Pleman Woodland, Senior Outburst Engineer, and Robert MacDonald, Mine Manager. The assistance of Jack Touseull of ASTM International regarding clarification of gas permeability measurement procedures is greatly appreciated.