The percolation leaching of the Cuban nickel tailings containing 0.34% Ni, 0.08% Co and 44.2% Fe was investigated by using tartaric and oxalic acids at different concentrations. About 70% Ni, 80% Co and 30% Fe were extracted after 5 days of leaching with the mixture of 0.15mol/L tartaric acid and 0.05mol/L oxalic acid at ambient temperature and normal pressure. Nickel and cobalt extraction of 80% as well as iron extraction of 50% were achieved from the pregnant solution by means of precipitation at 80°C for 2h. The precipitation at ambient temperature led to a similar result after 16 days. Cobalt, nickel and iron oxalates were found in the precipitate by using the X-ray diffraction method. The regeneration of acids during the precipitation step made possible the reuse of the raffinate at the leaching step. Heating of the precipitate at 200°C increased the metal concentration to 1.22% Ni and 0.33% Co, which can be fed in the existing nickel plant in Moa, Cuba. The magnetic processing of the leaching residues led to a non-magnetic product containing less than 20% Fe and a magnetic product containing more than 50% Fe.Nickel and cobalt are being extracted from the Cuban laterite ores containing more than 1% Ni and 0.15% Co at three hydrometallurgical plants. Two plants are using the Ammoniacal Carbonate Technology (Caron Process) and one plant is using the Acid Pressure Technology. In both technologies only 80–85% Ni and 20–30% Co can be extracted. About 100 million tonnes of the leaching residues containing less than 0.5% Ni and 0.1% Co have been produced in the last 50 years. Due to the serious environmental problem caused by these tailings, several investigations looking for simple operation conditions and low cost technologies are being carried out. Several authors have investigated the leaching of low-grade nickeliferous laterites using synthetic organic acids or acids obtained during the metabolism of microorganisms The aim of this study is to focus on the recirculated precipitate amenable to leaching with the existing process. The percolation leaching with tartaric acid as well as a mixture of tartaric and oxalic acids was attempted. In addition, extraction of metals from the pregnant solution by precipitation, thermal decomposition of the precipitate and upgrading of iron from the residues of percolation leaching were also carried out. The sample used in this investigation is from the tailings dam obtained during the ammoniacal carbonate process at the Ernesto Che Guevara nickel plant, Moa (North-East of Cuba). Percolators with a diameter of 8 The precipitation tests were carried out at 80 A muffle furnace was used for the thermal decomposition of the precipitate. For each test, about 3 The upgrading of the secondary tailings from the percolation leaching with organic acids was carried out by using the magnetic Jones-separator (WHIMS). This is a laboratory wet high intensity-magnetic separator used for processing up to 10 The percolation leaching with 0.15  The percolation leaching with a mixture of 0.15 The precipitation process at ambient temperature was carried out by maintaining about 1  The residual solution from the precipitation at ambient temperature for 16 days containing about 1.2 The objective of thermal treatment of the precipitate was to increase the cobalt and nickel contents by the decomposition of organic salts into inorganic oxides. An average of 1.3 The objective of the magnetic separation was to increase the iron content in the secondary tailings for use as a raw material in the steel industries. The X-ray patterns show the tailings contain magnetite, fayalite and quartz. It is known that magnetite has a high magnetic susceptibility in comparison to fayalite and quartz. The high intensity magnetic separator was used for that purpose. From the above results the following flow sheet ( The percolation leaching of the Cuban nickel tailings containing 0.34% Ni, 0.08% Co and 44.2% Fe was investigated by using tartaric and oxalic acids. About 70% Ni, 80% Co and 30% Fe could be extracted after 5 days leaching with the mixture of 0.15 Extraction of 80% Ni and Co and 50 % Fe from the pregnant solution were achieved by means of precipitation at 80 During the precipitation step, acids are regenerated, which can be reused for leaching. Heating the precipitate at 200 Magnetic processing of leaching residues led to a non-magnetic product containing less than 20% Fe and a magnetic product containing more than 50% Fe, which can be fed to the steel industry. The award of a research fellowship by the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) to C.M.F. Hernández to pursue research based at the Institute of Mineral Processing and Waste Disposal, Clausthal University of Technology, is highly appreciated.