Airflow rate to a cell is one of the main operating variables in flotation. In many plants, if measurements are available at all, they are typically made on a line common to several cells with valves to distribute as determined by the operator. In this study, air distribution throughout zinc cleaner circuit of CBI was adjusted to three different profiles. These are “as found” which was the original profile adjusted by operators, “decreasing” and “increasing” profiles which were adjusted for test. It was seen that air distribution profile significantly affected flotation selectivity. Selectivity between both sphalerite–pyrite and sphalerite–chalcopyrite increased with “increasing” profile. The effect of air distribution profile on flotation selectivity was also studied at mini pilot plant (MPP). Zinc rougher concentrate was taken as feed of MPP. Air distribution profile was adjusted and controlled by airflow meters of each cell. Three different air profiles; “balanced”, “decreasing” and “increasing”, were tested. The results of MPP tests also confirmed that “increasing” air distribution profile improved selectivity at zinc cleaner circuit.Froth flotation is strongly influenced by hydrodynamics and gas dispersion in the cell. Air distribution into a cell is one of the main operating variables in flotation. The efficiency of flotation mainly depends on how effectively air is used in the process. Many studies have been done on the effect of air dispersion on flotation process ( The main purpose of this study is to improve the metallurgical performance of flotation circuits by developing a control strategy for airflow among the flotation banks. A more reliable airflow meter with a control valve was installed to a selected bank in flotation circuit and various airflow profiles were tested. The findings of plant trial were also confirmed by the test work conducted at the MPP. Cayeli Bakir İşletmeleri AŞ (“CBI”) is a Turkish company owned by INMET Mining of Toronto, Canada. Detailed information about the CBI concentrator can be found at various papers presented before ( In this study, zinc first cleaner stage was selected to develop a control strategy for air distribution because feed to this circuit is quite stable. Test work was performed at the first four cells of zinc cleaner one bank consisting seven 8 Total airflow to the zinc cleaner bank was set to 700 The air distribution profiles tested were “as found”, “decreasing” and “increasing”. As found was the profile that was adjusted by the flotation operator. Decreasing and increasing air distribution profiles were adjusted by using individual manual valves on flotation cells. Sampling surveys were performed for each profile after the circuit stabilized. Feed, concentrate and tail samples were taken from each cell. The samples were weighed, dried and assayed for Zn, Fe and Cu. It can be seen at Recoveries were higher at the 1st of the bank for all profiles because of high mass pull. However, the highest recovery was at the “as found” profile as the air distribution was adjusted by the operators without any order. Therefore, concentrate grade was lowest as the Fe and Cu recoveries were high. Zinc recovery was slightly lower with increasing profile while the selectivity is better. It can also seen from Mini pilot plant (MPP) was designed and fabricated by Outotec. It is consisting of three tank cells of 5 Zn rougher concentrate was directly taken from the plant to the conditioner tank of the MPP which has a capacity to conduct 10 Increasing profile is giving better metallurgy in terms of selectivity between sphalerite and pyrite similar to the plant results. Especially, zinc grade is too high with increasing profile ( Metal recoveries were very high at the 1st cell with decreasing profile, resulting poor selectivity. Although, zinc recovery was low at the 1st cell with increasing profile, final concentrate recovery increased at the 2nd cell. Zinc recovery for balanced profile was in between. Fe recovery at the first cell of zinc cleaner bank increased gradually from 4% to nearly 12% as the airflow rate increased. It can be seen that high recovery at the first cell dominates the combined recovery of the bank. Also, water recovery is significantly lower for increasing profile resulting less entrainment and entrapment mechanism and hence higher zinc grade ( Air is one of the important parameter affecting the metallurgical performance of flotation circuits. Effective air control is important for getting the optimum results with minimum operating cost. Airflow should be measured reliably in order to develop a control strategy for various flotation circuits such as roughing, scavenging and cleaning. It was aimed to develop a control strategy with this study at zinc cleaner circuit by using the air affectively. Both plant and MPP test results showed that increasing profile is better in terms of selectivity of sphalerite against pyrite and chalcopyrite. The improved selectivity with the increasing profile is attributed to the low gas rate in the 1st cell reducing water recovery and hence limiting entrainment and entrapment. Especially, pyrite reported to the froth increases significantly with increasing profile mostly because of the entrainment mechanism. Lower pyrite recovery with decreasing profile confirms that main mechanism is entrainment/entrapment rather than true flotation. Other profiles resulted higher zinc recovery and lower selectivity in the 1st cell, which reduce overall bank performance. High level of air at the first cell increases the mass pull so much that selectivity ceases. Selectivity against pyrite is very important at zinc circuit because of two main reasons; firstly pyrite dilution makes the upgrading difficult resulting low final zinc concentrate grade and secondly there is a penalty for each percentage of iron in zinc concentrate after a certain limit. Therefore, pyrite rejection is very critical at zinc cleaner circuit. An air distribution strategy was developed with this study and implemented at the 1st zinc cleaner circuit. Low airflow rate in the first cell and increasing gradually along the bank resulted as the optimum metallurgy in terms of selectivity. The authors would like to thank the managements of Cayeli Bakır İşletmeleri AŞ for the permission to publish this paper.