The commercial sulfate process for pigment production uses concentrated sulfuric acid (>85 wt% H2SO4) as feeding material and discharges 8–10 tons of spend dilute acid (20 wt% H2SO4) per ton of product. Re-using spend acid to leach ilmenite can cut the waste emission and save fresh feeding acid. However, the leaching reaction with dilute acid is very slow and the digestion efficiency is fairly low. This paper describes a wet-milling process to enhance the dilute-acid leaching of ilmenite that makes it possible to produce TiO2 pigment in a more environmentally benign routine. The leaching kinetic study of unmilled ilmenite, dry milled 60 min ilmenite and wet milled 60 min ilmenite was conducted by revision of the shrinking core model (SCM), incorporation of particle size distribution (PSD) into SCM. The results revealed that mechano-chemical activation method significantly increased the leaching efficiency of titanium from 36% to 76% by reducing the particle size and increasing the reaction contact area. On the other hand, the milling process increased the lattice deformation and amorphization of crystalline, which lowered the activation energies in the leaching process. Compared with dry milling operation, wet milling is more effective, the particle size distribution of wet-milled ilmenite was much narrower, smaller, and more uniform. Wet milling of ilmenite makes the leaching reaction with dilute acid (60 wt% H2SO4) practicable and the re-use of spend acid becomes possible and economical.Titanium dioxide (TiO Nowadays, the sulfate process produces about 40% of the world's TiO A simple method to recycle spent acid is to leach ilmenite with a diluted acid. For example, using 60 wt% instead of 85 wt% sulfuric acid could halve the waste acid discharge. In addition to recovering the spent acid, the reuse of spend acid also reduces the gaseous pollution caused by flue gas (acidic gas, Mechanical activation, In this work, a wet mechano-chemical milling process for ilmenite was employed, in which water was introduced as an additive to enhance the milling efficiency. The role of the wet milling on the physicochemical properties was also investigated. The structures and morphologies of the ore during dry and wet milling were systematically characterized The ilmenite sample was obtained from Dingxing Titanium Company (Panzhihua, China). The raw ore was first dehydrated at 120 °C for 24 h. The chemical composition of the ilmenite was shown in A planetary ball mill (QM-QX2, Nanjing, China) with a revolution speed of 200 r·min The ilmenite leaching experiments were conducted in a 250 ml four-necked glass reactor with an agitator, a condenser, and a thermometer. In each experiment, 100 ml of 60 wt% H The Fe- or Ti-extraction in % ( The kinetic experiments for the leaching reaction were conducted in a 500-ml four-necked glass reactor. The reactor was also installed with an agitator, a condenser, and a thermometer in its openings. The fourth opening was used to feed reactants and withdraw the slurry samples. The reactants were heated with an oil bath in which the temperature fluctuations were controlled within 2 °C. In each experiment, 400 ml of 60 wt% H The amounts of Ti and Fe of ilmenite were measured using the alkali-melting method, which were the same as those described in our previous work XRD data were obtained with a diffractometer (D/max 2550 X, Rigaku, Japan), using Cu K Deviation from ideal crystallinity, as indicated by the finite crystallite size, strain, and extended defects (stacking faults and dislocations), leads to broadening of the diffraction lines. The crystallite size is the characteristic size of coherently diffracting domains and is generally different from the particle size because of polycrystalline aggregation. Strain is defined as the deformation per unit length and is measured as the change in The particle size was analyzed using a laser diffraction analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern, UK). The surface areas were measured with a multipoint nitrogen gas adsorption system (SSA-3500, Quantachrome, USA) using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) technique. The surface morphologies of the ilmenite samples before and after mechanical milling were observed using an SEM (S-4800, Hitachi, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV, and a high-resolution TEM (HRTEM; Tecnai G2 F20 S-TWIM, FEI, USA). To reduce agglomeration of the material, the samples were ultrasonically dispersed in alcohol for 15 min prior to the analysis. The vibration spectra were measured using an FTIR spectrometer (Spectrum Two L1600300, PerkinElmer, USA). Thermal analysis was performed on a thermogravimetry (TG) analyzer (Exstar 6000, Seiko, Japan) with a heating rate of 10 °C·min The acidolysis efficiency of the ilmenite before and after dry or wet milling was measured in 60 wt% H To understand the effect of mechanical activation on reaction intensification, characterizations, such as particle size analysis, specific surface area, SEM/TEM, XRD patterns and IR spectra, were conducted to measure the transformations in the crystal structure and morphologies after mechanical milling. Since the mechanical milling of samples was accompanied by disintegration of crystals and generation of fresh surfaces, typical changes after intensive milling included the increase in specific surface area and decrease in particle size. The size distribution and specific surface area depended on the aggregation and agglomeration of particles during the milling process The particle size distributions were shown in A comparison of the results of the particle size distributions in the dry- and the wet-milling processes, showed that the particle size distribution of wet-milled ilmenite was much narrower, smaller, and more uniform compared with that of dry-milling. Water added in the milling process served as a dispersing agent, preventing the ilmenite particles from aggregating. The BET surface areas of the dry- and wet-milled ilmenite samples were shown in The SEM micrographs of the unmilled samples and the milled samples were shown in In order to verify the changes in surface morphologies, crystal grain sizes, and degree of amorphization, TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis were employed, and the results were shown in The XRD patterns of the samples were illustrated in The mechanical forces affected the crystal structure and size through either deformation or breakdown of crystalline lattice. The reduced intensities of the XRD peaks confirmed the accumulation of lattice deformations. The variation in crystallite size and strain was quantified by means of the recently developed XRD data analysis software Materials Analysis Using Diffraction (MAUD), which was based on a full-pattern-fitting procedure (Rietveld method) The original size of the crystallites was 145.6 nm; after 30 min of dry or wet milling, the sizes were reduced to 64.6 nm or 50.0 nm, respectively; after 240 min of dry or wet milling, they were reduced to 52.3 nm or 26.5 nm, respectively. The original value of the lattice strain was 0.0867%; after 30 min of wet or dry milling, the strain changed to 0.2038% and 0.1170%, respectively; after 240 min of dry or wet milling, the strain changed to 0.2337% and 0.2290%, respectively. We observed a very sharp change in crystallite size and lattice strain for milled samples in the initial stage, which was correlated to the changes in morphologies, specific surface areas, and particle sizes after different milling times. However, neither the crystallite size nor the lattice strain varied significantly for milling times greater than 30 min. The presence of water mitigated the damage to the crystalline structure, which was consistent with previous results To further explore the role of mechanical force on the crystal structure, the degree of amorphization of ilmenite was calculated on the basis of the integrated intensity of the (104) peak (~ The results were shown in The structural changes in the samples were analyzed mostly in terms of the number and position of the IR absorption bands. The surface chemical functional groups of the samples were characterized using FT-IR, and the spectral results were shown in The presence of the hydrophilic oxygen-containing functional groups, stretching vibrations of the hydroxyl group at higher wave number around 3400 cm The oxidation of ilmenite in air had been reported to have a significant influence on the dissolution because of the gradual oxidation of ilmenite to thermally metastable Fe The oxidation reaction can be expressed as: The TG weight rise (3.794%) of unmilled ilmenite was slightly less than the theoretical value. This might be caused by the formation of 2.79% pre-oxidized Fe The calculated FeTiO The shrinking core model (SCM) According to the shrinking core model, the leaching conversion of solid reactant is a function of particle size and reaction time, it depends on the reaction conditions. The unreacted ratio of initial mineral ore was expressed as following: The chemical reaction in the dissolution ilmenite in H The surface reaction rate on the unreacted core can be written as When the sulfuric acid is excess, the influence of acid concentration can be neglected. Because the reaction was conducted in the dilute sulfuric acid of 60 wt% H The function in Eq. In this work, the reactant ilmenite ore is a blend of particles with different sizes, which possesses a size distribution. Therefore, the content of unreacted ilmenite during the leaching process is an integration function of particle diameters. For a multi-sized PSD, the particles of smaller diameter react faster than those with the larger sizes. Therefore, the conversion is an integration function of particle diameters. The fraction of unreacted (FU) particles is a function of PSD, namely: Obviously, the complete dissolution time for small particle is shorter than large particle because the smaller particles dissolved faster than the larger ones. At time Eq.   The Rosin–Rammler model is often used to simulate the particle size distributions The cumulative PSDs of the unmilled, dry milled and wet milled 60 min ilmenite particles were illustrated in With the Rosin–Rammler model, the titanium extraction rate can be calculated as, For simplifying, By the least square method, the Experimental data and the fitting curves were depicted in As listed in The results showed that the reaction followed the same mechanisms for both milled and unmilled ilmenite ores, and had very close activation energies. The enlargement of surface areas during the milling process due to size reduction enhanced the leaching reaction. The major effect of the milling operation was to decrease particle size and therefore to increase the reaction surface, that greatly enhanced the leaching reaction. Both dry and wet milling significantly reduced the particle sizes ( XRD measurements showed that the milling process did not change the crystalline structures of ilmenite ( Thermogravimetric results ( Compared with dry milling, wet milling significantly accelerated the breakage of crystalline of ilmenite. The existence of water avoided the agglomeration of fine particles and prevented the healing of micro-cracks. In mechanical activation, the breakage of crystalline lattice started from micro-cracks, in which there were a large amount of unsaturated Fe  Mechanical activation of ilmenite was investigated by means of dry and wet milling operations. This paper revealed that the mechano-chemical effects significantly enhanced the leaching efficiency of Ti (from 36% to 76%) by mechanical activation of ilmenite. Milling operation activated ilmenite by reducing particle and crystalline sizes and hereby increasing specific surface area, the reaction rate increased with specific surface area. On the other hand, milling operation induced amorphization of crystalline, that made ilmenite more active and the milled samples showed smaller activation energies in the leaching reaction from the kinetic study. Compared with dry milling, wet milling was more efficient. Water acted as a dispersant, avoiding the agglomeration and re-welding of fine particles, which improved the milling efficiency. Based on the wet-milling activation, a more environmentally benign sulfate process for TiO