Alumina ceramic components were produced using gelcasting and 3D printing techniques to generate the end product. The 3D printed mould made from (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene) ABS filament provides a convenient demoulding method by dissolution of the mould using acetone as a solvent. This process enables low cost production of complex shaped ceramic components. The effect of the suspension solid loading on the properties and microstructure of complex shaped alumina parts was investigated. The produced ceramic components had densities up to 99.0%, hardness of 18 GPa, flexural strength of 374 MPa and a fracture toughness of 3.8 MPa√m after sintering in air for 3 h, in good agreement with published values.Additive Manufacturing (AM) has demonstrated an ability to produce custom parts with complex geometries and proven to be of specific use in the rapid production of functional prototypes. AM is based on Computer Aided Design (CAD) which gives a high degree of freedom for verification of designs prior to manufacturing parts. CAD allows for simple, rapid, and economic design alterations with minimal time investments and relatively low cost [ The increase in demand for advanced ceramics has highlighted some shortcomings of the current processing techniques. Custom made parts with complex shapes are difficult and occasionally impossible to produce by traditional methods. Due to ceramic's high hardness and low fracture toughness, the machining of dense ceramic parts is difficult, time consuming and expensive. There is a rising need to find alternate solutions to manufacturing challenges that require custom solutions. The demand for low cost techniques has motivated innovative concepts for powder processing and moulding techniques for the production of complex shaped ceramics [ Direct material AM methods such as Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) and Three Dimensional Printing (3DP) have been used in the preparation of complex shaped ceramics and metals. Complex shaped parts with high densities have been produced. However, the equipment used is complex, costly and a protective atmosphere is required. Additive manufacturing can be applied to ceramic forming by producing complex shaped expendable moulds that can be used for investment type casting procedure [ Investigations into the colloidal processing of ceramics have been utilised and these have been found to improve their reliability [ The non-porous moulds used in gelcasting include materials such as aluminium, plastics and wax. Wax has been successfully used as an expendable mould. However, the production of complex shapes was generally achieved through split moulds and this process proved costly for low production volumes. With a focus on small production volumes and complex geometries, AM provides versatility, high precision and repeatability [ The aim of this work was to investigate the casting behaviour and fabrication of complex shaped alumina ceramic part by combining 3D printing and gelcasting methods. This would solve problems in existing applications and could lead to new ones. The materials used for casting is an alumina suspension that was cast into 3D printed moulds. Once gelled, the part will be demoulded by dissolving the mould in acetone. The produced parts were thermally processed and characterised by determining their relative densities, mechanical properties and their microstructures, as examined by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Commercially available alumina powder (Alfar Aesar) with an average particle size of 0.8 μm was used as the starting powder. A co-polymer of Isobutylene and maleic anhydride (Isobam®) was used as the dispersant and gelling agent while distilled water was used as the dispersion medium. The viscosities of alumina powders with and without the dispersant were measured by a rheometer (Anton Paar). The rheological analyses gave an indication of the optimal processing parameters for gelcasting. The gelling agent, Isobam®, was dissolved in distilled water to form the premix solution. Slurries with a solid loading of up to 60 vol% were prepared by adding the alumina powder into the premix solution. Slurries were mixed in a 250 ml stainless steel milling bowl with a zirconium oxide lining and an inside diameter of 7 cm. Alumina grinding balls with a diameter of 2 mm were used as the milling media. The powder and the milling balls used for the milling were carefully weighed to achieve a ball to powder mass ratio of 1:3. The slurries were milled for 24 h s to break up the agglomeration of the particles and ensure perfect mixing using a planetary ball mill at a milling speed of 300 rpm. The resulting slurries were degassed in a desiccator connected to a vacuum pump to remove any trapped air. Various solid models were constructed using computer aided design software. Cura® software was used to slice the model and produce its negative which acted as the mould pattern. A three dimensional printer was used to print the mould by extrusion of a plastic filament of acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS). The slurry was poured into the 3D printed ABS plastic moulds. The slurry containing moulds were left at room temperature for gelation to occur. After the polymerisation of the slurry was completed, the green samples were removed from the moulds by dissolving the mould in acetone. The green samples were dried in an environmental chamber with a controlled humidity of 90.0% and the temperature was kept at 50 °C. They were then heated to 600 °C for 1hr to remove the polymer in a special debindering muffle furnace and sintered in air at a temperature of 1650 °C for 3 h s. The Archimedes’ method was used to measure the density and porosity of the parts that were fabricated. The hardness and fracture toughness were determined by Vickers indentation onto mirror finished surfaces. Five indentations were made using a 5kgf load for 15 s. The values of the diagonals were measured and the hardness was calculated. The fracture toughness was determined by direct crack measurement method using the Anstis [ The flexural strength was determined by using the ball on three balls (B3B) [ Rheological properties of gelcasting suspensions are important as they regulate the properties of the formed green body. The rheological behaviour of alumina suspensions was determined as a function of the solids loading. The study was performed on slurries containing 40–60 vol% alumina powder and 0.3 wt% Isobam® after ball milling for 24 h s. The apparent viscosity of all suspensions was found to exhibit a shear thinning behaviour over a wide range of shear rate. The viscosity and shear thinning behaviour at high shear rates increases with an increase in the solid loading as observed in the viscosity curve. This phenomenon was also reported by Young et al. [ Gelcasting requires the use of non-porous moulds to achieve the desired shape. However the mould design and mould material play a significant role during the fabrication of a complex shape. The mould should be designed such that it allows shrinkage to occur but minimise the resulting stresses during gelation. The mould should also facilitate the release of air bubbles when casting the slurry in the presence of air. In this study the fabrication of complex shaped parts was achieved by casting in 3D printed ABS plastic moulds. Dimensional shrinkage is a typical phenomenon related to the casting processes and occurs during drying. Therefore the drying is regarded as the rate limiting step. Adequate drying conditions were experimentally determined and drying in a chamber with controlled humidity (90.0%) and a temperature of 50 °C was found to be favourable. The drying shrinkage was found to be 4.0% for both the 50 and 60 vol% solids loading, contrary to parts gelcast using 40 vol% solids loading which showed shrinkage of 14.0%. This illustrates that the drying shrinkage is a function of the solids loading. Thus, the drying shrinkage can be minimized by increasing the solids loading. However, a high solid loading is unfavourable as it leads to an increase in viscosity and potentially increases the occurrence of defects. A defect that was observed in the gelcast parts was entrapped air bubbles. This is a common problem that is inherent to solvent based processing techniques. Ultrasonication, defoaming agents and vacuum de-airing were utilised to eliminate entrapped air in the slurry. These methods used in combination were shown to be effective in eliminating entrapped air. With sufficient deairing, fewer pores were observed at low magnification and the parts were found to have relative densities up to 99.0%. However at higher magnifications both intergranular and intragranular pores were observed in all the ceramic parts produced, The solid loading of a suspension able to meet the requirements for ensuring the filling of the mould was as high as 60 vol%. However, the solid content in the slurry has a critical effect on the properties of the sintered parts.  Hardness and fracture toughness measurements were performed on the sintered parts by means of the Vickers indentation method using a loading force of 5kgf. The flexural strength was determined using the ball on three balls testing method [ The effect of solids loading on the flexural strength and hardness of alumina parts was examined in Microstructural and surface defects were found to be the course of crack initiation during flexural strength tests. The grain size in the 40 vol% solids loading ( Dense complex shaped alumina ceramics with relative densities between 98.0 and 99.0% of the theoretical density were obtained using a gelcasting method combined with additive manufacturing. The gelling of an alumina suspension was achieved by using a water soluble co-polymer of Isobutylene and Maleic Anhydride (Isobam®). Complex shaped parts were produced by moulding suspensions containing 40, 50 and 60 vol% alumina and 0.3 wt% Isobam® into 3D printed ABS moulds. This process reduces the time and cost of machining dense parts to achieve complex shapes. The properties of the produced alumina parts are highly depended on the preparation of the gelcasting suspension. The de-airing technique and solids loading played a critical role in the final relative density and mechanical properties of the parts produced. The densities and mechanical properties of the parts produced are comparable to parts fabricated by using conventional methods. The obtained relative densities obtained depend on the solids loading, sintering temperature and deairing. Part densities were up to 99.0%, hardness of 18 GPa, flexural strength of 374 MPa and a fracture toughness of 3.8 MPa√m. By using a 40 and 50 vol% solids loading suspension, complex shaped parts such as an impeller and a pyramid with relative densities above 99.0% were produced. These results demonstrate the capabilities of the combined 3D printing and gelcasting method. Thus, the forming of an object by gelcasting is only limited by the availability of the fabrication tool. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at