This paper investigates the ion exchange process using a relatively new sulphonated monophosphonic resin with the trade mark Monophos to remove trace iron from aqueous cobalt electro-refining electrolytes. Results obtained have shown that Fe concentration in process feed can be reduced from about 1.7mg/L to about 0.4mg/L. Loaded resin is easily eluted using either HEDPA (1-Hydroxyethylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid) or HCl solutions. In repeat loading after regeneration, resin stripped with 6M HCl shows a better Fe adsorption ability than resin stripped with 0.5M HEDPA. The results in this paper, together with results found in literature, indicate that this resin is very good for Fe removal in hydrometallurgical processes.High purity cobalt is an important material for many applications: 5N (99.999%) or higher purity cobalt is used to prepare contact layer in integrated circuits; it also finds applications in magnetic recording media, magnetic recording heads, optoelectronic devices, and magnetic sensors ( The common methods for Fe removal include chemical precipitation, solvent extraction and ion exchange. Chemical precipitation and solvent extraction methods are not able to reduce iron to a level sufficiently low to meet the requirement of 5 A high purity battery grade cobalt sulfate (CoSO The Monophos resin was first soaked with deionized (DI) water for 24 Both beaker and column loading tests were conducted. The feed pH value was adjusted by adding either H Stripping tests were done using the same setup as for column loading tests. 50 After stripping, used resin was regenerated using a sulfuric acid solution of pH  Resin may be damaged if feed temperature is higher than 70 As visible in With a lower pH value, feed has more H From Based on results obtained from beaker loading tests, we decided to conduct column loading tests with a pH  In order to examine reusability of the Monophos resin, the 2 resin samples which were stripped using 0.5 Fe removal from cobalt electro-refining electrolytes using a chelating resin of trade mark Monophos has been investigated. Based on results obtained, the following conclusions can be drawn: Fe concentration in process feed can be reduced from about 1.7 For Fe removal using Monophos resin, the optimal feed pH value is 2–3. For column adsorption, the longer the retention time, the better is the Fe removal. Fe stripping of the resin can be easily done using either HEDPA or HCl solutions. In repeat loading after regeneration, resin stripped with 6 This work was financially supported by the