Former Consultant Plastic Surgeon to the Hospital for Sick Children Great Ormond Street, Guy's Hospital and the Royal Masonic Hospital London. Born 7th December 1924 in Doncaster, Died 25th September 2014 aged 89 after a long illness. Ivor was educated at Doncaster Grammar School, St John's College, Cambridge University, 1942–45, University College Hospital London, 1945–48, gaining BA 1945, MB BChir 1948, MA 1949 and M Chir 1958 – all from Cambridge. He became FRCS in 1954. While a medical student at UCH in 1948, the year that the NHS was founded, Ivor was a student on the General Surgery firm of Gardham and Matthews and it was here that he came under the influence of David Matthews who encouraged him to go into surgery. Ivor worked as a Demonstrator in Anatomy at Cambridge University in 1950. It was here that he first took an interest in the anatomy of the soft palate and published in the British Journal of Plastic Surgery in 1951. During training he worked with David Matthews over many years as house surgeon, registrar, senior registrar at St Thomas's and The Hospital for Sick Children and Assistant before his appointment as the second Consultant Plastic Surgeon to Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital in 1964. When he was appointed Consultant Plastic Surgeon at Guy's Hospital in 1970 he was the first in the speciality there as his predecessor was appointed as a Casualty Surgeon and one other wartime trained plastic surgeon had a contract in General Surgery. Ivor was an extremely skilful, careful surgeon with enormous manual dexterity. He could tackle the whole range of plastic reconstructive surgery as well as aesthetic surgery with equal ease. His attention to detail and gentle tissue handling contributed greatly to his good results with few complications. A particular point was his insistence on keeping tissues moist and covered especially when operating under tourniquet. He had an outstanding “Bedside manner” and in the out-patient department was an extremely thorough and compassionate surgeon who developed great empathy with patients. His kindly twinkling sense of humour was not often overtly expressed but was a major feature of his personality. The overwhelming impression he made on patients and colleagues was “what a nice man”. He always led from the front and in my experience was extremely good at building a team and encouraging colleagues, medical, nursing and other allied health professionals. He had to be because in the 1960's and 1970's Plastic Surgery after it's Wartime spell of wider recognition could not recruit enough people to join the speciality, the posts were not available through lack of expansion and Plastic Surgery Units at that time were in very peripheral premises. Ivor's own practice was widely spread over units in London and in particular at Guy's Hospital where I was his registrar from 1970 to 1971 he had out-patient commitments at Guy's at the main hospital where there was also a Children's Burn Unit, had operating lists there as well as in New Cross Hospital and at Evelina Children's Hospital. This involved a large amount of travel over central and south-east London and in addition on Sundays he made a point of visiting every single in-patient under his care. The experience pursuing a step on the career ladder was invaluable in his role as speciality adviser to the Chief Medical Officer at the Department of Health and Social Security where he made active moves to widen the scope and remit of the speciality with expansion of the Plastic Surgery training and units throughout Britain. His teaching ward rounds at Guy's Children's Burn Unit were popular and well attended. As a Consultant trainer, Ivor was extremely patient and thorough taking junior trainees through a careful sequence of assist at an operation do one with him assisting and then doing one on their own. In the twin theatre available at New Cross this was particularly effective where he was immediately available next door. He was completely unflappable as demonstrated at an operating list at Evelina Children's Hospital one day in summer 1971. During the repair of a cleft palate just as the incisions had been made and suturing was about to start a fire alarm was heard and smoke started entering under the theatre door. Wet theatre drapes were placed to block the gap under the door. An urgent phone message was received instructing staff to cease all activities and evacuate immediately. A rapid question to all staff including the Anaesthetist David Carnegie, buoyed by the site of a turntable fire ladder outside the third floor theatre window confirmed the decision to complete the operation, by which time the fire had been extinguished. Following the collaboration with Paul Tessier by David Matthews at the Summer Meeting of the British Association of Plastic Surgeons in 1971 when operative demonstrations of Cranio-Facial surgery were performed, Ivor took over the fostering of this service at Great Ormond Street after David Matthews retired and a viable service was established with a team of colleagues. Publications over a wide range of topics included anatomy of the nerve supply of the soft palate and its muscles which is still widely quoted to this day, early and late bone grafting of cleft palate, ear reconstruction, injection treatment of cutaneous haemangioma, cystic hygroma of the neck, water bed for treatment of decubitus ulcer and other varied topics. He treated a large number of Epidermolysis Bulosa patients and received referrals internationally. He was very active in the British Association of Plastic Surgeons serving as Secretary 1969-74, on Council 1975 to 1977, Vice President 1984 and as President in 1985 he organised a highly successful Annual meeting in Cambridge. A long time member of the Royal Society of Medicine, he was President of the Plastic Surgery Section from 1980 to 1981. Always interested in engineering reconstruction Ivor helped his father – head of mining engineering in Doncaster – repair and rebuild cars and in retirement rebuilding and restoring a 1936 Riley Kestrel with his son. On retiring to Lymington, he became a qualified skipper passing all the correct examinations and made many cross channel voyages with his retired anaesthetist colleague David Carnegie. Ivor is survived by his wife Primrose a medical graduate, three children and five grandchildren. Husband of Primrose. Father of Amanda, Tony and Sue, Grandfather of Ian, Tom, James, Josephine and Sam.