Objective
                  This study assessed the relation among several aspects of the masticatory function and the nutritional status in adults with natural dentition.
               
                  Design
                  One hundred adults with natural dentition participated in this cross-sectional study. They performed one free-style masticatory test consisting of five trials of 20 silicon-chewing cycles. The preferred chewing side was determined by calculating the asymmetry index. Masticatory performance was determined by sieving the silicon particles, and the cycle duration was also recorded. Weight, body water percentage, body fat mass, muscle mass and osseous mass were measured using a portable digital weighing machine. Body mass index (BMI), waist-hip ratio, skinfold thickness and the upper-arm composition were determined. The relation between masticatory function and a nutritional variable were tested using Pearson or Spearman rank correlation coefficients or using analysis of variance or the Kruskal–Wallis H-test and the Mann–Whitney U test, as appropriate.
               
                  Results
                  Whereas body fat percentages for women were significantly higher than for men, the body mass index was higher in men than in women. Participants who were underweight chewed more asymmetrically and more slowly than normal weight or obese participants. A negative correlation was observed between body fat percentage and masticatory laterality. No relation between masticatory performance and any nutritional status indicator was detected.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Being underweight and having a low body fat percentage seem to be related to a masticatory lateral asymmetry and to a large cycle duration in young adults with natural dentition. Masticatory performance does not seem to be related to nutritional status.Nutrition is a general term for referring to the process of obtaining nutrients in food for health and growth. There are complex interactions between nutrition and oral and general health ( Oral function includes a number of phenomena such as masticatory performance, masticatory laterality or chewing rate. Masticatory performance can be determined by quantifying the degree of fragmentation of a test food after a fixed number of chewing cycles ( Poor masticatory performance has been associated with both overweight and being underweight in children and with a lower mid-upper-arm circumference in the elderly ( The main objective of this study was to determine the relationship between masticatory performance and the nutritional status in young adults with natural dentition. This study also assessed the relationship between masticatory laterality or chewing rate and the nutritional status in the same population. The null hypothesis was that masticatory performance is not associated with nutritional status. Young adults with natural dentition among volunteer students and staff at the Faculty of Dentistry, Autonomous University of Nayarit, Tepic, Mexico participated in this cross-sectional study. Individuals with fewer than 24 natural teeth, without any edentulous space, those undergoing active orthodontic treatment and those suffering orofacial pain were excluded. No participant had severe malocclusion or temporomandibular disorders that could affect mandibular movement. Of the 103 participants who were invited to enroll in this study, three were excluded because of the lack of data. Thus, 100 participants were included, with a mean age of 21.9 years, and 53% of the sample were women. All participants provided written informed consent. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine, Autonomous University of Nayarit, and all experiments were conducted in accordance with the principles of the Helsinki Declaration ( The subjects were asked to chew naturally without imposing any side of the mouth for mastication and count their chewing cycles. A test medium known as “bagged silicone” was used for 20 cycles to comminute the pieces ( To determine the preferred chewing side, one operator observed from the frontal plane on the side towards which the jaw moved while closing for each masticatory cycle. Therefore, each cycle was classified as right-, left- or no-side and recorded by means of two hand counters ( The total duration of the five masticatory assays was used to calculate the duration of an average chewing cycle ( All subjects were fasting and with bare feet and comfortable clothing (underwear or sportswear) worn during measurements. Weight, height, body circumferences and skinfold thickness were recorded three times using standard procedures ( Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as body weight divided by height squared. Waist-hip ratio (WWR) using a tape was determined as waist measurement divided by hip measurement. The upper arm composition was assessed based on anthropometric measurements of MAC and TSF using standard equations ( Upper arm muscle perimeter “AMP” Upper arm muscle area “AMA” Upper arm fat area “AFA” Upper arm adipose muscle index “AAMI” The body composition was assessed based on anthropometric measurements of skinfold thickness, weight and height. Body fat percentage was calculated using of body density “D” that is obtained through these equations ( % Body Fat (Siri) % Body Fat (Brozeck) % Corporal Body Fat “CBF” Body fat total, free fat mass and muscle mass were obtained through these mathematic formulas ( Body Fat Total (kg) “BFT” Fat Free Body mass (kg) “FFB” Muscle Mass Total (kg) “MMT” Blood samples were collected after fasting. Serum total protein, albumin and total cholesterol levels were determined using automated analyzers. A new qualitative variable called Obesity with four categories was created from BMI values, with the categories being Underweight if BMI Data from nutritional and anthropometric indicators are shown in No relation between masticatory performance and any nutritional status indicator was detected. Participants who were underweight chewed more asymmetrically (P Although some aspects of masticatory function were associated with obesity in the present study, no significant associations between masticatory performance and obesity or body fat percentage was detected, therefore the null hypothesis was not rejected. It was reported that poor masticatory performance was associated with both overweight and being underweight in children ( Masticatory laterality and chewing rate were associated with obesity in a young adult population with natural dentition. Being underweight, expressed not only as low values of BMI but also as low values of body fat percentage, have an habitual side for chewing. It is known that harder foods require more effort than softer foods and probably people use the preferred chewing side for comminuting hard food ( The results of the present study also suggest that obese subjects, with not only high values of BMI but also high values of body fat percentage, eat more rapidly than subjects without obesity. This finding is in concordance with the relationship between eating fast and weight gain demonstrated in longitudinal and cross-sectional studies ( This study has several limitations. First, only one artificial test food was used to measure the first phase of food comminution; therefore, the results are applicable to only one type of food. Furthermore, because subjects are being studied, and they have to count their chewing cycles, mastication becomes a voluntary instead of a semi-automatic act. Due to the cross-sectional design of this study, we cannot demonstrate cause and effect of the relation between masticatory function and obesity. In conclusion, being underweight and having a low body fat percentage seem to be related to a masticatory lateral asymmetry and a large cycle duration in young adults with natural dentition. In this population, masticatory performance does not seem to be related to nutritional status. The authors confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This study was approved by Secretary of research of the Autonomous University of Nayarit, Mexico. Code SIP15-20. We are very grateful to the subjects for their kind cooperation in this study. This research received partial funding from the