The Kolmogorov–Johnson–Mehl–Avrami model for isothermal transformation kinetics is universal under specific assumptions. However, the experimental Avrami exponent deviates from the universal value. In this context, we study the effect of transient heterogeneous nucleation on the Avrami exponent for bulk materials and also for transformations leading to nanostructured materials. All transformations are assumed to be polymorphic. A discrete version of the KJMA model is modified for this purpose. Scaling relations for transformations under different conditions are reported.An important problem pertaining to phase transformation relates to deciphering its mechanism from the volume fraction of material transformed In the KJMA model, transformation is initiated by homogeneous nucleation with the nuclei assumed to have a negligible initial radius ( In recent publications Transient nucleation and heterogeneous nucleation conditions give rise to different Avrami exponent values. Thus we obtain Let us consider a liquid that is quenched rapidly from above its melting point to a temperature The isothermal crystallization kinetics is analyzed after the following modified Avrami expression. The incubation time ( Assuming transformation by isothermal annealing at the peak transformation temperature ( The classical theory of homogeneous nucleation deals with phase transformation initiated by nuclei of spherical shape. In heterogeneous nucleation process, nuclei are formed on the surface of a foreign particle (e.g. grain refiner or mould wall) and are a part of a sphere. In the present model we assume that nucleants (grain refiners) are randomly distributed throughout the volume of the parent system. The number of such nucleants is limited and is expected to be less than the upper limit given by homogeneous nucleation. Nucleation occurs on the surface of the nucleants with In case of transformation by homogeneous nucleation we use the phantom nuclei concept Under this condition the nuclei are formed only in the untransformed volume on nucleants in the parent phase. The corresponding nucleation rate is defined as the number of nuclei per unit time per unit untransformed volume The expression for As mentioned earlier, the incubation time takes into account the time lag before The Avrami exponent As mentioned earlier, to define the system we need to calculate its characteristic length and time. In comparison to the steady state nucleation case, here we define the characteristic time by As noted earlier, time dependent nucleation rates violate the basic KJMA assumptions. As a first step, we therefore study the effect of increasing transient nucleation time   The aforementioned results correspond to the negligible nuclei size. It is already well known that including finite nuclei size can factor in bulk nanocrystallization kinetics for polymorphic transformations In our previous work, we established that the Avrami exponents show a linear scaling relation with a decrease in In Now we present the results for heterogeneous transient nucleation conditions. In  Our calculations suggest for transformations initiated by homogeneous transient nucleation, the On the other hand heterogeneous nucleation leads to an exponent value < In We now compare the results of We now discuss the effect on the linear scaling relations found in Ref. We have investigated the effect of transient nucleation, transient heterogeneous nucleation as applied to bulk materials and materials with nano grain (or finite nuclei) sizes in the KJMA formalism. To delineate the effect of various factors we first consider separately transient and heterogeneous nucleation cases before taking them together. The local Avrami exponent change with fraction transformed has been described for each such factor. Non-linear (sigmoidal) scaling relations have been found for deviations from the universal Avrami exponent for transformations initiated by transient (homogeneous) nucleation. Limited universality is followed in terms of systems defined by different characteristic lengths. However, such universality is violated in different forms, as heterogeneous nucleation conditions are also included. Finally, even when transformation is by transient heterogeneous nucleation, we find that linear scaling relations are still followed between