The effect of Fe content on the fluidity of 413 aluminum alloy has been investigated in both un-modified and Mn-modified states by vacuum fluidity test. Increasing Fe decreases the fluidity due to the formation of β-Al5FeSi and α-Al15(Fe, Mn)3Si2-intermetallic compounds. The effect of melt holding time was also studied. The fluidity of Mn-modified alloys decreases drastically with increasing holding time. Agglomeration of α-intermetallics and subsequent sludge formation is the main cause of fluidity descending. The fluidity of un-modified alloys is, however, less sensitive to holding time. Applying enough superheat and holding time, corresponding to segregation factor of the alloy, is an effective way to increase the fluidity of Mn-modified alloys by the dissolution of Fe-bearing intermetallics.Al–Si alloys are most widely used aluminum alloys due to their castability, high strength to weight ratio, corrosion resistance, etc In high-pressure die casting alloys, Fe is intentionally added to the melt in range of 0.8–1.1 High-iron containing alloys have the tendency to form sludge. Mn addition also promotes sludge formation. Modified intermetallics, have high-specific gravity and tend to settle to the bottom of the furnace or crucible as sludge. Sludge formation may also result in other problems such as the furnace wall damage. Entrapment of sludge into the mold cavity has some detrimental effects of mechanical and physical properties of the casting part Heating the melt to a higher temperature than a specific one (called sludge formation temperature) will cause the dissolution of intermetallics In the present research, the effect of Fe content (in un-modified and Mn-modified states), melt superheating and holding time, on the fluidity of 413 Aluminum alloy, has been investigated by vacuum suction method. The variation of fluidity with Fe content has been attributed to the morphology, volume percentage and agglomeration of Fe-intermetallic particles. The 413 alloy ingot with chemical composition is shown in After melting the ingots, specific amount of Fe was added to the melt in the form of master alloy Al–25 To investigate the effect of melt holding time on the fluidity, Mn-modified and un-modified melts were held at 670 Three of Mn-modified samples (no. 7–9) were heated to 800  Effect of Fe concentration on the fluidity of un-modified and Mn-modified melts is shown in The fluidity of each alloy as a function of segregation factor is plotted in  Microstructures of modified alloys have been shown in At a constant Fe concentration, according to Eq. On the other hand, at a constant segregation factor, the volume percentage of intermetallics in both Mn-modified and un-modified melts is nearly the same and effect of morphology of Fe-intermetallics on the fluidity becomes more pronounced. Therefore, the fluidity of Mn-modified melts is much more than un-modified melts at the same segregation factor ( Effect of holding the melt at pouring temperature on the fluidity of un-modified alloys is shown in On the contrary, the fluidity of Mn-modified alloys is strongly sensitive to the melt holding time at the pouring temperature.  In the case of the melt no. 9 that has the highest segregation factor and highest sludge formation temperature, holding time (20  Increasing iron content decreases the fluidity of both un-modified and Mn-modified 413 alloy, due to the formation of β-Al The fluidity of Mn-modified melts is better than un-modified ones at the same segregation factor or constant iron content. Holding the melt at the pouring temperature leads to a remarkable decrease in fluidity of Mn-modified alloys due to agglomeration of α-intermetallic compounds and sludge formation. The fluidity of un-modified alloys is less sensitive to holding time. Applying appropriate superheat and holding time corresponding to segregation factor of an alloy, dissolves Fe-bearing intermetallics in the melt and increases the fluidity of Mn-modified alloys at the same pouring temperature.